FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
and
Ex Rel. MITCHELL KAHLE and HOLLY HUBER,
Plaintiffs-Relators-Appellees,
v.
ONE LOVE MINISTRIES and CALVARY CHAPEL CENTRAL OAHU,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
DOE ENTITIES 1-50; JOHN DOES 1-50; and JANE DOES 1-50,
Defendants.
NO. CAAP-14-0001343
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0893-03)
FEBRUARY 28, 2018
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, and REIFURTH and CHAN, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
Plaintiffs-Relators-Appellees Mitchell Kahle and Holly
Huber (Relators) brought a qui tam action1 on behalf of the State
1"'Qui tam' is an abbreviation for ' qui tam pro domino rege
quam pro seipso ," which literally means 'he who as much for the
king as for himself.'"  United Seniors Ass'n, Inc. v. Phillip
Morris USA, 500 F.3d 19, 24 (1st Cir. 2007) (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted).  Generally, statutes authorizing qui
tam actions permit a private person, known as a "relator," to
bring a civil action on behalf of the government against an
(continued...)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of Hawai# i (State) against Defendants-Appellants One Love
Ministries (One Love) and Calvary Chapel Central Oahu (Calvary
Chapel) (collectively, the Churches).  Relators alleged that the
Churches had violated the Hawai #i False Claims Act (HFCA), Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 661, Part II, by fraudulently
underpaying the State for the Churches' use of public school
facilities under the Hawai #i Community Use of School Facilities
Program (Community Use of Schools Program), Hawaii Administrative
Rules (HAR) Chapter 39.  The Churches moved to dismiss the
Relators' First Amended Complaint, arguing that the Relators'
claims were foreclosed by the HFCA's public disclosure bar and
that the Relators did not fall within the original source
exception.  
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)2
denied the Churches' motion to dismiss.  On appeal, the Churches
argue that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) retroactively applying
the 2012 amendments to the HFCA to conduct that occurred prior to
the amendments; (2) ruling that the public disclosure bar is an
affirmative defense rather than a jurisdictional bar; (3) failing
to dismiss the First Amended Complaint under the public
disclosure bar; and (4) ruling that the Relators could meet the
definition of an "original source." 
We hold that the 2012 HFCA amendments do not apply
retroactively to conduct that occurred prior to the effective
date of the amendments.  We further hold that the 2012 HFCA
amendments changed the public disclosure bar from a
jurisdictional bar to an affirmative defense.  Therefore, in
ruling on the Churches' motion to dismiss, the Circuit Court
erred in applying the 2012 amended version of the HFCA (Amended
HFCA) to all of the claims in the First Amended Complaint. 
1(...continued)
individual or company who has knowingly presented a false of
fraudulent claim for payment to the government.
2  The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Instead, the Circuit Court should have applied the pre-amended
version of the HFCA (Pre-Amended HFCA) to claims arising before
the effective date of the 2012 HFCA amendments and the Amended
HFCA to claims arising after the effective date.  
As explained below, we affirm the Circuit Court's
denial of the Churches' motion to dismiss with respect to claims
arising after the effective date of the 2012 HFCA amendments.  We
vacate the Circuit Court's denial of the Churches' motion to
dismiss with respect to claims arising before the effective date
of the 2012 HFCA amendments.  We remand the case to permit the
Circuit Court to apply the Pre-Amended HFCA in deciding the
Churches' motion to dismiss with respect to claims arising before
the effective date of the 2012 HFCA amendments and for further
proceedings consistent with our Opinion. 
BACKGROUND
I.
In December 2011, the Relators began a review of
Hawai#i churches' use of public school facilities under the
Community Use of Schools Program.3  One Love and Calvary Chapel
3HAR § 8-39-1 (1996) provides, in pertinent part: "All
public school buildings, facilities, and grounds shall be
available for general recreational purposes and for public and
community use whenever these activities do not interfere with the
normal and usual activities of the school and its pupils as
provided by law."  Churches are classified as Type III users. 
HAR § 8-39-3  (1996).  For Type III users, the following fees and
charges are applicable to their use of school facilities: 
(A) A rental fee shall be assessed.
(B) The service charge for custodial services when
required by the school shall be for a minimum of two
hours.  The total custodial charge shall be the current
wages multiplied by the number of hours the
custodian(s) is on duty.
(C) A service charge for the cost of utilities shall be
assessed.
(continued...)
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
are two of the churches who used public school facilities for
weekly services and special events under the Community Use of
Schools Program.
On March 22, 2013, Relators filed a qui tam Complaint
on behalf of the State against the Churches, alleging violations
of the HFCA.  The Circuit Court granted the Churches' motion to
dismiss the Complaint, with leave for the Relators to file an
amended complaint, on the ground that the Complaint failed to
state the fraud claims with sufficient particularity.  The
Circuit Court denied the motion to dismiss, without prejudice, as
to the other grounds raised. 
On February 20, 2014, the Relators filed a First
Amended Complaint against the Churches.  The First Amended
Complaint contained numerous factual allegations regarding the
Churches' use of school facilities from 2007 to 2013 and asserted
that the Churches had violated the HFCA in three ways.  Count 1
alleged the violation of HRS § 661-21(a)(6); Count 2 alleged the
violation of HRS § 661-21(a)(7); and Count 3 alleged the
violation of HRS § 661-21(a)(8).4
3(...continued)
HAR § 8-39-5 (1996).
4As amended in 2012, HRS § 661-21(a)(6), (a)(7), and (a)(8)
(2016)  provide, in relevant part:
(a) . . . any person who:
. . .  
(6) Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or
used, a false record or statement material to an
obligation to pay or transmit money or property to
the State, or knowingly conceals, or knowingly and
improperly avoids or decreases an obligation to
pay or transmit money or property to the State; 
(7) Is a beneficiary of an inadvertent submission of a
false claim to the State, who subsequently
discovers the falsity of the claim, and fails to
(continued...)
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In the First Amended Complaint, Relators asserted that
they were "original sources" of the information contained in the
4(...continued)
disclose the false claim to the State within a
reasonable time after discovery of the false
claim; or
(8) Conspires to commit any of the conduct described
in this subsection,
shall be liable to the State for a civil penalty of not
less than $5,500 and not more than $11,000, plus three
times the amount of damages that the State sustains due
to the act of that person.
The 2012 amendments changed the numbering of the
subparagraphs in the previous version of HRS § 661-21(a).  The
current subsection (a)(6) was previously (a)(7), the current
(a)(7) was previously (a)(8), and the current (a)(8) was
previously (a)(3).  The 2012 amendments also amended the language
of the previous subsections (a)(7) and (a)(3).  Prior to the 2012
amendments, HRS § 661-21 (Supp. 2011) provided, in relevant part,
as follows:
(a) . . . any person who:
. . .
(3) Conspires to defraud the State by getting a false
or fraudulent claim allowed or paid;
. . .
(7) Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or
used, a false record or statement to conceal,
avoid, or decrease an obligation to pay or
transmit money or property to the State; or
(8) Is a beneficiary of an inadvertent submission of a
false claim to the State, who subsequently
discovers the falsity of the claim, and fails to
disclose the false claim to the State within a
reasonable time after discovery of the false
claim;
shall be liable to the State for a civil penalty of not
less than $5,000 and not more than $10,000, plus three
times the amount of damages that the State sustains due
to the act of that person. 
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
First Amended Complaint in that they "(i) obtained direct and
independent knowledge of the information on which the allegations
herein are based; (ii) have materially added to what little
information was publicly available prior to their efforts; and
(iii) have voluntarily provided said information to the Attorney
General of the State of Hawai #i before filing this action." 
Among other things, Relators alleged in the First Amended
Complaint that they: (1) visited schools (including schools used
by One Love and Calvary Chapel) to observe, photograph, and
document Hawai #i churches' actual use of school facilities,
"including the specific days, hours, activities and facilities
and utilities that churches were using";  (2) researched laws,
rules, and legislative history relating to the Community Use of
Schools Program; (3) reviewed Hawai #i Department of Education
practices and policies and Board of Education minutes and
materials relating to the Community Use of Schools Program;  (4)
requested and obtained pursuant to the Uniform Information
Practices Act (UIPA) copies of Hawai #i churches' "Form BO-1
Application[s] for Use of School Buildings, Facilities, or
Grounds" (BO-1 Applications), including the BO-1 Applications
submitted by One Love and Calvary Chapel;  (5) designed and
programed a "custom relational database" to analyze and review
the BO-1 Applications they obtained; (6) communicated directly
with school officials in person and through email, including
sending school principals customized requests for information
based on BO-1 Applications for their school;  (7) searched the
internet and monitored and reviewed various church websites; (8)
monitored churches' activities through personal on-site
surveillance, through observation of service broadcasts on
television and online, and by reviewing church newsletters and
email announcements; (9) submitted BO-1 Applications and rented
school facilities themselves; and (10) reviewed and analyzed the
information they obtained and programmed spreadsheets "to
calculate the amounts each church was actually paying a school,
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
as compared to the amounts each church had underpaid[.]"
The Churches filed a motion to dismiss the First
Amended Complaint pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure
(HRCP) Rule 12(b)(1) and Rule 12(b)(6) (2000).5  The Churches
sought dismissal pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) on the ground
that the Relators were jurisdictionally foreclosed from bringing
the First Amended Complaint because of the HFCA's public
disclosure bar and because the Relators did not fall within the
original source exception to the public disclosure bar.  The
Churches sought dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) on the ground
that the Relators had failed to state a claim on which relief
could be granted.
The Circuit Court denied the Churches' motion to
dismiss insofar as it was based on HRCP Rule 12(b)(1).  The
Circuit Court ruled that the HFCA's public disclosure bar
constituted an affirmative defense, and not a jurisdictional bar,
and it therefore denied the Churches' claim that it lacked
subject matter jurisdiction over the First Amended Complaint. 
The Circuit Court initially granted in part and denied in part
the Churches' motion to dismiss based on HRCP Rule 12(b)(6). 
However, the Circuit Court later reconsidered its partial
granting of the motion under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), and it denied
the Churches' motion insofar as it was based on HRCP Rule
12(b)(6).  Thus, the Circuit Court's ultimate decision was to
completely deny the Churches' motion to dismiss, rejecting the
motion on both the HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) and the HRCP 12(b)(6)
grounds asserted by the Churches.  The Circuit Court granted the
5HRCP Rule 12(b) provides in relevant part:
Every defense, in law or fact, to a claim for
relief in any pleading . . . shall be asserted in the
responsive pleading thereto if one is required, except
that the following defenses may at the option of the
pleader be made by motion: (1) lack of jurisdiction
over the subject matter, . . . (6) failure to state a
claim upon which relief can be granted[.] 
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Churches' motion to file an interlocutory appeal from its denial
of their motion to dismiss, and this appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I.
The Hawai #i appellate courts have not previously
construed the HFCA.  The HFCA, however, is patterned after the
federal False Claims Act (FCA), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729-3733.  We
therefore look to cases interpreting the FCA for guidance.  See 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc.
, 105 Hawai# i 462, 467, 99 P.3d
1046, 1051 (2004); State v. Ontai , 84 Hawai #i 56, 61, 929 P.2d
69, 74 (1996); Trivectra v. Ushijima , 112 Hawai #i 90, 101-02, 144
P.3d 1, 12-13 (2006). 
A.
The historical development of the FCA is instructive as
it helps provide context in understanding provisions in the FCA
that correspond to provisions in the HFCA.  The United States
Supreme Court described the historical development of the FCA as
follows:
As originally enacted, the FCA did not limit the
sources from which a relator could acquire the information
to bring a qui tam action.  In United States ex rel. Marcus
v. Hess, 317 U.S. 537, 63 S.Ct. 379, 87 L.Ed. 443 (1943), we
upheld the relator's recovery even though he had discovered
the fraud by reading a federal criminal indictment -- a
quintessential "parasitic" suit.  Id., at 545–548, 63 S.Ct.
379; see id., at 545, 63 S.Ct. 379 ("Even if, as the
government suggests, the petitioner has contributed nothing
to the discovery of this crime, he has contributed much to
accomplishing one of the purposes for which the Act was
passed").  Congress promptly reacted to that decision by
amending the statute to preclude qui tam actions "based upon
evidence or information in the possession of the United
States, or any agency, officer or employee thereof, at the
time such suit was brought."  This amendment erected what
came to be known as a Government knowledge bar: "Once the
United States learned of a false claim, only the Government
could assert its rights under the FCA against the false
claimant."  In the years that followed the 1943 amendment,
the volume and efficacy of qui tam litigation dwindled. 
"Seeking the golden mean between adequate incentives for
whistle-blowing insiders with genuinely valuable information
and discouragement of opportunistic plaintiffs who have no
significant information to contribute of their own,"
Congress overhauled the statute once again in 1986 "to make
the FCA a 'more useful tool against fraud in modern
times[.]'" 
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . § 3730(e)(4) was enacted in 1986 as part of this
larger reform.  Congress apparently concluded that a total
bar on qui tam actions based on information already in the
Government's possession thwarted a significant number of
potentially valuable claims.  Rather than simply repeal the
Government knowledge bar, however, Congress replaced it with
the public disclosure bar in an effort to strike a balance
between encouraging private persons to root out fraud and
stifling parasitic lawsuits such as the one in Hess.
Graham County Soil & Water Conservation Dist. v. United States ex
rel. Wilson, 559 U.S. 280, 293-95 (2010) (brackets and some
citations omitted).
B.
The HFCA was first enacted in 2000 "to allow for qui
tam, or citizen attorney general, lawsuits to recover against
persons who submit fraudulent claims for payment by the State." 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 84 in 2000 Senate Journal, at 768, 2000
House Journal, at 891.  When first enacted, the HFCA included a
jurisdictional public disclosure bar, which was similar to the
one in the 1986 FCA, and provided as follows: 
§ 661-28 Jurisdiction.  No court shall have
jurisdiction over an action under this part based upon the
public disclosure of allegations or transactions in a
criminal, civil, or administrative hearing, in a legislative
or administrative report, hearing, audit, or investigation,
or from the news media, unless the action is brought by the
attorney general or the person bringing the action is an
original source of the information.  For purposes of this
section:
"Original source" means an individual who has direct
and independent knowledge of the information on which the
allegations are based and has voluntarily provided the
information to the State before filing an action under this
part that is based on the information, and whose information
provided the basis or catalyst for the investigation,
hearing, audit, or report that led to the public disclosure.
HRS § 661-28 (Supp. 2011).6
6The public disclosure bar in the 1986 FCA had language very
similar to HRS § 661-28 (Supp. 2011), except that the 1986 FCA's
definition of "original source" did not include the requirement
that the "[individual's] information provided the basis or
catalyst for the investigation, hearing, audit, or report that
led to the public disclosure."  See 31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4)
(1986). 
(continued...)
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Congress amended the FCA in 2010.  In 2012, the Hawai# i
Legislature amended the HFCA to "bring the State's laws regarding
false claims against the State and the counties into compliance
with the federal False Claims Act."  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
3304, in 2012 Senate Journal, at 1063.  The 2012 HFCA amendments
include an amended public disclosure bar and "original source"
definition that closely parallels the language of the amendments
made in 2010 to the FCA.  As amended in 2012, the HFCA provides:
(b) The court shall dismiss an action or claim under
this part, unless opposed by the State, if the allegations
or transactions alleged in the action or claim are
substantially the same as those publicly disclosed:
(1) In a state criminal, civil, or administrative
hearing in which the State or its agent is a
party;
(2) In a state legislative or other state report,
hearing, audit, or investigation; or
(3) By the news media, 
unless the action is brought by the attorney general or the
person bringing the action is an original source of the
information.
(c) For purposes of this section, "original source"
means an individual who:
(1) Prior to public disclosure under subsection (b),
has voluntarily disclosed to the State the
information on which the allegations or
transactions in a claim are based; or
(2) Has knowledge that is independent of and
materially adds to the publicly disclosed
allegations or transactions, and who has
voluntarily provided the information to the
State before filing an action under this part.
HRS § 661-31 (b), (c) (2016). 
II.
The Churches argue that the Circuit Court erred in
retroactively applying the 2012 HFCA amendments to conduct that
occurred prior to the amendments.  We agree.
Generally, laws do not apply retroactively.  HRS § 1-3
6(...continued)
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1993) provides: "No law has any retrospective operation, unless
otherwise expressed or obviously intended."  "Hawai #i statutory
and case law discourage retroactive application of laws and rules
in the absence of language showing that such operation was
intended."  Gap v. Puna Geothermal Venture , 106 Hawai# i 325, 333,
104 P.3d 912, 920 (2004).
The effective date of the 2012 amendments to the HFCA
was July 9, 2012.  2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 294, § 11 at 1003. 
Not only is there no indication that the 2012 HFCA amendments
were intended to apply retroactively, but the legislation
enacting the 2012 HFCA amendments specifically states: "This Act
does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that
were incurred, and proceedings that were begun, before the
effective date of this Act."  Id. at § 9 at 1003.  
The First Amended Complaint alleged that the Churches
engaged in actionable conduct between 2007 and 2013.  It is clear
that the Amended HFCA only applies to claims arising after the
July 9, 2012, effective date of the 2012 HFCA amendments, and
that the Pre-Amended HFCA applies to claims arising before that
date.7  Therefore, in ruling on the Churches' motion to dismiss,
the Circuit Court erred in applying the Amended HFCA to all of
the Realtors' claims.
7Federal courts have not applied substantive amendments to
the FCA retroactively, but only prospectively.  See Graham
County, 559 U.S. at 283 n.1 (2010 amendments to the FCA);
Schindler Elevator Corp. v. United States ex rel. Kirk , 563 U.S.
401, 404 n.1 (2011) (same).
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
As explained below, the 2012 HFCA amendments changed
the public disclosure bar from a jurisdictional bar to an
affirmative defense on their effective date of July 9, 2012.  The
parties are in agreement that prior to the 2012 HFCA amendments,
the public disclosure bar under the Pre-Amended HFCA was a
jurisdictional bar.  HRS § 661-28 (Supp. 2011) of the Pre-Amended
HFCA was entitled "Jurisdiction" and contained the following
operative language: "No court shall have jurisdiction over an
action under this part based upon the public disclosure of
allegations or transactions in [certain specified fora] 
. . . ."  The United States Supreme Court, construing
corresponding language in the FCA (before it was amended in
2010), held that the public disclosure bar was jurisdictional.  
Rockwell Int'l Corp. v. United States , 549 U.S. 457, 468-69
(2007).  
The 2012 HFCA amendments, however, repealed HRS § 661-
28 (Supp. 2011) and moved the public disclosure bar to a new
section, HRS § 661-31.  The new HRS § 661-31 replaced the former
language "No court shall have jurisdiction over an action under
this part" with "The court shall dismiss an action or claim under
this part, unless opposed by the State, . . ."  The majority of
federal courts construing the corresponding amendment to the FCA
have held that the amendment changed the public disclosure bar
from a jurisdictional bar to an affirmative defense.  The
reasoning supporting this majority view has been expressed as
follows:
Under the prior version of the statute, [the public-
disclosure bar] operated as a jurisdictional limitation --
the public-disclosure bar, if applicable, divested the
district court of subject-matter jurisdiction over the
action.  See 31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4) (2005) (" No court shall
have jurisdiction over an action under this section based
upon the public disclosure of allegations . . . ." (emphasis
added)); Rockwell Int'l Corp. v. United States, 549 U.S.
457, 468–69, 127 S.Ct. 1397, 167 L.Ed.2d 190 (2007)
(explaining that § 3730(e)(4) is a "jurisdiction-removing
provision").  It is apparent, however, that the
public-disclosure bar is no longer jurisdictional.  The
amended statute does not mention jurisdiction but instead
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
states that in cases where the bar is applicable, the court
"shall dismiss" the action "unless opposed by the
Government."  31 U.S.C. § 3730(e)(4) (2010).  The 2010
amendments thus deleted the unambiguous
jurisdiction-removing language previously contained in 
§ 3730(e)(4) and replaced it with a generic,
not-obviously-jurisdictional phrase ("shall dismiss"), while
at the same time retaining jurisdiction-removing language in
§§ 3730(e)(1) and (e)(2).  In our view, these changes make
it clear that the public-disclosure bar is no longer a
jurisdiction-removing provision.  See , e.g., Brewster v.
Gage, 280 U.S. 327, 337, 50 S.Ct. 115, 74 L.Ed. 457 (1930)
("The deliberate selection of language so differing from
that used in the earlier acts indicates that a change of law
was intended."); Pirie v. Chi. Title & Trust Co., 182 U.S.
438, 448, 21 S.Ct. 906, 45 L.Ed. 1171 (1901) ("When the
purpose of a prior law is continued, usually its words are,
and an omission of the words implies an omission of the
purpose."); Chertkof v. United States , 676 F.2d 984, 987
(4th Cir.1982) ("[T]he deletion of language, having so
distinct a meaning, almost compels the opposite result when
words of such plain meaning are excised.").  Indeed, it is
difficult to understand how the amended public-disclosure
bar could be jurisdictional when the government has the
ability to veto a dismissal under that section.  See
Gonzalez v. Thaler, [565 U.S. 134], 132 S.Ct. 641, 648, 181
L.Ed.2d 619 (2012) ("Subject-matter jurisdiction can never
be waived or forfeited."); Brickwood Contractors, Inc. v.
Datanet Eng'g, Inc., 369 F.3d 385, 390 (4th Cir. 2004) (en
banc) ("Subject-matter jurisdiction cannot be conferred by
the parties, nor can a defect in subject-matter jurisdiction
be waived by the parties.").  And even if the changes
somehow did not establish Congress' intent to convert the
public-disclosure bar into a non-jurisdictional basis for
dismissal, the omission of the jurisdictional language would
nonetheless require us to treat the amended
public-disclosure bar as such.  See Sebelius v. Auburn Reg'l
Med. Ctr., [568 U.S. 145], 133 S.Ct. 817, 824, 184 L.Ed.2d
627 (2013) (Unless "Congress has clearly stated that the
[statutory limitation] is jurisdictional . . . , courts
should treat the restriction as nonjurisdictional in
character." (internal quotation marks and alteration
omitted)).
United States ex rel. May v. Purdue Pharma L.P., 737 F.3d 908,
916-17 (4th Cir. 2013) (footnote omitted; some brackets in
original).
Relying on federal courts expressing the minority view,
the Churches argue that the public disclosure bar should continue
to be viewed as a jurisdictional bar even after the 2012 HFCA
amendments.  However, we find the reasoning of the majority view
to be more persuasive and conclude that the 2012 HFCA amendments
changed the public disclosure bar from a jurisdictional bar to an 
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
affirmative defense on July 9, 2012, the effective date of the
2012 HFCA amendments. 
IV.
This change was significant because it had a direct
impact on the appropriate standards to apply in deciding the
Churches' motion to dismiss.  In deciding the Churches' motion to
dismiss, the Circuit Court should have treated the public
disclosure bar as jurisdictional (and applied the standard for
dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1)) with respect to claims
arising before July 9, 2012, and as an affirmative defense (and
applied the standard for dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6)) with
respect to claims arising after July 9, 2012.  Instead, the
Circuit Court treated the public disclosure bar as an affirmative
defense with respect to all of the Relators' claims asserted in
the First Amended Complaint.  Therefore, the Circuit Court
applied an incorrect standard in ruling on the Churches' motion
to dismiss regarding claims arising before July 9, 2012.
With respect to claims arising after July 9, 2012, the
public disclosure bar, which encompasses the original source
exception, is an affirmative defense.  In order to obtain
dismissal of such claims, the Churches were required to establish
under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) that the Relators' First Amended
Complaint failed to state a claim on which relief could be
granted.  The standard for a court to apply in deciding a motion
to dismiss under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) is well established:
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can
prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that
would entitle him or her to relief.  We must therefore view
a plaintiff's complaint in a light most favorable to him or
her in order to determine whether the allegations contained
therein could warrant relief under any alternative theory.
For this reason, in reviewing a circuit court's order
dismissing a complaint[,] our consideration is strictly
limited to the allegations of the complaint, and we must
deem those allegations to be true.
In re Estate of Rogers , 103 Hawai# i 275, 280–81, 81 P.3d 1190,
1195–96 (2003) (internal citations, brackets, and ellipsis points
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
omitted).  We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to
dismiss under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) de novo.  Wright v. Home Depot
U.S.A., Inc., 111 Hawai# i 401, 406, 142 P.3d 265, 270 (2006).
Unlike a motion to dismiss under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6),
the standard for a court to apply in deciding a motion to dismiss
under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) for lack of jurisdiction permits a
court, under certain circumstances, to consider evidence outside
the complaint and to resolve factual disputes.  The Hawai# i
Supreme Court has adopted the following standard regarding a
motion to dismiss under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1):
Our review of a motion to dismiss for lack of subject
matter jurisdiction is based on the contents of the
complaint, the allegations of which we accept as true
and construe in the light most favorable to the
plaintiffs.  Dismissal is improper unless "it appears
beyond doubt that the plaintiffs can prove no set of
facts in support of their claim which would entitled
them to relief."
[Love v. United States, 871 F.2d 1488, 1491 (9th Cir.
1989)].  However, "when considering a motion to dismiss
pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) the trial court is not
restricted to the face of the pleadings, but may review any
evidence, such as affidavit and testimony, to resolve
factual disputes concerning the existence of jurisdiction." 
McCarthy, 850 F.2d at 560 (citations omitted); see also 5A
C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure 
§ 1350, at 213 (1990).
Yamane v. Pohlson, 111 Hawai# i 74, 81, 137 P.3d 980, 987 (2006)
(brackets omitted).
In considering motions to dismiss for lack of
jurisdiction under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1), we have joined other
courts in distinguishing between facial and factual challenges to
subject matter jurisdiction under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1).  State v.
Alagao, 77 Hawai #i 260, 262, 883 P.2d 682, 684 (App. 1994);
Hopper v. Solvay Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 590 F. Supp. 2d 1352,
1358 (M.D. Fla. 2008).  A facial challenge asserts that the
absence of jurisdiction can be established by considering only
the allegations of the complaint itself.  The standard applicable
to a facial challenge to jurisdiction under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) is
basically the same as that applied for failure to state a claim
under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) -- the allegations of the complaint must
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
be accepted as true and construed in the light most favorable to
the plaintiff.  See Yamane, 111 Hawai# i at 81, 137 P.3d at 987;
Hopper, 590 F. Supp. 2d at 1358.  
A factual challenge to jurisdiction attacks the
validity or truthfulness of the facts alleged which support the
existence of jurisdiction.  To resolve a factual challenge, the
court must generally consider matters outside the pleadings.  For
a factual challenge to jurisdiction under HRCP Rule 12(b)(1), the
court is permitted to consider evidence outside the pleadings and
resolve disputed facts that are necessary to determine the
existence of jurisdiction.  See Yamane, 111 Hawai# i at 81, 137
P.3d at 987; Alagao , 77 Hawai #i at 262, 883 P.2d at 684. 
However, because the trial court is the trier of fact for the
factual disputes that are necessary to resolve a factual
challenge to jurisdiction, the trial court, and not the appellate
court, must make the necessary factual findings in the first
instance.  See May , 737 F.3d at 919-20.  In addition, because a
factual challenge to jurisdiction involves the resolution of
factual disputes, the trial court may be required to provide the
plaintiff with the opportunity for discovery and to hold an
evidentiary hearing to resolve the dispute.  Id.; Hopper, 590 F.
Supp. 2d at 1358; see also , Kerns v. United States , 585 F.3d 187,
192-93 (4th Cir. 2009).  The disputed jurisdictional facts found
by the trial court in ruling on a factual challenge to
jurisdiction are subject to the clearly erroneous standard of
review.
V.
We apply these principles in reviewing the Circuit
Court's denial of the Churches' motion to dismiss.  The Churches
argue that the Circuit Court erred in denying their motion to
dismiss the Relators' First Amended Complaint because the public
disclosure bar was applicable and the Relators did not satisfy
the original source exception under either the Pre-Amended HFCA
or the Amended HFCA.
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Under the Pre-Amended HFCA, the public disclosure bar
applies to complaints that are "based upon the public disclosure
of allegations or transactions in a criminal, civil, or
administrative hearing, in a legislative or administrative
report, hearing, audit, or investigation, or from the news
media."  HRS § 661-28 (Supp. 2011).  Under the Amended HFCA, the
public disclosure bar applies to "allegations or transactions
alleged in the [complaint that] are substantially the same as
those publicly disclosed: (1) In a state criminal, civil, or
administrative hearing in which the State or its agent is a
party; (2) In a state legislative or other state report, hearing,
audit, or investigation; or (3) By the news media[.]"  HRS § 661-
31(b) (format altered).
With respect to the exception to the public disclosure
bar where a complaint is brought by an original source, the Pre-
Amended HFCA defines an original source as "an individual who has
direct and independent knowledge of the information on which the
allegations are based and has voluntarily provided the
information to the State before filing an action under this part
that is based on the information, and whose information provided
the basis or catalyst for the investigation, hearing, audit, or
report that led to the public disclosure."  HRS § 661-28 (Supp.
2011).  Under the Amended HFCA, an original source is defined in
relevant part as "an individual who . . . [h]as knowledge that is
independent of and materially adds to the publicly disclosed
allegations or transactions, and who has voluntarily provided the
information to the State before filing an action under this
part."  HRS § 661-31(c)(2).
A.
In denying the Churches' motion to dismiss pursuant to
HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), the Circuit Court ruled that the "claims and
allegations in the First Amended Complaint sufficiently state a
claim against" the Churches "because Relators have independent
knowledge that materially adds to the publicly disclosed
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
allegations or transactions that are set forth in the First
Amended Complaint." 8 The Circuit Court therefore applied the
HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) standard and the definition of original source
in the Amended HFCA in rendering its decision.  With respect to
the claims in the First Amended Complaint arising after July 9,
2012, we conclude that the Circuit Court was correct in applying
the HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) standard and the Amended HFCA, and that it
properly denied the Churches' motion to dismiss as to these
claims.
As previously discussed, the public disclosure bar
(which encompasses the original source exception) constitutes an
affirmative defense under the Amended HFCA.  In the First Amended
Complaint, the Relators alleged that they were "original sources"
as the result of various actions they took to investigate and
uncover the alleged fraud, including visiting schools to observe
and document Hawai# i churches' actual use of school facilities;
communicating with school officials to obtain information
regarding the extent of the churches' use of school facilities;
programing a database and spreadsheets to analyze and determine
the amount of the alleged underpayments; and renting out school
facilities themselves to familiarize themselves with the
applicable procedures.  Accepting the allegations in the First
Amended Complaint as true and viewing them in the light most
favorable to the Relators, we cannot say that it appears beyond
doubt that the Relators would not be able to prove that they fall
within the original source exception under the Amended HFCA. 
Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's denial of the
Churches' motion to dismiss with respect to claims arising after
July 9, 2012.
8We do not read the Circuit Court's ruling as a
determination that the Relators satisfy the definition of
original sources, but only a determination that under the HRCP
Rule 12(b)(6) standard, the Churches failed to show that the
Relators would not be able to prove that they satisfy the
definition of original sources.
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.
Because the 2012 HFCA amendments do not apply
retroactively, the Circuit Court erred in applying the Amended
HFCA in denying the Churches' motion to dismiss with respect to
claims arising before July 9, 2012.  As to these claims, the
public disclosure bar and the original source exception raise
questions of jurisdiction that are subject to determination under
HRCP Rule 12(b)(1).  Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in
applying HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) and the Amended HFCA in denying the
Churches' motion to dismiss with respect to claims arising before
July 9, 2012.
Nevertheless, in evaluating a facial challenge to
jurisdiction under HRCP 12(b)(1), a court applies a standard that
is comparable to the standard under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6).  If the
Churches had solely raised a facial challenge to jurisdiction
regarding claims arising before July 9, 2012, we would conclude
that the Circuit Court did not err in denying such a facial
challenge.  This is because, accepting the allegations in the
First Amended Complaint as true and viewing them in the light
most favorable to the Relators, it would not appear beyond doubt
that the Relators could not prove that they satisfied the
requirements for jurisdiction under the Pre-Amended HFCA.  
It is clear, however, that the Churches raised a
factual challenge to jurisdiction in moving to dismiss claims
arising before July 9, 2012.  In support of their motion to
dismiss, the Churches submitted exhibits that were not contained
in the First Amended Complaint.  They also sought to have the
Circuit Court resolve facts disputed by the parties relating to
the public disclosure bar and original source exception.  In this
regard, we note that aside from agreeing that the BO-1
Applications obtained by the Relators in response to their UIPA
requests constitute publicly disclosed materials for purposes of
applying the public disclosure bar, the parties disputed each
other's claims on almost every other matter related to the
19FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
applicability of the public disclosure bar and original source
exception.  These included factual disputes regarding how and
when the Relators acquired knowledge and information that formed
the basis for their First Amended Complaint and the significance
of the Relator's independent investigation and activities in
revealing the alleged fraud.
In denying the motion to dismiss, the Circuit Court did
not resolve the factual disputes that were necessary to determine
the Churches' factual challenge to jurisdiction based on the
public disclosure bar under the Pre-Amended HFCA.  Rather, the
Circuit Court decided the Church's factual challenge to
jurisdiction regarding claims arising before July 9, 2012, under
the HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) standard, which required it to accept the
Relators' allegations in the First Amended Complaint as true and
to view the allegations in the light most favorable to the
Relators.  The Circuit Court erred in doing so.
C.
As the trier of fact, the Circuit Court must resolve in
the first instance the factual disputes that are necessary to
determine the Churches' factual challenge to jurisdiction based
on the public disclosure bar under the Pre-Amended HFCA.  See
Alagao, 77 Hawai #i at 262-64, 883 P.2d at 684-86; May , 737 F.3d
at 919-20.  We therefore vacate the Circuit Court's denial of the
Churches' motion to dismiss with respect to claims arising before
July 9, 2012.  On remand, the Circuit Court shall resolve any
factual disputes necessary to determine whether the public
disclosure bar is applicable, including whether the Relators are
original sources under the Pre-Amended HFCA, for claims arising
before July 9, 2012.  In deciding such factual disputes, the
Circuit Court may determine that it is necessary to provide the
Relators with the opportunity for discovery on matters relevant
to the Churches' jurisdictional challenge and to hold an
evidentiary hearing.  The Churches may also benefit from 
20FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
discovery regarding how and when the Relators obtained the
information on which particular alleged false claims are based.  
We note that questions of whether the public disclosure
bar and the original source exception apply under the Pre-Amended
HFCA depend upon the scope of the particular false claim at issue
and the facts and circumstances relevant to that claim.  It
therefore may be helpful for the Circuit Court to require the
parties to specifically address the scope of the false claim at
issue, the extent to which each claim is based on publicly
disclosed information that is subject to the public disclosure
bar, the Relators' "direct and independent knowledge" of the
information on which the claim is based, and how the Relators' 
"information provided the basis or catalyst for the
investigation, hearing, audit, or report that led to the public
disclosure."  To enable an appellate court to effectively review
the Circuit Court's rulings post-remand, it would also be helpful
for the Circuit Court to make specific factual findings on the
predicate facts that it relied upon in determining whether the
public disclosure bar and the original source exception are
applicable.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate in
part the Circuit Court's denial of the Churches' motion to
dismiss the First Amended Complaint, and we remand the case for
further proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
On the arguments:
James Hochberg
Jeremiah Galus
Erik Stanley
David J. Hacker (on the briefs)
for Defendants-Appellants
James J. Bickerton
Stephen M. Tannenbaum
(Bickerton Dang)
for Plaintiffs-Relators-Appellees
21