NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000668
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARCELINO RAMENTO, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
M&M TANKS, INC., Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee
 
and
 
JOHN S. BRUNS, Plaintiff,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
DOE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES 1-10 and
 
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1465)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Marcelino Ramento (Ramento) sued 
Defendant-Appellant M&M Tanks, Inc. (M&M Tanks) for age
 
discrimination, retaliation for opposing age discrimination, and
 intentional infliction of emotional distress. 
Ramento's first
 
trial ended in a mistrial.1 After a retrial, the jury found M&M
 
1The jury in the first trial found in favor of M&M Tanks
with respect to the claims asserted by Ramento's co-plaintiff,
John S. Bruns. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tanks liable on Ramento's claims and awarded general, special,
 
and punitive damages.
 
On appeal, M&M Tanks contends that: (1) the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)2
 erred in redacting 
the first-trial testimony of Ramento's expert to exclude,
 pursuant to the collateral source rule, testimony related to
 Ramento's receipt of social security retirement benefits, and
 then admitting the redacted testimony during the retrial; (2) the
 Circuit Court erred in denying M&M Tanks' motion for judgment as
 a matter of law on Ramento's claim for punitive damages, which
 was made at the close of Ramento's case in chief; and (3) there
 was insufficient evidence to support the jury's finding of
 liability on Ramento's retaliation claim. As explained below, we
 conclude that M&M Tanks' appeal lacks merit. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Ramento had a long work history as a plumber and
 
laborer. 
In June 2002, he began working for M&M Tanks. While
 
employed by M&M Tanks, Ramento worked on large construction
 projects doing work as a plumber and also providing physical
 labor.
 
In January 2005, M&M Tanks assigned Ramento to work on
 
a federal roadway improvement project at the Opana Regional Relay
 Station (Opana Project). Ramento was 64 years old at that time. 
On January 31, 2005, the foreman for the Opana Project assigned
 Ramento to perform heavy labor work.  At the end of the work day,
 
the foreman told Ramento that Ramento would no longer be needed
 
on the job and that he would be replaced by younger workers. On
 February 2, 2005, M&M Tanks gave Ramento a letter of separation,
 which explained that he was being separated from employment due
 to "Lack of Work."   However, several younger workers were
 
assigned to the Opana Project after Ramento was laid off. 
2The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 7, 2005, John S. Bruns (Bruns), Ramento's
 
co-plaintiff, submitted a memorandum to M&M Tanks alleging that
 
it had used age discrimination against Bruns and Ramento to lay
 them off. On February 11, 2005, Mike Deegan (Deegan), the vice-
president of M&M Tanks, met separately with Bruns and Ramento. 
During Ramento's meeting with Deegan, Ramento submitted a signed
 memorandum to Deegan in which Ramento asserted that "M&M Tanks,
 Inc. improperly used 'no work' and called it a 'separation' as a
 way to discharge me from working on the Opana job, using a
 younger person to replace me, resulting in age discrimination." 
Deegan explained to Ramento that "[t]here was no age
 discrimination" and that M&M Tanks would give him the opportunity
 to resume working if other job opportunities opened up. 
When Ramento left the meeting, another M&M Tanks 
supervisor asked him to drive a truck for several days to deliver materials. Ramento worked for M&M Tanks in that assignment until February 18, 2005. After that brief assignment, M&M Tanks never gave Ramento any additional work. Ramento was unable to find other employment, which led him to apply for social security retirement benefits two years earlier than he had previously planned. Ramento filed a complaint with the Hawai
'i Civil Rights 
Commission and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and he was issued right to sue notices by both commissions.  Ramento 
thereafter filed a complaint in Circuit Court. 
II.
 
3
In the first trial, the Circuit Court  declared a
mistrial as to Ramento's claims against M&M Tanks. On retrial,4
 
the jury found in favor of Ramento on his claims of age
 
discrimination, retaliation for opposing age discrimination, and
 intentional infliction of emotional distress. The jury awarded
 
3The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided over the first
trial.
 
4The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided over the
retrial.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
general, special, and punitive damages.
 
The Circuit Court entered its "Final Judgment" on 
June 9, 2011. M&M Tanks filed a "Motion for Judgment or, in the
 
Alternative, for a New Trial," which raised the same issues that
 M&M Tank raises in this appeal. On August 11, 2011, the Circuit
 Court issued its "Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Judgment
 or, in the Alternative, for a New Trial." This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 A.
 
At Ramento's first trial, Ramento called Thomas A.
 
Loudat, Ph.D (Dr. Loudat), an expert in economics, to testify
 about the past and future income Ramento lost as the result of
 M&M Tanks' termination of his employment. On cross-examination
 by M&M Tanks, Dr. Loudat testified that he should have subtracted
 the social security retirement benefits Ramento had received in
 calculating Ramento's lost past income, and that the failure to
 do so was an "oversight" on his part. Dr. Loudat was not
 available to testify at the retrial and portions of his testimony
 from the first trial were read into the record during the
 retrial.
 
M&M Tanks contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
redacting Dr. Loudat's first-trial testimony to exclude, based on
 the collateral source rule, testimony related to Ramento's
 receipt of social security retirement benefits and its effect on
 Dr. Loudat's calculation of Ramento's damages for lost past
 income, and then admitting the redacted testimony during the
 retrial. M&M Tanks does not claim that the collateral source
 rule is inapplicable to Ramento's receipt of social security
 benefits, and it does not claim that Dr. Loudat should legally
 have taken Ramento's social security benefits into account in
 calculating Ramento's damages for lost past income. Instead, M&M
 Tanks argues that the Circuit Court's admission of Dr. Loudat's
 redacted testimony violated its right to cross-examine and
 impeach Dr. Loudat. We disagree.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
In Bynum v. Magno, 106 Hawai 'i 81, 101 P.3d 1149 
(2004), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court described the collateral source 
rule as follows: 
The "collateral source rule," in general, provides that
benefits or payments received on behalf of a plaintiff, froman independent source, will not diminish recovery from thewrongdoer. Ellsworth v. Schelbrock, 235 Wis.2d 678, 611
N.W.2d 764, 767 (2000). "Under the collateral source rule,a 'tortfeasor is not entitled to have its liability reducedby benefits received by the plaintiff from a source whollyindependent of and collateral to the tortfeasor[.]'" Sam 
Teague, Ltd. v. Hawai' i Civil Rights Comm'n, 89 Hawai' i 269,
281, 971 P.2d 1104, 1116 (1999) (quoting Sato v. Tawata, 79Hawai'i 14, 18, 897 P.2d 941, 945 (1995)). 
Bynum, 106 Hawai 'i at 86, 101 P.3d at 1154 (brackets in original; 
footnote omitted). 
The supreme court in Bynum also cited Section 920A of
 
the Restatement (Second) of Torts (1979) (hereinafter
 
"Restatement"), entitled "Effect of Payments Made to Injured
 Party," and the comment to that section. The court noted that
 Section 920A(2) of the Restatement "establishes that, under the
 collateral source rule, '[p]ayments made to or benefits conferred
on the injured party from other sources are not credited against
 the tortfeasor's liability, although they cover all or part of
  
the harm for which the tortfeasor is liable.'" Bynum, 106
 
Hawai
'i at 86, 101 P.3d at 1154 (brackets in original; emphasis 
omitted) (quoting Restatement § 920A(2)). The court stated:
 
Comment b to § 920A, entitled "Benefits from collateral
sources," further explains that although double compensation
may result to the plaintiff, such a benefit should redound
to the injured party rather than "become a windfall" to the
party causing the injury:
 
The injured party's net loss may have been reduced
correspondingly, and to the extent that the defendant
is required to pay the total amount there may be a
 double compensation for a part of the plaintiff's
 
injury. But it is the position of the law that a
benefit that is directed to the injured party should
 
not be shifted so as to become a windfall for the
 tortfeasor. 
Restatement § 920A cmt. b (emphases added). Ultimately,
comment b explains that "it is the tortfeasor's
responsibility to compensate for all harm that he causes, 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not confined to the net loss that the injured party
receives." Id.
 
. . . The Restatement further declares that the rule
 
"that collateral benefits are not subtracted from the
 
plaintiff's recovery applies to the following types of
 
benefits: . . . [g]ratuities[ ] . . . [and s]ocial
legislation benefits." Restatement § 920A cmt. c(3)-(4)
(emphasis added). As to social legislation benefits, the
Restatement explains that "[i]f the benefit was . . .
established . . . by law, [the plaintiff] should not be
deprived of the advantage that it confers." Restatement 
§ 920A cmt. b.
 
Id. (brackets and ellipsis points in original).
 
The supreme court applied Restatement § 920A(2) and the
 
comment to Restatement § 920A in concluding that
 
Medicare/Medicaid payments are social legislation benefits and
 that "the collateral source rule prohibits reducing a plaintiff's
 award of damages to reflect the discounted amount paid by
 Medicare/Medicaid." Id. at 88-89, 101 P.3d at 1156-57.
5 The
 
court further concluded that the receipt of Medicare/Medicaid
 payments "should not be admitted in evidence to reduce damages
 'since, by the collateral source rule, the receipt of collateral
 source benefits is deemed irrelevant and immaterial on the issue
 of damages.'" Id. at 94, 101 P.3d at 1162 (citation and brackets
 
5In Bynum, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court answered "no" to both
the following questions certified to it by the United States
District Court for the District of Hawai 'i: 
"Where a plaintiff's healthcare expenses are paid by
Medicare and/or Medical, does the discounted amount
paid to a healthcare provider by [Medicare] and
Medi–Cal [(a California Medicaid program)] constitute
the amount that should be awarded as medical special
damages to a plaintiff in a negligence action? In this
 circumstance, is evidence of amounts billed in excess
of the amount[ ] paid irrelevant and inadmissible?"
 
Bynum, 106 Hawai
'i at 82, 101 P.3d at 1150 (some brackets in
original; footnote omitted). The supreme court held that "aplaintiff, injured by the tortious conduct of a defendant, isentitled to recover the reasonable value of medical services [provided to the plaintiff] and is not limited to theexpenditures actually paid by Medicaid/Medicare." Id. at 92, 101 
P.3d at 1160. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
omitted). The court cited with approval the reasoning that "'the
 
entire theory of the collateral source rule is to keep the jury
 from learning anything about the collateral income so that it
 will not influence the decision of the jury' for the purpose of
 reducing the award of damages." Id. (brackets and citation
 
omitted).
 
In Sam Teague, Ltd. v. Hawai
'i Civil Rights Comm'n, 89 
Hawai'i 269, 971 P.2d 1104 (1999), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
applied the collateral source rule to an award of back pay in an employment discrimination case. The court held "as a matter of law," that unemployment benefits are collateral source payments that "should not be deducted from awards of back pay under our employment discrimination law." Sam Teague, 89 Hawai
'i at 283, 
971 P.2d at 1118. Accordingly, the supreme court held that "the circuit court did not have discretion, as a matter of law, to reduce the award of back pay by the amount of unemployment benefits received by [the illegally discharged employee]." Id. 
C. 
Comment c to Restatement § 920A, which the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court applied in Bynum, specifically identifies "[s]ocial security benefits" as a "[s]ocial legislation benefit[]" that is subject to the collateral source rule. Based on Bynum and Sam Teague, we conclude that the social security retirement benefits received by Ramento were subject to the collateral source rule and that such benefits could not properly be considered in calculating Ramento's damages for lost past income. Because Ramento's receipt of social security retirement benefits was not relevant to the calculation of Ramento's damages for lost past income, the Circuit Court properly redacted the portion of Dr. Loudat's first-trial testimony that considered the effect of Ramento's receipt of social security benefits on Dr. Loudat's calculation of such damages. See Bynum, 106 Hawai
'i at 94, 101 
P.3d at 1162 (concluding that "the receipt of collateral source benefits is deemed irrelevant and immaterial on the issue of damages" (citation omitted)). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As noted, M&M Tanks does not contend that the
 
collateral source rule is inapplicable to Ramento's receipt of
 
social security benefits or that Dr. Loudat should legally have
 taken Ramento's social security benefits into account in
 calculating Ramento's damages for lost past income. 
Nevertheless, M&M Tanks argues that the Circuit Court's redaction
 of Dr. Loudat's testimony affected its ability to impeach Dr.
 Loudat by showing that he had acknowledged being wrong in
 computing Ramento's lost past income. In other words, M&M Tanks
 argues that the Circuit Court erred in preventing it from
 impeaching Dr. Loudat with his acknowledgment of error, even
 though Dr. Loudat's acknowledgment of error was incorrect as a
 matter of law. M&M Tanks further asserts that the Circuit
 Court's limiting its ability to impeach Dr. Loudat in this manner
 violated its right to cross-examine. We disagree.
 
The right to cross-examine in a civil case is not 
unlimited. See Kekua v. Kaiser Foundation Hospital, 61 Haw. 208, 
221, 601 P.2d 364, 373 (1979) (stating that "the extent of cross-examination is a matter largely within the discretion of the trial court"); see also State v. Brooks, 125 Hawai
'i 462, 470, 
264 P.3d 40, 48 (App. 2011) ("[A] criminal defendant's 'right to confront and to cross-examine is not absolute and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodate other legitimate interests in the criminal trial process.'" (citations omitted)). Under Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 403 (1993), the trial court 
has the discretion to exclude evidence "if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury[.]" Failing to redact Dr. Loudat's testimony that he should have subtracted Ramento's social security benefits in computing Ramento's lost past income, when such benefits cannot legally be subtracted under the collateral source rule, would clearly have created the danger of unfair prejudice to Ramento as well as the significant risk of confusing and misleading the jury. Even assuming that the redacted portion of Dr. Loudat's testimony had some 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
impeachment value, we conclude that under HRE Rule 403, the
 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the
 redacted portion of Dr. Loudat's testimony.
 
II.
 
M&M Tanks contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying its motion for judgment as a matter of law on Ramento's claim for punitive damages, made at the close of Ramento's case in chief, because M&M Tanks contends that there was no evidence presented of its financial condition. M&M Tanks frames the issue as whether there was sufficient evidence to support an award of punitive damages at the close of Ramento's case in chief. However, by presenting evidence after the Circuit Court denied its motion, M&M Tanks waived the right to challenge the sufficiency of the evidence at the close of Ramento's case in chief. See Azer v. Myers, 8 Haw. App. 86, 121 n.30, 793 P.2d 
1189, 2011 n.30 (party waived any error in the trial court's denial of motions for directed verdict made at the close of adversary's case in chief by proceeding to present evidence), rev'd in part on other grounds by 71 Haw. 506, 795 P.2d 853 (1990); Surprenant v. Rivas, 424 F.3d 5, 12-13 (1st Cir. 2005); see also State v. Pudiquet, 82 Hawai
'i 419, 423, 922 P.2d 1032, 
1036 (App. 1996) (applying similar rule in criminal cases where a defendant presents evidence after a motion for judgment of acquittal at the close of the prosecution's case is denied). We therefore consider M&M Tanks' sufficiency of the evidence claim based on all the evidence presented to the jury. We disagree with M&M Tanks' contention that there was insufficient evidence of Ramento's financial condition to support the jury's award of punitive damages. 
At the outset, we note that M&M Tanks does not argue
 
that the evidence of its conduct did not justify an award of
 punitive damages. M&M Tanks also does not argue that the jury's
 award of punitive damages was excessive. Instead, M&M Tanks'
 sole claim is that the award of punitive damages was precluded by
 the lack of evidence of its financial condition.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Romero v. Hariri, 80 Hawai 'i 450, 457-58, 911 P.2d 
85, 92-93 (App. 1996), the defendant challenged the jury's award
 
of punitive damages as excessive based on his claim that
 insufficient evidence of his financial condition had been
 presented. In rejecting this challenge, this court concluded: 
The failure to show net worth does not necessarily
invalidate a punitive [damage] award but only eliminates a
factor in which to gauge the reasonableness of the award.
Fahrenberg v. Tengel, 96 Wis.2d 211, 291 N.W.2d 516, 527
(1980). See also Ahmed v. Collins, 23 Ariz. App. 54, 530
P.2d 900, 904 (1975) ("wealth of a defendant is only one
factor which a jury may consider in assessing punitive
damages"). Moreover, "[t]he plaintiff may generally show
the reputed wealth of the defendant, and is not confined to
proof of facts directly showing [the defendant's] financial
condition." 22 Am. Jur. 2d Damages § 953 (1988). As
 explained long ago by a Wisconsin court, "In most cases[,]
evidence of reputed wealth would be the only evidence the
plaintiff could make upon the point, and . . . the defendant
. . . always has it in his [or her] power to present the
real facts to the jury in answer to the general proof of the
plaintiff." Draper v. Baker, 61 Wis. 450, 21 N.W. 527, 529
 
(1884). See also Rogers v. Florence Printing Co., 233 S.C.
567, 106 S.E.2d 258, 262 (1958) (holding that punitive award
not excessive and affirming principle that evidence of
defendant's worth is information within his possession and
defendant "should not be heard to complain that the jury
made its award without such information, where he himself
testified and did not offer it").
 
Id. at 458, 911 P.2d 93 (certain brackets in original).
 
In support of our conclusion, we noted that the only
 
information plaintiff had about defendant's financial worth was
 
based on his representations; "[d]efendant had the opportunity,
 and was better able, to present evidence which accurately
 portrayed his financial status"; and defendant had failed to
 introduce proof of financial worth beyond that of plaintiff's
 testimony. Id. 
In Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai
'i 93, 106, 947 P.2d 961, 
974 (App.) rev'd in part on other grounds, 86 Hawai 'i 84, 947 
P.2d 952 (1997), we disagreed with the defendant's claim that
 plaintiff was required to produce evidence of defendant's
 financial condition to support the award of punitive damages. We
 stated that "it is in the defendant's best interest to put on
 evidence of financial condition when punitive damages are being
 considered because 'the defendant . . . always has it in his [or
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
her] power to present the real facts to the jury in answer to the 
general proof of the plaintiff.'" Ditto, 86 Hawai 'i at 106, 947 
P.2d at 974 (citation omitted). We went on to conclude, in any event, that evidence of defendant's financial condition had been presented to the jury, and we rejected defendant's "argument that the punitive damage award was not supported by evidence of financial condition," noting that defendant had "failed to introduce evidence of his financial worth beyond" what was presented at trial. Id. at 106-07, 947 P.2d at 974-75. 
In this case, Ramento adduced evidence that M&M Tanks' 
contract for the Opana Project was in the area of $2.3 million;
 that Ramento had worked on many other projects while employed by
 M&M Tanks, including a large-scale project involving the
 installation of a two-mile water line along Kamehameha Highway
 and connecting 300 homes to the water line; and that M&M Tanks
 was a substantial company with a significant number of employees. 
M&M Tanks had the opportunity to present evidence of its
 financial condition in response to this evidence to controvert
 and oppose Ramento's claim for punitive damages, but M&M Tanks
 declined to present any evidence of its financial condition. 
Under these circumstances, based on Romero and Ditto, 
we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to warrant the submission of Ramento's punitive damage claim to the jury. See 
Ditto, 86 Hawai
'i at 106-07, 947 P.2d at 974-75; Romero, 80 
Hawai'i at 457-58, 911 P.2d 92-93. We also conclude that M&M 
Tanks has not provided any basis for this court to hold that the jury abused its discretion in awarding Ramento $325,000 in punitive damages. 
III.
 
M&M Tanks contends that there was insufficient evidence
 
to support the jury's finding of liability on Ramento's
 retaliation claim. We disagree.
 
The evidence shows that on February 11, 2005, Ramento
 
submitted a written complaint to M&M Tanks, asserting that it had
 discriminated against him on the basis of age. After Ramento
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
submitted his complaint, he was briefly called back to work for
 
about a week, but after that assignment ended, he was never 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recalled to work for M&M Tanks again, even though there was work
 
available on the Opana Project that he could perform.
 
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence for a 
rational jury to find that after Ramento complained about discrimination, M&M Tanks retaliated against him by refusing to call him back for further work. See Schefke v. Reliable 
Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai
'i 408, 425-26, 32 P.3d 52, 69­
70 (2001); Suzuki v. State, 119 Hawai 'i 288, 302-03, 196 P.3d 
290, 304-05 (App. 2008). Accordingly, we decline to disturb the jury's finding that M&M Tanks was liable on Ramento's retaliation claim. 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's "Final Judgment" and its 
"Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Judgment or, in the
 Alternative, for a New Trial." 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 26, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Carl H. Osaki 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Ronald Albu 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
14
 