NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000496 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
KATHERINE RENEE MCQUEEN, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1CPC-19-0001394)  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Katherine Renee McQueen (McQueen) 
appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; Notice of 
Entry" (Judgment
) entered on May 29, 2020, by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court  ).  On March 10, 2020, a jury 
found McQueen guilty as charged of one count of Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-711(1)(a), (1)(b) and/or (1)(d) (2014 & Supp. 2019).
 21
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided . 
2 HRS § 707-711(1) reads in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
(a) The person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes
substantial bodily injury to another;
(b) The person recklessly causes serious bodily injury toanother; 
. . . . 
(continued...) 2(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, McQueen argues the Circuit Court erred by: 
(1) failing to engage her in a "back-and-forth" Tachibana 
colloquy; (2) making incorrect evidentiary rulings, including (a) failing to strike testimony that mischaracterized the complaining witness, Gabriela Lyle (Lyle), as the "victim", (b) ruling that 
post-arrest evidence of McQueen "slipping handcuffs" was more 
probative than prejudicial, (c) striking McQueen's testimony that she had a shoulder injury predating the alleged incident, and (d) overruling McQueen's objection to the State's characterization of her during closing argument as "a drunk person" and "that drunk person". 
McQueen also argues she was denied effective assistance 
of counsel because her trial counsel: (a) failed to move for a judgment of acquittal after the Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaii's (State) opening statement; (b) failed to follow-up on 
Lyle's "septic" knee injury; (c) failed to question the State's 
witnesses regarding any evidence of choking injuries to Lyle in addition to a laceration injury; and (d) forced her to testify. 
Lyle accused McQueen of attacking her with a knife and 
causing a five-inch laceration on her arm. At trial, the State argued McQueen caused Lyle's injury while intoxicated from alcohol. In defense, McQueen argued she had no reason to and did not attack Lyle. 
I. Discussion 
A.  Tachibana Colloquy 
McQueen contends the Circuit Court violated her rights 
under Tachibana and its progeny because the colloquies provided to her did not constitute a "true exchange" in that it is unknown whether McQueen "actually understood" or had the "the correct understanding" of the Circuit Court's advisement, despite that 
(d) The person intentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury
to another with a dangerous instrument[.] 
2   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
she answered yes or no to the questions. See e.g., Tachibana v. 
State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 236 n.7, 900 P.2d 1293, 1303 n.7 (1995) 
(noting basic instructions a court should provide regarding a 
defendant's right to testify and not to testify); State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai# i 292, 294, 12 P.3d 1233, 1235 (2000) (concluding that 
the prior-to-trial advisement recommended in Tachibana should thereafter be mandated). McQueen asserts it was error for the court to read each of the Tachibana rights to her one by one, and then only ask yes-or-no questions as to whether she understood her rights.
3 
We conclude the Circuit Court did not err in conducting 
its colloquies pursuant to Tachibana and its progeny. A 
"[c]olloquy is defined as '[a]ny formal discussion, such as an 
oral exchange between a judge, the prosecutor, the defense counsel, and a criminal defendant in which the judge ascertains the defendant's understanding of the proceedings and of the defendant's rights.'" State v. Chong Hung Han, 130 Hawai# i 83, 
90, 306 P.3d 128, 135 (2013), as corrected (July 10, 2013), as corrected (July 31, 2013) (second alteration in original) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 300 (9th ed. 2009)). In Han, the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that a "true 
colloquy" did not occur where the trial court failed to sufficiently "engage[] in a verbal exchange with [the defendant] to ascertain [the defendant's] understanding of significant propositions in the advisement." Id.; see also State v. Pomroy, 
132 Hawai# i 85, 93, 319 P.3d 1093, 1101 (2014), as corrected 
(Jan. 29, 2015) (concluding colloquy deficient because "the 
3 The State asserts that McQueen failed to object to the manner in
which the Circuit Court advised her of her right to testify and her right not
to testify, and that McQueen thus waived this issue. However, Hawai #i 
appellate courts have consistently addressed this issue on a plain errorbasis. See State v. Staley, 91 Hawai #i 275, 287, 982 P.2d 904, 916 (1999)
(holding there was plain error due to circuit court's failure to establish onthe record that defendant's decision not to testify was made knowingly andvoluntarily); State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai #i 165, 173, 415 P.3d 907, 915
(2018) ("Once a violation of the constitutional right to testify isestablished, the conviction must be vacated unless the State can prove thatthe violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.") (citations omitted);Hawai #i
 Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
district court recited a litany of rights[,] it then asked [the 
defendant] if he 'understood that,' and it [was] unclear which right 'that' referenced");
4 State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai# i 165, 
171, 415 P.3d 907, 913 (2018). 
Here, the Circuit Court had the following pretrial 
exchange with McQueen: 
[Circuit Court:] I want to move on now to the next topic. In
this trial, Ms. McQueen, you have the constitutional rightto testify in your own defense. Do you understand what thatmeans? 
[McQueen:] Yes. [Circuit Court:] You should consult with your lawyer about
your decision to testify. But it is your decision. And noone can stop you from testifying, if that’s what you chooseto do. Do you understand that? 
[McQueen:] Yes. [Circuit Court:] If you choose to testify, the prosecutor
. . . will have the opportunity to cross-examine or ask youquestions. Do you understand what that means? 
[McQueen:] Yes. [Circuit Court:] Do you have any questions about what
happens if you choose to testify in the trial? 
[McQueen:] No. [Circuit Court:] You also have a constitutional right to not
testify and to remain silent. Do you understand what thatmeans? 
[McQueen:] Yes. [Circuit Court:] If you choose not to testify, the jury will
be instructed that it cannot hold your silence, as well asyour decision to not testify, against you when it decidesthe case. Do you have any questions about what that means? 
[McQueen:] No. [Circuit Court:] Do you understand what happens if you
choose not to testify? 
[McQueen:] Yes. 
In the ultimate colloquy before McQueen decided to 
testify, the following exchange occurred, in relevant part: 
4 In Pomroy, the supreme court also determined the lower court failed
to advise the defendant that "he had the right not to testify and that no one
can prevent him from testifying." 132 Hawai #i at 92, 319 P.3d at 1100. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Circuit Court]: When we started this trial, I told you you
have the constitutional right to testify in your owndefense. Do you understand what that means? 
[McQueen]: Yes. [Circuit Court]: You should consult with your lawyer about
your decision to testify. But it is your decision. And ifyou want to testify, nobody can stop you from doing so. Doyou understand that? 
[McQueen]: Yes.
 
. . . . 
[Circuit Court]: You also have the constitutional right to
not testify, and to remain silent. Do you understand whatthat means? 
[McQueen]: Yes.
 
[Circuit Court]: If you choose not to testify, the jury will
be instructed that it cannot hold your decision to nottestify and it cannot hold your silence against you in anyway when it decides the case. Do you understand what thatmeans? 
[McQueen]: Yes. [Circuit Court]: Do you understand what happens if you
choose not to testify? 
[McQueen]: Yes. [Circuit Court]: Did you have a chance to talk to Mr. Amadi
about your decision? 
[McQueen]: Yes. [Circuit Court]: Did you have enough time? [McQueen]: Yes. Yes. [Circuit Court]: Okay. Did you need more time to discuss it
with Mr. Amadi? 
[McQueen]: No. [Circuit Court]: Okay. And what is your decision? Is it to
testify, or not testify? 
[McQueen]: To testify. 
(Format altered.) 
In both the pre-trial advisement and ultimate colloquy,
the Circuit Court engaged in a "true exchange" by verbally 
ascertaining McQueen's understanding after each question with  
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regard to her right to testify and her right not to testify.5 
The Circuit Court also provided McQueen opportunities to ask 
questions regarding her right to testify or not testify. Moreover, the questions were clear and pointed. Further, the record is devoid of any indication that McQueen was, at any point, confused by the Circuit Court's questions. Nor does McQueen claim to have been confused by the ultimate colloquy. 
McQueen asserts this case is similar to State v. 
Eduwensuyi, 141 Hawai# i 328, 409 P.3d 732 (2018). We disagree. 
In Eduwensuyi, the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that the trial 
court failed to include necessary advisements in its colloquies. Id. at 333-34, 409 P.3d at 737-38. Thus, the supreme court declined to address Eduwensuyi's argument that the trial court failed to engage in a true colloquy. Id. at 333-34, 337 n.11, 
409 P.2d at 737-38, 741 n.11. 
We conclude the Circuit Court properly advised McQueen 
of her rights under Tachibana and its progeny.
B. Evidentiary Rulings
1. Reference to Lyle as a "victim" was harmless error 
McQueen argues the Circuit Court erred in not striking 
testimony referring to Lyle as a "victim," although the court properly sustained the defense's objection to the use of that term. 
John Lee (Lee) was a witness for the State who 
testified that he applied a tourniquet to Lyle's arm and called 911 after Lyle ran out of an apartment following the incident. Lee testified that while he was on the phone with dispatch, he was "[w]atching the victim. Making sure she didn't . . . collapse or go into shock." Defense counsel objected to the 
5 Given that McQueen decided to testify, the advisements regarding her
right not to testify are relevant. See Lewis
, 94 Hawai #i at 293-94, 12 P.3d
at 1234-35 (quoting 
Tachibana
, 79 Hawai #i at 236 n. 7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n. 7)
("In connection with the privilege against self-incrimination, the defendant
should also be advised that he or she has a right not to testify and that ifhe or she does not testify then the jury can be instructed about thatright."). 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
characterization of Lyle as "the victim" and moved to strike. 
The Circuit Court stated, "[i]t's granted" but "the motion to strike is denied." The Circuit Court then instructed Lee to refer to Lyle as "woman" or "complaining witness." Prior to deliberation, the court instructed the jury that McQueen should be presumed innocent unless proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
6 
"Counsels and witnesses should refrain from using the 
term 'victim,' as the term is 'conclusive in nature and connotes a predetermination that the person referred to had in fact been wronged.'" State v. Stan, CAAP-18-0000579, 2021 WL 1199823, at *4 (Haw. App. Mar. 30, 2021) (SDO) (citing State v. Mundon, 129 Hawai#i 1, 26, 292 P.3d 205, 230 (2012)). However, the use of 
the term by a witness or the prosecution will not always result in prejudicial error requiring that a conviction be vacated. See 
id.; State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai# i 413, 417-18, 903 P.2d 718, 722-
23 (App. 1995) (use of term "victim" in instruction to jury was harmless error even though whether complaining witness was abused was a question yet to be determined by jury). 
Here, Lee was a lay witness who referred to Lyle as a 
"victim" one time. In these circumstances, Lee's use of the term was harmless given that the court sustained the objection, instructed the witness to refrain from using the term, and instructed the jury at the end of trial that a defendant is presumed innocent unless proven guilty. See Mundon, 129 Hawai# i 
at 25-26, 292 P.3d at 229-230 ("use of the term 'victim' in the limited circumstances of this case was not prejudicial to [the defendant]" where court sustained an objection to use of the term by a witness but overruled objections to the state's use of the term during the testimony of three police officers). 
6 The Circuit Court's instruction to the jury was: "You must presume
the defendant is innocent of the charge against her. This presumption remains
with the defendant throughout the trial of the case, unless and until theprosecution proves the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt." 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Evidence of McQueen Slipping Handcuffs 
a. The evidence was relevant 
McQueen next contends it was error for the Circuit 
Court to admit evidence that after being detained, McQueen 
"slipped the handcuffs" three times while in a Honolulu Police Department (HPD) patrol car.
7 At trial, the State argued the 
evidence was relevant in the event McQueen claimed it was physically impossible for her to stab Lyle due to voluntary intoxication. On appeal, the State argues that "[t]he probative value of McQueen slipping the handcuffs was significant because it showed that she had the ability to control her movements, or conduct, very soon after the stabbing despite being intoxicated" and cites to HRS § 702-230(2) (2014 & Supp. 2019).
8 We conclude 
the Circuit Court was not wrong to admit this evidence. 
In the State's case-in-chief, Officer Reid Nakamura 
(Officer Nakamura) testified that his first interaction with 
McQueen was in the back seat of his patrol car where he "had 
noticed that she had slipped the handcuffs[.]" Defense counsel objected, arguing that any observations of McQueen slipping the handcuffs were irrelevant and prejudicial. The following discussion then ensued: 
[Circuit Court]: Is the objection to the state
eliciting evidence of defendant's demeanor, or thefact that she was slipping out of handcuffs? 
[Defense Counsel]: Slipping out of handcuffs. [Circuit Court]: So you're allowed to get into
his physical observations of the defendant. 
7 The evidence was presented in the State's case-in-chief. Although
McQueen had not made an argument claiming physical impossibility due tovoluntary intoxication at that time, counsel also did not disclaim that such adefense would not be used. 
8 HRS § 702-230(2) (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(2) . . . . Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant is admissible to prove or negativeconduct or to prove state of mind sufficient toestablish an element of an offense. Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant is not admissible to negative the state of mind sufficient toestablish an element of the offense. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[State]: Right. But that was -- the state would argue
that they cannot be separated. The act of slipping outof the handcuffs if someone's handcuffed, the state'sgoing to argue that, you know, it's not normal to tryand slip out of them. It's not something that anormal, sober person would do, if they're in the backof a police vehicle. And attempt to slip out of thehandcuffs not once, but twice, even after she'sre-cuffed. 
[Circuit Court]: Sobriety and the ability to
slip out of handcuffs are not connected. 
[Defense Counsel]: Yes. [State]: And, well, that's why the state wants that
information is because the voluntary intoxicationdefense allows intoxication to negate conduct. And thestate is trying to show that she had physical prowess. 
[Circuit Court]: Now I understand where you're –-[State]: But mentally, as to the state of mind, it
cannot negate. So therefore there is a difference --there's a reason why. 
[Circuit Court]: The relevance goes to the
defendant's ability to control her conduct after shewas in the police custody. Therefore it's impartedback to her ability to control conduct when she wasstill in the apartment. The court finds probativevalue to that. 
(Format altered.) 
After the Circuit Court overruled the objection, 
Officer Nakamura proceeded to testify that he "noticed [McQueen] 
with her hands in front. And the handcuffs were still attached toher right wrist, with the left hand free, and then the left handcuff dangling" but "[did not] know how she got out of the handcuffs."  
Evidence is relevant if it has "any tendency to make 
the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." Hawai#i Rules of Evidence 
(
HRE) Rule 401. Although all relevant evidence is generally 
admissible, HRE Rule 402, "evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice," among other things. HRE Rule 403. 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"A trial court's determination that evidence is 
'relevant' within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) is 
reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review." State v. St. 
Clair, 101 Hawai# i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003) (citation 
omitted). In contrast, a trial court's balancing of the probative value of evidence against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE Rule 403 (1993) is reviewed for abuse of discretion. State v. Richie
, 88 Hawai# i 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1245 (1998). 
Here, evidence that McQueen slipped the handcuffs is 
relevant to her physical ability soon after the incident notwithstanding evidence of her alcohol consumption. Officer Nakamura testified he did not know how McQueen actually slipped the cuffs, but that McQueen's hands were initially cuffed behind her back and then seen in the front of her body, which evidences physical prowess to move her hand from behind her body to the front. This is relevant to McQueen's potential defense of physical impossibility due to voluntary intoxication.
9 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in admitting the evidence. 
b. The evidence was more probative than prejudicial 
Courts consider the following factors when weighing the 
probative value of evidence against the prejudicial effect: "the need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof, and the degree to which the evidence will probably rouse the jury to overmastering hostility." State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai# i 442, 
463, 60 P.3d 843, 864 (2002) (evidence not more prejudicial than probative where it was necessary to show defendant had knowledge 
9 McQueen also argues the Circuit Court was wrong to impart McQueen's
ability to control her conduct back to when she was still in the apartment
because the time gap between the incident and when police arrested McQueencould have provided opportunity for McQueen to become intoxicated. However,given the testimony by Lyle and McQueen that McQueen had been consumingalcohol between 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. and Lyle's testimony of McQueen'sactions, there was ample evidence of McQueen's consumption of alcohol beforethe incident. 
10   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and ability to plan crime in light of conflicting evidence 
available and defendant's defense) (citation omitted). 
Here, the factors weigh in favor of admission of the 
testimony. The evidence was necessary for the State to prove it was physically possible for McQueen to have committed the alleged offense, in the event she asserted physical impossibility due to voluntary intoxication as a defense. This need is underscored by the fact that McQueen was already claiming physical impossibility as a defense.
10 There was also limited evidence demonstrating 
McQueen's physical abilities in light of other evidence calling into question her ability to control her body.
11 
Moreover, McQueen's argument that the evidence "make[s] 
her seem a seasoned criminal, and [makes] her appear guilty – as if she needs to escape police" is unconvincing. In testifying that McQueen had slipped the handcuffs multiple times, Officer Nakamura did not state McQueen attempted to escape from the police or insinuate such. The evidence was not likely to rouse a 
jury to overmastering hostility. We conclude the Circuit Court 
did not abuse its discretion in its HRE Rule 403 balancing of this evidence. 
3.  Exclusion of testimony about
McQueen's preexisting injury was harmless 
Next, McQueen argues the Circuit Court improperly 
excluded her testimony regarding a shoulder injury predating the incident. The State argues there was no error because it only objected to the part of McQueen's testimony requiring a medical opinion and defense counsel stated "if it's about [the State] 
10 McQueen raised physically impossibility due to a preexisting
shoulder injury as a potential defense. 
11 Officer Nakamura testified that when officers began photographing
McQueen's hands for evidence, she was instructed to hold her hands out and
then make a fist. However, McQueen failed to follow the simple instructionsalthough she appeared capable of doing so. Officer Moses Chang ( Officer 
Chang) testified that when McQueen was arrested, he observed that she was
unable to keep balance and he held her up while escorting her so she would notfall. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
objecting for medical testimony . . . you can strike that." The
State also points out that there was other testimony to the effect that McQueen's shoulder injury pre-dated the incident.  
During direct examination, when asked why she was 
wearing a sling in court, McQueen testified: 
[McQueen:] I had to have surgery. I had to have my tendon
and rotator collar repaired a couple weeks ago. 
[Defense Counsel:] Okay. Is this a -- was this a preexisting
injury prior to September 21st or 22nd? 
[McQueen:] This was a preexisting injury, because my arm
frequent -- was popping up. It was dislocating too manytimes. 
(Format altered.) Following this testimony, the State objected 
as follows: 
[State]: Your Honor, the testimony regarding the
rotator cuff and the surgery is a medical opinion,especially on the rotator cuff being torn, andthe shoulder injury . . . . 
[Circuit Court]: So what remedy do you want? [State]: I would like the court -- I mean, I would
like the court to strike at the very least, and give acurative instruction. . . . I think I'm okay with juststriking the testimony, and giving a curativeinstruction, and the court's emphasis that [the juryis] not to consider any injury to the defendant'sshoulder, or any testimony regarding a prior injury. 
(Format altered.) 
After sustaining the State's objection, the Circuit 
Court stated the following to the jury: 
The objection is sustained. Motion is granted. So,ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you're to disregardMs. McQueen's last answer regarding the injury to hershoulder. It actually calls for a medical conclusion.So she's not the doctor. That testimony is stricken,you're not [to] consider as part of your considerationof the case. 
(Format altered.) 
In other testimony by McQueen, however, she testified 
her shoulder injury pre-dated the incident. On cross-
examination, McQueen testified that she had a shoulder injury 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prior to September 22, 2019 and that it had "been weak for about 
two years" prior to the incident. 
We conclude the Circuit Court did not err in striking 
McQueen's testimony about her shoulder surgery to repair her "tendon and rotator collar" and that it was a "preexisting injury" in that such testimony called for a medical opinion. McQueen was nonetheless allowed to testify separately about her shoulder injury.
4. The Circuit Court did not err regarding the
characterization of McQueen in closing argument 
Lastly, McQueen contends the State improperly 
characterized her as "a drunk person" or "that drunk person" in closing argument. McQueen argues using these terms "connote[s] a predetermination of motive for the alleged crime" and places her "in an abhorrent light before the jury" because of the association most people have with the term "drunk." The State argues that characterizing McQueen as "drunk" in its closing argument was a permissible and reasonable inference based on the evidence from the State's witnesses and McQueen's own admission that she had been drinking alcohol the day of the incident. We conclude there was no error. 
The supreme court has stated: 
[A] prosecutor, during closing argument, is permitted to draw
reasonable inferences from the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence. It is also within the boundsof legitimate argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, andcomment on the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence. 
State v. Clark, 83 Hawai# i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) 
(citations omitted). 
Here, characterizing McQueen as "a drunk" and "that 
drunk person" was a reasonable inference within the wide latitude 
afforded to prosecutors. First, McQueen herself admitted to consuming alcohol before the incident. Officer Nakamura testified that McQueen could not follow simple instructions, and Officer Chang testified McQueen was "really unsteady on her feet" 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and that she would have likely fallen if he had not held her up 
while escorting her. Both Officers Nakamura and Chang also testified McQueen was "slurring" her words during their interactions with her. Another officer, Jason Yee Hoy, testified that McQueen "[s]melled like the odor of alcohol" during his interaction with McQueen following the incident. Moreover, Lyle testified that on the evening of the incident, McQueen fell and knocked over the TV in the apartment, fell into the front door, and spoke nonsensically. 
The State presented the following, in closing argument: 
We first heard from [Lyle], who told you that this was
not the same person who she interacted with the day before.
Yesterday, she was nice. Earlier in the day, she bought herlunch and food. But this was a different person. She wasstumbling over herself, knocking into furniture, fallingover, mumbling to herself, saying things that didn't makesense, aggressive, yelling at her, calling her names. Shewas upset because [Lyle] was lying down all day, and she hadto clean because she wanted to make the apartment nice forher friend's inspection. 
And that testimony was consistent with what the
officers told you, that she had slurred words. She wasunsteady on her feet. She could not walk unassisted. 
Officer Moses Chang told you that if he didn't assist
her down those stairs, she definitely would have fallen.Officer Nakamura said she was unable to follow simpleinstructions. He said she was told to make her hands into a fist and keep them in a fist. She kept opening and closingthem. Officer Yee Hoy told you that when he escorted herdown, he smelled an odor of alcohol on her. 
And by the defendant's own admission, she had two full
glasses of Mike's Hard Lemonade. 
. . . . 
I want to focus . . . on the probability of what [Lyle
says] and whether it was supported by the evidence.Now, what did she say? She said that around 6 or 7 p.m.,she got into an argument with a drunk person, that drunkperson got upset – 
. . . . 
And it's also supported by the evidence. 
(Format altered.) 
There was ample evidence in the record from which the 
State could reasonably infer and argue that McQueen was drunk 
during the incident. The Circuit Court did not err in denying 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
McQueen's objection to the State's characterization of her during 
closing argument.
C. Ineffective assistance of trial counsel claims 
McQueen also argues she was denied effective assistance 
where her trial counsel failed to 1) move for judgment of acquittal after the State's opening statement; 2) inquire about the effects of Lyle's septic knee on her behavior; 3) question the State's witnesses about the lack of choking injuries on Lyle after the incident; and 4) allow McQueen to decide for herself whether to testify.
12 
A defendant has the burden to prove ineffective 
assistance of counsel by demonstrating 1) "that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence[;]" and 2) "that these errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. Salavea, 147 Hawai# i 
564, 576, 465 P.3d 1011, 1023 (2020) (citation omitted). Importantly
, "[s]pecific actions or omissions that are alleged to 
be erroneous but that had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny." Id. 
1. Defense counsel was not required to seek judgment
of acquittal after the State's opening statement 
McQueen argues her trial counsel should have filed a 
motion for judgment of acquittal after the State failed to assert in its opening statement that it would prove the incident occurred in the City and County of Honolulu. 
This argument is 
without merit. 
The trial court has the authority to grant a motion for 
judgment of acquittal at the close of the prosecutor's opening statement if it is clear that the prosecution's argument will 
12 HRAP Rule 28(a) provides: "If a brief raises ineffective assistance
of counsel as a point of error, the appellant shall serve a copy of the brief
on the attorney alleged to have been ineffective." Here, the record reflectsthat McQueen failed to serve the opening brief on trial counsel. McQueen'sappellate counsel is therefore cautioned to comply with HRAP Rule 28(a). 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fail regardless of other evidence that may be introduced. State 
v. Simpson, 64 Haw. 363, 368, 641 P.2d 320, 323-24 (1982). 
However, "[a]n opening statement merely provides an opportunity for counsel to advise and outline for the jury the facts and questions in the matter before them[;] . . . [it] is not evidence." Id. at 369, 641 P.2d at 324 (citations omitted). 
Thus, a motion at the close of the prosecutor's opening statement is rarely granted. Id. at 368, 641 P.2d at 323. 
In criminal cases, the State is required to prove venue 
beyond a reasonable doubt. HRS § 701-114(1)(d) (2014).
13 Under 
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 18, "the prosecution 
shall be had in the circuit in which the offense or any part of it was committed." 
Moreover, "[t]he first judicial circuit is 
the island of O[# ]ahu[.]" HRS § 603-1(1). As this court has 
stated, "the City and County of Honolulu covers the same area as the first judicial circuit . . . . Consequently, proof that an event occurred in the City and County of Honolulu or on the Island of O[# ]ahu is proof that it occurred within the first 
judicial circuit." State v. Correa, 5 Haw. App. 644, 650, 706 
P.2d 1321, 1325 (1985). 
Here, the State proffered the following during its 
opening statement: "[Lyle] found herself pinned underneath the defendant, Katherine Renee McQueen, in a 
Waikiki studio -- in a 
Waikiki studio apartment"; "This assault occurred on the eighth floor of 2509 Ala Wai Boulevard"; "[Lyle] wasn't sure whether she was going to move back to Kauai or stay on Oahu"; "Tony brought the defendant to 2509 Ala Wai Boulevard"; "She works at a bar called Kelly O'Neil's, which is also in Waikiki"; "You're also 
13 HRS § 701-114(1) states, in relevant part: 
(1) Except as otherwise provided in section 701-115, no person
may be convicted of an offense unless the following are proved beyond a
reasonable doubt: 
. . . . (d) Facts establishing venue[.] 
16   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
going to hear from Honolulu Police Department officers"; and "Dr. 
Yost is a trauma surgeon at Queen's medical." (Emphases added.) 
The opening statement does not clearly indicate the 
State would fail to prove the incident occurred on O# ahu. 
Simpson, 64 Haw. at 368, 641 P.2d at 323. In fact, the State introduced ample evidence during the trial that the incident occurred in the City and County of Honolulu during direct examination of Lee, Perez's apartment office manager, and one of the HPD officers who responded to the scene of the incident. 
Based on the record, McQueen's trial counsel did not 
erroneously fail to seek judgment of acquittal after the State's opening statement, and McQueen was not denied effective assistance of counsel on this basis. 
2. Whether trial counsel was ineffective for not pursuing
questions about Lyle's septic knee should be
addressed in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding 
Next, McQueen argues her trial counsel was ineffective 
for failing to inquire about Lyle's septic knee as an "alternative theory for the source of [Lyle's] knife wound[,]" considering the possible symptoms of being septic.
14 
While "matters presumably within the judgment of 
counsel, like trial strategy, 'will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight[,]'" State v. Smith, 68 Haw. 304, 311, 712 P.2d 496, 501 (1986), as amended Jan. 14, 1986, where the record does not explain a legitimate rationale for defense counsel's decision within the range of competence demanded of criminal attorneys, this court may deny a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel without prejudice to the defendant to raise such claims at an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding. See State v. Ramos, No. 
28356, 2009 WL 353290, at *14 (Haw. App. Feb. 6, 2009) (mem.) 
14 In her Opening Brief, McQueen lists a variety of effects from being
septic as published on the Center of Disease Control's website. Based on such 
asserted effects, McQueen argues her trial counsel should have offered analternative explanation for Lyle's injuries, including that Lyle inflicted theinjuries on herself, or that Lyle's condition could have affected her memoryof what had occurred. 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(denying defendant's ineffective assistance of counsel claim 
without prejudice to raising claim in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding where record did not adequately explain why trial counsel chose to pursue lines of inquiry that elicited testimony from officer pertaining to defendant's past criminal activities). 
Here, McQueen's trial counsel questioned Dr. Yost, 
Lyle's treating physician after the incident, regarding Lyle's septic diagnosis, to which Dr. Yost responded he believed Lyle was septic prior to the incident, the infection was from her right knee, a person who is septic could exhibit signs of fatigue, and whether someone who is septic could experience symptoms of a cold or a flu would depend on how sick the person was at that point. However, the record does not adequately explain why McQueen's trial counsel stopped short of questioning Dr. Yost about the effects of being septic and its impacts on Lyle's behavior. Without more, it is unclear whether McQueen's trial counsel declined to pursue this line of questioning "pursuant to a legitimate trial strategy and within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." Ramos, 2009 
WL 353290, at *14 (mem. op.) (citation omitted). As earlier noted, McQueen failed to serve her trial counsel with the Opening Brief in this appeal, thus precluding a response from trial counsel. McQueen's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel on this basis is denied without prejudice to McQueen raising this claim in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding where trial counsel has an opportunity to respond to the claim and the record can be properly developed.
3. Trial counsel was not ineffective in failing
to elicit testimony regarding choking marks on Lyle 
McQueen also argues she received ineffective assistance 
of counsel because trial counsel did not elicit any testimony about the lack of choking injuries sustained by Lyle during the incident. We conclude this argument is without merit. 
Lyle testified that during the incident, "[McQueen's] 
whole body weight was on me. And she had her hand on my neck" for 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
about three minutes, "[j]ust holding my neck[.]" Dr. Yost 
testified that when Lyle was admitted to the emergency room for treatment, Lyle's clothing was removed and he did a "quick examination of the patient to see if there [were] any other injuries." Dr. Yost then testified: "We didn't find any other trauma." On cross-examination, trial counsel asked Dr. Yost about any other injuries found on Lyle, to which he reiterated none were found. 
On appeal, McQueen's counsel attempts to construe 
Lyle's testimony as an unsubstantiated allegation that McQueen choked Lyle because there is no evidence that Lyle sustained any injuries around her neck. Notably, however, Lyle never alleged McQueen choked her at any point to prompt trial counsel to inquire about the lack of injuries around Lyle's neck. Based on the record, McQueen has not demonstrated there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence in this regard. McQueen's trial counsel was not ineffective on this point.
4. The record does not reflect that 
trial counsel forced McQueen to testify 
Last, McQueen argues she "made no knowing, intelligent, 
or voluntary decision" to testify because the Circuit Court's colloquy was deficient and because her trial counsel mandated that she testify. This argument is without any support in the record. 
As noted above, the Circuit Court did not err in 
advising McQueen of her Tachibana rights. Indeed, the court specifically asked McQueen whether she understood if it was her decision alone to testify: 
[Circuit Court]: When we started this trial, I told you you
have the constitutional right to testify in your owndefense. Do you understand what that means? 
[McQueen]: Yes. [Circuit Court]: You should consult with your lawyer about your
decision to testify. But it is your decision. And if you want to
testify, nobody can stop you from doing so. Do you understandthat? 
[McQueen]: Yes. 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added) (format altered). Further, McQueen fails to 
cite where in the record her trial counsel "took the decision [whether to testify] away from [her.]" Notably, at the conclusion of McQueen's sentencing hearing she thanked the court for the opportunity to have a trial and to testify at her trial despite disagreeing with the verdict. Contrary to her argument on appeal, this indicates McQueen's decision to testify was of her own volition. McQueen's claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel based on being forced to testify by her trial counsel is rejected. 
II. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the May 29, 2020 "Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence; Notice of Entry" entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. However, McQueen may pursue her ineffective assistance of counsel claim in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding with respect to whether trial counsel improperly failed to pursue further inquiry about Lyle's septic knee. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 27, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
20 Kai Lawrence,for Defendant-Appellant 
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, for Plaintiff-Appellee 