 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001082
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plainitff-Appellee, v.
KATHLEEN FISCHER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 3DTC-12-046848)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kathleen Fischer (Fischer) appeals
 
from the November 29, 2012 Amended Judgment and Notice of Entry

 
1
of Amended Judgment (Amended Judgment)  that dismissed without
prejudice the State of Hawai 'i's (State) charge against Fischer 
for reckless driving of a motor vehicle in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291-2 (2007), entered by the District
 Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division (District Court) in
 case number 3DTC-12-046848.
2
 
3
Fischer appears to argue  that the District Court erred
when it amended the judgment to dismiss the charge without
 
1
 The text of Fischer's December 14, 2012 notice of appeal in case
number 3DTC-12-046848 identifies, as the sole document appealed from, the
"ORDER AMENDING DISMISSAL WITH PREJUDICE TO DISMISSAL WITHOUT PREJUDICE,
RAISED AND ARGUED [sic] November 29, 2012, entered November 29, 2012, Order
attached as Exhibit One." (Notice of Appeal) However, we can find no such
order in the record and Exhibit One, attached to her Notice of Appeal, is a
copy of the aforementioned Amended Judgment. Therefore, we presume Fisher
appeals from this Amended Judgment, and not some other order allowing the
amendment of the judgment.
 
2
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo presided.
 
3
 Fischer's "Point of Error" is in violation of Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as it does not state "wherein the record the alleged error occurred and [] where in the record thealleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error wasbrought to the attention of the court[.]" Counsel is cautioned that future noncompliance may result in sanctions. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prejudice because (1) the District Court did not enter any
 
findings of fact or conclusions of law to justify its original
 judgment; (2) the minutes and the original judgment indicated the
 case had been dismissed with prejudice and the State did not move
 to amend the allegedly incorrect judgment until after a second
 charge against Fischer had been filed; and (3) the District Court
 did not enter any findings or conclusions to justify its Amended
 Judgment.
 
After a careful review of the record in this case, the
 
issues raised and arguments made by the parties and the
 applicable authority, we resolve Fischer's appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
As a preliminary matter, we reject the State's argument
 
that this court lacks jurisdiction over this appeal. The State
 
4
argues, inter alia, that there was no final decision  from which
Fischer could take her appeal, insofar as she has yet to appear
 for trial on the charge against her. However, the State fails to
 appreciate that, while trial on the Complaint filed by the State
 
5
in case number 3DTA-12-01957  may be pending, the instant,
underlying case number 3DTC-12-046848 was resolved by the
 District Court's dismissal of this case.
 
Fischer's argument that the District Court erred in 
failing to render findings in support of its decision to grant the State's motion to dismiss is unconvincing. It is uncontested that the prosecution had the authority to dismiss the charge in this case, prior to trial, with leave of the District Court. Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48(a). Fischer 
provides no authority for the proposition, and we know of none, that requires a court to make findings or give reasons for granting such leave. 
4
 HRS ยง 641-12 (Supp. 2015), governing appeals from the district
courts, provides, in pertinent part,
 
Appeals upon the record shall be allowed from all final
decisions and final judgments of district courts in all
criminal matters. 
5
 We take judicial notice of the files and records of the District
Court of the Third Circuit in case number 3DTA-12-01957. Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence Rule 201.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second, although Fischer complains that the State did
 
not move to amend the original judgment until after the complaint
 
in case number 3DTA-12-01957 had been filed, she does not explain
 why this timing affects the validity of the Amended Judgment. 
6
Indeed, HRPP Rule 36  specifically provides that clerical errors
may be corrected "at any time."

 
Finally, Fischer complains that the District Court

 
failed to enter any findings or conclusions justifying the entry
 of the Amended Judgment. To the contrary, in granting the
 State's motion to amend, the District Court stated, "Court's
 intent was to allow dismissal without prejudice[,]" "the written
 judgment and order is incorrect and does not accurately reflect
 the Court's intent in allowing a dismissal" and "I do find it's a
 clerical mistake." Thus, we conclude that, to the extent that
 findings or conclusions were necessary, the District Court
 sufficiently informed the parties regarding the reasons for its
 decision.
 
Accordingly, we affirm the Amended Judgment entered by
 
the District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division on
 November 29, 2012.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 9, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard L. Holcomb,

for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Linda L. Walton,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai 'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
6
 HRPP Rule 36, Clerical Mistakes, provides, in relevant part, 
Clerical mistakes in judgments, orders or other parts
of the record and errors in the record arising from
oversight or omission may be corrected by the court at any
time of its own initiative or on motion of any party and
after such notice, if any, as the court orders. 
3
 