NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000637
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RONALD W. BENNER, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE
CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE ENTITIES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-2761)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Ronald W. Benner (Benner) appeals
 
from the Final Judgment, filed on July 28, 2015, in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).  The Final Judgment
 
was based on an order determining that Benner was liable for
 
Unjust Enrichment and Conversion because he had improperly
 received vacation rental proceeds for a residential property in
 Honolulu, Hawai
'i (the Property) and an order determining 
damages. The Final Judgment was entered in favor of Plaintiff-
Appellee JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (JPMorgan
 
1
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Chase) and against Benner in the amount of $641,597.31, plus
 
post-judgment interest of 10% per annum.
 
On appeal, Benner contends that the circuit court erred
 
when it denied "Defendant Ronald W. Benner's Motion (1) To
 
Dismiss and/or For Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Frivolous
 Complaint, and (2) for Award of Attorneys Fees and Costs" (Motion
 
to Dismiss). Benner argues that the claims asserted by JPMorgan
 
Chase in this case arose from the same transaction and occurrence
 
litigated in a prior lawsuit between these same parties and thus
 the claims here are barred under res judicata principles.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we reject Benner's
 
arguments asserted in this appeal. However, in light of this
 court's ruling and remand in a related appeal, we remand this
 case to the circuit court.
 
I. Background
 
On August 13, 2009, JPMorgan Chase conducted a non­
judicial foreclosure sale on the Property and was also the 
highest bidder at the sale. On February 9, 2010, JPMorgan Chase filed a Quitclaim Deed with the Bureau of Conveyances State of Hawai
'i. 
A. Benner I
 
On April 13, 2010, in Civil No. 10-1-0799, JPMorgan
 
Chase filed a Complaint for Ejectment against Benner. (Benner I)
 
On October 26, 2012, JPMorgan Chase filed a Motion for Summary
 
Judgment on its Complaint for Ejectment. 
On March 6, 2013, the circuit court filed on order
 
granting JPMorgan Chase's summary judgment motion and for writ of
 ejectment.
2 On March 6, 2013, the circuit court also entered a
 
Judgment in favor of JPMorgan Chase and a Writ of Ejectment for
 Benner's removal from the Property.
 
On July 20, 2013, following the circuit court's
 
resolution of a post-judgment motion, Benner filed a Notice of 
2
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appeal from the circuit court's Judgment, resulting in appellate
 
case No. CAAP-13-0002164 in this court.
 
On April 6, 2016, based on Kondaur Capital Corp. v. 
Matsuyoshi, 134 Hawai 'i 342, 341 P.3d 548 (2014), this court 
issued an opinion which vacated the circuit court's Judgment in Benner I and remanded that case back to the circuit court. JPMorgan Chase Bank, Nat'l Ass'n v. Benner, 137 Hawai
'i 326, 372 
P.3d 358 (App. 2016).
B. Benner II (Instant Case)
 
JPMorgan Chase filed the Complaint in this case on
 
October 15, 2013, when Benner I was already on appeal. Here, the
 
Complaint seeks to "obtain (i) a judgment against [Benner] for
 
the fair market value of the Property during the time [Benner]
 
was unlawfully in possession after the Quitclaim Deed; (ii) an
 accounting of all improper vacation rental proceeds received by
 [Benner]; and (iii) a judgment against [Benner] for all improper
 vacation rental proceeds." JPMorgan Chase asserted three counts
 against Benner: Count I (Trespass to Land); Count II (Unjust
 Enrichment); and Count III (Conversion).
 
On November 8, 2013, Benner filed the Motion to Dismiss
 
asserting that the allegations in the Complaint arose "from the
 same transaction and occurrence complained of in [Benner I][.]"
 On December 4, 2013, JPMorgan Chase filed a Memorandum in
 Opposition to Benner's Motion to Dismiss, asserting that it first
 discovered that Benner was renting the Property as a vacation
 rental when taking Benner's deposition almost two years after the
 Complaint had been filed in Benner I. 
At a hearing on January 23, 2014, after several
 
hearings and supplemental briefings, the circuit court orally
 concluded:
 
In reviewing the complaint for ejectment filed in
[Benner I], the Court does note that in paragraph
6 of that complaint plaintiff alleged that the defendant was
remaining on the property as a trespasser. Therefore with respect
to Count 1 of the complaint in Civil Number 13-1-2761 for
trespass, the Court grants the motion on the grounds of res
judicata. The claim for trespass was previously brought or could
have been brought and so is barred.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to Count 2, unjust enrichment, and Count
3, conversion, the Court grants the motion to dismiss with
respect to the relief requested of the fair market value of
the property during the time the defendant was unlawfully in
possession of the property as those claims could have been
brought at the time of the complaint filed in [Benner I].
 
With respect to Counts 2 and 3 for the requested
relief with respect to the vacation rental proceeds, the
Court denies the motion without prejudice. Those claims
 
were discovered after the filing of the complaint in [Benner
I] and it's not been established to the Court that the
plaintiffs knew or should have known of those –- that claim
at the time the complaint was filed as the defendant was in
possession of the property at the time. 
(Emphasis added.) 
On April 2, 2014, the circuit court filed an "Order
 
Granting in Part and Denying Without Prejudice in Part Defendant
 
Ronald W. Benner's [Motion to Dismiss]." The circuit court: (1)
 granted Benner's Motion to Dismiss with regard to Count I
 (Trespass to Land); (2) granted the motion with regard to Count
 II (Unjust Enrichment) and Count III (Conversion) insofar as
 Counts II and III "request[ed] a monetary judgment in favor of
 [JPMorgan Chase] and against [Benner] for the fair market value
 of the Property during the time [Benner] was unlawfully in
 possession after the Quitclaim Deed"; and (3) denied the motion
 without prejudice regarding Counts II and III insofar as both
 counts "request[ed] a monetary judgment in favor of [JPMorgan
 Chase] and against [Benner] for rental proceeds received by
 [Benner] after the Quitclaim Deed."
 
On March 6, 2015, the circuit court filed an order
 
finding Benner "liable for Unjust Enrichment and Conversion
 because he received vacation rental proceeds which he was not
 legally entitled to from [the Property]."
 
On June 29, 2015, the circuit court filed an order
 
granting JPMorgan Chase's Motion for Award of Damages and
 awarding JPMorgan Chase the amount of $641,597.31. On July 28,
 2015, the circuit court filed the Final Judgment.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 27, 2015, Benner timely filed a Notice of
 
Appeal.
II. Discussion
 
A. Benner's Contentions In This Appeal
 
Benner asserts that all claims in this case are barred
 
and the circuit court erred when it did not grant his Motion to
 
Dismiss in its entirety "[b]ecause the claims asserted by
 [JPMorgan Chase] below arose from the exact same transaction and
 occurrence which was the subject of [the] prior lawsuit between
 the same parties[.]"
 
Res judicata, or claim preclusion, "prohibits a party 
from relitigating a previously adjudicated cause of action." Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai
'i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004) 
(citation omitted). As the court in Bremer discussed, 
[t]he judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction is a bar
to a new action in any court between the same parties or
their privies concerning the same subject matter, and
precludes the relitigation, not only of the issues which
were actually litigated in the first action, but also of all
grounds of claim and defense which might have been properly
litigated in the first action but were not litigated or
decided.
 
Id. (citation and some emphasis omitted, block format altered).
 
In general,
 
[t]he party asserting claim preclusion has the burden of
establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on the
merits, (2) both parties are the same or in privity with the
parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in
the original suit is identical with the one presented in the
action in question.
 
Id. at 54, 85 P.3d at 161.
 
Here, it is evident that JPMorgan Chase's claims based
 
on Benner's receipt of revenue from renting the Property is not
 
identical to the claims asserted by JPMorgan Chase in Benner I. 
Rather, for purposes of this appeal, the crucial question is
 whether JPMorgan Chase might have properly litigated the claims
 pertaining to the rental revenues in Benner I. 
In Bolte v. Aits, Inc., 60 Haw. 58, 587 P.2d 810 
(1978), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court addressed whether a second 
lawsuit involving the same parties was barred by res judicata. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Bolte, both lawsuits involved claims for breach of contract. 
The supreme court first noted that:
 
[t]he rule against splitting a cause of action is an aspect
of Res judicata and precludes the splitting of a single
cause of action or an entire claim either as to the theory
of recovery or the specific relief demanded. The rationale
for the rule is to prevent a multiplicity of suits and
provide a limit to litigation. It exists to avoid harassment
of the defendant, vexatious litigation, and the costs
incident to successive suits on the same cause of action.
 
Id. at 60, 587 P.2d at 812. The supreme court further stated,
 
[t]he rule against splitting should not be so rigidly
applied, however, to produce an injustice and thwart the
policy upon which it was founded. Thus, where the plaintiff
is ignorant of a possible cause of action which existed at
the time of commencement of a prior, related action, and he
is not negligent in his ignorance or his ignorance was
caused by the fraud or fault of the defendant, plaintiff's
purpose in bringing the subsequent action will not be to
consciously and unreasonably vex or harass the defendant.
Rather, plaintiff's purpose will merely be to enforce the
alleged liability upon the defendant. Consequently, the
rationale and rule against splitting a cause of action will
be inapplicable.
 
Id. at 62-63, 587 P.2d at 814. 
In Bolte, the Plaintiff sued for a breach of contract
 
and subsequently sued in a second action for a separate breach of
 
the same contract. Id. at 59, 587 P.2d at 812. The supreme
 
court stated that "although there is evidence as to when
 plaintiff had knowledge of the second breach, the trial court
 failed to make the factual determination as to exactly when the
 second breach occurred." Id. at 64, 587 P.2d at 814. The
 
supreme court further noted that the issue of when the second
 breach occurred was crucial to the res judicata inquiry. Id. at
 
64, 587 P.2d at 815. This is because if the second breach
 occurred after the filing of the first suit, "[r]es judicata and
 the rule against splitting a cause of action will not operate to
 bar the bringing of the second action." Id. However, 
if the second breach occurred prior to the filing of the
first suit . . . then, dependent on whether plaintiff had
knowledge of the second breach before the first suit was
filed and whether his possible lack of knowledge was due to
the negligence of plaintiff or the fault or fraud of
defendant, the second suit may be barred.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. Therefore, the supreme court concluded that 
the trial court erred in granting defendant's motion for
summary judgment . . . absent a finding as to the materialfacts of exactly when the second breach occurred and, if thebreach occurred prior to the filing of plaintiff's firstaction, the reasons for plaintiff's ignorance of the secondbreach until after the first suit was filed[.] 
Id. 
In this case, at the January 23, 2014 hearing, the 
circuit court explained its reasoning for denying the portion of
 
Benner's Motion to Dismiss with regard to the vacation rental
 proceeds. The circuit court concluded that 
With respect to Counts 2 and 3 for the requested
relief with respect to the vacation rental proceeds, the
Court denies the motion without prejudice. Those claims
 
were discovered after the filing of the complaint in [Benner
I] and it's not been established to the Court that the
plaintiffs knew or should have known of those –- that claim
at the time the complaint was filed as the defendant was in
possession of the property at the time. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Benner did not meet his burden to establish that res
 
judicata
 applies to the claims related to the rental proceeds. 
See Bremer, 104 Hawai 'i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161. The circuit court 
determined, and Benner does not contest, that JPMorgan Chase
 
discovered that Benner was renting the property after JPMorgan
 Chase filed its Complaint in Benner I.
3 Further, Benner does not
 
3 At a hearing on December 12, 2013, addressing Benner's Motion to
Dismiss, Benner's counsel did not dispute that JPMorgan Chase learned about
the rental payments to Benner only after the Complaint was filed in Benner I,
stating:
 
I think we could probably stipulate that the Plaintiff may
not have known about these rental payments until sometime
after the judgment or the complaint in the prior action was
filed. That's not going to change our position on this
issue of res judicata, and the reason is is that the relief
in both of the -– both of these cases arises from that set
 of facts that claim that Mr. Benner was not entitled to
 remain on the property. . . . It doesn't matter when they
learned that he was collecting rent, in fact it's
irrelevant. They could have gone for that anyway in the
prior case, and we don't need discovery to determine when
they learned of that. We admit that perhaps they learned of
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assert or point to anything showing that JPMorgan Chase's lack of
 
knowledge about Benner renting the property was due to JPMorgan
 Chase's negligence.
4 Given the analysis in Bolte and the
 
circumstances in this case, the circuit court properly determined
 that Benner failed to carry his burden to establish that res
 judicata barred Counts II and III, to the extent those Counts are
 based on the rental proceeds.
5
 
Therefore, the circuit court properly denied Benner's
 
Motion to Dismiss with respect to Counts II and III related to
 the vacation rental proceeds.
B. Remand to the Circuit Court
 
This case was litigated in the circuit court while
 
Benner I was pending on appeal.
6 Benner's liability here for
 
unjust enrichment and conversion appears to be related to
 
JPMorgan Chase having acquired legal title to the Property
 through the non-judicial foreclosure which is the subject of
 Benner I. Given this court's opinion vacating the Judgment in
 Benner I and remanding that case to the circuit court for further
 proceedings, it appears that in the interest of avoiding
 potentially inconsistent judicial rulings and for purposes of
 judicial economy, this case should also be remanded to the
 circuit court.
 
3(...continued)
it after they filed their complaint, but they still

should've gone for damages in the prior case.
4 Benner also does not argue that after JPMorgan Chase learned about
Benner renting the Property, it should have amended its pleadings in Benner I
or somehow sought a joinder, so that its claims related to the rental proceeds
could have been litigated in Benner I. We do not reach this issue.
5
 Given our analysis of the argument Benner raises, we need not address
whether this court's opinion vacating the circuit court's Judgment in Benner I
would also render the doctrine of res judicata or the rule against splitting
claims inapplicable.
6
 The Final Judgment in this case was entered by the circuit court on
July 28, 2015. This court's opinion in Benner I was issued on April 6, 2016.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We do not vacate the Final Judgment in this case
 
because: we reject Benner's arguments raised in this appeal; we
 
are mindful that extensive proceedings were had in this case; the
 record before us shows that Benner did not seek to stay
 
7
enforcement of the Final Judgment;  and Benner I is still being
litigated on remand. 
Rather, we believe the best course of
 
action under the circumstances is to remand this case to the
 circuit court, where further proceedings may be had, including as
 to the effect of Benner I on this case and to address whether
 this case should be consolidated with Benner I.
 
III. Conclusion
 
We conclude that Counts II and III based on rental
 
proceeds received by Benner were not barred by res judicata, and
 
we thus reject Benner's arguments in this appeal. However, for
 the reasons discussed above, we remand this case to the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit for further proceedings consistent
 with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 3, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Jade Lynne Ching,
Kee M. Campbell,(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7 Fairly late in the proceedings before the circuit court in this case,
and long after the circuit court had denied Benner's Motion to Dismiss on res
 
judicata grounds in early 2014, Benner filed a motion on February 26, 2015,
which sought, inter alia, to stay the proceedings in this case pending
resolution of the appeal in Benner I. The circuit court denied the request
for an immediate stay, but without prejudice to Benner seeking a stay of
enforcement if a judgment was later entered in the case. The Final Judgment
was later entered on July 28, 2015, but the record does not reflect that
Benner sought to stay enforcement of the Final Judgment.
 
9
 