NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000116
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JESUS SALAS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0447)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Jesus Salas (Salas) with one count of first-
degree sexual assault and six counts of third-degree sexual assault against three minor complainants, ES, FS, and DS, who were all under the age of fourteen at the time of the alleged offenses. After a jury-waived bench trial, the Circuit Court of 
1
 the First Circuit (Circuit Court) found Salas guilty of four
counts of third-degree sexual assault. The Circuit Court
 sentenced Salas to concurrent terms of five years of
 imprisonment. 
Salas appeals from the Judgment filed on February 16,

 
2016. On appeal, Salas contends that: (1) his reindictment in
 the present case was barred because the dismissal of a prior
 
1The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indictment should have been with prejudice rather than without
 
prejudice; (2) because the Circuit Court's grant of the State's
 oral motion for nolle prosequi of the prior case should have been
 with prejudice, the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to
 subsequently enter an order granting the State's written motion
 for nolle prosequi of the prior case without prejudice; (3) his
 waiver of his right to a jury trial was invalid due to the
 ineffective assistance of his counsel; and (4) the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in sentencing him to imprisonment based on
 his failure to admit guilt to the charges. 
As explained below, we conclude that Salas' challenges 
to his convictions are without merit, and we affirm his convictions. However, based on State v. Kamana
'o, 103 Hawai 'i 
315, 82 P.3d 401 (2003), and State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai 'i 321, 
389 P.3d 916 (2016), we conclude that the Circuit Court improperly relied upon Salas' refusal to admit his guilt in imposing its sentence. We therefore vacate Salas' sentence and remand for resentencing before a different judge. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Salas was the father-in-law of the aunt of the three
 
minor complainants. At the time of the alleged offenses, ES was
 eight years old, FS was ten years old, and DS was twelve years
 old. 
At trial, DS testified that when she saw Salas at her
 
aunt's house, she hugged him and kissed him on the cheek "as an
 uncle" and out of respect. Salas told her, "No, give me a good
 kiss[,]" and he "Frenched kissed [her] with his tongue" in her
 mouth. Salas told DS that he had to check her for cancer. He
 then placed his hands under her shirt and bra, and then he
 squeezed and rubbed her breasts. 
FS testified that Salas was sitting on a cooler
 
drinking beer and told FS to "drink some." Salas told FS to sit
 on his lap, and when she sat on his leg, he "touched [her]
 behind" over her shorts. Salas asked FS if she had any warts,
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
grabbed her arm, pulled her closer to him, then placed his hands
 
under her shirt and felt her breast. 
ES testified that she saw a person she referred to as
 
"papa" at her aunt's house.2 "Papa" noticed a wart on ES's hand
 
and asked if she had "anymore[.]" When ES said no, "papa" said
 he was going to check. "Papa" put his hand in ES's shirt, and
 
then put his hand under ES's tights and panty and touched her
 
"private" and "butt" with his hands. When "papa" touched ES's
 "private," which she identified as her vagina, she felt something
 in her "private."
 
II.
 
On March 28, 2013, Salas was charged by grand jury
 
indictment in Cr. No. 13-1-0447 (Prior Case) with seven counts of
 sexual assault against ES, FS, and DS, while each was less than
 fourteen years old: Count 1 -- first-degree sexual assault of ES
 by inserting his finger in her genital opening; Count 2 -- third-
degree sexual assault of ES by placing his hand on her breast;
 Count 3 -- third-degree sexual assault of ES by placing his hand
 on her buttock; Count 4 -- third-degree sexual assault of FS by
 placing his hand on her breast; Count 5 -- third-degree sexual
 assault of FS by placing his hand on her buttock; Count 6 -­third-degree sexual assault of DS by placing his hand on her
 breast; and Count 7 -- third-degree sexual assault of DS by
 inserting his tongue into her mouth. The third-degree sexual
 assaults alleged in Counts 2 through 7 were charged under Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-732(1)(b) (Supp. 2012).
3
 
2
ES was initially asked if she knew someone named Jesus Salas. ES
 
responded that "[h]e's familiar" but was unable to identify Salas in court.
ES described the actions of a person she called "papa," whom she identified as
the father of her aunt's husband or boyfriend. ES did not really know "papa"
prior to seeing him at her aunt's house. ES identified a truck that "papa"
drove, which was the same truck that DS identified as Salas' truck. 
3At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-732(1)(b) and the
statutory definition of "sexual contact" in HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2012)
provided as follows:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 6, 2013, Salas moved to dismiss Counts 2 through 
7 of the indictment in the Prior Case for failure to allege an 
essential element of the third-degree sexual assault offense, namely, that the alleged victim was not married to Salas. On June 28, 2013, the Circuit Court entered its written order denying Salas' motion. On January 31, 2014, this court issued a summary disposition order in State v. Muller, CAAP-10-0000225, 2014 WL 444230 (Hawai
'i App. Jan. 31, 2014). In Muller, this 
court held that the defendant's status of not being married to the complainant was an essential element of third-degree sexual assault under HRS § 707-732(1)(b), and that the failure to allege this element in the indictment rendered the charge deficient, requiring that the charge be dismissed without prejudice. Id., 
2014 WL 444230, at *1-2. 
On February 18, 2014, Salas filed a motion for
 
reconsideration of the Circuit Court's order denying his motion
 to dismiss, asserting that the Circuit Court should reconsider
 its order in light of Muller. A hearing on Salas' motion for
 reconsideration was scheduled for April 8, 2014. 
On March 18, 2014, a grand jury returned a second
 
indictment against Salas in Cr. No. 14-1-0447 (Present Case), the
 case underlying this appeal. The indictment in the Present Case
 
3(...continued)
third degree if:
 
. . .
 
(b)	 The person knowingly subjects to sexual contact
another person who is less than fourteen years old or
causes such a person to have sexual contact with the
person[.]
 
HRS § 707-732(1)(b).
 
"Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts of
"sexual penetration", of the sexual or other intimate parts of a
person not married to the actor, or of the sexual or other
intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether directly or
through the clothing or other material intended to cover the
sexual or other intimate parts.
 
HRS § 707-700 (emphasis added).
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was the same as the indictment in the Prior Case, except that
 
consistent with Muller, Counts 2 through 7 charging Salas with
 third-degree sexual assault were amended to allege that Salas was
 not married to the minor complainants.
 
In the morning on March 27, 2014, Salas was arraigned
 
on the indictment in the Present Case. During the arraignment,
 Salas made an oral motion to dismiss the indictment in the
 Present Case on the ground that there was a pending indictment in
 the Prior Case that was based on the "identical set of facts[.]" 
 
In response, the State, after informing the Circuit Court that
 the State "will follow up with . . . a written motion to nolle
 prosequi the [Prior Case]," orally moved to nolle prosequi the
 Prior Case because Salas had been re-indicted in the Present
 Case. The Circuit Court, Judge Richard K. Perkins presiding,
 denied Salas' motion to dismiss the indictment in the Present
 Case and granted the State's motion to nolle prosequi the Prior
 Case. Salas waived reading of the indictment in the Present Case
 and asked that the Present Case be set for trial. Judge Perkins
 informed Salas that the Present Case was assigned to Judge Randal
 K.O. Lee, the same judge handling the Prior Case, and set the
 Present Case for trial. 
In the afternoon on March 27, 2014, the State's written
 
motion for nolle prosequi without prejudice of the Prior Case,
 made on the ground that Salas had been reindicted in the Present
 Case, was filed as "approved and so ordered" by Judge Lee.
4
 
On April 29, 2014, Salas filed a motion to dismiss the
 
indictment in the Present Case on the ground that the State's
 oral and written motions to nolle prosequi the indictment in the
 Prior Case were ineffective to dismiss the Prior Case, and
 therefore, the Prior Case, which stated the same charges as the
 Present Case, remained pending. The Circuit Court held a hearing
 
4The State's written motion for nolle prosequi in the Prior Case was
dated March 18, 2014, the same date the indictment in the Present Case was
filed. The motion, signed as approved and so ordered by Judge Lee, was filed
on March 27, 2014, in the Prior Case. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on Salas' motion on July 8, 2014, orally denied the motion at a
 
hearing held on July 15, 2014, and filed its "Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant's [April 29,
 2014,] Motion to Dismiss" on July 25, 2014.
 
On August 19, 2014, Salas filed a motion to dismiss the
 
indictment in the Present Case with prejudice on double jeopardy
 and due process grounds. On October 7, 2014, the Circuit Court
 held a hearing on Salas' motion. The Circuit Court denied Salas'
 motion, and on October 10, 2014, it filed its "Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant's [August 19,
 2014,] Motion to Dismiss With Prejudice."
5
 
III.
 
On September 21, 2015, following a colloquy with Salas,
 
the Circuit Court found that Salas knowingly, voluntarily, and
 intelligently waived his right to a jury trial.
6 Salas also
 
signed a written waiver of his right to a jury trial, which was
 filed on that same day. 
After a bench trial, the Circuit Court found Salas
 
guilty of Counts 4 through 7 and not guilty of Counts 1 through
 3. The Circuit Court sentenced Salas to concurrent terms of five
 years of imprisonment on Counts 4 through 7. This appeal
 followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Salas argues that his reindictment in the Present Case
 
was barred because the dismissal of the indictment in the Prior
 Case should have been with prejudice rather than without
 prejudice. We disagree.
 
Salas' argument is based on two false premises: (1)
 
that the Circuit Court's dismissal of the indictment in the Prior
 
5The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided over Salas' April 29, 2014, and
August 19, 2014, motions to dismiss.
 
6The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided over the hearing on Salas'
waiver of his right to a jury trial and over Salas' trial and sentencing.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Case was or should be viewed as a dismissal with prejudice; and
 
(2) the indictment in the Prior Case was dismissed after jeopardy
 had attached. Because neither of these premises is true, Salas'
 argument is without merit.
 
A.
 
Salas argues that because the State's oral motion to
 
nolle prosequi the Prior Case, made during Salas' arraignment on
 the indictment in the Present Case, did not specify that the
 State was seeking a nolle prosequi without prejudice, it must be
 presumed that Judge Perkins' granting of the State's nolle
 prosequi motion was a dismissal with prejudice. However,
 contrary to Salas' argument, the general presumption is that when
 an indictment is dismissed upon the government's motion before
 trial, "the dismissal is without prejudice to the government's
 right to reindict for the same offense, unless the contrary is
 expressly stated." United States v. Ortega-Alvarez, 506 F.2d
 
455, 458 (2d Cir. 1974) (construing Federal Rules of Criminal
 Procedure (FRCP) Rule 48(a), which contains language very similar
 
7
); see to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48(a)
United States v. Matta, 937 F.2d 567, 568 (11th Cir. 1991) ("Generally, unless a contrary intent is clearly expressed, [FRCP] Rule 48(a) dismissals are without prejudice."); United States v. Brown, 425 F.3d 681, 682 (9th Cir. 2005) ("Dismissals by the government are generally presumed to be without prejudice 'unless a contrary intent is clearly expressed.'" (citations omitted)). 
In addition, the context of Judge Perkins' ruling makes
 
clear that his grant of the oral motion for nolle prosequi of the
 Prior Case was a dismissal without prejudice. The State's oral
 motion was made at the arraignment on Salas' reindictment in the
 Present Case. The State reindicted Salas because under this
 
7HRPP Rule 48(a) (2000) provides: The prosecutor may by leave of court
file a dismissal of a charge and the prosecution shall thereupon terminate.
Such a dismissal may not be filed during the trial without the consent of the
defendant." 
  
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court's decision in Muller, Counts 2 through 7 of the original 
indictment in the Prior Case were defective for failing to allege the essential element that Salas was not married to the complainants. The remedy established in Muller for this defect, and the remedy established by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court for 
similar defects in a charge, is the dismissal of the charge without prejudice. See Muller, 2014 WL 444230, at *2 (remanding 
case with instructions to dismiss the case without prejudice); State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i 383, 386, 219 P.3d 1170, 1173 
(2009) (upholding remedy of dismissal without prejudice of a charge that was deficient for failing to allege an essential element of the charged offense); State v. Gonzalez, 128 Hawai
'i 
314, 324, 288 P.3d 788, 798 (2012) (holding that because the charge was deficient for failing to allege the requisite mens rea, dismissal of the charge without prejudice was mandated). Given the reason for the State reindicting Salas, and the established remedy for the defect in the charges that prompted the reindictment, it is clear that the State sought to dismiss the original indictment without prejudice. 
Moreover, it would be pointless for the State to
 
reindict Salas if it intended to preclude prosecution by moving
 to dismiss the original indictment in the Prior Case with
 prejudice. It also would make no sense for Judge Perkins to set
 the indictment in the Present Case for trial if he had precluded
 prosecution on that indictment by dismissing the charges in the
 Prior Case with prejudice. Finally, the intent of the State's
 oral motion and the effect of the Circuit Court's ruling was made
 unmistakably clear by the State's written motion to nolle
 prosequi the Prior Case without prejudice and the Circuit Court's
 grant of the written motion.
 
B.
 
In support of his argument that his reindictment in the
 
Present Case was barred, Salas cites case authority that a nolle
 prosequi order entered over a defendant's objection after
 jeopardy has attached bars a subsequent trial for the same
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense. See State v. Murray, 69 Haw. 618, 619, 753 P.2d 806,
 
807 (1988). This authority, which applies after jeopardy has
 
attached, is inapposite. Here, the Circuit Court granted the
 State's nolle prosequi motion on the Prior Case before jeopardy
 attached. Because jeopardy had not attached, the Circuit Court's
 grant of the State's nolle prosequi motion did not bar Salas'
 prosecution in the Present Case or implicate Salas' protection
 against double jeopardy. See United States v. Martin Linen
 
Supply Co., 430 U.S. 564, 569 (1977) ("The protections afforded
 by the [Double Jeopardy] Clause are implicated only when the
 accused has actually been placed in jeopardy. This state of
 jeopardy attaches when a jury is empaneled and sworn, or, in a
 bench trial, when the judge begins to receive evidence."
 (citations omitted)).
 
C.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court granted the State's
 
oral and written nolle prosequi motions and dismissed the
 original indictment in the Prior Case without prejudice and
 before jeopardy had attached. Accordingly, Salas' prosecution on
 the indictment in the Present Case was not barred.
 
II.
 
Salas argues that because Judge Perkins' grant of the
 
State's oral motion for nolle prosequi of the indictment in the
 Prior Case was or should have been with prejudice, Judge Lee
 lacked jurisdiction to subsequently enter an order granting the
 State's written motion for nolle prosequi of the Prior Case
 without prejudice. Like Salas' first argument, this argument is
 based on the same erroneous claim that Judge Perkins' grant of
 the State's oral motion for nolle prosequi was or should have
 been with prejudice. We therefore reject this argument.
 
III.
 
We reject Salas' claim that his waiver of his right to
 
a jury trial was invalid due to the ineffective assistance of his
 counsel. The only support Salas provides for this claim is his
 assertion that he had requested a jury trial in the Prior Case. 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Salas apparently contends that his request for a jury trial in
 
the Prior Case must mean that his waiver of his right to a jury
 trial in the Present Case could only be attributable to the
 ineffective assistance of his counsel. We are not persuaded by
 Salas' reasoning. More importantly, the record refutes Salas'
 claim that he did not validly waive his jury trial right. 
On the morning scheduled for jury selection, Salas
 
informed the Circuit Court that he wanted to waive his right to a
 jury trial and proceed with a bench trial. Salas' counsel
 informed the Circuit Court: 
Over the weekend, I met with Mr. Salas. And on Saturday
afternoon he informed me that -- he informed me that he
 wanted to just have a trial before Your Honor. I gave him
an opportunity to think about it over the weekend on Sunday,
and he reaffirmed that, and he has signed a waiver of jury
trial this morning.
 
The Circuit Court engaged in a colloquy with Salas 
that included questioning him about his level of education,
 
whether he was thinking clearly, his understanding of a jury
 trial, his understanding of the rights he would be giving up by
 waiving the right to a jury trial, whether he discussed the
 waiver with his counsel, whether he had questions about his right
 to a jury trial, and whether was waiving his right voluntarily. 
At the end of this colloquy, the Circuit Court found that Salas
 had knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived his right to
 a jury trial. The record also contains a written waiver of the
 right to jury trial signed by Salas. We conclude that Salas has
 failed to meet his burden of showing that his jury trial waiver
 was invalid due to the ineffective assistance of his counsel.
 
IV.
 
At sentencing, the Circuit Court stated its reasons for
 
imposing its sentence on Salas as follows:
 
With respect to sentencing, the court will take
judicial notice of the records and files, including the
report from Adult Client Services which will be filed under
seal and made a part of the record. 
With respect to the sentencing factors in this case,
the court will note the defendant's age. He is 77 years of
 
10
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
age, in deteriorating health, and will note that the court
has considered his 28 years -- his commendable career in the
military for 28 years. However, the court also notes that
the defendant in this case, from day one, has completely
denied the allegations. In fact, in the presentence
investigation report, he mentions that the oldest child in
this case -- although he was found not guilty of that
offense,
[8] he notes that the oldest child initiated the
 
kissing in the truck and the inappropriate touching, that
the oldest child initiated that. 
The court is concerned that if defendant is in the
 
community, even while being supervised, he would be ordered
to undergo sex offender treatment, and the court is
concerned that he would not benefit from such treatment and
 such rehabilitation as he denies any wrongdoing in this
case. And without treatment, the court will note that there
is a danger of recidivism as he does have access to
children.
 
Therefore, it is the judgment and sentence of this
court that the defendant be committed to the custody of
Director of Department of Public Safety for an
indeterminate term in Counts 4, 5, 6, and 7, five years
imprisonment, all to run concurrent.
 
Salas contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in sentencing him to imprisonment based on his failure
 
to admit guilt to the charges. We conclude that the Circuit
 Court improperly relied upon Salas' refusal to admit his guilt in
 imposing its sentence. 
In Kamana 'o, the supreme court stated that "it is well 
settled that a sentencing court may consider a defendant's lack
 of remorse in assessing the likelihood of successful
 rehabilitation." Kamana
'o, 103 Hawai 'i at 321, 82 P.3d at 407. 
It further stated, however, that "[a] sentencing court . . . may
 not infer a lack of remorse from a criminal defendant's refusal
 to admit guilt." Id.  After stating these two principles, the
 
supreme court observed:
 
Consistent with the foregoing, a significant number of
jurisdictions has recognized the subtle, yet meaningful,
distinction between imposing a harsher sentence upon a
defendant based on his or her lack of remorse, on the one
hand, and punishing a defendant for his or her refusal to
admit guilt, on the other, the latter being a violation,
inter alia, of a criminal defendant's rights to due process,
to remain silent, and to appeal.
 
8The Circuit Court apparently misspoke as Salas was found guilty of
Count 7 for inserting his tongue in DS's mouth. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id.
 
In order to determine "whether a sentencing court had
 
erroneously relied on a defendant's refusal to admit guilt in
 
imposing a sentence[,]" the supreme court applied the following 
three-factor analysis:
 
(1) the defendant's maintenance of innocence after
conviction, (2) the judge's attempt to get the defendant to
admit guilt, and (3) the appearance that, had the defendant
affirmatively admitted guilt, his sentence would not have
been so severe.
 
Id. at 323, 82 P.3d at 409 (format altered; brackets omitted)
 
(quoting People v. Wesley, 411 N.W.2d 159, 162 (Mich. 1987).
 
Under circumstances similar to Salas' case, the supreme 
court in Kamana 'o, id. at 323-24, 82 P.3d at 409-10, and in 
Barrios
, 139 Hawai 'i at 338-39, 389 P.3d at 933-34, applied this 
three-factor analysis and concluded that the sentencing court had improperly relied on the defendant's refusal to admit guilt. Based on 
Kamana 'o and Barrios, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
improperly relied upon Salas' refusal to admit guilt in imposing its sentence. 
We therefore vacate Salas' sentence and remand the 
case for resentencing before a different judge. See Barrios, 139 
Hawai'i at 339, 389 P.3d at 934. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
Judgment to the extent that it entered judgment of conviction
 against Salas on Counts 4 through 7. We vacate the Judgment with
 respect to the sentence it imposed on Salas, and we remand the
 case for resentencing before a different judge, consistent with
 this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 24, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Maria Corazon Avinante 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brandon H. Ito Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 