 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000435
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
FRIDAY SHOMOUR, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0169)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Friday Shomour ("Shomour") appeals
 
from the April 2, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
("Judgment") entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 ("Circuit Court").
1 A jury convicted Shomour of two counts of
 
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 707-733(1)(a).
2 Shomour was sentenced
 
on April 2, 2012, to concurrent one-year terms of imprisonment
 for each of the two counts, with credit for time served. 
On appeal, Shomour contends that (1) the prosecutor
 
engaged in misconduct by making improper remarks during closing
 arguments, and (2) the Circuit Court erred by instructing the
 jury with an inapplicable and misleading jury instruction and
 failing to instruct the jury with a necessary and proper
 instruction.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided.
 
2
 Pursuant to HRS § 707-733(1)(a), "[a] person commits the offense
of sexual assault in the fourth degree if . . . [t]he person knowingly
subjects another person to sexual contact by compulsion or causes another
person to have sexual contact with the actor by compulsion[.]" See HAW. REV.
 
STAT. § 707-733(1)(a) (1993).
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Shomour's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Shomour contends that the State committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct in three separate instances by making
 improper remarks during its closing arguments and that such
 misconduct, individually and cumulatively, constitutes reversible
 error. As Shomour did not timely object below to any of the
 allegedly improper remarks, we review for plain error. 
(a) Shomour first argues that the State improperly
 
inflamed the passions and prejudices of the jurors by using the
 complaining witness's ("C.W.") disability "as an emotional appeal
 to evoke sympathy from the jury." He argues that her disability
 was irrelevant to the issues at hand and that there was no
 legitimate basis upon which to infer that Shomour targeted C.W.
 because of her disability. 
Shomour cites to State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 984 
P.2d 1231 (1999), to support his argument. In Rogan, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court held that it was improper for the prosecutor to remark during closing arguments that "finding 'some black, military guy on top of your daughter' is 'every mother's nightmare.'" Id. at 414, 984 P.2d at 1240. As the defendant's 
race was irrelevant to whether he committed the charged offense, the court construed the prosecutor's remarks as "contrived to stimulate racial prejudice" and an "improper plea to evoke sympathy." Id. 
C.W.'s disability, on the other hand, was relevant as 
it tended to address Shomour's possible motive and means. Shomour agreed that he had recognized C.W. as "smaller than the average person[,]" speaking differently, and having "mannerisms [that] were a little different[.]" He also agreed that he had recognized C.W. as disabled. Given that C.W. alleged three instances where he approached her and touched or kissed her in an unwanted manner, it was not improper for the State to argue that the jury should infer that Shomour, perceiving C.W.'s apparent vulnerability, believed he could do so repeatedly. See State v. 
Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) ("[A] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecutor, during closing argument, is permitted to draw 
reasonable inferences from the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence." (citing State v. Apilando, 79 Hawai' i 128, 141, 900 P.2d 135, 148 (1995))). The State's 
remarks about C.W.'s disability and the inferences to be drawn therefrom were not improper and thus not a basis to find error. 
(b) Shomour next contends that the State's argument
 
that C.W. testified consistently "both in this proceeding and a
 proceeding prior" was improper and prejudicial. He argues that
 this remark left the jury to speculate regarding the prior
 trial's charges and outcome and that the State's argument
 regarding consistency misrepresented C.W.'s testimony. 
It was not improper, however, for the State to
 
reference the prior proceeding in its argument regarding the
 consistency of C.W.'s testimony because the evidence contained
 such references. Moreover, it was defense counsel who first made
 mention of the prior proceeding and introduced as evidence C.W.'s
 recollection of her testimony from that proceeding. Regarding
 the consistency of C.W.'s testimony, the State's argument below
 was that the discrepancies were not material. The State
 maintained that C.W. consistently testified in the two
 proceedings that Shomour touched her vagina with some part of his
 hand and that he touched one of her breasts. This is also proper
 argument, and Shomour fails to show error. 
(c) Finally, Shomour contends that the State improperly
 
vouched for C.W.'s credibility when it remarked that "State will
 reiterate [C.W.'s] testimony is credible. She's honest. She's
 clear and precise." Shomour argues that this was an expression
 of the prosecutor's personal opinion regarding C.W.'s
 credibility, which constituted reversible error.
3 The State
 
responds that the remark, when taken in context, merely addressed
 
3
 Shomour cites to State v. Suan for support in establishing the
impropriety of the State's remark and its harmfulness. See 121 Hawai' i 169,
214 P.3d 1159 (App. 2009). Suan, however, is unhelpful in establishing
harmfulness because the improper vouching there was but one of several
separate sets of remarks that the court found, for different reasons, to be
individually improper and cumulatively harmful, see id., in contrast to the
single instance of improper vouching alleged in this case. Moreover, asdiscussed infra, even if the remark were improper, any error was harmless. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.W.'s candor in admitting to discrepancies in her testimony, and
 
therefore was not improper vouching. 
Prosecutors must refrain from expressing their personal
 
opinions regarding the credibility of witnesses. State v. Marsh,
 
68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986) (citing United
 States v. Young, 470 U.S. 1 (1985); ABA Standards for Criminal
 Justice, Standard 3-5.8 (2d ed. 1980)). The problem with such
 vouching is that "the prosecutor's opinion carries with it the
 imprimatur of the Government and may induce the jury to trust the
 Government's judgment rather than its own view of the evidence." 
Young, 470 U.S. at 18-19. 
Here, the comment that "[C.W.'s] honest" was made
 
during rebuttal, appears to tie back to the prosecutor's comments
 in her initial closing argument, and responds to defense
 counsel's closing argument:
 
[Prosecutor]: State argues [C.W.'s] testimony is
credible. Although she's nervous, she was poised, she was
direct, she was frank, she was clear, her -- she was
intelligent, and her responses were thoughtful.
 
. . . .
 
[Defense counsel]: . . . [T]here's a variance in the
State's own factual presentation to you of material facts. It's
 
just that simple. You get one version, then you get another
version, then you get a third version. It's a moving target. And
 why is that important? That goes to the credibility of,
essentially, the complaining witness, the sole witness for the
State.
 
Initially she told you yesterday that she was on the sofa
and that Friday Shomour approached her when she was watching TV
and he placed a finger on her vagina. A year ago she said she was
on the sofa and he put his palm on her crotch. Later, yesterday,
she said, well, it wasn't really his finger; it was, like, the
second knuckle of one of the middle fingers. . . . [J]ust the
reporting itself is contradictory, which can, in and of itself,
lead to a lack of credibility. If the story is changing, it's a
moving target. It's more hard to find it credible.
 
. . . .
 
With regard to the breast, [C.W.] said yesterday that it was
a finger above the . . . left breast, two or three inches above
the left breast. . . . A year ago she showed Judge Kubo the
opposite breast and up higher. So we have some material variances
 of the reporting here, which makes it difficult to find proof
beyond a reasonable doubt. . . .
 
One issue – another thing I'd like to point out for your
consideration . . . is the delay in the report. . . . The first
person she tells about this is a girl in her bible study class.
Little lies become bigger.
 
. . . .
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Prosecutor]: State will reiterate [C.W.'s] testimony is
credible. She's honest. She's clear and precise. And based on her
testimony, all the elements are proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
And because all the elements are proven beyond a reasonable doubt,
you need to find Defendant guilty of both charges of Sex Assault
in the Fourth Degree.
 
Assuming for the sake of argument that the comment4 was
 
an improper expression of the prosecutor's personal opinion
 
5
regarding C.W.'s honesty generally,  or that it may have been
perceived as such by the jury, it does not rise to the level of 
reversible error. 
Generally, a single, minor, isolated instance 
of an improper assertion will not deprive a defendant of his right to a fair trial. See State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 
366–67, 742 P.2d 369, 372 (1987) (declining to find reversible error where the prosecutor's remarks, while improper, were not "particularly egregious"); State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai' i 577, 592­
93, 994 P.2d 509, 524-25 (2000) (holding that a once-repeated improper remark during closing argument asserting the people's safety as the highest law did not prejudicially affect the defendant's substantial rights); see also State v. Trujillo, 42 P.3d 814, 832 (N.M. 2002) ("An isolated, minor impropriety ordinarily is not sufficient to warrant reversal, because a fair trial is not necessarily a perfect one."). But see also State v. 
Benson, No. 29846, 2010 WL 2601488, at *3 (Haw. Ct. App. June 30, 2010) (SDO) (declining to hold that there must be multiple instances of misconduct to constitute reversible error). 
Where, as here, witness credibility was a crucial issue
 
and there was no specific curing instruction from the court, the
 nature or egregiousness of the misconduct may be determinative. 
See, e.g.
, Marsh, 68 Haw. at 660-61, 728 P.2d at 1302-03 (holding
 
plain error where the prosecutor's misconduct was "particularly
 
4
 We focus only on the comment that "She's honest." The preceding
comment, that "State will reiterate [C.W.'s] testimony is credible," is fairly
understood as reiterating prior argument and signposting additional argument.
Even if the two comments were considered collectively, the outcome would
remain the same. 
5
 At least one recent case, however, provides a persuasive basis for
holding it not to be misconduct. See State v. Moore, No. 30000, 2011 WL
2857248 (Haw. Ct. App. July 19, 2011) (SDO) (declining to find misconduct
where the prosecutor introduced a single remark regarding credibility with "I
think" and proceeded to support the remark by discussing evidence). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
egregious," having "expressed on at least nine occasions her
 
belief that defense witnesses had lied," the case turned on
 witness credibility, and there was no prompt curing instruction
 to the jury); Benson, 2010 WL 2601488 (holding reversible error
 where the State twice argued in closing that the testifying
 police officers must be credible because they would not
 jeopardize their careers by perjuring themselves and a finding of
 officer credibility was crucial to the State's case). 
The alleged error in the instant case is readily
 
distinguishable from those in Marsh and Benson. Here, unlike in
 Marsh, the prosecutor did not engage in repeated assertions
 regarding her belief in C.W.'s credibility. Nor did the
 prosecutor, unlike in Benson, craft argument regarding
 credibility around an improper basis such as a police officer
 being more credible simply because he or she is a police
 
6
 the prosecutor made only the briefest of (possibly)
 officer;
improper assertions and otherwise advanced nothing but proper
 argument. 
The bare statement that "[s]he's honest," asserted in
 
the midst of a broader argument describing a percipient lay
 witness's testimony and apparent characteristics, was far from
 egregious and does not constitute reversible error.
 
(2) Shomour contends that the Circuit Court erred by
 
issuing the following jury instruction regarding unanimity:
 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the purpose
of showing that there is more than one act upon which proof of an
element of an offense may be based. In order for the prosecution
to prove an element, all twelve jurors must unanimously agree that
7
the same act has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.[ ]
Shomour argues that this instruction was confusing and misleading
 
and inconsistent with the instructions delineating the elements
 of each of the two counts. He also contends that the Circuit
 Court erroneously omitted an instruction apprising the jury that
 a finding of guilt on one count does not necessitate a finding of
 guilt on the other count. 
6
 A related line of case law specifically holds that it is improper to
argue that a police officer is credible simply because he or she is a police
officer or because the officer will suffer adverse job consequences if he or shelies. See, e.g., Suan, 121 Hawai' i at 174-75, 214 P.3d at 1164-65. 
7
 This instruction is derived from State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 928
P.2d 843 (1996). 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shomour is correct that, because the State specified 
the particular acts upon which it was relying to gain 
convictions, the unanimity instruction was unnecessary. Arceo, 
84 Hawai' i at 27, 928 P.2d at 869. He fails, however, to provide 
authority that supports his contention that the Circuit Court erred by issuing the instruction.
8 
Contrary to Shomour's assertion, the unanimity
 
instruction does not conflict with the instructions delineating
 the elements for each of the two counts. Here, the unanimity
 instruction, read in conjunction with the other instructions
 given, provides that the State might have produced evidence of
 more than one instance where Shomour placed his hand on C.W.'s
 genitalia or of more than one instance where Shomour placed his
 hand on her breast; and that, if so, in order to convict Shomour
 on either count, the jury must be unanimous in finding that
 Shomour committed any one such act supporting that count. 
Because the State produced evidence of only one instance where
 Shomour touched C.W.'s genitalia and only one instance where he
 touched her breast, the instruction is superfluous, but it is not
 conflicting.
 
Furthermore, Shomour fails to explain how this 
instruction might have confused or misled the jury such that it may have convicted Shomour less than unanimously for those specific acts with which he was charged. Cf. Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 
at 353–55, 219 P.3d at 1140–42. The instructions defining the elements of each offense specified the particular acts with which Shomour was charged. Furthermore, the instructions corresponded unambiguously to the evidence presented. Finally, the jury was instructed that it must be unanimous on each of the two specific counts. Therefore, the inclusion of the unnecessary unanimity instruction was not reversible error. 
Shomour also contends that the jury should have
 
8
 Shomour cites to State v. Mundon and Arceo for support; these
cases establish that, in certain circumstances, it is error not to include a
unanimity instruction. They are silent, however, on whether it is error to
include such an instruction where it is unwarranted. See State v. Mundon, 121
Hawai'i 339, 353–55, 219 P.3d 1126, 1140–42 (2009); Arceo, 84 Hawai' i at 33,
928 P.2d at 875. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
received the following standard jury instruction:
 
The defendant is charged with more than one offense
under separate counts in the indictment/complaint. Each
 
count and the evidence that applies to that count is to be
considered separately. The fact that you may find the
defendant not guilty or guilty of one of the counts charged
does not mean that you must reach the same verdict with
respect to [any][the] other count charged. 
Hawai'i Standard Jury Instructions Criminal 4.06 (1991). In this 
two-count case, where the acts underlying each offense were
 
distinct, as was the corresponding evidence, the instructions
 when read as a whole were not prejudicially insufficient,
 erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. See State v. Kassebeer,
 
118 Hawai' i 493, 504, 193 P.3d 409, 420 (2008). 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's April 2, 2012 Judgment
 
of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 13, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender, Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 for Defendant-Appellant.
 
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
8
 