  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000059
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Interest of
 
K. P.
 
Born November 18, 2004
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00818)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ., with
Leonard, Presiding Judge, concurring separately)
 
In this joint appeal, Mother-Appellant (Mother) and
 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeal from the "Order Affirming
 
Jurisdiction and Amending the Order File Stamped September 15,
 [sic] 2014,"
1 filed on January 12, 20152
 in the Family Court of
the Fifth Circuit (Family Court).3
  
On appeal, Mother and Father contend that the Family
 
Court's decision to exercise jurisdiction and impose family
 supervision pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 571­
1
 The pertinent order being amended was actually file stamped September
18, 2014. 
2
 In their Joint Notice Of Appeal, Mother and Father also indicate
that they appeal from the "Order Denying Mother's Second Non-Hearing Motion
for the Court to Reconsider its Decision at the Conclusion of the Return
 Hearing on September 3, 2014," entered January 22, 2015. However, Mother and
Father present no substantive argument regarding the order. 
3
 The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided.
   
     
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11(9) and 587A-5 (Supp. 2015)4
 exceeded the bounds of reason due
to the lack of evidence of harm or threatened harm to K.P.
 
pursuant to HRS § 587A-4 (Supp. 2015).5 Mother and Father
 
contend that any threatened harm in this case does not reach the
 
4
 HRS § 571-11(9) provides in pertinent part:
 
§571-11 Jurisdiction; children. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, the court shall have exclusive
original jurisdiction in proceedings: 
. . . .
 (9) For the protection of any child under chapter 587A[.]
 
HRS § 587A-5 provides:
 
§587A-5 Jurisdiction. Pursuant to section 571­
11(9), the court shall have exclusive original
jurisdiction: 
(1)	 In a child protective proceeding concerning any
child who is or was found within the State at the
 time specified facts and circumstances occurred,
are discovered, or are reported to the department.
These facts and circumstances constitute the basis
 for the court's finding that the child's physical
or psychological health or welfare is subject to
imminent harm, has been harmed, or is subject to
threatened harm by the acts or omissions of the
child's family; and
(2)	 In any prior child protective proceeding under
chapter 587, the former Child Protective Act. 
5
 HRS § 587A-4 provides in pertinent part:
 
"Harm" means damage or injury to a child's physical or
psychological health or welfare, where:
 
(1) The child exhibits evidence of injury, including,
but not limited to:
 
. . . .
 
(H) Extreme mental distress;
 
. . . .
 and the injury is not justifiably explained, or
the history given concerning the condition or
death is not consistent with the degree or type
of the condition or death, or there is evidence
that the condition or death may not be the
result of an accident;
 
. . . .
 
"Threatened harm" means any reasonably foreseeable
substantial risk of harm to a child. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
level of a threat of extreme mental distress.6
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve the
 appellants' point of error as follows and affirm the Family
 Court.
 
The Family Court concluded that it had jurisdiction
 
because K.P.'s physical or psychological health or welfare was
 subject to imminent harm, harm, or threatened harm by the acts or
 omissions of her family and also that K.P. was subject to a
 threat of harm of extreme mental distress due to the high level
 of conflict in the family home and prior history. The Family
 Court also concluded that there was a threat of extreme mental
 distress based on unresolved substance abuse issues, altercations
 between Father and Mother's boyfriend that caused stress for
 K.P., and Mother's stress from the situation was being
 transferred to K.P. 
The Family Court concluded that there were unresolved
 
domestic violence issues apparently based upon K.P. witnessing
 one or more arguments or altercations between Father and Mother's
 boyfriend. One altercation between Father and Mother's boyfriend
 occurred while K.P. was present. Another altercation between
 Father and Mother's boyfriend, although unclear whether K.P.
 witnessed it, resulted in Father being incarcerated. Also, it
 appears that Father was arrested once, approximately four years
 before the petition in this case was filed, for family abuse of
 K.P., and Mother testified in this case that Father had
 previously been violent with Mother. Therefore, Father's
 argument that there was no evidence that he personally caused
 harm or threatened harm is without merit. In terms of substance
 abuse issues, it is undisputed that after DHS received a notice
 of concern regarding Mother and her boyfriend which in part
 
6
 Mother and Father argue that the Guardian Ad Litem used an incorrect
standard of proof in closing arguments. Any incorrect argument by the
Guardian Ad Litem regarding the standard of proof necessary to impose family
supervision was harmless because the Family Court did not adopt the Guardian
Ad Litem's standard of proof.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged drug use, Mother and Mother's boyfriend were court
 
ordered to take a urinalysis test and both tested positive for
 marijuana, Mother admitted to having "a little hit here and
 there, just so I can go to sleep[,]" and that, while Mother used
 to have a prescription to use marijuana, she does not currently. 
And while Mother denies that her boyfriend is a methamphetamine
 user, boyfriend, whom Mother lives with, did test positive for
 methamphetamine after taking the court ordered urinalysis test. 
The record reflects unresolved substance abuse issues involving
 Mother and her boyfriend.
 
In large part, Mother and Father request that this 
court reevaluate the evidence presented to the Family Court. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (citation 
and quotation marks omitted). The Family Court did not abuse its discretion in concluding that K.P.'s physical or psychological health or welfare was subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions of her family and that K.P. was subject to a threat of harm of extreme mental distress due to the high level of conflict in the family home and prior history. 
The Family Court also did not err by considering a 
supplemental safe family home report, dated June 5, 2014, which also involved K.P.'s sibling. Mother and Father concede that "when this was objected to by counsel, the lower court indicated that it would filter out any information relating to [sibling], . . . " Absent evidence to the contrary, we presume that a judge sitting as the trier of fact will rely only on competent evidence. See In re Doe, 79 Hawai
'i 265, 275, 900 P.2d 1332, 
1342 (App. 1995). In any event, the Family Court imposed family supervision, which means the "legal status in which a child's legal custodian is willing and able, with the assistance of a service plan, to provide the child with a safe family home." HRS § 587A-4. Thus, the Family Court concluded that Mother and Father could provide a safe family home with the assistance of a service plan. In making that determination, the Family Court was 
4
    Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order
 
Affirming Jurisdiction and Amending the Order File Stamped
 
September 15, [sic] 2014," filed on January 12, 2015 in the
 Family Court of the Fifth Circuit is affirmed.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
required to consider the safe family home factors in HRS § 587A-7 
(Supp. 2015). One factor that must be considered is "[s]ervices
 provided to the child and family[.]" HRS § 587A-7(1)(H). Thus,
 the Family Court did not abuse its discretion merely from the
 fact it considered the supplemental safe family home report and
 the services provided to K.P.'s sibling which were extensively
 described in the supplemental safe family home report.
7
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 19, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Kai Lawrence,
for Mother-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
Warren Perry,
for Father-Appellant.
 
Russell K. Goo, 
Mary Anne Magnier,
Jay K. Goss,
Deputy Attorney General,
Department of the Attorney
General, State of Hawai
'i,
for Appellee. 
Associate Judge
7
 Mother and Father contend that their constitutional right to due
process was violated because the Family Court considered the supplement safe
family home report. Mother and Father cite no legal authority to supporttheir claims, and also fail to provide any citation to constitutionalprovisions, state or federal, under which they assert their rights have beenviolated, as required by Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
28(b)(7) and (8). Failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28 constitutes waiver ofthe arguments. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) and (7).
We reject Mother and Father's contention that, because they assert
that a constitutional right has been violated, we review the entire case,
including the Family Court's weighing of evidence, de novo. It is only the
constitutional questions, if properly presented and not waived, that are
reviewed de novo. See In re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawai' i 236, 239,
151 P.3d 717, 720 (2007) ("This court reviews questions of constitutional law
de novo[.]")
 
5
 