NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000785
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FETU KOLIO,
Appellant/Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HAWAI'I PUBLIC HOUSING AUTHORITY,
Appellee/Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2339-09)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J. and Leonard, J.,
with Reifurth, J. dissenting)
 
Appellant/Plaintiff-Appellant Fetu Kolio (
Kolio)
 
appeals from the (1) March 21, 2013 "Order Affirming Appellee's
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order, Filed
 
on September 21, 2012, And Dismissing Appellant's Agency's
 
Appeal" (Order Affirming FOFs/COLs/D&O) and (2) April 12, 2013
 
Judgment both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court).
 
In this secondary appeal, Kolio contends the circuit
 
court erred by: 
(1) affirming Appellee/Defendant-Appellee Hawai 'i 
Public Housing Authority's (HPHA) interpretation that the Mayor Wright Homes Tenant Association (MWTA) rules are binding 
obligations under the parties' Rental Agreement; 
1 
The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2(2) affirming the Oahu Eviction Board's September 21,
2012 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order"
(Eviction Order) because HPHA failed to identify any specific
laws, rules, regulations, ordinances of governmental authorities,
or Mayor Wright project rules that pertain to and establish
standards for residential occupants that had been violated by
Kolio; and#
(3) affirming the Eviction Order because HPHA failed to
show Kolio's actions posed a threat to health, safety, or the
right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises of other residents or
HPHA employees because the alleged threat by Kolio was entirely
speculative, supported only by hearsay, and was based on a
misinterpretation of the plain meaning of the lease provision.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Kolio's points of error as follows.
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 17-2020-5(b)
(2004), provides in relevant part: 
§17-2020-5 Grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction.
. . . .
(b)  The following constitutes grounds for termination of
the rental agreement:
(1)Serious or repeated violation of material terms of the
rental agreement, including, but not limited to:
(A)Failure to make payments due under the
rental agreement;
(B)Failure to fulfill household obligations
as defined in the rental agreement.
(2)Other good cause, including, but not limited to,
the following:
(A)Criminal activity or alcohol abuse;
(B)Discovery after admission of facts that
made the tenant ineligible;
(C)Discovery of material false statements or
fraud by the tenant in connection with an
application for assistance or with
reexamination of income; and
(D)Failure of a family member to comply with
service requirement provisions of 24
C.F.R. part 960, subpart F; andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(E)	 Failure to accept the corporation's offer
of a revision to the existing rental
agreement, subject to the requirements of
24 C.F.R. 966.4(1).
(Emphasis added.)
 
Section 8 of the Rental Agreement, entitled "Tenant's
 
Obligations," contained a provision under subsection (p)
 
obligating Kolio to not engage in "(1) [a]ny criminal activity or
 
alcohol abuse that threatens the health, safety or right to
 
peaceful enjoyment of Management's public housing premises by
 
other public housing residents or neighboring residents or
 
employees of Management[.]" Violation of this obligation
 
constituted grounds for HPHA to terminate Kolio's Rental
 
Agreement. See HAR § 17-2020-5(b)(1)(B). 
HPHA's issued a "Notice of Violation of Rental
 
Agreement and Proposed Termination of Rental Agreement (Non-Rent
 
Violation)" giving Kolio notice that HPHA was proceeding to
 
terminate his lease because of his violation of section 8(p)(1)
 
of the Rental Agreement. The Eviction Board concluded Kolio
 
failed to comply with section 8(p)(1) and specified that he had
 
"engaged in criminal activities that threatened the health,
 
safety and right to peaceful enjoyment of the other residents of
 
the Mayor Wright housing project."
 
Kolio contends his conviction of second-degree theft
 
was not the kind of "criminal activity" contemplated by section
 
8(p)(1) because his criminal acts did not "threaten[] the health,
 
safety or right to peaceful enjoyment" of Mayor Wright Housing by
 
residents or employees. Kolio's criminal theft involved the
 
2
"Resident Participation Funds,"  which were to be used "to
generate programs for the residents within the community to gain

 
2 
United States Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations set
forth the purposes of the MWTA "Resident Participation Funds" at issue. 24
 
C.F.R. § 964-150(a)(1). HUD provides monies to fund tenant participation and
HPHA is required to provide these monies to "the duly elected resident
council . . . ." 24 C.F.R. § 964-150(a)(1). These funds "must be used for
 the purpose set forth in subparts B and C of this part [964]." 24 C.F.R.
 § 964-150(a)(2). Subpart B, entitled "Tenant Participation," provides, "[t]he
role of the resident council is to improve the quality of life and resident
satisfaction and participate in self-help initiatives to enable residents to
create a positive living environment for families living in public housing."
24 C.F.R. § 964.100. Subpart C establishes a "Tenant Opportunities Program,"
which "provides opportunities for resident organizations to improve living
conditions and resident satisfaction in public housing communities." 24
 C.F.R. § 964.200(a).
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
either employment or anything to make them become self
 
sufficient, or to provide anything that would be a benefit to the
 
residents within the community" and "[f]or services like it [the
 
appropriate expenditure] could be anything from computer classes
 
to sewing classes to reading classes, anything that would benefit
 
the, not the association, the residents . . . ."
 
Kolio refers to Boston Hous. Auth. v. Bryant, 693
 
N.E.2d 1060 (1998) for the proposition that financial harm, such
 
as that caused by a tenant's act of credit card fraud, is
 
distinct from "types of harm that threaten health, safety, or
 
peaceful enjoyment that can justify eviction." Boston Hous.
 
Auth. is distinguishable from this case in that as noted by HPHA,
 the Massachusetts court concluded the Boston Housing Authority's
 
power to employ summary eviction procedures was "limited by
 
statute to violations of provisions that forbid crimes that are
 
physically destructive, violent, associated with violence, or
 
visibly asocial."
3 Id., 693 N.E.2d at 1063. The Massachusetts
 
court also noted, the "threat" posed by the tenant's fraudulent
 use of the credit card to the Boston Housing Authority employee's
 
health and safety "rest[ed] on a chain of conjecture about
 
hypothetical facts" and none of the potentially threatening
 
events ever occurred. Boston Hous. Auth., 693 N.E.2d at 1062.
 
3 The pertinent Massachusetts statute required the housing authority
to afford tenants a hearing on lease termination except
 
if there is reason to believe that the tenant or a
 
member of the tenant's household has (1) unlawfully
caused serious physical harm . . . , or (2) threatened
to seriously physically harm another . . . , or (3)
destroyed, vandalized or stolen property of a tenant
or the housing authority or any person lawfully on the
premises of the housing authority which thereby
creates or maintains a serious threat to the health or
 safety of a tenant or employee of the housing
authority or any person lawfully on the premises of
the housing authority, or (4) on or adjacent to
housing property, possessed, carried, or illegally
kept a weapon . . . , or (6) engaged in other criminal
conduct which seriously threatened or endangered the
health or safety of another tenant, an employee of the
housing authority or any other person lawfully on the
premises of the housing authority[.]
 
Mass. Gen. L. Ann. 121B, § 32 (2004). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, Kolio's criminal theft misappropriated
 
MWTA "Resident Participation Funds," that were already allocated
 
and were now unavailable for purposes that included the benefit
 
of the health, safety, and peaceful enjoyment of the Mayor Wright
 
Housing residents. Kolio's theft thus constituted the kind of
 
criminal activity that posed a "threat" within the meaning of
 
section 8(p)(1) of the Rental Agreement and provided sufficient
 
grounds for the Eviction Order.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) March 21, 2013 "Order
 
Affirming Appellee's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
 Decision and Order, Filed on September 21, 2012, And Dismissing
 
Appellant's Agency's Appeal" and (2) April 12, 2013 Judgment both
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 28, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Philip W. Miyoshi
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Appellant/Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Diane K. Taira 
John C. WongJennifer R. SugitaDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee/Defendant-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 