 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI#I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000023 30-JUN-2025 07:40 AM Dkt. 69 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000023 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I, 
LUANA GOLDEN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
and JALYN GOLDEN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CRAIG Y. WATASE dba MARK DEVELOPMENT INC.,
Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0000991) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Luana Golden ( Luana
), self-
represented, appeals from the Judgment entered in favor of 
Defendant-Appellee Craig Y. Watase dba Mark Development Inc. (Watase) on January 13, 2023, by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit ( Circuit Court ).
1 
On June 24, 2020, Luana and Plaintiff-Appellee Jalyn 
Golden ( Jalyn) filed a self-represented complaint against Watase, 
alleging "demand for duty of care/culpable negligence/pain and suffering/emotional distress" arising out of alleged water leaks and mold in Luana's leased apartment. (Formatting altered.) 
1 The Honorable John M. Tonaki presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The complaint states that Watase is the registered agent for 
"Mark Development Inc."  and seeks damages from Watase, but does 
not otherwise mention Watase in the operative allegations. The Circuit Court granted Watase's July 19, 2022 motion for summary judgment ( MSJ) as to all claims in the complaint. 2
On appeal, Golden appears to contend that the Circuit 
Court erred in granting Watase's MSJ.3 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Luana's contentions as follows, and affirm. 
We review the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment 
de novo, applying the following familiar standard: 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions onfile, together with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue as to any material fact and that themoving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effectof establishing or refuting one of the essential elements ofa cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to thenon-moving party. In other words, we must view all of theevidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light mostfavorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawai #i 46, 55–56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285–86 
2 Documents attached to the complaint identify Mark Development,
Inc. (MDI) as the "Managing Agent" for the property. 
3 Luana's amended opening brief fails to comply in material respects
with Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) and (7). In 
particular, the brief does not contain a statement of the points of error anddoes not include supporting references to the record. The argument section isconclusory and difficult to discern. Nevertheless, we have "consistentlyadhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity 'to have theircases heard on the merits, where possible.'" 
Morgan v. Planning Dep't, Cnty.
of Kauai , 104 Hawai#i 173, 180-81, 86 P.3d 982, 989-90 (2004) (quoting
O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu , 77 Hawai#i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364
(1994)). We thus address Luana's argument to the extent discernible. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2013) (citation omitted). 
We conclude that Watase satisfied his initial burden on 
summary judgment through the declarations and exhibits attached 
to the MSJ. See id.
 at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286. Watase's 
declaration stated that he was a shareholder, officer, director and the registered agent of MDI, a 
Hawai#i corporation, and 
attached a lease agreement for the subject apartment between "Landlord[,] Whitmore Circle Partners LP, the owner acting by and through its duly authorized Managing Agent, [MDI]," and "Tenant[,] Luana . . . ." Watase argued that "no action lies against [him]" in those capacities under relevant Hawai #i law. 
Watase further argued in the MSJ that the complaint was 
barred by the doctrines of res judicata and collateral estoppel. He claimed that Luana and Jalyn had filed: 
(1) an April 9, 2020 
complaint in the District Court of the First Circuit, asserting substantially similar allegations against him and MDI; and (2) a June 17, 2020 notice of dismissal of that complaint with prejudice. Copies of the district court complaint and the notice of dismissal with prejudice were attached to the declaration of counsel. 
The burden then shifted to Luana and Jalyn, and they 
did not raise a genuine issue of material fact. See
 Ralston, 
129 Hawai#i at 56–57, 292 P.3d at 1286–87 ("[W]hen the moving 
party satisfies its initial burden of production, . . . the burden shift[s] to the nonmoving party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of 
trial.") (citation omitted). Indeed, though it appears Luana retained legal counsel to represent her, she and Jalyn did not file any opposition to the MSJ. On this record, the Circuit 
Court did not err in granting the MSJ. 
For these reasons, the Judgment entered in favor of 
Defendant-Appellee Craig Y. Watase dba Mark Development Inc. on 
January 13, 2023, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, June 30, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Luana Golden,Self-represented /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Plaintiff-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Keith A. Matsuoka, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
4 