NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000062 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE GUARDIANSHIP 
OF LN AND BN 
(FC-G NO. 17-1-0006) 
AND 
IN THE MATTER OF THE CUSTODY 
OF LN AND BN 
(FC-M NO. 19-1-0163) 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant MK (Guardian) appeals from the 
January 10, 2020 Order Denying [Guardian]'s Motion to Reconsider 
Order Denying Her Petition for Custody and Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment (
Order Denying Reconsideration) entered by 
the Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court) in both FC-
G No. 17-1-0006 (Guardianship Case) and FC-M No. 19-1-0163 
(Custody Case).  Guardian also challenges the Family Court's 
Summary Judgment Order and the Order Terminating Guardianship, as 
well as the Order Denying Custody. 1
1 The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely ( Judge Heely ) presided over the
final proceedings which also resulted in the December 6, 2019 Order Granting
Motion for Summary Judgment Filed October 8, 2019 ( Summary Judgment Order ) and
the December 13, 2019 Order Granting Father['s] Motion to TerminateGuardianship of Minors ( Order Terminating Guardianship ) in the Guardianship
Case, and the December 13, 2019 Order Denying Petition for Custody ( Order 
Denying Custody ) in the Custody Case; however, the Honorable Lloyd A. Poelman
(Judge Poelman ) presided over earlier proceedings stemming from a motion to
terminate guardianship in the Guardianship Case. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. The Petition for Guardianship Respondent-Appellee Father (Father) and Respondent-
Appellee Mother (Mother) are the biological and legal parents of 
two children (Children), born in 2007 and 2012. Guardian is the 
Children's former maternal great aunt; she was related to the 
Children by her (former) marriage to Mother's uncle. 
On February 15, 2017, during a period of marital strife 
between Mother and Father (who since divorced), Guardian filed pro se a Petition for Appointment of a Guardian of the Persons of Minors (Petition for Guardianship), in FC-G No. 17-1-0006, 
requesting that she be appointed guardian of the Children on the 
grounds that such appointment was necessary for the Children's schooling, medical care, and "proper life support." Guardian prepared one-page "Waiver of Notice and Consent to Guardianship" papers (Waiver and Consent) for Father and Mother to sign. 
Father did not check a box stating that he did not want notice of 
further hearings, but the Waiver and Consent stated that Father did not require that he be given 14 days notice; Father's Waiver and Consent is signed. Mother's name is printed on her Waiver and Consent; a box is checked next to a statement saying, "I do not want to be notified of any further hearings and understand that the Court may grant the Petition without further notice to me." Neither Father nor Mother were represented by counsel with respect to the Petition for Guardianship. 
On April 3, 2017, a hearing was held on the Petition 
for Guardianship.
2 Guardian and Father appeared at the hearing; 
Mother did not. The parties were placed under oath. The Family Court first addressed Guardian and noted that there was no proof of service or return of service filed with the Court. Guardian stated they were served by her niece and asked if she could "write" the submission showing service. The Court told her no, the person who served the petition and notice of hearing should do it. No proof of service for the Petition for Guardianship 
2 Judge Poelman presided. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and/or the notice of hearing on the petition was ever filed.3 
The Family Court then spoke with Father: 
THE COURT: . . . There's a waiver of notice and 
consent to guardianship in the file that says that you
received a copy of the petition requesting the appointmentof [Guardian] as guardian of [the Children] and that you gotnotice of today's hearing; that you consent to theguardianship to her appointment as the guardian and waivethe requirement that you receive any further notices of anyhearings. Is that correct? 
[Father]: Yes. 
THE COURT: And this document says that same thing.
Is this your signature on the document? 
[Father]: Yes. THE COURT: And today you have been sworn to tell the
truth. Do you still consent to this guardianship? 
[Father]: Yes. THE COURT: And you are the natural father? [Father]: Yes. THE COURT: Okay. Thank you. You're welcome to stay
or you can be excused if you'd like, but you can stay. I 
don't care. 
The Family Court did not further address Father at the 
hearing. The Court noted that it had the consent of the mother 
and Mother's name. Although Mother's name is hand-printed on the waiver of notice and consent form, which does not appear to bear any signature, Mother does not deny that she initially consented to the guardianship. The Court asked Guardian where she lived, with whom, and how long the Children had been living with her, as well as about her employment status. The Court asked Guardian whether she was providing the Children "with their household care, shelter, food, and taking on those responsibilities?" She said, "Yes. The parents give as they can." The Court asked further questions about the Guardian's taking on the financial, educational, and health care needs of the Children. She informed 
3 Neither Mother nor Father raised a direct challenge on any grounds
to the initial April 3, 2017, Order Appointing Guardian of the Minor Persons
(Order Appointing Guardian ). They later explained that they consented to the
guardianship because they viewed it as, essentially, a means to help them andthe Children through a difficult period and they never understood or intendedthat it could affect their custody of the Children or prevent them fromreuniting with the Children. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Court they have insurance through Medicaid. The Court asked 
Guardian whether she believed the guardianship was in the best interest of the Children and asked if she understood and acceptedher duties and responsibilities. She answered affirmatively. Finally, the following exchange occurred:  
THE COURT: Based upon the records of the case and the
testimony and evidence presented, the Court finds it has
jurisdiction in this matter and that all statutoryrequirements have been met. The material allegations of thepetition for appointment of guardian have been proven andall necessary consents have been obtained or noticerequirements have been filed. 
Would you just briefly on the record state why it is
that there is the need for the guardianship. Are the parents unable to take care of the children or what is thereason for the guardianship? 
[Guardian]: They are separated. The mother lives in 
Lahaina and the father works. So it's hard for me to signeducational papers for school. I need it to take them to the doctor. 
THE COURT: And they're living with you? 
[Guardian]: Yes. THE COURT: And why is it that they live with you and
not the parents? 
[Guardian]: Because the mother -- the kids go to
school at -- the little girl goes to [particular school] and
the boy goes to [other school], but the mother lives inLahaina and dad works early in the morning. 
THE COURT: And they don't live with the father or do
they? 
[Guardian]: They visit on weekends. 
THE COURT: They visit the father on weekends? [Guardian]: Yes, and sometimes mom. THE COURT: Okay. The Court finds that the subject
children are in need of -- and circumstances require a
guardian be appointed. 
The Court finds that the petitioner
is a fit and proper person who can provide proper care andsupervision, granting of the petition for guardianship willserve the welfare and best interest of the subject children. 
Therefore, the petition is granted. The petitioner is
appointed as guardian of the subject minor children to servewithout compensation and without bond. 
The guardianship
will remain in effect until the attainment of majority ofthe subject minor children or further order of the Court. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Order Appointing Guardian was entered, and 
corresponding Letters of Guardianship of Minor Children were 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issued the same day. It does not appear that Father or Mother 
were ever served with these documents, and they did not approve them as to form. 
B. The Subsequent Proceedings 
On August 14, 2019, Father filed Father['s] Motion to 
Terminate Guardianship of Minors (Motion to Terminate) in the 
Guardianship Case. In the Motion to Terminate, Father argued, 
inter alia, that the Family Court should terminate the guardianship because it would be in the Children's best interest to return to the custody and care of their father, that Father had never been determined to be unfit or unable to provide a safe and wholesome home for the Children, and that the court must consider the preference granted to parents. Father explained, in his memorandum in support as well as his sworn declaration, that he consented to the guardianship because he and Mother were in the midst of a separation and contemplating divorce. Mother had moved to another part of the island and was unable to assist in taking the Children to school and appointments, and Guardian was willing to assist. The guardianship was presented to him by Guardian as a way to make it easier for Guardian to take the Children to school and healthcare appointments during his work days. He attested that, during the guardianship, he maintained contact with the Children and had parenting time on the weekends, as well as at other times. He provided financial support and spent holidays with the Children. 
However, Guardian terminated contact between Father and 
the Children when, in 2019, he informed her that the divorce was nearly final and he wanted the Children to return to his custody and control. Father attested that his relationship with Mother had improved since they were officially divorced and she moved back upcountry. When Guardian was unreceptive to his request for the Children's return, Father told Guardian that he never thought he would be unable to have his children returned to him. In response to his attempts to discuss the return of the Children, Guardian said he was giving her attitude, not being respectful, and later, that they could talk when he could talk to her without 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being angry (he denied being angry). His last visit with the 
Children was on Father's Day, two months prior to filing the motion. He expressed appreciation for all that Guardian had done, but pointed to his ability to care for the Children and requested termination of the guardianship. 
On August 29, 2019, Guardian filed a request to 
continue to act as the Children's guardian, responding to and contesting nearly all of the averments made in the Motion to Terminate (Opposition to Termination). As it specifically 
concerned whether it would be in the Children's best interest to 
return to Father's custody, Guardian alleged, inter alia, that Father was unstable, required a Breathalyzer device to drive, and lived with his girlfriend who was legally married and has three children of her own that rotate between families. Guardian raised these concerns to dispute Father's contention that he had not been found unfit nor his home found unstable or unwholesome in the original appointment proceedings. 
At a September 3, 2019 hearing on the Motion to 
Terminate, Father and Guardian appeared with counsel and Mother appeared pro se, stating that she supported Father's attempt to terminate the guardianship. The Family Court stated that it appeared to be a contested case that should be set for trial. Guardian requested, and the parents ultimately agreed to, the Court's appointment of Davelynn Tengan (Tengan or Fact Finder) as 
a neutral "fact finder" to give the court factual information in 
the form of a report after reading the filings, contacting the parties, including Mother, and meeting with the Children. The parties discussed whether the Family Court could order de facto parenting time for Guardian in the event the Motion to Terminate was granted, and the court invited Guardian to file a motion for visitation.
4 
On September 17, 2019, the Family Court held a hearing 
regarding setting an interim parenting schedule and establishing that the Fact Finder's report was to evaluate whether there were 
4 Guardian never filed a motion for visitation, and instead
petitioned for sole legal and joint physical custody initiating the Custody
Case. Her appeal makes no argument concerning visitation. We therefore do not address the issue further. 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any credible allegations that either parent was currently unfit 
or unable to provide a stable and wholesome home. Appearing through counsel, Mother orally moved to terminate the guardianship and for summary judgment, arguing that the parents were fit parents and that they could not afford further legal proceedings. The motions were denied without prejudice to the filing of a dispositive motion. 
On September 24, 2019, Father filed a Memorandum of Law 
for the Fact Finder, reiterating the factual assertions and arguments made in the Motion to Terminate. 
On September 25, 2019, Mother filed her memorandum in 
support of the Motion to Terminate. Citing Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57 (2000), Mother argued, inter alia, that "parents have [an] absolute constitutional right to terminate the guardianship." Mother claimed that, in the absence of a finding that parents are unfit, the Family Court was required to grant the Motion to Terminate. 
On October 8, 2019, Mother filed her motion for summary 
judgment to terminate guardianship (Motion for Summary Judgment), 
which Father joined, echoing the arguments stated in her 
memorandum in support of the Motion to Terminate and urging the Family Court to immediately and summarily return the Children to their parents. 
On October 8, 2019, Guardian initiated the Custody Case 
with the filing of a Petition for Custody. Therein, Guardian alleged that — in addition to being the legally-appointed guardian of the Children since April 3, 2017 — Guardian had de facto custody of the Children from 2012 and 2016, respectively.
5 
Guardian claimed, inter alia, that the younger child had been in Guardian's care "every weekend and eventually during the weekdays" since April of 2012, when the younger child was an infant, and that Guardian began to care for the older child in June of 2016. Guardian also alleged that she "provided both 
5 In her opening brief, Guardian states that the Children had been
living with her for "approximately six months" leading up to her appointment
on April 3, 2017. At the April 3, 2017 hearing on the Petition forGuardianship, Guardian stated under oath that the Children had been livingwith her since September, meaning September of 2016. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minor children with a stable and wholesome home" and that she "is 
a fit and proper person to have care, custody, and control of the minor children." 
On October 22, 2019, Tengan filed a Report of the Fact 
Finder (Factfinder Report) in the Guardianship Case. The 
Factfinder Report stated the charge to Tengan, as the Fact 
Finder, and detailed interviews with the Children, both parents, and Guardian. As a result of her factfinding, Tengan reported that there were not credible allegations that either Mother or Father were presently unfit to parent or unable to provide a stable, wholesome home for the Children. Through discussion with Guardian and Guardian's niece, Tengan identified the allegations that might bear upon Mother and Father's fitness. Tengan reported that several of the allegations were too remote in time to weigh upon the parents' current fitness. Although the Factfinder Report noted potential concerns regarding Father's alcoholism and fighting between Father and Father's girlfriend, who lives with Father, Tengan found that any concerns were outweighed by "other positive parenting and personal characteristics" identified in the interviews. The Factfinder Report also stated that the Children's preference was to live with their parents and that the Children supported Father's assertion that he had stopped drinking. 
On October 23, 2019, in the Custody Case, Father filed 
an opposition to the Petition for Custody. Father argued that Guardian was not a de facto parent, but rather that she had been a babysitter and then a legal guardian. Accordingly, Guardian's role was not that of a de facto parent like in the cases cited by Guardian. On October 23, 2019, Father also filed Father's Answer to Petition for Custody, responding to Guardian's allegations. 
On October 24, 2019, in the Guardianship Case, Guardian 
filed a memorandum in opposition to the Motion for Summary Judgment, disputing Father and Mother's contention that there was an absolute right to revoke a consensual guardianship where the parents were not deemed unfit or unable to provide a stable or wholesome home. Guardian asserted that the Family Court was obligated to determine the matter based on the best interest of 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 the Children and, to that end, maintained that there was a 
genuine issue of material fact as to whether termination of the guardianship was in the Children's best interest. Guardian also asserted that, on the basis of her de facto custodianship, there 
was prima facie evidence that awarding custody to Guardian was in the children's best interest. 
On October 29, 2019, a hearing was held on the 
Factfinder Report, the Motion for Summary Judgment, and the Petition for Custody. The Family Court acknowledged its receipt of the Factfinder Report and confirmed with Tengan her finding that neither parent is unfit or unable to provide a stable or wholesome home. After lengthy arguments, and a Hawai# i Family 
Court Rules (
HFCR) Rule 56(f) request by Guardian to be allowed 
to file a declaration addressing the Motion for Summary Judgment and the Factfinder Report, the Family Court declined to rule at that time on the parents' fitness and the legal arguments presented by the parties. The Family Court invited the parties to file declarations opposing or supporting fitness and continued the hearing on the Motion for Summary Judgment. At a further hearing the next day, which was intended to address interim custody of the Children, the Family Court noted: 
The Court does not agree with the initial portion of
the motion for summary judgment that says that the parents
can create a guardianship and terminate the guardianship ifthere's a question of fact whether they are fit parents, andthat is and if there is a question of fact. If there's no 
question of fact there and if the parents are fit and properand stable, then I agree with their position that they havean absolute right to terminate the guardianship and takecustody again of the children, but if there is a question offact as to whether they are fit and stable, then that issuewould need to be tried. 
So the Court under [HFCR] Rule 56(f) set deadlines
yesterday for filings of declarations and affidavits inregard to whether there is a question of fact as to whetheror not the parents are fit or not, and the Court saidyesterday it will take the fact finder's findings intoconsideration as part of that motion for summary judgment. 
Now, I did review the fact finder's findings, and the
fact finder's opinion was that these parents are fit.That's still disputed by the guardian at this point in time.We still are in the middle of this motion for summaryjudgment question. 
(Emphasis added). 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The court went on to state that "while there's a 
question of fact being alleged regarding the fitness of the 
parents, the fact finder's findings didn't support that." 
On November 5, 2019, Father submitted a declaration 
supporting the Fact Finder's finding that he was fit, proper, and able to provide a wholesome home; asserting that all of Guardian's allegations regarding his fitness were well behind him; and categorically denying the new allegations as hearsay and falsehoods. Father's mother, girlfriend, and sister, and employer also submitted declarations supporting Father's fitness to regain custody of the Children. 
Also on November 5, 2019, Guardian submitted her 
declaration in opposition to the Motion for Summary Judgment, making a series of allegations regarding, inter alia, the conditions leading to the creation of the guardianship, Father's history of drinking and driving, the Children's concerns about Father's relationship with his girlfriend, and other concerns about whether it was in the Children's best interest to be returned to their parents.
6 
On November 7, 2019, Mother submitted affidavits from 
Jenna Yap, Executive Director of the Keiki Aloha & Miss Hawaii America Preliminary Scholarship Competition; Mother's mother; and a friend of the family attesting to, inter alia, Mother's character and fitness. 
On November 12, 2019, in the Custody Case, Guardian 
filed a reply memorandum to Father's opposition to the Petition for Custody, arguing that she had asserted a prima facie case of de facto parenting and distinguishing the case law cited by the parents. 
A hearing was held on November 19, 2019, during which 
the Family Court heard arguments regarding the Motion for Summary Judgment, Motion to Terminate, and Petition for Custody. The court reconvened on November 27, 2019 to issue its rulings on the Motion for Summary Judgment, Motion to Terminate, and Petition for Custody. At the further hearing, the court recounted in 
6 The declaration also contains averments pertaining to the
Children's activities and well-being while under Guardian's care. 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detail its review of the history of both the Guardianship and 
Custody Cases. The court reviewed the creation of guardianship; reviewed the authority of Fact Finder and the Factfinder Report, cataloged the various motions and memoranda filed by the parties and the rulings made by the prior judge, and ultimately granted the Motion for Summary Judgment and Motion to Terminate, finding no genuine issue of material fact that "parents are ready and able to provide a safe, proper home for their children." The court then stated its determinations regarding the Petition for Custody and denied the petition on the grounds that Guardian was not a de facto parent, acknowledging the preference it accorded 
to the parents in granting termination of the guardianship. 
On December 6, 2019, the Family Court entered the 
Summary Judgment Order. On December 13, 2019, the Family Court entered the Order Terminating Guardianship and Order Denying Custody. On December 23, 2019, Guardian filed a motion to reconsider the Order Denying Custody and the Summary Judgment Order (Motion for Reconsideration) in the Guardianship and 
Custody Cases. Mother and Father both opposed the motion, and on 
January 10, 2020, the Family Court entered the Order Denying Reconsideration. 
On February 7, 2020, Guardian timely filed a notice of 
appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Guardian raises three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Family Court erred in: (1) granting the 
Motion for Summary Judgment and the Motion to Terminate;
7 (2) 
dismissing the Petition for Custody for failure to state a claim 
7 Guardian's points of error do not comply with the requirements of
Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4), including but not limited
to the failure to specifically identify the alleged error(s) and where in the
record they occurred. For example, the first point of error states "The
Family Court erred when it granted Parent's MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT TO 
TERMINATE GUARDIANSHIP  in the guardianship case" with no indication of where
in the record the alleged error occurred or where it was objected to.
Although the imprecise wording used seems to challenge only the Summary
Judgment Order, and not the Order Terminating Guardianship, in the interest of
reaching the merits, to the extent that it is possible and makes sense to doso, we will attempt to construe the related arguments in the "Argument"section of the opening brief as applicable to both orders. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
upon which relief could be granted; and (3) denying 
reconsideration. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,we will not disturb the family court's decision on appealunless the family court disregarded rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a partylitigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds ofreason. 
Hamilton v. Hamilton, 138 Hawai# i 185, 197, 378 P.3d 901, 913 
(2016) (quoting Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 126, 136, 276 
P.3d 695, 705 (2012)). Likewise, we review the denial of a 
motion for reconsideration for abuse of discretion. See Doe v. 
Doe, 98 Hawai# i 144, 150, 44 P.3d 1085, 1091 (2002). 
We review an award of summary judgment de novo under 
the same standard applied by the Family Court. See Blaisdell v. 
Dep't of Pub. Safety, 119 Hawai# i 275, 282, 196 P.3d 277, 284 
(2008). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue as to any material fact and that themoving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effectof establishing or refuting one of the essential elements ofa cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to thenon-moving party. In other words, we must view all of theevidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the lightmost favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai# i 239, 254-55, 172 P.3d 
983, 998-99 (2007) (brackets omitted) (quoting Taniguchi v. Ass'n 
of Apartment Owners of King Manor, Inc., 114 Hawai# i 37, 46, 155 
P. 3d 1138, 1147 (2007)). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
There are three decisions at issue on appeal, the 
Family Court's granting of summary judgment and termination of 
the guardianship in the Guardianship Case, and the Family Court's denial of the Petition for Custody, in which Guardian sought sole legal and joint physical custody of the Children, in the Custody Case. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. The Summary Judgment Order and the Order Terminating
Guardianship 
The Petition for Guardianship identified the Children 
and their parents, and stated only that Guardian's appointment 
was necessary because "the children need to be enrolled in school, need medical care, and need proper life support." The petition did not allege that the Children were abused or neglected in any way; nor did it allege that the parents were unfit or unable to care for the Children. The petition sought appointment of Guardian pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 560:5-204 (2018),
8 which provides in relevant part: 
§ 560:5-204 Judicial appointment of guardian;
conditions for appointment.  (a) A minor or a person
interested in the welfare of a minor may petition for
appointment of a guardian. 
(b) The court may appoint a guardian for a minor if
the court finds the appointment is in the minor's bestinterest, and: 
(1) 
The parents consent; 
(2) All parental rights have been terminated; or
 
(3) 
The parents are unwilling or unable to exercisetheir parental rights. 
HRS § 560:5-206 (2018) provides in relevant part: 
§ 560:5-206 Judicial appointment of guardian;
priority of minor's nominee; limited guardianship. (a) The 
court shall appoint as guardian a person whose appointmentwill be in the best interest of the minor. The court shall appoint a person nominated by the minor, if the minor hasattained fourteen years of age, unless the court finds theappointment will be contrary to the best interest of theminor. 
(Emphasis added). 
At the April 3, 2017 hearing on the Petition for 
Guardianship, after putting Guardian under oath, the Family Court 
asked her whether the parents were unable to take care of the children or what was the reason for the guardianship. Guardian did not say that the parents were unable or unfit to care for the 
8 Contrary to certain arguments made by Guardian after Father and
Mother sought to terminate the guardianship, this guardianship was not
initiated pursuant to HRS § 560:5-202 (2018), which permits parentalappointment of a guardian effective upon the appointing parent's death oradjudicated incapacitation, or a physician's determination that the parent isno longer able to care for the child. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Children, but instead responded that the parents were separated 
and the father worked, and she (Guardian) needed it (the guardianship) to sign educational papers for school and to take the Children to the doctor. Again, there was no assertion that the parents were neglectful or abusive or that they were relinquishing custody to Guardian, who was the Children's long-time babysitter, as well as an extended family member (through an ex-spouse). The court asked why the Children lived with her, not the parents, and she explained that the Mother lived in Lahaina, the Children both go to schools in upcountry Maui - near where both Guardian and Father live - and "dad" works early in the morning. When asked, Guardian said that the Children visit Father, and sometimes Mother on the weekends. With that, the Family Court granted the Petition for Guardianship and entered the form of order submitted by Guardian (which was not approved as to form by Mother and Father), as well as the Letters of Guardianship submitted by Guardian. 
Roughly two years later, Father sought to terminate the 
guardianship pursuant to HRS § 560:5-210 (2018), which provides: 
§ 560:5-210 Termination of guardianship; other
proceedings after appointment. (a) A guardianship of a
minor terminates upon the minor's death, adoption,
emancipation or attainment of majority, or as ordered by thecourt. 
(b) A ward or a person interested in the welfare of
a ward may petition for any order that is in the bestinterest of the ward. The petitioner shall give notice ofthe hearing on the petition to the ward, if the ward hasattained fourteen years of age and is not the petitioner,the guardian, and any other person as ordered by the court. 
In the Motion to Terminate, Father argued, inter alia, 
that it was in the best interests of the Children to terminate 
the guardianship and return the Children to Father's care and custody, and that there had never been any allegation that he was an unfit parent or that he was unable to provide Children with a stable and wholesome home. Father's declaration explained, inter alia, his consent to the guardianship: 
8. When [Guardian] told me about the guardianship papers
in April of 2017, it was presented to me as a way tomake it easier for her to take the children to school and to their healthcare appointments; I didn't understand that I was giving up custody and control of 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
my children; if I had known about power of attorney I
would have just signed those for her[.] 
With the Opposition to Termination, Guardian submitted 
a l8-page (single-spaced) declaration asserting for the first 
time that the guardianship had been necessary because, inter alia, Father and Mother were unable to properly parent the Children and provide a stable home, and that both Mother and Father had alcohol or drug addictions. Guardian did not contradict Father's statement (above) that the guardianship had been presented by her as a means to facilitate school and healthcare matters. Guardian did not dispute Father's averment that Father was not informed and did not understand that consent to the guardianship could be viewed as giving up custody and control of the Children. 
The Family Court did not address the substance of the 
Motion to Terminate at the initial hearing, and instead appointed the Fact Finder and set a date for an evidentiary hearing, addressed that Guardian could file a motion for "de facto parenting time," which could come into play if the guardianship were terminated, and established a pretrial and motions schedule. After the filing of the Petition for Custody, the Motion for Summary Judgment, the Factfinder Report, and further submissions of the parties and interim hearings, on November 19, 2019, the motions came on for hearing in the Guardianship Case.
9 
Mother's argument in the Motion for Summary Judgment 
was that, as there had never been any determination that Father and Mother were unfit parents, and the guardianship was grounded solely in their consent, that they had a fundamental right to terminate the guardianship. In her memorandum in opposition, Guardian argued that the proper inquiry under HRS § 560:5-210 was whether the termination of the guardianship was in the Children's best interests. At the second of two hearings at which this motion was discussed by Judge Poelman, on October 30, 2019, the court explained: 
9 Matters at issue in the Custody Case came on for hearing at the
same time, but they will be discussed separately. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I just wanted to briefly summarize as far as the
motion for summary judgment, thank you for all the argument
and all your presentations yesterday. I basically took thatunder advisement. I didn't rule on the motion itself other than to say it's possibly a question of fact whether theparents are fit, and taking the motion in the light mostfavorable and the prior declarations, the Court still wantedto ask for updated declarations after the fact finder'sreport from the guardian to establish whether or not therereally is a question of material fact as to whether or notthe parents are fit as parents, and what is left is aquestion of fact, then, that will have to go to trial. 
The Court does not agree with the initial portion of
the motion for summary judgment that says that the parentscan create a guardianship and terminate the guardianship ifthere's a question of fact whether they are fit parents, andthat is and if there is a question of fact. If there's noquestion of fact there and if the parents are fit and properand stable, then I agree with their position that they havean absolute right to terminate the guardianship and takecustody again of the children, but if there is a question offact as to whether they are fit and stable, then that issuewould need to be tried. 
So the Court under [HFCR] Rule 56(f) set deadlines
yesterday for filings of declarations and affidavits inregard to whether there is a question of fact as to whetheror not the parents are fit or not, and the Court saidyesterday it will take the fact finder's findings intoconsideration as part of that motion for summary judgment. 
Now, I did review the fact finder's findings, and the
fact finder's opinion was that these parents are fit.That's still disputed by the guardian at this point in time.We still are in the middle of this motion for summaryjudgment question. When I have pending matters before theygo to trial, sometimes it can take a while. I have possibletrial dates, but these might be too soon but if we don't usethese trial dates, which actually don't work because they'rebefore the continued motion for summary judgment, I'd liketo get on the calender the trial date in the event themotion for summary judgment is denied and if the Court findsthere is a question of fact to go to trial regarding thefitness of the parents. 
Thus, while making it clear that he was not ruling on 
the Motion for Summary Judgment, Judge Poelman indicated four 
things: (1) that he rejected Mother's argument that parents can create and then terminate a guardianship, as a matter of law, even if there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether they are fit parents; (2) he agreed with Mother's argument that to the extent that if there was no genuine of material fact as to whether the parents are fit parents, then they have an absolute right to terminate the guardianship and take custody of the Children; (3) although the Fact Finder's opinion was that Father and Mother are fit parents, Guardian disputed their fitness; and 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) pursuant to HFCR Rule 56(f), the court was allowing the 
parties to file additional declarations or affidavits on the issue of the parents' fitness, and would then rule on the Motion for Summary Judgment. At the prior, October 29, 2019 hearing, Judge Poelman further indicated that the ruling on summary judgment would be made viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, in this case, Guardian. 
The matters next came on for hearing on November 19, 
2019, before Judge Heely, who asked each of the parties to address whether they had any objection to her reviewing the record, including the details of what had transpired at the prior hearings before Judge Poelman, and then ruling on them. No objections were raised to proceeding as suggested by Judge Heely. At that hearing, Guardian argued that, contrary to Judge Poelman's characterization of the issue, the termination of the guardianship should be based on what is in the best interest of the Children, not on whether or not Father and Mother were fit parents. Guardian further argued that based on the declarations submitted, viewed in the light most favorable to Guardian, there were genuine issues of material fact either as to whether Father and Mother were fit and proper parents or whether it was in the best interests of the Children to terminate the guardianship. Father and Mother argued that this was a "simple consensual guardianship" case where they agreed to the Family Court creating a "de jour guardianship." In context, parents were arguing that their consent was only effective to give Guardian certain legal status to help Guardian care for their Children and that they never consented to a guardianship that would impinge on their parental rights. Guardian reiterated that the declarations established that there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Father and Mother were fit and proper parents. Judge Heely indicated that she would continue the hearing to allow her time to review the record, including the record of the prior hearings as well as the declarations that were filed concerning the summary judgment, and that court would reconvene on November 27, 2019, for the court's rulings on all pending matters. 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the continued hearing on November 27, 2019, the 
Family Court reviewed in part the record of the proceedings that 
the court had considered, including but not limited to the Fact Finder's investigation of the best interest of the Children pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(4) (2018). The Family Court noted in particular the Fact Finder's opinion that neither Mother nor Father were unfit parents or lacked stability or wholesomeness. The Family Court confirmed that the Motion to Terminate and the Motion for Summary Judgment were separate and distinct motions. The Family Court ruled that there was no genuine issue of material fact and that Mother was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. The Family Court then indicated that based on its review of the entirety of the record, the court was granting the Motion to Terminate. 
On appeal, Guardian argues that the Family Court erred 
in granting the Motion for Summary Judgment because there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the termination of the guardianship was in the best interest(s) of the ward(s), in this case the Children. Guardian further argues that there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether it was in the best interests of the Children to terminate the guardianship in light of Guardian's declaration expressing her concerns regarding the fitness of both Mother and Father. We review these issues de novo. 
As to the parents' fitness, on appeal, Guardian points 
to "instances of alcohol intoxication on the part of Father" that were "detailed" in Guardian's declaration, presumably referencing the November 5, 2019 declaration in opposition to the Motion for Summary Judgment, but no record citation was provided. Guardian's November 5, 2019 declaration includes 33 numbered paragraphs, as well as numerous subparagraphs. Paragraphs 6 and 7 of Guardian's declaration repeated hearsay reports concerning Father "driving under the influence" two times in 2014 and again in January 2017, two years and ten months prior to the ruling on the Motion for Summary Judgment. Paragraph 12 states that one of the Children said something to Guardian's niece — not Guardian — about an alleged incident in January of 2019 related to a 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Breathalyzer device in Father's car. Guardian's November 5, 2019 
declaration does not create a genuine issue of material fact as to Father's unfitness as a parent due to instances of alcohol intoxication. While the record as a whole, including the Factfinder's Report, indicates that Father has a history of problems with alcohol, it also indicates that he was sober, and Father's history did not rise to the level of unfitness, lack of stability, or lack of wholesomeness. We note the opportunities given to provide further additional evidence pursuant to HFCR Rule 56(f), and we conclude that the Family Court did not err in concluding Guardian did not raise a genuine issue of material fact as to Father and Mother's fitness as parents. 
There is nothing in the record to indicate that the 
Family Court's ruling on the Motion for Summary Judgment was intended to address factual or legal issues beyond the parents' fitness. Neither the oral ruling or written Summary Judgment Order indicate any ruling on Mother's argument concerning her fundamental constitutional rights as a parent. Guardian does not argue otherwise on appeal. We decline to express an opinion as to a question of law that was not ruled on by the Family Court. 
As to the Order Terminating Guardianship, Guardian's 
only argument on appeal is that the Family Court "applied the wrong standard, indicating only that the parents were ready and able to provide a safe, proper home for their children, not whether it was in their best interests to terminate the guardianship." This argument is without merit. The Motion to Terminate specifically asked the Court to determine that it was in the best interests of the Children to terminate the guardianship, arguing, inter alia, that the court must consider the preference granted to parents pursuant to HRS § 560:5-210 and HRS § 571-46(a)(1) when determining the Children's best interests. Guardian provides no citation to the record supporting the argument that the court's ruling on the Motion to Terminate was not based on the best interests of the Children. Guardian makes no specific factual or legal argument on appeal — except as to the parents' fitness, which has already been addressed — that it was not in the Children's best interests to 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 terminate the guardianship. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Family Court did not 
err in entering the Summary Judgment Order. We further conclude 
that the Circuit Court did not err or abuse its discretion in entering the Order Terminating Guardianship. 
B. Order Denying Custody 
Guardian argues that the Family Court erred in 
dismissing the Petition for Custody, purportedly for failure to 
state a claim upon which relief can be granted. 
As stated above, on October 8, 2019, Guardian filed the 
Petition for Custody. In it, Guardian alleged that she is a fit and proper person to have care, custody and control of the Children, she can provide the Children with a stable and wholesome home, and she has had de facto custody of the Children for an extended period of time. Guardian further alleged, inter alia, that pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(2) and the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court's decision in A.A. v. B.B., 139 Hawai# i 102, 384 P.3d 878 
(2016), Guardian should be adjudged to be a "
de facto custodian" 
of the Children and that she should be awarded sole legal and shared physical custody of the Children, pursuant to a parenting plan to be proposed by her. Father and Mother raised numerous arguments in opposition to the Petition for Custody, but the central argument was that Guardian did not have de facto custody of the Children, rather she was a long-time babysitter who offered to help care for the Children during the work week, while the parents were struggling through their separation and divorce, and that the legal guardianship was presented to them as a way of making it easier for her to provide additional support to the Children, in particular with respect to school and health care matters. 
Before further examining the parties' arguments and the 
Family Court's ruling on the Petition for Custody, we consider the supreme court's decision in A.A.
, which addresses the 
interpretation and application of HRS § 571-46(a)(2), which permits an award of custody to a person who has had de facto custody of a child. HRS § 571-46(a) provides in relevant 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 part: 
§ 571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding custody
and visitation; best interest of the child.  (a) In actions 
for divorce, separation, annulment, separate maintenance, or
any other proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as tothe custody of a minor child, the court, during the pendencyof the action, at the final hearing, or any time during theminority of the child, may make an order for the custody ofthe minor child as may seem necessary or proper. In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided by thefollowing standards, considerations, and procedures: 
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or toboth parents according to the best interests ofthe child, and the court also may considerfrequent, continuing, and meaningful contact ofeach parent with the child unless the courtfinds that a parent is unable to act in the bestinterest of the child; 
(2) Custody may be awarded to persons other than thefather or mother whenever the award serves the best interest of the child. Any person who hashad de facto custody of the child in a stableand wholesome home and is a fit and properperson shall be entitled prima facie to an awardof custody; 
(3) If a child is of sufficient age and capacity toreason, so as to form an intelligent preference,the child's wishes as to custody shall beconsidered and be given due weight by thecourt[.] 
A.A. involved a same-sex couple, who jointly decided to 
adopt and raise a child who was the biological grandchild and 
legal adoptive child of B.B. 139 Hawai# i at 104, 384 P.3d at 
880. They lived together as a family unit, along with B.B.'s 
teenage son, jointly sharing all parental care, duties, custody, and responsibilities. Id. They jointly planned for A.A. to also 
adopt the child, but that did not occur. Id. When they 
separated, they entered into a written 50/50 co-parenting agreement, which B.B. later sought to revoke. Id. A.A. 
petitioned for joint custody pursuant to the de facto custody 
provision in HRS § 571-46(a)(2). Id. 
The supreme court emphasized that the over-arching 
consideration in child custody matters is the best interests of the child, and that the family courts possess broad discretion as to that determination. Id. at 106, 384 P.3d at 882. The court 
noted that pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(1), custody "should be"awarded to either or both parents, according to the best  
interests of the child, but that pursuant to the de facto custody 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 provision in HRS § 571-46(a)(2), custody "may be" awarded to 
someone else, if that award serves the best interests of the child. 139 Hawai# i at 106, 384 P.3d at 882. In examining HRS 
§ 571-46(a)(2), the supreme court stated: 
Although "de facto custody" is not defined, we interpret it
to mean sole or shared physical custody in combination withan assumption of incidents of legal custody enumerated inHRS § 571-2, which include "the duty to protect, train, anddiscipline the minor and to provide the minor with food,shelter, education, and ordinary medical care." In other words, de facto custody is consistent with a parental role. 
Id. at 107, 384 P.3d at 883. 
Later in its opinion, in conjunction with one of the 
court's many references to B.B.'s expansive treatment of A.A. as 
a co-parent, voluntarily sharing physical custody and parenting decisions and duties, the supreme court clarified that: 
Our decision [regarding whether B.B.'s protected parental
rights would be violated by sharing custody with A.A.] isbased on the circumstances presented by this case. We note 
that a parent does not relinquish his or her parental rightsby merely relying on childcare assistance from others . As 
stated, de facto custody is not established by mere physicalcustody of a child.  Nonetheless, we decline to adopt a
bright line rule regarding the extent of a parent'sprotected liberty interest as "the constitutionalprotections in this area are best 'elaborated with care'" ona case-by-case basis. 
Id. at 114 n.18, 384 P.3d at 890 n.18 (emphasis added). 
The supreme court identified the three statutory 
factors by which a person may establish a prima facie case of de 
facto custody, that the person seeking custody is (1) a fit and 
proper person, (2) who has had de facto custody of the child, (3) in a stable and wholesome home. Id. at 107, 384 P.3d at 883. 
However, the court again noted the family court's ultimate discretion in determining the custody award based on the best interests of the child. Id. Due to the insufficiency of the 
family court's findings concerning whether A.A. established a prima facie case, the supreme court "express[ed] no opinion" on the issue but nevertheless noted that the record was sufficient to support a finding of de facto custody because B.B. "shared all parental care, duties, and responsibilities with respect to Child with A.A. from [early infancy in] October 2011 to October 2013 and then continued to have actual joint custody of Child until 
22  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
April 2014, pursuant to the written co-parenting agreement."10 
Id. at 107 n.8, 384 P.3d at 883 n.8. 
As argued by Guardian, at the October 30, 2019 hearing, 
Judge Poelman described Father's opposition to the Petition for 
Custody "as a kind of a Rule 12(b)(6) motion saying that there's a failure to state a . . . claim upon which relief can be granted . . . ." The judge invited Guardian to file an opposition or response to that argument prior to the next hearing, which Guardian did. At the next hearing, held on November 19, 2019, Father argued to Judge Heely that: 
The petition should be denied because there is no de facto
parenting here. There is none of that. She had de jourguardianship. They have never lived together. They havenever created a parent-like relationship. She's trying tocome in on [a custody case] by claiming because she hadguardianship of the children, she created a de factoparenting, and under all the facts that is not true, yourHonor. She can't even make that borderline threshold argument. 
In other words, notwithstanding Judge Poelman's 
characterization, Father argued that the facts did not support a 
finding of de facto parenting. Guardian argued that pursuant to 
A.A., Guardian was authorized to assert that she had a de facto parental relationship with the Children, and that she satisfied the prima facie criteria, recognizing that making a prima facie case did not entitle her to custody. Guardian's counsel stated that Guardian was seeking an evidentiary hearing, but then said that with respect to the Custody Case, based on Judge Poelman's determination that Father's opposition was like an HFCR 12(b)(6) 
10 As discussed below, in this case, the lack of findings of fact
concerning whether Guardian established a prima facie case of de facto  custody
under HRS § 571-46(a)(2), as well as findings and conclusions concerning the
ultimate issue of the best interests of the Children, render the recordinsufficient for appellate review of the Order Denying Custody. We express noopinion, but nevertheless note that there are numerous distinctions betweenthe case at bar and A.A., and the record tends to support a finding that
Guardian did not have de facto  custody of the Children. Here, there is no
evidence in the record that the parents intended to share custody or co-parent
with Guardian. On the contrary, she was the trusted, long-time babysitter whooffered to assist the parents and the Children get through a stressful periodduring the marital breakup. As she testified under oath at the initial guardianship proceeding, the "consensual" guardianship was to facilitateschool and doctor appointments. Parents never agreed or gave any sort ofinformed consent to joint custody or a relinquishment or diminution of theirparental rights. There is no evidence that the Children ever considered Guardian to be a parent, as opposed to a valued caregiver. 
23 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 motion, the court would not need to take evidence to decide the 
case. 
At the next (and final) hearing, the Family Court 
(Judge Heely) stated the court's ruling that the Petition for Custody was denied. When challenged by Guardian's counsel that "Judge Poelman ruled this was a 12(b)(6) motion, has to be decided on the pleadings, not on the facts[,]" the court noted that it relied on the pleadings, including Father's opposition asserting that Guardian was not a de facto parent. The Family Court noted that Father and Mother had been the parents for nine years plus and they have rights, and the court questioned why Guardian did not file a petition for custody during the pendency of the guardianship. Guardian's counsel responded, "She didn't file it before because she wasn't a de facto parent yet." The court said "exactly . . . she's not a de facto parent and she --the Court ruled that she is not a de facto parent . . . ." 
While the Family Court orally ruled that Guardian was 
not a de facto parent, the court did not enter findings of fact 
and conclusions of law supporting that ruling. Indeed, both Family Court judges seemed to indicate that the court would be ruling on the Petition for Custody as a matter of law, but it appears that the Family Court ultimately concluded that Guardian did not establish the facts necessary for a prima facie case of de facto custody under HRS § 571-46(a)(2). 
In light of this record, we must conclude that the 
record is insufficient for appellate review of the Order Denying Custody. The Family Court should have, at a minimum, made findings and conclusions with regard to whether Guardian satisfied the de facto custody test of HRS § 571-46(a)(2). See 
A.A.
, 139 Hawai# i at 108, 384 P.3d at 884. Further, it appears 
that some sort of evidentiary hearing was necessary to make such findings and conclusions, as we cannot conclude, as a matter of law, that Guardian cannot petition for custody pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(2). As it is necessary to remand this case to the Family Court, we note that even if the Family Court were to find and conclude that Guardian had de facto custody of the Children for some period of time, and satisfied the other two statutory 
24 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 factors, the establishment of a prima facie entitlement to 
custody is not dispositive. The Family Court must make the 
ultimate determination as to the best interests of the Children in granting or denying Guardian's petition, which may need to be supported by additional findings. 
C. The Order Denying Reconsideration 
Guardian provides no discernible argument on appeal 
that she presented new evidence and/or arguments that were not or 
could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated motions in the Guardianship Case. See, e.g., Tagupa v. Tagupa
, 
108 Hawai# i 459, 465, 121 P.3d 924, 930 (App. 2005) ("The purpose 
of a motion for reconsideration is to allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion." (brackets omitted)). As we have concluded that the record is insufficient to review the Family Court's Order Denying Custody, we need not reach the issue of whether the Family Court abused its discretion in denying reconsideration of that order. 
V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, the Family Court's December 13, 2019 
Order Terminating Guardianship is affirmed. 
The Family Court's 
December 13, 2019 Order Denying Custody is vacated, and the Custody Case is remanded to the Family Court for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 5, 2022. 
On the brief: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
 
/s/ Clyde J. WadsworthAssociate Judge 
25 Benard M. Herren,Valerie B. McKelvey(Cain & Herren, ALC), andBrianne L.O. Wong Leong(Wong Leong Cuccia, LLLC)
for Petitioner-Appellant.