NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000147
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
WOLFGANG EISERMANN, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 13-1-0002) (CR. NO. 91-2964))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Wolfgang Eisermann (Eisermann) 
appeals from the "Order Designating Motion to Correct [Hawai 'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 48 Violation Pursuant to 
[HRPP Rule] 48 as Nonconforming Petition for Post-Conviction Relief and Denying Petition" (Order Denying Petition) filed by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 On 
appeal, Eisermann argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying his petition, which was based on his claim that his right to a speedy trial under HRPP Rule 48 had been violated. We affirm. 
I.
 
In his underlying criminal case, Eisermann moved prior
 
to trial to dismiss the charges against him for violation of HRPP
 
1The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 48. The Circuit Court denied the motion. After a jury
 
trial, Eisermann was found guilty of three counts of first-degree
 sexual assault, one count of attempted first-degree sexual
 assault, four counts of third-degree sexual assault, and one
 count of kidnapping. On October 21, 1994, the Circuit Court
 
sentenced Eisermann to concurrent terms of imprisonment on these
 
counts, which included twenty-year terms of imprisonment on
 Eisermann's first-degree sexual assault and attempted first-
degree sexual assault convictions.
 
Eisermann filed a direct appeal of his judgment. On 
April 24, 1997, this court affirmed the judgment. State v. 
Eisermann, No. 18566 (Hawai
'i App. Apr. 24, 1997) (memorandum 
opinion). Thereafter, Eisermann filed numerous post-conviction claims for relief, including two motions filed pursuant to HRPP Rule 35 and three petitions pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. The Circuit Court denied all of Eisermann's claims for post-conviction relief, and the Circuit Court's decisions were affirmed in all cases in which Eisermann filed an appeal. Eisermann did not raise the claim that his speedy trial rights under HRPP Rule 48 had been violated on direct appeal or in any of his prior post-conviction motions or petitions for relief. 
On January 10, 2013, Eisermann filed a "Motion to
 
Correct [HRPP] Rule 48 Violation Pursuant to [HRPP Rule] 48,"
 which is at issue in this appeal. Eisermann contended that his
 right to a speedy trial had been violated, based on his claim
 that he had not been brought to trial within the time limits
 established by HRPP Rule 48. The Circuit Court deemed this
 motion to be a nonconforming petition for post-conviction relief
 pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 (2006) (Nonconforming Rule 40 Petition). 
The Circuit Court denied the Nonconforming Rule 40 Petition,
 without a hearing, on the ground that the issue raised in the
 Nonconforming Rule 40 Petition had previously been ruled upon by
 the trial court in Eisermann's underlying criminal case and had
 not been raised by Eisermann on direct appeal or in any of his
 prior petitions for post-conviction relief. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
The sole claim raised by Eisermann in this appeal is
 
that his right to a speedy trial under HRPP Rule 48 was violated,
 
and therefore the Circuit Court erred in denying his
 Nonconforming Rule 40 Petition. However, as noted by the Circuit
 Court, HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides that "Rule 40 proceedings
 shall not be available and relief thereunder shall not be granted
 where the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled
 upon or were waived."
 
The record reflects that in his underlying criminal
 
case, Eisermann filed a motion to dismiss the charges based on a
 claim that HRPP Rule 48 had been violated, and the Circuit Court
 denied this motion. Eisermann, however, did not challenge the
 Circuit Court's ruling on direct appeal or raise the claim that
 his speedy trial rights under HRPP Rule 48 had been violated in
 any of his prior post-conviction motions or petitions for relief. 
Eisermann could have raised this claim in these prior proceedings
 and has not demonstrated the existence of extraordinary
 circumstances to justify his failure to previously raise this
 claim. See HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). Accordingly, we conclude that
 
Eisermann has waived the issue raised in his Nonconforming Rule
 40 Petition, and we affirm the Circuit Court's denial of that
 petition without a hearing.
 
III. 
The Order Denying Petition is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 26, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Wolfgang Eisermann
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 