 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000464 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
PAULETTE M. PAULICH, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 3CPC-20-0000623) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Paulette M. 
Paulich appeals from 
the "
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered by the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit on July 28, 2021.1 For the reasons 
explained below, we affirm. 
On July 16, 2018, Mark Brown was driving a motorcycle 
when he was hit by a car. The driver of the car did not stop at 
the scene of the collision. Brown died at the scene. 
On May 14, 2019, a grand jury indicted Paulich for 
Negligent Homicide in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702.5(1) and Accidents Involving 
Death or Serious Bodily Injury in violation of HRS § 291C-12. 
The State filed a motion to determine voluntariness of various statements made by Paulich after the accident. Paulich filed 
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided.   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
three motions to suppress evidence. The motions were heard on 
August 2, 2019. However, the charges against Paulich were dismissed without prejudice because of a violation of Hawai# i 
Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 48. 
Charges against Paulich were refiled on July 1, 2020.
2 
The State refiled its motion to determine voluntariness, and Paulich refiled her motions to suppress. The motions were heard on October 27, 2020. Paulich and the State stipulated to admission of the transcript of the August 2, 2019 hearing from the previous case (which had been conducted by the same judge), and the exhibits from that hearing. 
The circuit court granted the State's motion to 
determine voluntariness and denied Paulich's motions to suppress. On December 2, 2020, the circuit court entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and two orders. Paulich does not challenge the circuit court's findings of fact.
3 Those findings are 
binding on appeal. Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 
Hawai# i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). 
The circuit court found that Hawai# i County Police 
Department (HCPD
) police officer Kimo Keliipaakaua was assigned 
to investigate the July 16, 2018 accident. The accident scene was Highway 11, near the 83-mile marker. HCPD officers Bruce Parayano and Jason Foxworthy were present when Officer 
Keliipaakaua arrived at the scene. A motorcycle was lying in the 
gravel shoulder on the northbound side of Highway 11. Brown was also lying on the gravel shoulder, dead. 
A black Cadillac sedan was found on Highway 11 about a 
half mile north of the motorcycle and Brown. 
There was evidence 
on the roadway, including a black tire mark and debris trail, 
2 Amended charges were later filed to correct a typographical error. 
3 The statement of the points of error in Paulich's opening brief
does not comply with Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(C).
We cannot discern, from Paulich's arguments, that she challenges any of the
findings of fact contained in either of the circuit court's orders. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
leading to the Cadillac from where the motorcycle and Brown were 
found. 
The Cadillac was parked at an angle on a grass 
embankment, perpendicular to the roadway. The back end was partially blocking the north-bound lane. The motor was running, the lights were on, all four doors were closed, and three of the doors were locked. There was substantial damage to the front bumper and passenger area. No one was present in the area. 
Officer Keliipaakaua looked inside the Cadillac. There 
was no one inside, but Officer Keliipaakaua saw a purse, clothes, and empty beverage containers. He ran the license plate number and learned that Paulich was a registered co-owner of the Cadillac. 
Officer Keliipaakaua entered the Cadillac because it 
was blocking the roadway and was a traffic hazard, and also to identify who the driver could have been. Inside the purse was a zippered wallet. Officer Keliipaakaua opened the wallet and found a Hawai# i identification card bearing Paulich's name. The 
contents of the wallet and purse were returned to the Cadillac and the vehicle was secured as evidence, which was standard HCPD practice for motor vehicle collisions involving death. 
Officer 
Keliipaakaua later obtained warrants to search the Cadillac and the wallet. 
After a jury trial, Paulich was found guilty of an 
included offense, Negligent Homicide in the Second Degree, and of the charged offense Accidents Involving Death or Serious Bodily Injury. The Judgment was entered on July 28, 2021. 
This appeal 
followed. 
Paulich contends that the circuit court erred by 
failing to suppress evidence obtained during the warrantless search of her car and wallet, failing to suppress the statements she made to HCPD officers at her residence on the night of the collision, and failing to suppress statements she made at the HCPD Kona station on March 14, 2019, after she was arrested. She 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also contends that there was insufficient evidence to support the 
jury's verdict.
1. The circuit court denied Paulich's motion to 
suppress evidence obtained during the warrantless searches of her car and wallet. Paulich does not specify what evidence recovered from her car or wallet was improperly admitted at trial. Her brief mentions "empty containers for alcoholic beverages"
4 and 
her state identification card,5 but provides no citations to the 
record as required by Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(4)(A) and (C). However, we discern from her brief that she appears to challenge the circuit court's conclusions of law (
COL) nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 
Hawai# i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012) (stating that 
"noncompliance with Rule 28 does not always result in dismissal of the claims, and this court has consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible. This is particularly so where the remaining sections of the brief provide the necessary information to identify the party's argument.") (cleaned up). 
The circuit court's conclusions of law in a pretrial 
ruling in a criminal case are reviewed under the "right/wrong" standard. State v. Alvarez
, 138 Hawai# i 173, 181, 378 P.3d 889, 
897 (2016). 
The circuit court concluded: 
2. Hawaii has adopted the two-part test that Justice
Harlan articulated in his concurring opinion in Katz v.
United States, 389 U.S. 347, 88 S.Ct. 507, 19 L.Ed.2d 576 
4 The record does not indicate that empty containers of alcoholic
beverages were offered or admitted into evidence. We note that the containers were in plain view — Officer Keliipaakaua testified that he saw the containerswhen he looked into the Cadillac before entering the vehicle. 
5 The record does not indicate that Paulich's ID card was offered or 
admitted into evidence. We note that Officer Keliipaakaua obtained Paulich'sname by checking her car's license plate, which was in plain view, and thatOfficer Parayano knew where Paulich lived. Accordingly, the informationobtained by the police officers at Paulich's residence later that evening(including observations of her injuries and signs of intoxication) was not thefruit of the warrantless search of Paulich's car or her wallet. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1967), to determine whether an individual has a reasonable
expectation of privacy. [State v. ]Bonnell, 75 Haw. 124,
139, 856 P.2d 1265, 1273-74. Under this test: "First, onemust exhibit an actual, subjective expectation of privacy.Second, that expectation must be one that society wouldrecognize as objectively reasonable." Id., [75 Haw. at
139,] 856 P.2d at 1274 (quoting State v. Biggar, 68 Haw.404, 407, 716 P.2d 493, 495 (1986)). 
COL no. 2 was right. 
The circuit court concluded: 
3. [Paulich]'s actions demonstrated that she did not have
the subjective intent to avoid in [sic] public gaze, in that
she left her vehicle running, partially blocking thehighway, with one of the doors unlocked after it had beeninvolved in a traffic collision involving a fatality. State 
v. Quiday, 141 Hawai #i 116, 122, 405 P.3d 552, 558, 2017 WL
5591790 (2017). 
COL no. 3 was actually a mixed finding of fact and 
conclusion of law.6 A mixed finding of fact and conclusion of 
law is reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard because 
the determination is dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. Est. of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 
Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007). A conclusion of law 
that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id.
In State v. Quiday, 141 Hawai# i 116, 405 P.3d 552 
(2017), the supreme court held that the defendant's placement of marijuana plants in his fenced backyard, the activities in which were not capable of observation by members of the public at ground-level, was "indicative of his subjective intent to avoid the public gaze[.]" Id. at 122, 405 P.3d at 558 (original 
brackets omitted). Cf. State v. Mahone, 67 Haw. 644, 648, 701 
6 The label of a finding of fact or a conclusion of law does not
determine the standard of review. City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Honolulu Police
Comm'n, 151 Hawai #i 56, 62, 508 P.3d 851, 857 (App. 2022) (citing Crosby v.
State Dep't of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai #i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308
(1994)). 
The question whether a circuit court's determination is a finding of
fact or a conclusion of law is a question of law, freely reviewable by an
appellate court. See Kilauea Neighborhood Ass'n v. Land Use Comm'n, 7 Haw.
App. 227, 229, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988) (citation omitted). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 171, 174-75 (1985) ("The right to claim the protection of 
the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article I, Section 7 of the [Hawai# i] Constitution depends upon whether 
the area searched was one in which there was a reasonable expectation of freedom from government intrusion. 
One has no 
standing to complain of a search of property he has voluntarily abandoned.") (citations omitted). COL no. 3 is supported by substantial evidence in the record and reflects an application of the correct rule of law; it was not clearly erroneous. 
The circuit court concluded: 
4. Even if [Paulich] had a subjective expectation of
privacy, it is not an expectation that society would
recognize as reasonable as [Paulich]'s property was leftunattended on the side of the road and was clearlyassociated with a vehicle that had been involved in a fatal car crash and was partially blocking lanes of travel. State 
v. Kolia, 116 Hawai #i 29, 34, 169 P.3d 981, 986 (Ct. App.
2007). 
In State v. Kolia, 116 Hawai# i 29, 169 P.3d 981 (App. 
2007), we held that the defendant "relinquished any expectation 
of privacy that he had in the fanny pack when he voluntarily discarded it while fleeing from the police." Id. at 31, 169 P.3d 
at 983; see also Mahone, 67 Haw. at 648, 701 P.2d at 174-75. COL no. 4, a mixed finding of fact and conclusion of law, is supported by substantial evidence in the record and reflects an application of the correct rule of law; it was not clearly erroneous. 
The circuit court concluded: 
5. Further, even if the two part test in Katz is
satisfied, the police officers on scene were investigating a
fatal vehicle crash in which the operator of the vehicle hadfled the scene, to the extent a search was conducted theinvestigating officers were faced with exigent circumstancesthat required immediate police action to try and forestallthe likely escape of a suspect who had already distancedthemselves from the scene of the crime. State v. Dorson, 62
Haw. 377, 384-85, 615 P.2d 740, 746 (1980). 
In State v. Dorson, 62 Haw. 377, 615 P.2d 740 (1980), 
the supreme court held: 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
An exigency, for the purposes of a warrantless search
or seizure, exists when immediate police action is required
to prevent imminent danger to life or serious damage toproperty, or to forestall the likely escape of a suspect orthe threatened removal or destruction of evidence. To justify a warrantless search or seizure, the government mustbe able to show that it was impracticable for the police toobtain a warrant, or that the delay attendant upon theapplication for, and the issuance of, the warrant would havelikely resulted in the removal or destruction of evidence. 
Id. at 384–85, 615 P.2d at 746 (citations omitted). 
In this case there was no exigency because the Cadillac 
was disabled  and abandoned, had been impounded, and the driver 
had already fled the scene. 
COL no. 5, a mixed finding of fact 
and conclusion of law, was clearly erroneous. The error does 
not, however, require that the Judgment be vacated, for the other reasons explained in this summary disposition order. 7
The circuit court concluded: 
6. Finally, even if the two part test in Katz is
satisfied and there was not exigent circumstances justifying
the warrantless search, the discovery was inevitable as theinvestigating officers seized all of the evidence at thescene and later applied for search warrants to search andinventory the contents of the sedan which was the subject ofthe complained of warrantless search. Clear and convincingevidence was put forth that in fatal collisions the vehiclesare seized by police as evidence for later investigation,which occurred in this case. State v. Lopez, 896 P.2d 889
(Haw. 1995). 
In State v. Lopez, 78 Hawai# i 433, 896 P.2d 889 (1995), 
the supreme court adopted the federal concept of inevitable 
discovery, stating that "the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule is a sound principle, which prevents the setting aside of convictions that would have been obtained in the absence of police misconduct." Id. at 451, 896 P.2d at 907. The 
State must, however, "present clear and convincing evidence that any evidence obtained in violation of article I, section 7 [of 
7 Officer Keliipaakaua testified that the front passenger side of
the Cadillac, including the wheel rim and tire, was heavily damaged. The tire 
was flat with the metal part of the rim protruding from the tire, touching theground. Officer Keliipaakaua also testified that he saw white markings on theasphalt roadway, which appeared to have been caused by something grinding onthe asphalt. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Hawai# i Constitution], would inevitably have been discovered 
by lawful means before such evidence may be admitted under the 
inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule." Id. 
(footnote omitted). The circuit court found that warrants to enter and recover evidence from the Cadillac and Paulich's wallet were subsequently issued. The warrants were admitted into evidence. Paulich does not challenge those findings, or the issuance of the search warrants. 
COL no. 6, a mixed finding of fact and conclusion of 
law, is supported by substantial evidence in the record and reflects an application of the correct rule of law; it was not clearly erroneous. 
The circuit court concluded: 
7. To the extent any complained of search violated
[Paulich]'s rights to be free from unreasonable search and
seizure, the search did not result in any 'fruit' whichwould require suppression as [Paulich]'s identity as apossible operator was already known from the investigatingofficers conducting a registered owner check of the vehiclewhich was accomplished without entering the vehicle. 
COL no. 7, a mixed finding of fact and conclusion of 
law, is supported by substantial evidence in the record and 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law; it was not clearly erroneous. 
We conclude that the circuit court did not err by 
denying Paulich's motion to suppress evidence obtained during the warrantless searches of her car and wallet. In addition, Paulich has not shown that any evidence obtained as a result of the warrantless searches of her car and wallet was admitted at trial. 
2. The circuit court denied Paulich's motion to 
suppress the statements she made to HCPD officers at her residence on the night of the collision. She argues that Officer Keliipaakaua obtained her residence address from her state identification card, which he found after a warrantless search of her purse. However, the circuit court found, and Paulich does not challenge, that after the license plate check identified 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Paulich as a registered owner of the Cadillac, Officer Parayano 
told Officer Keliipaakaua he knew where Paulich lived from previous contacts with her. Officer Keliipaakaua and Officers Parayano and Foxworthy went to Paulich's residence at about 11:50 p.m., three to four hours after the initial report of the collision. 
The police officers knocked on Paulich's door. Paulich 
appeared. Officer Keliipaakaua identified himself and the other officers, and asked Paulich to come outside so they could speak with her. Paulich said she did not want to go outside, but invited the officers to enter her residence. All three officers entered Paulich's residence. Paulich testified that she did not believe she was going to be arrested on July 16, 2018, she did not feel threatened, she spoke to the police officers freely, and she just wanted to know why the officers were there and to answer their questions. She never asked the officers to leave her residence. 
At trial, Officer Keliipaakaua testified: 
Q. (By [the State]) And did you have a conversation
with [Paulich] that night? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Did you ask her what kind of vehicle she owns? A. Yes. Q. And what did she say? A. She said that she -- she owns a Cadillac sedan. 
. . . . 
Q.
 Did you ask her where her vehicle was? 
A. Yes. Q. And what did she say? A. She said that it was in the garage of her, uh,
garage of her residence. 
Q. And when you walked up to the residence could you
see the garage? 
A. Yes. It was a open carport. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Okay. And you could see directly into that? 
A. Yes. Q. And was there a vehicle in the carport? A. No, it was empty. Q. While you were talking with [Paulich] did you ask
her if she had gone anywhere that day? 
A. Yes. Q. What did she say? A. She said she had gone to the store earlier. Q. Did she refer to what store she went to or what,
um, the area the store was located? 
A. Yes. Q. Where -- what -- what was the general area that she
said she went to? 
A. Uh, general area of Ocean View. Q. Okay. And did she indicate whether or not anyone
else drives her vehicle? 
A. She said she was the only driver. 
Paulich argues that Officer Keliipaakaua's testimony 
about what Paulich said to him the night of July 16, 2018, should 
have been suppressed because she was not advised of her Miranda rights. The circuit court concluded: 
2. [Paulich] was not in custody on July 16, 2018 at the
time the statements were made to Officers present at her
residence, she invited officers into her home and was notplaced under arrest as police did not have probable cause toarrest her at the time as they did not feel they had enoughinformation relating to the identity of the driver of thesedan, her freedom had not been deprived, and therefore therequirements of Miranda do not apply to the statements madeby [Paulich]; these statements may be used by the State uponestablishing proper foundation. Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U.S. 436, 444, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 1612, 16 L. Ed.2d 694(1966)[.] 
COL no. 2, a mixed finding of fact and conclusion of 
law, is supported by substantial evidence in the record and 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law; it was not clearly erroneous. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. The circuit court denied Paulich's motion to 
suppress the statements she made to HCPD officers at the Kona 
station on March 14, 2019. Paulich does not contest that she understood and initialed an advice-of-rights form, admitted into evidence as State's exhibit 1. However, she argues that her consent was coerced by a deliberate extrinsic falsehood: because the police officers did not tell her "that a main factor is whether the accident occurred due to intoxication,[
8] [she] was 
deprived of making a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of her rights under [Miranda]." She does not cite to evidence in the record to support her argument,
9 as required by HRAP 
Rule 28(b)(7). Although we are not obliged to "sift through the voluminous record to verify an appellant's inadequately documented contentions[,]" Lanai Co. v. Land Use Comm'n, 105 Hawai# i 296, 309 n.31, 97 P.3d 372, 385 n.31 (2004), we address 
her argument because the circuit court found, and the State does not dispute: 
61. Officers did not inform [Paulich] that being under the
influence of drugs or alcohol was an element of the offences
[sic] she was being investigated for. 
In State v. Matsumoto, 145 Hawai# i 313, 452 P.3d 310 
(2019), the supreme court noted that "a deliberate falsehood will 
be regarded as coercive per se if the falsehood is extrinsic to the facts of the alleged offense and is of a type reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a confession regardless of guilt." Id. at 325, 452 P.3d 
8 HRS § 707-702.5 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of negligent homicide in
the first degree if that person causes the death of: 
(a) Another person by the operation of a vehicle in
a negligent manner while under the influence of drugs
or alcohol[.] 
9 Paulich cites only to her proposed findings of fact, which contain
no citations to the trial court record and are not themselves evidence. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 322 (citing State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 511, 849 P.2d 58, 
73 (1993)). 
In Kelekolio, the supreme court adopted the rule that 
"deliberate falsehoods extrinsic to the facts of the alleged offense, which are of a type reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence an accused to make a confession regardless of guilt, will be regarded as coercive per se[.]" Id. 
at 511, 849 P.2d at 73. The court explained: 
Some examples of extrinsic falsehoods — of a type reasonably
likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence anaccused to make a confession regardless of guilt — wouldinclude (1) assurances of divine salvation upon confession,(2) promises of mental health treatment in exchange for aconfession, (3) assurances of treatment in a "nice hospital"(in which the defendant could have his personal belongingsand be visited by his girlfriend) in lieu of incarceration,in exchange for a confession, (4) promises of more favorabletreatment in the event of a confession,(5) misrepresentations of legal principles, such as(a) suggesting that the defendant would have the burden ofconvincing a judge and jury at trial that he was "perfectlyinnocent" and had nothing to do with the offense,(b) misrepresenting the consequences of a "habitualoffender" conviction, and (c) holding out that thedefendant's confession cannot be used against him at trial,and (6) misrepresentations by an interrogating policeofficer, who is a close friend of the defendant, that thedefendant's failure to confess will get the officer intotrouble with his superiors and jeopardize the well-being ofthe officer's pregnant wife and children[.] 
Id. at 512–13, 849 P.2d at 73–74 (citations omitted). 
An investigating law enforcement officer's failure to 
tell a suspect the elements of any criminal offense of which the 
suspect may be charged is "extrinsic to facts of the alleged offense in question[.]" Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 511, 849 P.2d at 
73. Paulich fails to explain how the police officers' failure to 
tell her that intoxication is an element of negligent homicide in the first degree was "reasonably likely to induce an untrue statement or to influence [her] to make a confession regardless of guilt." Matsumoto, 145 Hawai# i at 326, 452 P.3d at 323. 
Paulich did not confess to driving while intoxicated, nor was evidence of any such confession introduced at trial. 
Paulich was 
ultimately found guilty of Negligent Homicide in the Second 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Degree, an offense of which intoxication is not an element. See 
discussion below in section 4. 
In Matsumoto the defendant "confessed to a crime after 
an interrogating officer informed him, untruthfully, that he did 
not pass a polygraph test." Id. at 316, 452 P.3d at 313. After 
a comprehensive analysis of the extensive literature and research establishing "the coercive nature of falsified polygraph test results[,]" the supreme court held that "inculpatory statements elicited during a custodial interrogation from a suspect whom has previously been given falsified polygraph results in the interrogation process are coercive per se and are inadmissible at trial." Id. at 326-27, 452 P.3d at 323-24 (citing Kelekolio, 74 
Haw. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73). Paulich cites no legal or other authority for the proposition that a law enforcement officer is required to recite all of the elements of an offense to a suspect, or that the officer's failure to do so is coercive per se. We conclude that the officers' omission under the circumstances of this case was not coercive per se. 
Paulich also argues that "[p]olice further 
misrepresented the law by mischaracterizing the length of an arrest before the probable cause determination created by the Riverside case." She cited County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, 500 U.S. 44, 57 (1991), a class action challenging the manner in which a California county provided "probable cause determinations to persons arrested without a warrant." Id. at 47 (emphasis 
added). The Supreme Court stated: "a jurisdiction that provides judicial determinations of probable cause within 48 hours of arrest will, as a general matter, comply with the promptness requirement of Gerstein[ v. Pugh, 420 U.S. 103 (1975) and] . . . be immune from systemic challenges." Id. at 56 (emphasis added). 
The Court then stated that "in a particular case[,]" a probable cause determination could be challenged "if the arrested individual can prove that his or her probable cause determination was delayed unreasonably." Id.
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Riverside is inapposite. Here, the determination that 
there was probable cause to arrest Paulich was made before she 
was arrested. The circuit court found, and Paulich does not dispute: 
57. Before [Paulich]'s arrest [the] officer made telephone
calls attempting to locate Paulich. 
58. As a result of the telephone calls made, [o]n March
13, 2019, Paulich learned there was a warrant out for her
arrest. 
59. Paulich testified that she was unable to sleep after
learning there was a warrant out for her arrest. 
Paulich was arrested pursuant to a warrant. Riverside does not 
apply. 
4. Paulich contends there was insufficient evidence 
to support the jury's verdict. When reviewing the sufficiency of 
evidence on appeal, we apply the following deferential standard of review: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecutionwhen the appellate court passes on the legalsufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction;the same standard applies whether the case was beforea judge or jury. The test on appeal is not whetherguilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, butwhether there was substantial evidence to support theconclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai# i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citation omitted). 
"'Substantial evidence' as to every material 
element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. 
Paulich was found guilty of the included offense of 
Negligent Homicide in the Second Degree. HRS § 707-703 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of negligent homicide in
the second degree if that person causes the death of: 
(a) Another person by the operation of a vehicle in
a negligent manner[.] 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The evidence presented at trial, including testimony 
from eyewitness Charles Brown, Officer Keliipaakaua, and Paulich 
herself, considered in the light most favorable to the State, supported the jury's verdict. 
Paulich was also found guilty of Accidents Involving 
Death or Serious Bodily Injury. HRS § 291C-12 (1993) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in serious bodily injury to or death of any person
shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of theaccident or as close thereto as possible but shall thenforthwith return to and in every event shall remain at thescene of the accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of section 291C–14. Every such stop shall bemade without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
The evidence presented at trial, considered in the 
light most favorable to the State, supported the jury's verdict. 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence" entered by the circuit court on July 28, 2021, is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 21, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
15 Eli N. Bowman, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen L. Frye, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 