NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000912
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SUSAN A. CHIN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1325)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Susan A. Chin (Chin) appeals from a 
June 6, 2014 Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (Circuit Court). Chin
 
was convicted of Theft in the Second Degree in violation of

 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-831(1)(b) (Supp. 2008) and
 
sentenced to five years imprisonment. On appeal, Chin contends
 
that the Circuit Court erred in denying her Motion for Judgment
 of Acquittal and that there was insufficient evidence to support
 her conviction. 
Chin raises two points of error on appeal, contending

 
that the Circuit Court erred in denying Chin's Motion for
 Judgment of Acquittal at the close of the State's case, and that
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the evidence in the case failed to establish beyond a reasonable
 
doubt Chin's guilt of Theft in the Second Degree.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Chin's points of error as follows.
 
The State charged Chin with Theft in the Second Degree
 
in violation of HRS § 708-831(1)(b). HRS § 708-830 (2014)
2
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 708-830 Theft. A person commits theft if the
person does any of the following:
(1)	 Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over
 
property. A person obtains or exerts
unauthorized control over the property of
another with intent to deprive the other of the
property.
(2)	 Property obtained or control exerted through
deception. A person obtains, or exerts control
over, the property of another by deception with
intent to deprive the other of the property.
 
HRS § 708-831(1) provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 708-831 Theft in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of theft in the second degree if the person
commits theft:
 
(a)	 Of property from the person of another;
(b)	 Of property or services the value of which
exceeds $300[.]
 
Chin argues that the State failed to prove beyond a
 
reasonable doubt that Chin exerted unauthorized control over
 
Complainant Dreama Burcham's (Burcham's) money with the intent to
 
deprive Burcham thereof. Specifically, Chin argues that "there
 
was never any evidence provided the trier of fact that [Chin]
 ever communicated with [Burcham]." Chin contends that the "mere
 fact that Chin was the subscriber of the cell phone number
 Burcham called, does not itself prove that Burcham spoke to
 Chin." 
As the State argues, however, the telephone records
 
showing calls made back and forth between Chin's telephone number
 and Burcham's telephone number during the relevant time period
 provide strong circumstantial evidence that "Herrina Colby"
 
2
 HRS § 708-830 has remained unchanged since 2008.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
either was Chin or was acting on Chin's behalf. The evidence
 
presented at trial also showed that Chin was the account holder
 for the alternative email address listed on the email account
 from which "Herrina Colby" communicated with Burcham during the
 relevant time period, further suggesting that "Herrina Colby" was
 Chin. 
Additionally, the State presented testimony from a 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officer that HPD had not been 
able to confirm the existence of anyone named "Herrina Colby." 
Based on this evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the State, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude that Chin had communicated with Burcham and that Chin had obtained or exerted control over Burcham's property with the intent to deprive Burcham thereof under HRS § 708-831(1)(b). See State v. Walton, 
133 Hawai
'i 66, 90, 324 P.3d 876, 900 (2014). 
Chin also appears to argue that because Burcham's
 
$9,000 check did not clear until December 10, 2008, Burcham's
 payment for the condominium rentals was not received by the
 November 30, 2008 deadline. Consequently, she submits, under the
 terms listed on the November 14 and November 18, 2008 invoices,
 Burcham forfeited all deposits and payments made, and Chin was
 entitled to retain Burcham's money. 
The State responds that this interpretation of the
 
terms is "contrary to common sense" and not what Burcham
 understood the terms to mean. Burcham testified:
 
I was told [the full amount] would be charged to my credit
card or the rooms would go back into the pool, that they
would either charge my credit card five percent, which is
why I said I would write a check, or we would lose our
rental spot. Not lose the money, was never told that we
would lose the money.
 
Indeed, even assuming the invoice could be considered
 
"contractual," the actual language in the invoices does not state
 
that failure to pay within thirty days of the rental date would
 result in Burcham both forfeiting the full amount due and losing
 
the opportunity to rent the units. Rather, it states, in
 
relevant part:
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Total is due in full 30 days prior check-in. Otherwise the
 
entire amount will be charged to the card holder's credit
card plus any fees applied or the condo(s) will be re-rented
to protect the owner's interest. . . . 
In addition, Chin does not argue, and in fact denies,
 
that she was "Herrina Colby." Rather, Chin maintains that she
 
was merely the final recipient of Burcham's $9,000 check. 
Defense counsel argued repeatedly during closing statements that
 Chin was not "Herrina Colby." As Chin was not a party to the
 
alleged agreement between "Herrina Colby" and Burcham, Burcham's
 
purported failure to perform under that agreement would not
 entitle Chin to keep the $9,000 that was deposited into her
 personal bank account.
 
Chin also argues that the State failed to prove Chin's
 
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt because it "left unanswered" the
 "obvious questions" of whether Chin's landlord, Eddie Ching, was
 also the owner of a rental unit at Discovery Bay and whether the
 $5,000 check Chin wrote to Ching constituted a legitimate payment
 for one of the units Burcham attempted to rent. Chin provides no
 case law to support the proposition that the State is required to
 address every possible question or theory that may weigh in the
 defendant's favor in order to prove the defendant's guilt beyond
 a reasonable doubt, and we find none.
 
We conclude that based "upon the evidence viewed in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the [jury], a reasonable mind might fairly conclude [Chin's] guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." Walton, 133 
Hawai
'i at 90, 324 P.3d at 900. Thus, the Circuit Court did not 
err in denying Chin's Motion for Judgment of Acquittal. We further conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the jury's guilty verdict. See id. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's June
 
4, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 12, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
William A. Harrison 
(Harrison & Matsuoka)for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 