NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000499 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JACLYN PICKERILL, Defendant-Appellant 
A
PPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
KONA DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-20-02431) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Wadsworth and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Jaclyn Pickerill (
Pickerill) 
appeals from the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment entered
on July 8, 2021 (Judgment
), by the District Court of the Third 
Circuit, Kona Division (District Court).  Pickerill was 
convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an 
Intoxicant in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-
61(a)(1) (2020).  Pickerill did not testify at trial. 21 
1 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr., presided. 
2 HRS § 291E-61 states, in pertinent part: 
§ 291E-61   Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of avehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pickerill raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred by: (1) giving 
Pickerill two advisements that did not comply with the 
limitations, requirements, and standards set in Tachibana v. 
State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995), State v. Monteil, 
134 Hawai# i 361, 341 P.3d 567 (2014), and State v. Celestine, 142 
Hawai#i 165, 415 P.3d 907 (2018); and (2) conducting a defective 
ultimate Tachibana colloquy. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the 
relevant legal authorities, we address Pickerill's points of 
error as follows: 
(1) Pickerill argues that the District Court erred 
(twice) when it added that she should consult with her attorney 
regarding her decision to testify, just after the court advised 
Pickerill that she had a constitutional right to testify and just 
before the court advised Pickerill that it was ultimately her 
decision and no one can prevent her from testifying should she 
choose to do so. Pickerill argues that this "added instruction" 
rendered the advisements defective in three ways. First, 
Pickerill argues that this added instruction made the advisement 
unbalanced – i.e., the advisement did not maintain an even 
balance between the right to testify and the right not to testify 
– because the court gave no similar instruction while advising 
Pickerill of her right not to testify. Second, Pickerill argues 
that the added instruction was improper because it was not 
strictly informative - i.e., the District Court told her that she 
should consult with her attorney regarding the decision to 
testify. Third, Pickerill argues that the added instruction 
ambiguously imposed an unlawful obligation on Pickerill to 
consult with her attorney if her decision was to testify. 
Pickerill submits that the added instructions have the effect of 
influencing a defendant not to testify because they impose an 
additional requirement only if the defendant decides to testify. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
We decline to hold that it is plain error, regardless 
of the totality of the Tachibana advisement and colloquy, for a 
trial court to tell a defendant that he or she should consult 
with his or her attorney in conjunction with the court's 
Tachibana advisement and colloquy with the defendant. 
We further decline to hold that, under the 
circumstances here, the District Court's statement to Pickerill 
that "you should consult with your lawyer regarding your decision 
to testify" imposed an unlawful obligation on Pickerill to 
consult with her attorney if her decision was to testify. That 
statement was immediately followed by "[h]owever, it is 
ultimately your decision, and no one can prevent you from 
testifying should you choose to do so." 
However, the supreme court has repeatedly emphasized 
its mandate to the trial courts to "maintain an 'even balance' 
between a defendant's right to testify and the right not to 
testify." Monteil, 134 Hawai# i at 370, 341 P.3d at 576, citing 
State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai# i 292, 295, 12 P.3d 1233, 1236 (2000). 
This balance is important and intended to ensure that the trial 
court's advisement does not influence the defendant's decision 
one way or the other. See Tachibana, 79 Hawai# i at 236 n.7, 900 
P.2d at 1303 n.7. 
Here, the District Court failed to maintain an 
even balance between its advisements, twice telling Pickerill 
that she should consult with her attorney in conjunction with the 
advisement regarding her right to testify, but at no point 
telling Pickerill that she should consult with her attorney in 
conjunction with her right not to testify. 
As Pickerill did not exercise her right to testify, we 
cannot conclude that the District Court's error was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt because it is not knowable whether 
Pickerill's testimony, had she given it, could have established 
reasonable doubt that she operated a vehicle under the influence 
of an intoxicant in violation of HRS § 291E–61(a)(1). See 
Celestine, 142 Hawai# i at 173, 415 P.3d at 915. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) In light of the above, we need not reach 
Pickerill's further argument regarding whether, in the ultimate 
colloquy, the District Court engaged in a sufficient verbal 
exchange with Pickerill. 
Based on the above, the District Court's July 8, 2021 
Judgment is vacated, and the case is remanded to the District 
Court for further proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 24, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
Marcus B. Sierra 
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge Stephen L. Frye,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4 