  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001287
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
TONY ALAN WILLIAMS, Petitioner-Appellant, vs.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 11-1-0065; CR. NOS. 87-0851 & 87-1589)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Tony Alan Williams (Williams)
 
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Denying Petition for Post Conviction Relief, filed on September
 30, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court).
1
 
On September 7, 1988, in Cr. No. 87-0851, Williams was
 
convicted of two counts of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 
First Degree, two counts of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 Second Degree, and Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the Third
 
1
 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Degree. Also on September 7, 1988, in Cr. No. 87-1589, Williams
 
was convicted of Murder in the First Degree, Possession of Weapon
 by Felon, and two counts of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 First Degree.
 
On February 22, 1990, in Appeal No. 13309, the supreme
 
court affirmed Williams's convictions. The supreme court held,
 inter alia, that Williams's claim that a protective order issued
 by the trial court deprived him of due process, because it
 prohibited the release of grand jury transcripts, witness names
 and addresses, statements, and other documents until shortly
 before trial, was without merit.
 
On April 7, 1992, Williams filed a Petition for Post
 
Conviction Relief (First Petition), pursuant to Rule 40 of the
 
Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP). On April 10, 1992,
 Williams filed an Amended Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
 
(Amended First Petition). 
On May 7, 1992, the Circuit Court denied the First
 
Petition and Amended First Petition. The Circuit Court noted
 that Williams did not claim ineffective assistance of appellate
 counsel and held that Williams's claim that "prison restrictions
 and a failure by his trial counsel to inform him of information
 which his counsel received by way of discovery prevented him from
 advising his counsel as to how to cross-examine witnesses," was
 raised or ruled upon or that Williams knowingly and
 understandingly failed to raise the issue on appeal. 
On October 25, 1994, in Appeal No. 16151, the supreme
 
court affirmed the denial of the First Petition and Amended First
 
2  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Petition. The supreme court noted that Williams admitted that he
 
fully apprised his appellate counsel about the issue of his
 administrative segregation, which he claimed precluded him from
 reviewing discovery material with his trial counsel during the
 course of trial. However, since Williams did not claim
 ineffective assistance of appellate counsel, the supreme court
 held that the issue was waived, pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).
 
On October 25, 2002, Williams filed a Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody (Second Petition), pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. 
Williams claimed that: (1) prison officials violated his right
 
to file an effective appeal because he was not allowed access to
 his case files and discovery when he was transferred to a prison
 in Washington; (2) prosecutors violated HRPP Rule 16(e)(4) when
 
they failed to timely make discovery available due to a
 
protective order issued upon the request of the prosecution; (3)
 
the prosecution elicited or allowed uncorrected perjury from a
 
witness, Alexander McAllister (McAllister); (4) trial counsel
 
rendered ineffective assistance by (a) failing to make the jury
 
aware that there was no evidence that his weapon was operational,
 (b) failing to check McAllister's alibi, (c) failing to present
 
expert testimony that an audio or video tape did not contain his
 
admission to murder, and (d) failing to make the jury aware that
 McAllister committed perjury; and (5) he received ineffective
 assistance of appellate counsel.
 
On March 19, 2003, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Petition
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release
 
Petitioner from Custody, which denied the Second Petition.
 
On November 15, 2004, in Appeal No. 25742, this court
 
affirmed the denial of the Second Petition because the Second
 Petition did not present any new claims, and the issues were
 previously raised and ruled upon, waived, or had no merit. 
On December 13, 2011, Williams filed a Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody (Third Petition), pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. 
Williams claimed that his rights to equal protection and due
 
process were violated, and his right to file an appeal was
 violated because he was kept from reviewing discovery as a pre­trial detainee due to a protective order issued pursuant to HRPP
 Rule 16(e)(4). Williams also claimed that even after his
 conviction, he was not allowed to review the discovery because he
 was transferred to the State of Washington. Williams admitted,
 however, that the State turned over discovery to him on August 1,
 2000.
 
On September 30, 2014, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Petition
 for Post-Conviction Relief, which denied the Third Petition. The
 Circuit Court held that Williams's claims regarding access to
 discovery and transport to the State of Washington were raised in
 the First and Second Petitions, denied, and the denials were
 affirmed on appeal. The Circuit Court also noted that, if
 Williams was denied access to discovery until August 1, 2000, he
 had the discovery prior to filing his Second Petition in 2002. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Williams again claims that untimely
 
disclosure of discovery due to a protective order, perjury by
 
McAllister, and withholding of discovery until August 1, 2000,
 denied him the right to an appeal or to collaterally attack his
 convictions. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Williams's points of error as follows:
 
The issue of whether discovery was properly withheld
 
due to a protective order was raised and ruled upon in Williams's
 direct appeal in Appel No. 13309. The issue of perjured
 testimony by McAllister was raised and ruled upon in the Second
 Petition. Williams admitted that discovery was made available to
 him on August 1, 2000, well before he filed his Second Petition
 in 2002. Williams raised claims in his Second Petition relating
 to his transportation to Washington and his receipt of discovery
 in August 2000 that were ruled upon in the Second Petition. To
 the extent that Williams raises additional claims relating to his
 lack of access to discovery materials until August 2000, he
 failed to prove the existence of extraordinary circumstances to
 justify his failure to raise such claims in the Second Petition. 
Therefore, relief pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 is unavailable. HRPP
 Rule 40(a)(3).
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's September
 
30, 2014 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying
 
[Third] Petition for Post-Conviction Relief.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 18, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Tony Alan Williams,
Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Lisa M. Itomura,Diane K. Taira,Deputy Attorneys General,for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 