NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000716 17-DEC-2025 08:08 AM Dkt. 81 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000716 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANTHONY F. PEREIRA II, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1PC161000973) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Anthony F. Pereira II appeals from the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence  entered by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit on October 9, 2024.
1 We affirm. 
A grand jury indicted Pereira for (1) Murder in the 
Second Degree of his mother, Barbara Pereira; (2) Carrying or Use 
of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony (murder); 
(3) Kidnapping; (4) Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony (kidnapping); (5) Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree of Dodie Guzman; and (6) Promoting a Dangerous 
Drug in the Third Degree (methamphetamine). 
After a jury-waived trial, the court found Pereira 
guilty as charged on Counts 1, 2, 5, and 6. Counts 3 and 4 merged with Count 1. Pereira was sentenced to life in prison with the possibility of parole on Count 1; twenty years on 
1 The Honorable Rowena A. Somerville presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count 2; five years on Count 5; and five years on Count 6, all to 
run concurrently. This appeal followed. 
Pereira challenges only his conviction for Murder in 
the Second Degree. He states a single point of error: "The circuit court erred when it found [he] did not prove the affirmative defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance" (EMED). He argues "the court erroneously required [him] to 
demonstrate a total loss of self-control and failed to assess the 
reasonableness of his disturbance from the subjective viewpoint." 
The standard of review we apply to the trial court's 
finding of guilt is: 
Evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered 
in the strongest light for the prosecution when the
appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of suchevidence to support a conviction; the same standard applieswhether the case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond areasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidenceto support the conclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Young , 93 Hawai #i 224, 230, 999 P.2d 230, 236 (2000) 
(brackets omitted). 
Barbara was killed on June 10, 2016. 
Hawaii Revised 
Statutes ( HRS) ยง 707-702 (2014) then provided: 
Manslaughter. . . . 
(2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder
in the first and second degrees it is an affirmativedefense, which reduces the offense to manslaughter orattempted manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the timethe defendant caused the death of the other person, underthe influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance  for 
which there is a reasonable explanation . The reasonableness 
of the explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint ofa reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendantbelieved them to be. . . . 
(Emphasis added). 
"EMED manslaughter has been characterized as voluntary 
manslaughter because it involves the intentional or knowing 
killing of another while under the influence of a reasonably induced extreme mental or emotional disturbance causing a 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
temporary loss of normal self-control ." Young , 93 Hawai#i at 
233, 999 P.2d at 239 (cleaned up) (emphasis added). 
"It is insufficient for a criminal defendant merely to 
allege that he or she was experiencing emotional distress at the 
time of the charged offense. . . . [T]he mitigating EMED defense focuses on the defendant's reaction to the stress, [that is], on whether the defendant's reason was overborne." 
State v. Perez , 
90 Hawai#i 65, 74, 976 P.2d 379, 388 (1999) (cleaned up). Under 
HRS ยง 707-702(2), "[t]he disturbance was meant to be understood in relative terms as referring to a loss of self-control due to intense feelings." State v. Adviento, 132 Hawai #i 123, 150, 319 
P.3d 1131, 1158 (2014). In other words, "loss of control is a significant, even determining, factor in evaluating an EMED claim." 
Young, 93 Hawai#i at 233, 999 P.2d at 239 (brackets 
omitted). 
Pereira argues he was "suffering from a profound 
psychological collapse and overwhelming emotional distress" when he killed his mother. 
The reasonable explanation for his 
disturbance was, he claims, his belief that his mother had harmed his wife and daughter based on images on his mother's phone he believed depicted his wife and daughter with blood on their faces. 
When the trial court announced its decision, it 
correctly stated the law: 
In [State v. Perez ] the Court held that presence or absence
of self control  was a significant factor in deciding whether
defendant was under the influence of EMED in such a manner 
as to mitigate culpability to manslaughter. 
[Perez] was clear that it is insufficient for a
criminal defendant [merely] to allege that he wasexperiencing emotional distress at the time of the chargedoffense. A mitigating EMED defense instead focuses on the 
defendant's reaction to the stress, whether the defendant's
reason was overborne . The key distinction is being
intentional or knowing and controllability  respectively. 
(Emphasis added.) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The trial court then stated: 
However, the question remains whether this belief had
a reasonable explanation. Defendant found out about the 
photos on June 9, 2016, the same day he spoke to both hiswife and his daughter. It should be noted that these alleged photos have not been admitted into evidence. There is no history that Barbara Pereira and the defendant had anynegative incidents between them prior to this. To the contrary, she would visit him twice a day and make sure thathe was okay. They had a great relationship. Barbara Pereira was not shot until June 10, 2016, at the point whenshe tried to leave the house. 
At one point he was about to take Barbara Pereira for
medical assistance, two hours after he had shot her. But unfortunately Barbara Pereira passed out, and he had achange of plan. He was clearly thinking this through.  
Therefore, there was no reasonable explanation for the EMEDdisturbance at the time he shot Barbara Pereira in the leg.There was also no evidence to show that he was sufferingfrom EMED when Dodie left. He shot Barbara Pereira in the head two times and in the arm approximately 15 minutes afterDodie left. For this there is no reasonable explanation. 
The Court finds that the defendant has not proven the
elements of the affirmative defense by a preponderance ofthe evidence. Therefore, defendant is guilty of murder inthe second degree. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Evidence of calculated actions can disprove an EMED 
defense. Young, 93 Hawai#i at 233, 999 P.2d at 239. The trial 
record contains substantial evidence to support the trial court's 
finding that Pereira did not prove his EMED affirmative defense. 
The October 9, 2024 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence 
is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, December 17, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
Harrison L. Kiehm, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Robert T. Nakatsuji, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
4 