NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000651
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NIKOLAUS NETTER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1531)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Nikolaus Netter (Netter) by felony 
information with second-degree burglary, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-811 (1993).
1 The felony information 
charged that Netter "did intentionally enter unlawfully in a building, to wit, the Embassy Suites, situated at 201 Beachwalk Street, with intent to commit therein a crime against person or property rights . . . ." After a jury trial, Netter was found guilty as charged. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
2
(Circuit Court)  originally sentenced Netter to probation for a
term of five years under Hawai 'i's Opportunity Probation 
1/ HRS § 708-811, in relevant part, provides that "[a] person commits
the offense of burglary in the second degree if the person intentionally
enters or remains unlawfully in a building with intent to commit therein a
crime against a person or against property rights."
 
2/ The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided over the proceedings at issue in
this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Enforcement (HOPE) program, with special conditions that included
 
one year of incarceration to run concurrently with any other
 sentence being served, with credit for time served and subject to
 early release to an appropriate drug/alcohol and/or mental health
 treatment program. On July 24, 2012, the Circuit Court filed an
 "Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence" (Amended
 Judgment), which modified its original sentence by reducing the
 special condition of incarceration to 162 days. 
The charge against Netter stemmed from his entering an
 
Embassy Suites Hotel in Waikiki (Embassy Suites Hotel), accessing
 the fourth floor at a time when it was reserved for registered
 hotel guests, and eating food from a breakfast buffet which was
 only for registered hotel guests. Approximately five months
 before the charged incident, the security department for the
 Embassy Suites Hotel had issued a trespass warning to Netter
 based on his eating food from the fourth floor breakfast buffet
 without being a registered hotel guest. The trespass warning
 notified Netter that he was prohibited from entering the premises
 for a period of one year.
 
On appeal, Netter contends that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion "in allowing the State to introduce the
 prior bad-act evidence that Netter had previously been issued a
 trespass warning from the Embassy Suites Hotel." We disagree and
 affirm the Circuit Court's Amended Judgment.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
During the period relevant to this case, the Embassy
 
Suites Hotel offered a complementary breakfast buffet that was
 limited to registered hotel guests. The breakfast buffet was
 served on the fourth floor, and access to that floor was
 generally restricted to hotel guests when breakfast was being
 served. There were signs in the area of the buffet that
 indicated that the buffet was for registered guests only.
 
On May 16, 2011, the security department for the
 
Embassy Suites Hotel issued a trespass warning to Netter after he
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was observed eating at the breakfast buffet and falsely claimed
 
that he was a registered hotel guest. The trespass warning
 notified Netter that he was prohibited for a period of one year
 "from entering and/or returning onto" the premises of the Embassy
 Suites Hotel. It further notified Netter that failure to comply
 with the warning "will result in your arrest and prosecution for
 criminal Tresspass[.]" 
On October 25, 2011, Netter entered the Embassy Suites
 
Hotel through the front entrance, went into an elevator, obtained
 access to the fourth floor, and was observed eating food from the
 breakfast buffet. After hotel security confirmed that Netter was
 not a registered guest, Netter was detained by hotel security,
 the police were called, and Netter was arrested.
 
II.
 
Prior to trial, Netter filed a motion in limine to
 
preclude the State from introducing evidence of "[t]he facts of,
 the circumstances of, and the reasons for [Netter's] trespass
 warning from Embassy Suites Hotel on May 16, 2011." In opposing
 Netter's motion, the State argued that based on Netter's pre­trial filings and his questioning of the prospective jurors, it
 was clear that Netter's defense was that he lacked the necessary
 intent to commit the charged offense. The State argued that the
 circumstances of the prior trespass warning were highly probative
 of Netter's intent and admissible under Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2012). The State asserted:
 
[Netter] was previously caught on May 16th eating the
breakfast buffet when he wasn't a registered guest, and he
tried to lie to the officer, security, and tell them that he
was registered. And eventually what they did on that day is
they trespassed him and they told him not to come back
because you are eating breakfast here and you're not a
guest. And I think that goes directly to the heart of this
entire case. I think that shows intent. And if that's
 their defense, I think the State is very free to open that
up and bring that out in the prior trespass warning why he
was trespassed and the fact the he did in fact know and he
actually had the intent to take the breakfast again.
 
Netter indicated that he was willing to stipulate that
 
he was not supposed to be at the Embassy Suites Hotel, but was
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not willing to stipulate to anything beyond that. Netter argued
 
that the State should not be allowed "to go into why [Netter] was
 given the trespass warning or that [Netter] was even given the
 warning." Netter acknowledged that his defense was that he did
 not "have the intent to commit a crime against person or
 property." 
The Circuit Court granted in part and denied in part
 
Netter's motion in limine. The Circuit Court ruled that the
 State would not be permitted to elicit the specific conduct
 engaged in by Netter (i.e., eating the breakfast buffet reserved
 for registered guests) which prompted the prior trespass warning. 
However, the State would be permitted to introduce evidence that
 "[Netter] was previously trespassed on May 16, 2011, for being on
 the hotel premises; that at that time he was not a hotel guest;
 and that at that time he was utilizing services otherwise
 reserved for hotel guests." The Circuit Court indicated that it
 would be willing to revisit its ruling depending on how the case
 developed and if the defense opened the door in a way that
 affected the Circuit Court's probative/prejudice analysis.
 
III.
 
At trial, the State presented evidence that during the
 
period relevant to this case, Embassy Suites Hotel offered its
 registered guests a complementary breakfast buffet located on the
 fourth floor. When the buffet was being offered, a hotel guest's
 room key was required to operate the elevator and to have it stop
 on the fourth floor. However, a non-guest could access the
 fourth floor by entering the elevator and waiting for a hotel
 guest to use a room key or for the elevator to be called to the
 fourth floor. There were signs in the area of the breakfast
 buffet that stated that the breakfast was for registered guests
 only. 
On May 16, 2011, Embassy Suites Hotel Security Officer
 
Abel Silva (Silva) encountered Netter on the fourth floor. Silva
 and other security officers conducted a trespass investigation,
 after which the security department issued a trespass warning to
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Netter. Silva described the trespass warning as a "form" that 
stated Netter was "not supposed to be entering hotel property for
 a period of one year." The State also introduced the written
 trespass warning issued to Netter. The State did not introduce
 evidence of the specific conduct or circumstances that prompted
 the issuance of the trespass warning. 
Approximately five months later, in the morning on
 
October 25, 2011, Netter was observed by Embassy Suites Hotel
 staff on the fourth floor eating at the breakfast buffet. When
 questioned, Netter stated that he was a guest at the hotel. 
Netter provided a room number and falsely identified himself as
 "Preston Thomas." Netter continued to eat while he was being
 questioned. When Netter was told that the information he
 provided was false, Netter acknowledged that he was not a hotel
 guest, but claimed that he had spent the night with a hotel guest
 who told Netter he could go eat the free breakfast. Netter gave
 another name for this hotel guest, which did not correspond to
 any registered guest at the hotel. When advised that the police
 were being called, Netter raised his voice and claimed that he
 wanted to file a complaint with the manager and talk to "the
 guest." 
Netter then attempted to leave the scene. He was told
 
by hotel security to stop. Netter attempted to push a security
 officer out of the way, and a scuffle ensued. Netter was
 restrained until the police arrived.
 
IV.
 
Netter testified in his own defense at trial. On
 
direct examination, Netter testified that on October 25, 2011, he
 got up at about 6:00 a.m., after sleeping on the beach, and began
 walking around Waik
iki. He had been laid off from work the day
 
before, was hungry, and had no money. According to Netter, he
 entered a building that unbeknownst to him was property of the
 Embassy Suites Hotel. Netter entered the building to go into a
 convenience store, but the store was not yet open. While waiting
 for the store to open, a nearby elevator opened and a man inside
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asked if Netter was going up. Netter entered the elevator and
 
got out on the fifth floor. He recalled that there was a
 breakfast on the fourth floor, so he walked down the fire exit to
 the fourth floor.
 
Netter saw guests walking to the buffet and "just
 
mingled" and walked with them. Netter took food and a drink from
 the buffet. He sat down and began to eat, tying to "blend" with
 the registered hotel guests.
 
A short time later, Netter was approached by hotel
 
staff, who asked Netter for his name and room number. Netter
 gave a false name and "Room 1208" as the room in which he was
 staying. Netter was then approached by a hotel security officer
 who told Netter that his name "didn't check out" and that he was
 not a registered guest. Netter then said that he was not a
 guest, but was a "guest of a guest." Netter realized that the
 security officer did not believe his story and so he "acted
 indignant," as if his "rights or something were being infringed"
 and attempted to leave. Security officers prevented Netter from
 leaving and he was taken to the hotel's security office until the
 police arrived. 
On cross-examination, Netter admitted that he knew
 
there was a breakfast buffet on the fourth floor; that he had no
 money to pay for breakfast that day; and that he knew that the
 breakfast was not "free." Netter also admitted that he had lied
 to hotel personnel and that he had previously been "trespassed"
 from the hotel and informed that he could not come back. While
 Netter was not sure about the time line, he conceded that five
 months before the charged incident sounded "about right" for the
 prior trespass warning. 
On redirect examination, Netter confirmed that he knew
 
the breakfast buffet was not meant for him. However, he stated
 that there was no cash register in the vicinity of the buffet and
 so he could not have paid for the buffet even if he had wanted to
 pay.
 
V.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In closing, defense counsel argued that Netter did not
 
intend to commit a crime against person or property rights when
 
he entered the Embassy Suites Hotel premises. Defense counsel
 argued that it was Netter's intent to feed himself, not to commit
 a crime. Defense counsel noted that there was no cash register
 and no way for Netter to pay for the breakfast, and counsel
 likened Netter's conduct to crashing a party. The defense
 contended that Netter's conduct constituted the crime of
 trespass, but not burglary.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Netter contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in allowing the State to introduce prior bad-act
 evidence that Netter had previously received a trespass warning
 from the Embassy Suites Hotel. Netter acknowledges that the
 evidence that Netter had previously received a trespass warning
 from the Embassy Suites Hotel was relevant. Netter concedes that
 "[a]s the defense put Netter's intent upon entering the hotel at
 issue, evidence that he had previously committed the same type of
 offense was relevant to establish his intent."
 
Netter also acknowledges that the Circuit Court had
 
precluded the State from presenting evidence about the specific
 basis for the prior trespass warning. Netter, however, contends
 that the Circuit Court did not go far enough because even with
 the limitation on the specific information that could be
 introduced regarding the prior incident, "the unmistakable
 implication was that Netter had [previously] committed the same
 offense[.]" Netter therefore claims that the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion and violated HRE Rules 404(b) and 403
 (1993) in admitting evidence that the Embassy Suites Hotel had
 previously issued a trespass warning to Netter. As explained
 below, we conclude that Netter's claim is without merit.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in relevant part, that:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show action
in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident.
 
Under HRE Rule 404(b), "other bad act" evidence is admissible
 
when: 1) it is relevant to any fact of consequence other than the
 defendant's propensity to commit the crime charged; and 2) its
 probative value is not substantially outweighed by the danger of
 unfair prejudice. State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31–32, 828 P.2d
 
1266, 1270 (1992). The trial court's decision in balancing
 probative value against unfair prejudice involves the application
 
3
of HRE Rule 403  and is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  State
 
v.
 Cordeiro, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 (2002). 
III.
 
In order to establish the charged second-degree
 
burglary, the State was required to prove that Netter (1)
 intentionally entered the Embassy Suites Hotel unlawfully (2)
 with the intent to commit a crime therein against a person or
 against property rights. Evidence that the Embassy Suites Hotel
 had issued a trespass warning to Netter only five months before
 the charged offense was highly relevant to proving the charged
 offense. Netter's lack-of-intent defense only served to increase
 the probative value of this evidence.
 
Evidence of the prior trespass warning showed that
 
Netter knew that he was not permitted to enter the Embassy Suites
 Hotel and demonstrated that he intentionally entered the Embassy
 
3/ HRE Rule 403 (1993) provides:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Suites Hotel unlawfully. By showing that Netter intentionally
 
entered unlawfully and by negating Netter's claim of an unknowing
 or accidental entry into the Embassy Suites Hotel, this evidence
 also served to prove that Netter entered with the intent to
 commit a crime against a person or property rights therein. 
We note that evidence of the specific details regarding 
Netter's prior trespass warning -- namely, that the warning had been issued after Netter was caught by hotel security eating at the breakfast buffet and falsely claimed that he was a registered hotel guest -- would have been highly relevant to disprove Netter's defense that he did not enter the hotel with the intent to commit a crime against property rights or persons. The Circuit Court, however, precluded the State from adducing the specific basis for the prior trespass warning. We therefore are not called upon to decide whether the Circuit Court's decision to admit evidence of the prior trespass warning, without limitation, would have been permissible. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in permitting the State to introduce evidence regarding Netter's prior trespass warnings under the limitations the Circuit Court imposed. See State v. Steger, 114 
Hawai
'i 162, 171-73, 158 P.3d 280, 289-91 (App. 2006) (holding 
that evidence of the defendant's uncharged drug activities was admissible under HRE 404(b) to prove the defendant's knowledge and intent regarding the charged drug offenses). 
We reject Netter's claim that the Circuit Court erred 
in failing to give a limiting instruction regarding the prior trespass warning. Netter did not request a limiting instruction regarding this evidence. See HRE Rule 105 (1993) (only requiring 
the trial court to give a limiting instruction "upon request"). We conclude that as a matter of legitimate trial strategy, Netter's counsel may have decided to forego requesting a limiting instruction to avoid drawing attention to the evidence of the prior trespass warning and the implication that it may have involved conduct similar to the charged offense. See State v. 
Munson, No. 30495, 2012 WL 5677857, at *4–5 (Hawai
'i App. Nov. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15, 2012) (Memorandum Opinion) (citing the reasoning in State v. 
Cabagbag, 127 Hawai 'i 302, 315-16, 277 P.3d 1027, 1040-41 
(2012)). 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Amended Judgment. DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 