  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000133
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RODERICK BAGAOISAN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0332)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Roderick Bagaoisan (Bagaoisan)
 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's (Circuit
 
Court's) January 10, 2011 Judgment/Guilty Conviction and
 Sentence/Notice of Entry (Judgment) for promoting a dangerous
 
drug in the third degree.
1
 
On December 30, 2008, Bagaoisan and co-defendant Robyn
 
Dahle (Dahle) were each charged with (1) Promoting a Dangerous
 Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
2
(HRS) § 712-1243 (Supp. 2007) (Count One),  and (2) Unlawful Use
of or Possession with Intent to Use Drug Paraphernalia, in
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1243 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous drug in
the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any dangerous
drug in any amount.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010) (Count Two).  On July 14,
 
2010, following a jury trial, Bagaoisan was found guilty of Count
 
One and not guilty of Count Two. 
On appeal, Bagaoisan raises three points of error: (1)
 
the verdict should be overturned based on insufficiency of the
 
evidence; (2) the verdict as to Count One should be overturned
 
based on inconsistent verdicts; and (3) the Circuit Court abused
 
its discretion when it denied Bagaoisan's three motions for
 
judgment of acquittal because the offense was de minimis.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Bagaoisan's appeal as follows:
 
Bagaoisan contends that the prosecution "failed to
 
present sufficient evidence to convict as to each element of
 
Promotion of a Dangerous Drug." The appellate court reviews the
 
sufficiency of evidence on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960 
3
 HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides:
 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of this chapter[.] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d at 1241 (citation omitted). Under such review, the 
appellate courts "give full play to the right of the fact finder 
to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw 
justifiable inferences of fact." State v. Grace, 107 Hawai' i 
133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) (citation omitted). 
Under HRS § 712-1243, the State's burden at trial was
 
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Bagaoisan "knowingly
 possess[ed] any dangerous drug in any amount." It is
 
uncontroverted that methamphetamine is a Schedule II drug, and is
 
therefore a "dangerous drug." See HRS § 712-1240 (Supp. 2011) &
 
HRS § 329-16 (e)(2) (2010). The State presented uncontested
 
evidence from Honolulu Police Department (HPD) criminalist
 
Hillary Okamura that the substance found in the apparatus tested
 
positive for the presence of methamphetamine and weighed 0.009
 
grams. Bagaoisan's challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence
 
is whether he "possessed" the 0.009 grams of methamphetamine.
 
In this jurisdiction, possession can be either actual 
or constructive. State v. Moniz, 92 Hawai' i 472, 475, 992 P.2d 
741, 744 (App. 1999) (citing State v. Mundell, 8 Haw. App. 610, 617, 822 P.2d 23, 27-28 (1991)). "A person who knowingly has 
direct physical control over a thing, at a given time, is then in 
actual possession of it." Mundell, 8 Haw. App. at 617, 822 P.2d 
at 27. Here, Bagaoisan was not in actual possession of the apparatus containing the methamphetamine at the time that the 
arrest warrant was executed on Dahle. Therefore, the State was 
required to prove at trial that Bagaoisan was in constructive 
possession of the apparatus. 
"Constructive possession reflects the common sense 
notion that an individual may possess a controlled substance even 
though the substance is not on his or her person at the time of 
arrest." Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 475, 992 P.2d at 744 (citations, 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Constructive possession, therefore, "expands the scope of possession statutes 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to encompass those cases where actual possession at the time of
 
arrest cannot be shown but where the inference that there has
 
been actual possession is strong." Id. at 476, 992 P.2d at 745
 
(citations, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
In Moniz, the defendant appealed from her conviction
 
4
for promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree  andunlawful use of drug paraphernalia, claiming that there was 
insufficient evidence to support the conviction. 92 Hawai
'i at 
473, 992 P.2d at 742. Pursuant to a search warrant, HPD conducted a search of the residence Moniz shared with her 
husband. Id. at 474, 992 P.2d at 743. Moniz was present at the 
time of the search and remained seated on a couch throughout the duration of the search. Id. As a result of the search, the 
officers recovered items including a clear plastic bag containing 0.634
 grams of marijuana and a plastic gram scale containing
 
traces of a white substance subsequently determined to be 0.004
 grams of methamphetamine. Id. Moniz's defense was that her
 
husband, and not she, was responsible for the scale, marijuana,
 and methamphetamine residue found in their shared residence. Id. 
Moniz's husband accepted full responsibility for the marijuana,
 and testified that he used and sold drugs, and that it was his
 
scale. Id. When asked if Moniz ever held or had possession of
 
the scale, her husband responded, "No. Maybe I might have left
 it out. Maybe. I'm not too sure. Or, you know, she might have
 
put it away." Id. at 474-75, 992 P.2d at 743-44. It was
 
conceded that Moniz knew that there were drugs and paraphernalia
 in their apartment.
5 Id. at 475, 992 P.2d at 744. 
4
 Like HRS § 712-1243 (Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third
Degree), under HRS § 712-1249 (Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the Third
Degree), the State is required to prove that the defendant "knowingly
possess[ed] any marijuana . . . in any amount." HRS § 712-1249(1) (1993).
 
5
 Moniz testified that she was aware that her husband used drugs and
that she "had seen the marijuana in [his] drawer." Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 475,
992 P.2d at 744. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A jury found Moniz guilty of promoting a detrimental
 
drug in the third degree (for the marijuana) and unlawful use of
 
drug paraphernalia (for the scale). Id. In reviewing Moniz's
 
conviction, this Court looked at whether there was substantial
 evidence to support a finding of constructive possession. Id. at
 
476, 922 P.2d at 745. We noted
 
To support a finding of constructive possession the evidence
must show a sufficient nexus between the accused and the
 drug to permit an inference that the accused had both the
power and the intent to exercise dominion and control over
the drug. Mere proximity is not enough.
 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Factors to
 
consider in inferring a nexus between the accused and the drug,
 
such that would permit an inference that the accused had
 
constructive possession of the drug, include:
 
(1) the defendant's ownership of or right to possession of
the place where the controlled substance was found;
(2) the defendant's sole access to the place where the
controlled substance was found;
(3) defendant under the influence of narcotics when
arrested;
(4) defendant's presence when the search warrant executed;
(5) the defendant's sole occupancy of the place where the
controlled substance was found at the time the contraband is
 discovered;
(6) the location of the contraband;
(7) contraband in plain view;
(8) defendant's proximity to and the accessibility of the
narcotic;
(9) defendant's possession of other contraband when
arrested;
(10) defendant's incriminating statements when arrested;
(11) defendant's attempted flight;
(12) defendant's furtive gestures;
(13) presence of odor of the contraband;
(14) presence of other contraband or drug paraphernalia, not
included in the charge;
(15) place drugs found was enclosed.
 
Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 476, 992 P.2d at 745 (format altered). 
Other factors have been deemed relevant such as, "the consistent 
presence of known narcotics users on the premises," "the large 
quantity of drugs found," "the presence of large sums of money," 
"the fact that the defendant had previously sold drugs," and "the 
fact that the drugs were found among the defendant's personal 
belongings." Id. (brackets and citations omitted). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
While these factors are helpful in evaluating whether
 
constructive possession exists, "they are far more difficult to
 
apply in cases . . . where a defendant does not have exclusive
 
possession or control of the place where drugs are found and no
 
drugs are found on the defendant's actual person." Id. In
 
recognizing the difficulty in evaluating constructive possession
 where a defendant does not have exclusive possession or control
 
of the place where the drugs are found, 
it is necessary for the State to show facts that would
permit a reasonable mind to conclude that the defendant had
 
the intent and capability to exercise control and dominion
over the drugs. That is, the evidence must raise a
 reasonable inference that the defendant was engaged in a
criminal enterprise and not simply a bystander. Proof of
 the defendant's knowledge of the presence of drugs and the
defendant's ownership or right to possession of the place
where the drugs were found, alone, are insufficient to
 
support a finding of the exercise of dominion and control.
Other incriminating circumstances must be present to
buttress the inference of knowing possession and provide the
necessary link between a defendant and illegal drugs.
 
Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 476-77, 992 P.2d at 745-46 (internal 
quotation marks, brackets and citations omitted) (emphasis 
added). 
There was substantial evidence that Moniz had the power
 
to exercise control and dominion over the marijuana because it
 was found in a drawer that she shared with her husband, and she
 
was aware that the marijuana was there. Id. at 477, 992 P.2d at
 
746. Despite her power to exercise control and dominion over the
 
marijuana, this court concluded that there was insufficient
 
evidence in the record that Moniz had the necessary intent to
 
exercise control and dominion over the marijuana. Id. The
 
evidence against Moniz was that she (1) resided in the apartment
 
where the marijuana was found, (2) was present when the search
 
warrant was executed, (3) had knowledge of the presence of the
 
marijuana in the drawer, and (4) had the power and capability of
 
exercising control and dominion over the marijuana. Id. The
 
court held that "[t]he foregoing evidence, standing alone, does
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not support an inference that [Moniz] intended to exercise
 
dominion and control over the marijuana." Id. (emphasis added). 
In addition, Moniz and her husband both testified that 
Moniz strongly opposed her husband's use of drugs, did not 
procure the marijuana, and never smoked marijuana. Moniz, 92 
Hawai'i at 477, 992 P.2d at 746. Further, when asked whether she 
could have taken the packet of marijuana from the drawer and 
thrown it away, Moniz replied: "No. I don't know because I just 
live over there. But if cannot find it, he going get mad. To 
him, that's his one. And I going throw away?" Id. The evidence 
further indicated that when the police arrived to execute the search warrant, Moniz let them in and sat on the couch while they 
conducted their search; she did not engage in any furtive or 
suspicious conduct or make any incriminating statements, but was 
cooperative with them throughout their search. Id. The amount 
of marijuana weighed less than a gram, and with the exception of the scale with a residue of methamphetamine, no other contraband 
was found in the apartment. Id. Based on this evidence, the 
court stated that "we cannot conclude that a nexus between [Moniz] and the marijuana can be inferred[,]" and therefore 
reversed the jury conviction and circuit court's judgment and 
sentence of Moniz for promoting a detrimental drug in the third 
degree. Id. at 477, 480, 992 P.2d at 746, 749. 
Like in Moniz, Bagaoisan was not in actual physical
 
possession of the methamphetamine when it was seized; therefore,
 
the dispositive issue is whether substantial evidence was adduced
 
at trial from which the jury could reasonably infer that he had
 
constructive possession of it. Bagaoisan contends, inter alia,
 
that there was no substantial evidence that (1) he had the intent
 
to exercise dominion and control over the drugs, and (2) that he
 
was engaged in a criminal enterprise and was not simply a
 
bystander as to the co-defendant's possession of the apparatus
 
and its contents.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In considering the evidence adduced at trial in the
 
strongest light for the prosecution, it appears that there was
 
substantial evidence to support the conclusion that Bagaoisan had
 
knowledge of the glass beaker apparatus and its contents, that he
 
shared the residence with Dahle, that he was present during the
 
execution of the warrants on Dahle, and that the methamphetamine
 
was found in close proximity to Bagaoisan. Both Vedena and Dahle
 
testified that Bagaoisan lived at the Waha residence, kept his
 
belongings at the residence, and stayed at the residence up to
 
five times a week for a couple of months. This evidence is
 
sufficient to support the conclusion that Bagaoisan had a right
 
to possession of the Waha residence and shared the residence with
 
Dahle. Officer Nesbit testified that Bagaoisan was found
 
sleeping "less than two feet" from the apparatus and the
 
methamphetamine. This evidence establishes Bagaoisan's proximity
 
to the apparatus and its contents, and his presence during the
 
execution of the warrants on Dahle when the apparatus was found. 
Lastly, Dahle's testimony establishes that Bagaoisan knew of the
 
presence of the apparatus and the drugs in the residence.  There
 
was no additional evidence adduced at trial to prove that
 
Bagaoisan "possessed" the methamphetamine. 
Thus, there was substantial evidence that Bagaoisan
 
resided in the apartment where the smoking apparatus containing
 
the methamphetamine was found, he was present when the arrest
 
warrant was executed, he had knowledge of the presence of the
 
smoking apparatus and, by reasonable inference, that
 
methamphetamine was contained inside the apparatus, and he had
 
the power and capability of exercising control and dominion over
 
the apparatus and methamphetamine. 
This evidence is virtually indistinguishable from the
 
type of evidence presented in Moniz. In Moniz, this court held
 
that the evidence, standing alone, did not support an inference
 
that Moniz intended to exercise dominion and control over the
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
drugs found in her residence. Id. Here, without any evidence
 
from which to infer that Bagaoisan had the necessary intent to
 
exercise control and dominion over the methamphetamine, we
 
conclude that there is insufficient evidence that he had
 
constructive possession over the methamphetamine.
 
The State maintains that Moniz is distinguishable 
because Bagaoisan was the closest person to the apparatus and it 
was less than two feet from his head when it was found, whereas 
Moniz was found in a completely different room from where the 
drugs were located. While proximity is a factor to consider in 
determining the sufficiency of the evidence, "[m]ere proximity is 
not enough" to support a finding of constructive possession. 
Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 476, 992 P.2d at 745. The State's argument 
that Bagaoisan was "closest" to the methamphetamine does not make Moniz inapplicable to the instant case. 
The State also argues that Moniz is distinguishable on
 
the grounds that Moniz denied ever using drugs; whereas here,
 
Bagaoisan did not. It is well-settled law that 
a defendant has a constitutional right not to take the
 
stand, and a constitutional right to have the jury
instructed that no adverse inferences are to be drawn from
 
the fact that the defendant does not take the stand.
 
State v. Sugiyama, 71 Haw. 389, 391, 791 P.2d 1266, 1267 (1990). 
Bagaoisan's choice to exercise his constitutional right not to
 
take the stand, and therefore his failure to testify regarding
 
any past drug use, may not be used to draw an adverse inference
 
that absent such a denial, he likely possessed the necessary
 
intent to exercise dominion and control over the methamphetamine. 
The instant case is similar to Moniz in other respects. 
Moniz "let [the police] in and sat on the couch while they 
conducted their search. She did not engage in any furtive or 
suspicious conduct or make any incriminating statements, but was 
cooperative with them throughout their search." Moniz, 92 
Hawai'i at 477, 992 P.2d at 746. Here, the evidence adduced at 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
trial indicates that when police arrived to execute the warrants,
 
Bagaoisan did not engage in any furtive or suspicious conduct to
 
try to hide the apparatus, nor did he make any incriminating
 
statements.
 
Also in Moniz, this Court noted that "the amount of 
marijuana found in the drawer weighed less than a gram, and with 
the exception of the scale with a residue of methamphetamine in 
its bowl, no other contraband was found in the apartment." 
Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 477, 992 P.2d at 746. Here, Officer Nesbit 
testified that he "didn't find any other contraband in the house at that time[,]" nor did he find any other contraband on or near 
Bagaoisan when he woke Bagaoisan up. Although in Moniz the 
officers were executing a search warrant, whereas here the 
officers were executing an arrest warrant, there was no evidence 
adduced at trial to indicate that Bagaoisan was under the 
influence of narcotics at the time of the search or at the time 
he was arrested, he did not possess any contraband or 
paraphernalia at the time of the search or when he was arrested, 
nor was the apparatus and methamphetamine found amongst his 
personal belongings. See Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 476, 992 P.2d 745 
(providing these as factors to consider in determining the sufficiency of the evidence). 
Finally, Moniz was asked whether she could have taken 
the packet of marijuana from the drawer and thrown it away. 
Moniz, 92 Hawai' i at 477, 992 P.2d at 746. Moniz responded "No. 
I don't know because I just live over there. But if cannot find it, he going get mad. To him, that's his one. And I going throw 
away?" Id. Although Moniz "had the power and capability of 
exercising control and dominion over the marijuana," there was no evidence to "support an inference that [Moniz] intended to 
exercise dominion and control over the marijuana.", because in 
her view, it was not hers to discard. Id. Here, Bagaoisan had 
previously told Dahle to "get rid" of the glass beaker apparatus 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and its contents. By telling Dahle to get rid of the apparatus,
 
it similarly appears that Bagaoisan did not have the intent to
 
exercise dominion and control over the apparatus and its
 
contents, although he had the power to do so, because it was not
 
his to discard.
 
Based on the foregoing, even viewing the evidence in
 
the light most favorable to the prosecution, no sufficient nexus
 
between Bagaoisan and the methamphetamine exists such as to
 
permit an inference that he had both the power and the intent to
 
exercise dominion and control over the methamphetamine. 
For these reasons, we conclude that there was 
insufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict that 
Bagaoisan knowingly possessed the methamphetamine. 
Accordingly, 
we need not discuss Bagaoisan's remaining points of error, which are without merit. The Circuit Court's January 10, 2011 Judgment 
is reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 27, 2012 
On the briefs: 
Daniel G. Hempey
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 