 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000484 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
S
TATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
WEI SHI, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
H
ONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-20-0000191) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Chan, JJ.) 
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Wei Shi was 
convicted of the offense of Prostitution in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 712-1200(1)(b) (2014). He appeals from 
the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order" entered by the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, on 
July 29, 2021.1 He contends that the district court erred by 
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal, and that the State's evidence was insufficient to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. For the reasons explained below, we affirm the Judgment. 
We review a ruling on a motion for judgment of 
acquittal by applying the same standard applied by the trial court: "whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most 
1 The Honorable Michael A. Marr presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the 
province of the trier of fact, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Carroll, 146 
Hawai#i 138, 150, 456 P.3d 502, 514 (2020) (brackets omitted). 
Similarly, the standard of review for sufficiency of 
the evidence is: 
whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most
favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of theprovince of the trier of fact, the evidence is sufficient tosupport a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind mightfairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case requires substantialevidence as to every material element of the offensecharged. Substantial evidence as to every material elementof the offense charged is credible evidence which is ofsufficient quality and probative value to enable a person ofreasonable caution to support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full play to the right of the fact finder todetermine credibility, weigh the evidence, and drawjustifiable inferences of fact. 
State v. Bowman, 137 Hawai# i 398, 405, 375 P.3d 177, 184 (2016) 
(citation omitted). 
HRS § 712-1200 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of prostitution if
the person: 
. . . . 
(b) Pays, agrees to pay, or offers to pay a fee to
another to engage in sexual conduct. 
(2) As used in this subsection . . . "sexual 
conduct" means "sexual penetration" . . . [as] defined in
section 707-700[.] 
HRS § 707-700 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
"Sexual penetration" means: 
(1) Vaginal intercourse . . . [or] fellatio[.] 
Honolulu Police Department undercover police officer 
Makalapua Monteilh testified at trial. She posted an 
advertisement on AdultLook, a website where "escorts" post 
advertisements. She explained that an escort is "[s]omeone who provides sexual conduct for a fee." The district court admitted 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State's Exhibit 1, a copy of the advertisement, into evidence. 
JEFS 70, at 2. The advertisement contained a phone number. 
On January 6, 2020, Officer Monteilh received a text 
message at the phone number on the advertisement. The text asked, "How much for full service?" She explained that "full service" is street vernacular for vaginal intercourse and fellatio. She replied in two separate texts — "250, hour; 200, half hour." But the person canceled. 
The same number texted Officer Monteilh again on 
January 10, asking what time she was available. She asked the person to remind her what they wanted. The reply was "[f]ull service." She replied, "Can do." The person texted, "250[?]" She agreed and gave the person an address and asked what the person was wearing. The person replied, "orange clothing." She asked for a name. The person replied, "Wei." 
On January 10, 2020, Officer Monteilh met Shi at the 
address she had texted. Shi was wearing an orange shirt. Officer Monteilh motioned for Shi to come toward her. Shi walked over. Officer Monteilh asked if Shi was Wei; he confirmed his identity. She asked if he had $250. 
He said, "yes." She "asked him if he had condoms because he needed to 
use the condoms for the sex and blow job, and he said no. He asked where we could get some." Officer Monteilh told Shi to follow her. He did. She signaled the other police officers on her team. Shi was arrested. 
Officer Monteilh's testimony and State's Exhibit 1, 
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, was sufficient to establish that Shi agreed or offered to pay a fee to Officer Monteilh to engage in sexual conduct in violation of HRS § 712-1200(1)(b). Shi's arguments to the contrary are without merit. The district court did not err by denying Shi's motion for judgment of acquittal. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the 
district court on July 29, 2021, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 12, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge Eric Lee Niemeyer, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4 