   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000432
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RONALD JHUN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0293)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ronald Jhun (Jhun) appeals from a
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment), entered on April
 
1
1, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
court). Judgment was entered against Jhun after a jury found him
 
guilty of committing Sexual Assault in the First Degree (Count
 
2
I), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­
730(1)(b) (2014).3
 
1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2 Jhun was indicted on five (5) counts, but four (4) of them were
dismissed prior to trial. 
3 HRS § 707-730 provides in pertinent part that
 
§707-730 Sexual assault in the first degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the first degree
if:
 
. . . .
 (b)	 The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with another person who is less than
fourteen years old[.]
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Jhun asserts that (1) he was denied a fair
 
trial because of prosecutorial misconduct during closing
 
argument, (2) he received ineffective assistance of counsel
 because defense counsel did not object to the misconduct
 committed during closing argument, and (3) the circuit court
 abused its discretion by denying Jhun's motion for mistrial after
 the prosecutor's improper question during direct examination. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
(1) Prosecutorial Misconduct. 
Jhun asserts that the prosecuting attorney for 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) committed 
prosecutorial misconduct twice during closing arguments. Both alleged instances of misconduct pertain to the credibility of two children who testified at trial. The State was reliant on the testimony of the two children, the only witnesses to the alleged sexual assault, who were 13 and 14 years old at the time of trial, which was held at least two and a half years after the alleged incident.
4 The defense's theory of the case was that the 
children made up the sexual assault because they did not like Jhun, who was the children's grandmother's live-in boyfriend. The children lived with their grandmother, who was their legal guardian. Thus, the pivotal issue was the children's credibility at trial. 
Defense counsel did not object to either instance of 
alleged misconduct identified on appeal. 
If defense counsel does not object at trial to
prosecutorial misconduct, this court may nevertheless
recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous. "We mayrecognize plain error when the error committed affects
substantial rights of the defendant." State v. Cordeiro, 99
Hawai'i 390, 405, 56 P.3d 692, 707 (2002) (citations and 
3(...continued)
. . . .
 
(2)
 Sexual assault in the first degree is a class A
felony.
4
 The indictment alleges the incident occurred between June 1, 2011 and
July 6, 2012. Trial was held on January 5-7, 2015. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
internal quotation marks omitted). See also Hawai' i Rules of
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) (2003) ("Plain errors or
defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed althoughthey were not brought to the attention of the court."). Wewill not overturn a defendant's conviction on the basis of plainly erroneous prosecutorial misconduct, however, unless"there is a reasonable possibility that the misconductcomplained of might have contributed to the conviction."
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238
(1999). 
State v. Wakisaka , 102 Hawai 'i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003).
We must first determine if either instance was improper conduct. 
Then, if there was improper conduct, we must determine whetherthere is a reasonable possibility that the misconduct contributedto the conviction, and the factors we consider in this regardare: "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of acurative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of theevidence against the defendant." Id. (quoting State v. Sawyer,
88 Hawai
'i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998)).
(a) During closing arguments, the State addressed gaps
in the memory of the Minor complaining witness [Minor CW]regarding dates and street names by arguing as follows:
Now, [Minor CW]. Again, he was emotional. He cried
on the stand. You saw that. He was polite. He thought
before he answered questions. He even corrected us. If wesaid something incorrect, he would say no, it's not that. Hesaid if he didn't remember. He wasn't just sitting up theretelling a story about anything.
And like we talked about in jury selection, child's
memories are different from adults. [Minor CW] wasn't clearon dates. He wasn't sure how old he was. He wasn't surewhat year it was. He said 2010ish, maybe 2011. What he didknow was the defendant did this to [him] when the defendantwas living with them. And you have the time frame when thedefendant was with them.
He didn't remember street names. I don't know where
is [***] Avenue or [***] Avenue. He didn't remember that. But what he did remember was important details. Heremembered the important details and he told you those
details.[5]
(Emphasis added.)
On appeal, Jhun challenges the prosecutor's statement:
"And like we talked about in jury selection, child's memories are
different from adults." Jhun asserts that this statementamounted to misconduct because there was no evidence submitted
5Identifying information is removed from this quote.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
during trial to substantiate the State's claim. The State
 
contends in response that, because the issue had been discussed
 during voir dire and the jurors had agreed that children have
 
6
different memories than adults,  particularly as to specific
dates, it is something commonly recognized.
 
The prosecutor must refrain from commenting on "matters
 
outside the evidence adduced at trial." State v. Tuua, 125
 
Hawai'i 10, 14, 250 P.3d 273, 277 (2011). However, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court has previously noted that an attorney may comment
 during closing argument upon matters of common knowledge which
 are not special to the case in trial. Lauer v. Young Men's
 
Christian Ass'n of Honolulu, 57 Haw. 390, 397, 557 P.2d 1334,
 1339 (1976). Moreover, "where statements in voir dire reflect
 the common experience of the jurors, prosecutors are entitled to
 refer to the statements in summation." State v. Walsh, 125
 
Hawai
'i 271, 304, 260 P.3d 350, 383 (2011) (Recktenwald, C.J., 
concurring).7 Given the record and circumstances in this case,
 
6 During voir dire, the following exchange occurred:
 
[Prosecution]:  Okay. How would you say children's

memories are with regard to perhaps dates when specific
things happen or details?
A PROSPECTIVE JUROR:  As far as dates, they may not

remember the detail of the date, but an occurrence, they're
usually pretty clear -­
[Prosecution]:  Okay.

A PROSPECTIVE JUROR: -- if it happened.
[Prosecution]: So you would say –- correct me if I'm
wrong, but what I'm hearing from you is that a child would
be more likely to remember details or more important
details, but maybe not details such as dates or time frame?
A PROSPECTIVE JUROR:  They might remember the day, but

not a specific date.
. . . .
 
[Prosecution]: Okay. Is there anyone here –- do you
all agree with what [prospective juror] said about that?
Okay. Record reflect that most jurors are nodding their
heads.
 
Does anyone not agree that children's memories are a
little–-they have a little more difficult time remembering
details such as a specific date? Okay. Record reflect no
 one is raising their hands.

7
 We note that Walsh involved a situation where the prosecutor used the 
defendant's presence at voir dire to attack his credibility by alleging thathe tailored his testimony based on juror statements he heard during voir direregarding the relationship between eye contact and credibility. 125 Hawai' i 
at 291-92, 260 P.3d at 370-71. It does not appear that the majority in Walshtook issue with the general proposition we quote above from the concurring
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we conclude that the challenged statement was not plain error
 
that affected Jhun's substantial rights.
 
Moreover, even if the challenged statement were deemed
 
plain error, it was an isolated and singular instance in which
 the prosecutor commented on the difference between the memories
 of adults and children. The State did not belabor the point. It
 was stated as part of the State's larger argument in response to
 the defense's challenge to the veracity of the children
 witnesses, and the State emphasized that the children witnesses
 remembered the "important details," and were credible based on
 their candor and conduct while testifying. There was no curative
 instruction because no objection was made. However, with regard
 to the strength or weakness of the evidence, the corroborating
 testimony of the other minor child who witnessed the incident is
 significant in strengthening the evidence against Jhun in this
 case. Thus, even if the statement were deemed improper, we
 cannot say, given the circumstances and record in this case, that
 there was a reasonable possibility that the misconduct
 contributed to the conviction. 
(b) During the State's rebuttal closing argument, after
 
the defense centered its closing argument on attacking the
 credibility of the child witnesses, the State asserted that 
[The defense] wants you to say the kids are lying because
they cannot remember dates?
 
The kids are telling the truth because you saw them
testify. [The defense] wants you to think that [the kids]
are making this up, but they're going to take the stand and
take an oath and cry when they relive it? If this is the
 
7(...continued)
opinion; rather, as the majority noted:

 
What is at issue is the prosecutor's argument that
Respondent lacked credibility because his allegedly credible
demeanor was derived from his presence at trial during which
he supposedly heard jurors refer to credibility traits and
had mimicked those traits. In that regard, the prosecutor
employed voir dire statements regarding eye contact as
evidence that Respondent had an advantage that he gained
solely from his presence. The prosecutor's attack on
Respondent's credibility due to his presence is at issue,
not any “common knowledge” of the jurors.
 
Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 291 n.35, 260 P.3d at 370 n.35. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
case, these kids should be writing movies and acting because
kids don't make this stuff up. Not this stuff.
 
(Emphasis added.)8 Jhun asserts the last portion of the argument
 
constitutes misconduct because the State declared that kids do
 
not make up being sexually assaulted, and that this amounted to a
 statement of personal opinion on the veracity of the child
 witnesses. The State responds that the prosecutor was clearly
 referring to just the two children who testified, not kids in
 general.
 
"It is generally recognized under Hawai
'i case law that 
prosecutors are bound to refrain from expressing their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or the credibility of witnesses." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
'i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996). 
During closing arguments, a prosecutor may "draw reasonable inferences from the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence." Id. The prosecutor is permitted to 
argue, based on his or her analysis of the evidence, the credibility of a witness. State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 
P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986). "[C]losing argument affords the prosecution (as well as the defense) the opportunity to persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom." State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai
'i 577, 592, 994 P.2d 509, 
524 (2000) (citation and quotation mark omitted). 
Review of the entirety of the State's closing arguments
 
demonstrates that the prosecutor's broad theme was that the jury
 could trust the children because they observed the children
 testify and witnessed their raw emotion while testifying. This
 theme was presented throughout the prosecutor's closing argument. 
In the challenged statement, the prosecutor was responding to the
 defense's attack on the witnesses' credibility by tying the issue
 back to the overall theme. The prosecutor stated that "[t]he
 kids are telling the truth because you saw them testify[,]" noted
 
8
 After the State finished its initial closing argument, defense
counsel placed on the record an objection to the State's alleged expression of
personal opinion during the closing argument regarding the Minor CW's
credibility. The defense commented that the State twice stated that the Minor
 CW was "credible." Defense counsel did not re-raise the objection during the
State's rebuttal argument.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the children took an oath and cried while testifying, and,
 
that children do not fake this type of emotion, nor would they
 make up such a story. The State followed up the challenged
 statement with the following: 
And you have two child witnesses who you saw testify
who were very credible. And that's what this case is about. 
It's not about two young children making up this huge story
as a vendetta to get the defendant out of the house when he
was already out. This is what this case is about, ladies
and gentlemen.
 
The prosecutor emphasized the State's broader argument that,
 
based on the observation of the witnesses and the content of
 their testimony, the witnesses were credible. 
Given the State's theory of the case and its reliance 
on the jurors having observed the child witnesses, the prosecutor's comments were not improper. See State v. Cordeiro, 
99 Hawai
'i 390, 425, 56 P.3d 692, 727 (2002) (holding that the 
prosecutor is permitted to comment, based on evidence, that certain testimony is untruthful, and thus comment on the credibility of certain witnesses); Clark, 83 Hawai
'i at 306, 926 
P.2d at 211 (holding that the prosecutor's argument that the defendant's story was a "cockamamie story" was not improper, and was simply an argument that defendant's denial was improbable and untruthful). 
Neither of the above identified instances amounted to
 
reversible prosecutorial misconduct.
(2) Ineffective Assistance of Counsel. 
Jhun's ineffective assistance of counsel claim is based 
on the trial counsel's failure to object to the above identified alleged instances of prosecutorial misconduct. As noted above, we conclude that the identified statements did not amount to prosecutorial misconduct. Therefore, counsel's lack of objection does not reflect a lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, or the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327. 
(3) Motion for Mistrial. 
Jhun contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by denying his second motion for mistrial following an
 exchange between the prosecutor and the children's grandmother,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
who was testifying at the time, that indicated to the jury that
 
Jhun had been incarcerated for another offense.
 
Prior to trial, the circuit court addressed Jhun's
 
motion in limine regarding exclusion of evidence relating to
 Jhun's prior criminal record, prior arrests, and all other
 pending legal criminal matters. The State reassured the circuit
 court that it would not get into Jhun's criminal record, but
 wanted guidance as to how to address that grandmother had learned
 on July 6, 2012, that the defendant had been arrested for
 revocation of his federal supervised release, and it was only
 then that the children informed grandmother about the sexual
 assault. The circuit court instructed the prosecutor not to get
 into why the children told their grandmother about the assault
 unless the defense opened the door to such questioning during
 cross-examination.
 
During the State's direct examination of grandmother,
 
the following occurred: 
Q And was there a time soon after that where the
 
defendant no longer had access to the home and your children
or the two children?
 
A Yes.
 
Q And when was that?
 
A July 6. I found out he was incarcerated.
 
After defense counsel objected and moved to strike, a bench
 
conference proceeded in which the defense moved for mistrial. 
The court ruled that it would strike the answer and tell the jury
 to disregard, but deny the motion for mistrial. The court
 reasoned that the jury could infer that Jhun was incarcerated for
 the instant offense, and the issue does not rise to the level
 where the only remedy was a mistrial. The court then instructed
 the jury as follows: "All right. Ladies and gentlemen, the last
 answer of the witness is stricken from the record. You will
 disregard it entirely. It must play no part in your
 deliberations or your decision of this case. It is stricken from
 the record."
 
After a recess, the prosecutor resumed direct
 
examination of grandmother by asking: "[Grandmother], at some
 point after July 6, 2012, did your granddaughter [ ] tell you
 some disturbing information?" Defense counsel objected and the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court called counsel to the bench:
 
Okay. I'm striking the answer –- the question from the
record. I'm not going to allow any further questioning of
the area because of the timing, you know. Like I said, one
reason I did not declare –- grant the defense motion for
mistrial is because again, in my estimation, a fair
inference of this jury simply upon hearing the witness say
that she found out he was incarcerated could be that it was
 for this offense, that he had been arrested for this
offense. But the point is he wouldn't be arrested for this
offense until the children told her this, et cetera, et
 cetera.
 
Defense counsel moved for a mistrial because the question was a
 
violation of the court's ruling on the motion in limine. The
 court responded that it had made its ruling on the motion for
 mistrial and it had been denied. The bench conference concluded
 and the prosecutor moved on to a different question.
 
When prosecutorial misconduct is the basis for a
motion for mistrial, a new trial is warranted only where
"the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the
defendant's right to a fair trial."• State v. Kupihea, 80
Hawai'i 307, 316, 909 P.2d 1122, 1131 (1996) (quoting State 
v. McGriff, 76 Hawai' i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 782, 792 (1994)).
"In order to determine whether the alleged prosecutorial
misconduct reached the level of reversible error, [thereviewing court] consider[s] the nature of the allegedmisconduct, the promptness or lack of a curativeinstruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence
against [the] defendant."• Id. (quoting State v. Agrabante,
73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992)).
"Because the declaration of a mistrial is
 
discretionary on the part of the trial court, we review the
court's action on an abuse of discretion standard." State v.
 Lam, 75 Haw. 195, 201, 857 P.2d 585, 589 (1993) (citations
omitted). The same is true with respect to the denial of a
mistrial.
 
State v. Loa, 83 Hawai 'i 335, 348-49, 926 P.2d 1258, 1271-72 
(1996) (citation omitted).
 
Jhun contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion because the prosecutor's question put Jhun's character
 
into issue and, because the circuit court did not issue a
 curative instruction, the jury was influenced by Jhun's other
 criminal actions in violation of Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 Rule 403 and 404(a).
9
  
9
 Jhun only presents argument in his brief that the circuit court
abused its discretion by denying the second motion for mistrial. The point of
error is phrased as: "The trial court abused its discretion when it denied the
defense's motion for mistrial based on the DPA's improper question which
violated HRE Rules 403 and 404(a)." 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion. While the circuit court did not explicitly strike 
the prosecutor's question, the circuit court refused to let grandmother answer, and the prosecutor moved on to a different subject. Thus, no evidence was adduced that intimated that Jhun was in jail for a separate issue at the time the children told grandmother about the sexual assault. To the extent that the prosecutor's question may have implied to the jury that Jhun had bad character, the jury instructions included that: "You must consider only the evidence which has been presented to you in this case and such inferences therefrom as may be justified by reason and common sense[,]" and "[s]tatements or remarks made by counsel are not evidence. You should consider their arguments to you, but you are not bound by their recollections or interpretations of the evidence." Juries are presumed to follow the court's instructions. State v. Knight, 80 Hawai
'i 318, 327, 
909 P.2d 1133, 1142 (1996). 
We conclude that the prosecutor's actions did not
 
affect Jhun's substantial rights and the circuit court did not
 abuse its discretion in denying a mistrial. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, entered April 1, 2015, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 21, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender,Office of the Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
James M. Anderson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 