   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000687
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF N.G.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 08-01-1643)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on August 31, 2011 in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
On appeal, Mother contends that the Family Court erred 
by determining that the Petitioner-Appellee, State of Hawai' i, 
Department of Human Services (DHS), made reasonable efforts to 
reunify her child, N.G., with Mother because DHS did not provide 
appropriate services and the assistance of a Marshallese 
interpreter prior to terminating her parental rights. Mother 
argues that DHS should not have withdrawn its requirement that 
Mother undergo a psychological evaluation since it was "necessary 
to address mental health concerns, parenting ability, and the 
most effective way Mother can integrate and learn information so 
that DHS can provide better services[.]" 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's points of error as follows:
 
Mother's claim that DHS's withdrawal of the requirement
 
of a psychological evaluation of Mother demonstrates that a
 
reasonable effort to reunify her with N.G. was not made cannot be
 
sustained in this case. The only pertinent evidence presented to
 
the Family Court supported the determination that a psychological
 
evaluation of Mother through an interpreter would not be helpful. 
The psychological evaluation requirement was eliminated based
 
upon the examiner's opinion that Mother did not understand
 
English and "[p]sychological evaluation through interpreters are
 
of questionable validity and testing norms are often not
 
available for other cultural groups." It was recommended that
 
"more appropriate information on their parenting skills,
 
knowledge, and perceptions could be secured by service providers
 
such as therapist, visitation supervisors, etc., who have more
 
ongoing contact with these clients." Thereafter, the service
 
plan required that Mother's individual therapist, Dr. Welch,
 
obtain the same or similar types of information to assess Mother. 
Importantly, Mother agreed to DHS's request to
 
eliminate the requirement of a psychological evaluation and use
 
an individual therapist in the service plan during a hearing on
 
March 24, 2009. Mother again agreed to the modified service plan
 
that did not include a psychological evaluation during a hearing
 
on February 10, 2010. Mother also provided no argument or
 
support for the proposition that a psychological evaluation
 
performed through the use of interpreters would provide valid and
 
useful information concerning Mother's mental health and
 
parenting abilities. 
DHS made reasonable efforts to provide an interpreter
 
for Mother's services. DHS stated that it does not employ
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interpreters. Rather, it makes referrals to service providers
 
and it is the responsibility of the service provider to arrange
 
for an interpreter to be present at each meeting. After Mother
 
requested, and the Family Court ordered, that an interpreter be
 
available for services, Mother cites an example of when an
 
interpreter was not present for two therapy sessions.  However,
 
in a Safe Family Home Report dated September 13, 2009, DHS stated
 
that it "made a referral to Dr. Welch but mother has stalled it
 
till this day, and has not started her individual therapy
 
sessions. Mother puts the blame on the translator and the
 
translator blames [Mother]'s lack of cooperation to facilitate
 
scheduling." Mother also does not claim any harm or prejudice
 
resulted from a lack of an interpreter for two therapy sessions. 
Mother eventually requested that an interpreter be
 
present while she visited with N.G. because the child was
 
learning English and could not understand her. The Family Court
 
then ordered that an interpreter be provided during visits with
 
N.G. Mother cites no instances where there was no interpreter
 
provided during visitation. 
Mother cites several instances in which there was no
 
interpreter available for a court hearing. In each instance
 where Mother did not waive the presence of an interpreter, the
 
hearing was continued. Mother does not argue that any harm or
 
prejudice resulted from the continuance of the hearings.
 
The Family Court's unchallenged findings of fact and
 
conclusions of law clearly support its determination that it is
 
not reasonably foreseeable that Mother will become willing and
 
able to provide N.G. with a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time.
 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, it is hereby ordered that the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on August 31, 2011, in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit Court, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 30, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Leslie C. Maharaj
for Mother-AppellantCECILLA ASHER fka CECILLA BENJAMIN Chief Judge 
Gay M. TanakaMary Anne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-AppelleeDEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 