NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000347
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JOSEPH K. CHANDLER, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-002300)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Appellant Joseph K. Chandler (Chandler)
 
appeals from the March 6, 2013 "Order Dismissing with Prejudice
 
Appellant Joseph K. Chandler's Appeal" (Order Dismissing) entered
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  The Order Dismissing, which was reduced to a Final Judgment on April 8, 2013, affirmed a decision by the Board of Trustees of the Employees' Retirement System of the State of Hawai
'i (ERS Board) 
in favor of Appellee-Appellee Employees' Retirement System of the State of Hawai
'i (ERS). 
Chandler contends the circuit court erred by affirming
 
the following ERS Board actions:
 
(1) failing to determine that Chandler's medical
 
condition qualified for disability retirement benefits under
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 88-284 (Repl. 2012);
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) rejecting Chandler's supplemental medical exhibits,
 
which he prepared as a pro se party;
 
(3) finding that determinations by the U.S. Social
 
Security Administration's Office of Disability Adjudication and
 
Review (SSA) and other medical examiners did not establish that
 Chandler's incapacity is likely to be permanent; and
 
(4) other errors of law affecting Chandler's request
 
for ordinary disability retirement benefits.
I. BACKGROUND
 
Chandler (born 1964) was employed by the State of 
Hawai
'i, Department of Education as a Custodian II at Keaau High 
School. 
On July 2, 2009, Chandler submitted his application for
 
ordinary disability retirement to ERS. On July 9, 2009, ERS
 acknowledged receipt of Chandler's application for ordinary
 disability retirement benefits, noting that he was required to
 submit a statement of an examining physician. ERS received the
 needed statement from Douglas C. Olsen, M.D. (Dr. Olsen) on July
 23, 2009. Dr. Olsen's report, dated July 2, 2009, states: (1)
 Chandler should be permanently relieved from his duties; (2) he
 will be prevented from performing duties for his present
 employment for the remainder of his life; and (3) retirement is
 recommended, noting that he is "[u]nable to perform the physical
 demands of employment - lifting/carrying/pushing/pulling
 bending/stooping." At that time, Dr. Olsen had served as
 Chandler's primary care physician for over four years, since
 2006.
 
On October 28, 2009, Chandler wrote to State of 
Hawai
'i, Hawai 'i Employer-Union Health Benefits Trust Fund (EUTF), 
alerting the agency that he had not received a response to his ERS application for seven months, lacked medical insurance, and could not pay for prescribed medications, a list of which was attached to his letter to EUTF. 
On February 16, 2010, Florian Flores (Flores), a 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
physical therapist and Director of Hawai 'i FCE and Rehabilitative 
Services, submitted an occupation specific functional capacity 
evaluation (FCE) based on a 6.45 hour examination of Chandler on February 12, 2010 to the ERS Medical Board (Medical Board). Flores' FCE described work factors covered in the assessment as "Musculoskeletal, Repetitive Movement, Static Strength, Hand Function, Material/Non-Material Handling and Task simulations," and did not indicate that any psychological assessments were conducted. Flores stated that Chandler "can work at LIGHT PDL [physical demand level] for an 8-hour day" and noted, "[t]he maximum physical requirement for School Custodian II, DOE is 50 lbs or greater. I believe it is unlikely that [Chandler] will be able to achieve this material handling ability and return to full time, full duty work as School Custodian II with any type of work hardening/conditioning program." 
On March 10, 2010, ERS received a Lumbar Spinoscope
 
Evaluation report from Robert L. Smith, M.D. (Dr. Smith), who
 examined Chandler on February 12, 2010 and concluded:
 
Since [Chandler] is only 45 and approximately 100 pounds
overweight he would benefit from a restricted calorie but
fully nutritious diet such as documented by Dr. Shintani
locally and self directed reactivation and reconditioning at
a community based fitness center. Psychosocial barriers may
include fear avoidance behaviors, lack of motivation and
non-compliance.
 
On March 10, 2010, the Medical Board received a letter
 
dated March 10, 2010 from Flores, stating:
 
I reviewed Mr. Chandler's FCE and Spinoscope reports per
your request. I conclude that if [Chandler] is able to
successfully lose at least 50 lbs of body weight following
the Shintani diet per Dr. Robert Smith's recommendation, he
will be more likely than not to achieve the physical demand
capacity of MEDIUM (50 lbs) and recover full time, full duty
work as School Custodian through extensive work
conditioning/work hardening.
 
Also on March 10, 2010, the Medical Board completed its
 
report, certifying Chandler as "physically or mentally
 
incapacitated for further performance of duty[,]" but that his
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incapacitation is not likely to be permanent and he should not be
 
retired.
 
On April 21, 2010, the ERS Board sent a letter to
 
Chandler apprising him of their April 12, 2010 decision to deny
 his application for ordinary disability retirement.
 
In a letter with the subject heading "Ordinary
 
Disability Retirement Appeal," received on May 17, 2010, Chandler
 urged the ERS Board to consider reports from Rudolph Puana, M.D.
 (Dr. Puana) and Dr. Olsen. Chandler noted that ERS Benefits
 Manager, Karl Kaneshiro (Kaneshiro), informed him that the
 Medical Board made its decision prior to receiving Florian
 Flores' reports and that he could not review these medical
 reports unless he filed an appeal. Chandler does not specify if
 Kaneshiro was referring to Flores' March 10, 2010 report alone or
 in combination with his February 16, 2010 FCE. Chandler attached
 a report by Dr. Puana dated May 3, 2010, which stated Chandler's
 "pain is very debilitating due to extreme spinal cord
 involvement" and he would be absent even from a part-time job
 three or more days a month if he attempted such employment. In
 response to the question, "Do you feel that [Chandler] is
 accurately describing his complaints of pain?[,]" Dr. Puana
 answered affirmatively and further opined that Chandler's
 symptoms are documented and credible.
 
On June 29, 2010, ERS assigned hearings officer duties
 
over Chandler's appeal to Mario R. Ramil. On September 1, 2010,
 Hearings Officer Ramil responded to Chandler's concern that he
 could neither afford an attorney nor airfare to and from Honolulu
 for a hearing. Hearings Officer Ramil proposed to address his
 appeal via submissions of additional medical reports and written
 arguments, thereby obviating the need to hold a "face-to-face"
 hearing.
 
On September 7, 2010, Frank Ury, the attorney who
 
represented Chandler in proceedings related to his SSA disability
 claim, submitted a copy of a SSA Decision dated May 18, 2010 to 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the ERS. The SSA Decision found Chandler "disabled under
 
sections 216(i) and 223(d) of the Social Security Act since
 December 31, 2007." SSA found Chandler's statements concerning
 the intensity, persistence, and limiting effects of these
 symptoms [of medically determinable impairments] are generally
 credible." SSA also noted:
 
[t]he State agency medical consultants' physical assessments
and psychological consultants' mental assessments are given
little weight because other medical opinions are more
consistent with the record as a whole and evidence received
 at the hearing level show that [Chandler] is more limited
than determined by the State agency consultants. Greater
 weight is afforded the opinions of Drs. Olsen and Puana as
they have established a treatment relationship with
[Chandler]. Their opinions are further supported by the
comprehensive psychological assessment of Dr. Bratton, who
determined that [Chandler] is not able to meet the normal
demands of a low stress job on a daily basis, 'due to a
combination of an existing bipolar disorder, now expressed
as depression, along with cumulative effects of multiple
closed head traumas.'
 
The SSA Decision does not identify the State agency
 
medical consultants it refers to and did not append their
 
physical or psychological assessments.
 
On September 13, 2010, Hearings Officer Ramil wrote to
 
the Medical Board and Chandler, stating that Chandler had waived
 his right to a face-to-face hearing and proposing a schedule
 whereby Chandler would provide the Hearings Officer and Medical
 Board counsel with additional supporting documents by October 15,
 2010 and the Medical Board would respond to the submissions by
 November 15, 2010.
 
On September 28, 2010, the Aloha Pain Clinic, LLC,
 
which employed Dr. Puana, submitted to the ERS Board, chart notes
 from examinations of Chandler on April 16, 2010, May 3, 2010, and
 July 21, 2010 and a history and physical report dated March 30,
 2010.
 
On October 6, 2010, Hearings Officer Ramil forwarded a
 
letter from Chandler with attached documents to Medical Board
 counsel: (1) the SSA Decision dated May 18, 2010; (2) medical 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
documents from Dr. Puana; (3) medical records from Dr. Olsen; and
 
(4) a notice of continuance of sale in connection with a
 foreclosure action on Chandler's home.
 
On November 15, 2010, the Medical Board filed its
 
Position Memorandum in support of its certification that Chandler
 is not permanently disabled and should not be retired. The
 Position Memorandum indicated that the Medical Board's
 determination relied on Flores' and Dr. Smith's reports and Dr.
 Olsen's medical records.
 
In a November 20, 2010 email, Hearings Officer Ramil
 
informed ERS manager, Karl Kaneshiro, that he had recused himself
 from hearing Chandler's appeal due to a telephone interaction
 with Chandler. On June 30, 2011, the ERS wrote to Junell Y. K.
 Lee, to inform her that ERS had reassigned hearings officer
 duties over Chandler's appeal to her and noted that Chandler had
 acquired representation by counsel as of March 30, 2011.
 
Hearings Officer Lee held a telephone conference with
 
the parties on August 11, 2011 in which Chandler's request for a
 full evidentiary hearing was denied but Chandler was granted an
 opportunity to write a rebuttal to the Medical Board's November
 15, 2010 Position Memorandum.
 
On October 3, 2011, Hearings Officer Lee received
 
Chandler's Position Memorandum, to which were appended three
 exhibits: (1) a copy of Chandler's general work assignments at
 Keaau High school; (2) medical records from SSA's file on
 Chandler's application; and (3) a summary of Chandler's medical
 absences from work.
 
Chandler's exhibits included: 
(1) Dr. Olsen's chart notes from dates including, May
 
22, 2007, May 29, 2007, June 25, 2007, July 16, 2007, July 31,
 2007, August 13, 2007, September 20, 2007, October 25, 2007,
 October 29, 2007, November 6, 2007, December 10, 2007, December,
 20, 2007, December 27, 2007, January 25, 2008, March 7, 2008,
 March 11, 2008, February 28, 2008, April 24, 2008, May 19, 2008,
 May 29, 2008, June 9, 2008, June 23, 2008, July 1, 2008, July 15,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2008, July 11, 2008, July 29, 2008, September 4, 2008, September
 
16, 2008, February 3, 2009, February 22, 2009, May 12, 2009, and
 July 2, 2009;
 
(2) work slips excusing Chandler from work duties on
 
associated dates;
 
(3) Dr. Olsen's summaries of prescription medications
 
Chandler was taking and a February 22, 2009, physician summary
 view;
 
(4) records of a December 18, 2007 visit with Kenneth
 
T. Kaan, M.D. (Dr. Kaan);
 
(5) records of a May 12, 2008 examination by Todd
 
Thompson, M.D. recommending physical therapy and x-rays;
 
(6) records of a December 11, 2009 examination by Lyla
 
Prather, M.D., who stated Chandler "would likely tolerate
 sedentary to occasional mild activity without much difficulty. 
He should refrain from prolonged walking, or from
 carrying/lifting/pushing/ pulling more than light loads to
 prevent further worsening of his back pain[]";
 
(7) records of a November 14, 2008 full psychological
 
evaluation by Joseph Bratton, Ph.D. (Dr. Bratton);
 
(8) records of a February 26, 2009 examination by
 
Antoine Cazin, M.D. (Dr. Cazin), regarding Chandler's complaints
 of low back pain, epilepsy, and depression; and
 
(9) radiologic reports dated August 13, 2007, November
 
16, 2007, February 21, 2008, July 11, 2008, July 30, 2008.
 
In Exhibit 2, medical evidence supporting the SSA
 
Decision, included a report from a disability claims examiner
 based on a February 26, 2009 examination by Dr. Cazin, noting
 that Chandler's main complaints were low back pain, "[e]pilepsy,"
 and depression. Dr. Cazin stated,
 
[b]ecause of his chronic low back pain, [Chandler] is very
uncomfortable doing any work-related activities and also not
doing any activity since he states that recently for four
nights he was 'screaming all night' because of pain.
Otherwise, there is no physical limitation to the working ability
of [Chandler] demonstrated by today's examination. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In a letter dated October 4, 2011 to Hearings Officer
 
Lee, the Medical Board objected to Chandler's exhibits because
 
they "go[] beyond the record and beyond the scope of the Medical
 Board's position statement[.]" The Medical Board further noted
 that it had not been made aware that there may have been a
 psychiatric/psychological component to Chandler's disability and,
 "[e]xcept for pages 2-7 of exhibit 2, none of the other records
 were provided to the Medical Board for review at any time."
 
On December 12, 2011, Hearings Officer Lee submitted
 
her Recommended Decision. The Recommended Decision stated the
 August 11, 2011 Order permitting Chandler to submit a written
 rebuttal to the Medical Board's Position Memorandum did not also
 permit Chandler to submit additional evidence and therefore his
 three exhibits were inadmissible and not considered by Hearings
 Officer Lee. "By attaching Exhibits "1" through "3" to his
 Position Memorandum, [Chandler] is trying to sneak in additional
 evidence almost one year after his October 15, 2010 deadline
 lapsed [the deadline for the Medical Board's Position
 Memorandum]."
 
Hearings Officer Lee's Recommended Decision reasoned
 
that the Medical Board and SSA could reach different decisions on
 Chandler's disabled status because: (1) the Medical Board and SSA
 use different criteria; (2) SSA considered Chandler's psychiatric
 evaluation by Dr. Bratton on November 14, 2008, while the Medical
 Board did not have records of Chandler's psychiatric problems
 before it; and (3) SSA's "disability" determination did not
 establish that Chandler's disability is likely to be permanent.
 
On February 3, 2012, Chandler filed exceptions to the
 
ERS Board's proposed decision, again submitting his three
 exhibits. Chandler argued he had been proceeding pro-se at the
 time he was expected to file his exhibits and that it was
 "unrealistic" and "unfair" to expect him to have analyzed the
 applicable rules, requirements, and procedures, and further
 contended that "Hearings Officer [Lee] relied on a technicality
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to exclude material and relevant evidence to avoid the merits" of
 
his claim.
 
On May 31, 2012, the Medical Board filed its response
 
to Chandler's exceptions to the ERS Board's proposed decision,
 requesting the ERS Board adopt Hearings Officer Lee's Recommended
 Decision in toto. The Medical Board contested the
 characterization of Chandler as "unable to understand his
 responsibilities" because he complied with deadlines for
 submitting evidence and position letters.
 
On June 12, 2012, the ERS Board heard arguments from
 
the parties on Chandler's appeal in Honolulu. Because the
 proceeding was an "appeal as opposed to a hearing," Chandler was
 not permitted to speak on his own behalf. On August, 6, 2012,
 ERS Board affirmed the proposed decision and adopted the
 Recommended Decision.
 
On September 6, 2012, Chandler filed a notice of appeal
 
to the circuit court requesting reversal of the ERS Board's
 August 6, 2012 Final Decision (Final Decision), a grant of
 ordinary disability retirement benefits, and attorneys' fees.
 
In his opening brief, filed November 5, 2012, Chandler
 
raised the same points of error before the circuit court that he
 has raised on appeal to this court.
 
On February 20, 2013, the circuit court heard arguments
 
from the parties. The circuit court concluded, "based upon what
 was submitted and the record on appeal, the [circuit court]
 cannot say that [Hearings Officer Lee's] decision was clearly
 erroneous . . . ." On the issue of Hearing Officer Lee's
 Recommended Decision to exclude Chandler's three exhibits, the
 circuit court noted,
 
[Hearings Officer Lee] does mention that although technical
exactness may not be required of pro se litigants,
submitting 97 pages of additional evidence almost one year
after the submission deadline, after a ruling has already
been made denying the introduction of additional evidence,
is way beyond the back-bending afforded pro se litigants,
especially since the medical board no longer has the
opportunity to respond to such additional evidence.
 
9
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further noting the lack of "case law that fleshes out
 
that particular phrase 'likely to be permanent'" in HRS § 88­
284(a)(2), the circuit court reasoned, "so it's up to the
 hearings officer and the medical board to determine whether or
 not his physical incapacity's likely to be permanent." The
 circuit court affirmed the ERS Board's Final Decision because it
 "[could] not say that [Hearings Officer Lee's Recommended
 D]ecision was clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
 probative, substantial evidence and what was admissible on the
 whole record."
 
On March 6, 2013, the circuit court issued an order
 
dismissing Chandler's appeal, which effectively affirmed the ERS
 Board's Final Decision. On March 31, 2013, Chandler filed a
 notice of appeal from the circuit court's order.
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Appellate review of agency decisions is governed by HRS
 
§ 91-14(g) (2012 Repl.), which states that:
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
 (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise
of discretion.
 
Agency decisions carry a presumption of validity and
 
this "presumption is particularly significant where the appellant 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenges a substantive decision within the agency's expertise 
as 'clearly erroneous,' 'arbitrary,' 'capricious,' or an 'abuse of discretion[.]'" In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 
Hawai
'i 97, 143, 9 P.3d 409, 455 (2000). 
"An agency's findings of fact are reviewable under the 
clearly erroneous standard to determine if the agency decision was clearly erroneous in view of reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record." Poe v. Hawai'i Labor 
Relations Bd., 87 Hawai
'i 191, 195, 953 P.2d 569, 573 (1998). 
Generally, findings of fact will not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. "[Such] findings are presumed to be correct, and appellant bears the burden of pointing out specifically where they were erroneous." MPM Hawaiian, Inc. v. Amigos, Inc., 63 
Haw. 485, 486, 630 P.2d 1075, 1077 (1981). "[U]nchallenged factual findings are deemed to be binding on appeal, which is to say no more than that an appellate court cannot, under the auspices of plain error, sua sponte revisit a finding of fact that neither party has challenged on appeal." Okada Trucking 
Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai
'i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 
73, 82 (2002). 
"An agency's conclusions of law (COLs) are freely 
reviewable to determine if the agency's decision was in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions, in excess of statutory authority or jurisdiction of agency, or affected by other error of law." Poe, 87 Hawai
'i at 195, 953 P.2d at 573. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the party who 
initiates an appeal proceeding bears the burden of proof, including the burden of producing evidence and the burden of persuasion. Hoffacker v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 101 
Hawai
'i 21, 24, 61 P.3d 532, 535 (App. 2002). "The degree or 
quantum of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence." Id. 
"[T]he party initiating the proceeding shall have the burden of proof, including the burden of producing evidence and the burden of persuasion[,]" and the "degree or quantum of proof shall be a 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
preponderance of the evidence." Hawaii Administrative Rules
 
(HAR) Rule § 6-23-31 (2009).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. 	ERS Board's findings related to the May 18, 2010
SSA Decision do not constitute reversible error.
 
Chandler's contention that Hearings Officer Lee's
 
findings concerning SSA's Decision constituted reversible error
 has no merit. Hearings Officer Lee did not err in finding: (1)
 no evidence demonstrates that SSA and ERS ordinary retirement
 benefit eligibility criteria are the same; (2) SSA's "disability"
 determination did not establish that Chandler's disability is
 likely to be permanent under HRS § 88-284(a)(1); and (3) medical
 evidence contained in SSA's Decision, in and of itself, did not
 establish Chandler's incapacity to be permanent.
 
To qualify for social security disability benefits,
 
Chandler was required to demonstrate that he suffered from a
 "medically determinable physical or mental impairment
 which . . . can be expected to last for a continuous period of
 not less than 12 months." 42 U.S.C. § 423(d)(1)(A) (2004). By
 contrast, ERS required Chandler to show he is likely to be
 permanently incapacitated in order to qualify for ordinary
 disability retirement. See HRS § 88-284(a)(1). Hearings Officer
 
Lee correctly found SSA's determination that Chandler is
 "disabled" is not conclusive evidence that he met eligibility
 requirements for ERS ordinary disability retirement benefits.
 
ERS hearings officers are afforded broad powers and
 
duties, which includes "rul[ing] on offers of proof and
 receiv[ing] evidence[.]" HAR § 6-23-14(b)(6). Contrary to
 Chandler's contention that Hearings Officer Lee's findings of
 fact 29, 30, and 31 constituted reversible error, we conclude
 that she acted within her discretion in determining that SSA's
 Decision did not contain medical evidence establishing Chandler's
 incapacity to be permanent.
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. 	ERS's interpretations of "the time of [Chandler's]
application" are inconsistent.
 
This court defers to an agency's interpretation of the 
statutes they administer, unless that interpretation "is plainly 
erroneous and inconsistent with both the letter and intent of the statutory mandate[.]" Kahana Sunset Owners Ass'n v. Cnty. of 
Maui, 86 Hawai
'i 66, 72, 947 P.2d 378, 384 (1997). Under HRS 
§ 88-284(a)(1), Chandler was required to show that he was "mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty at the time of application[.]" (Emphasis added.) Citing this provision in its November 15, 2010 Position Memorandum, the Medical Board contended, "[m]edical records post application should not be considered." The Medical Board defended its decision, insofar as findings relied upon medical records that were contradicted by reports from Drs. Olsen and Puana. Drs. Olsen and Puana's medical reports were based on treatments on March 30, 2010, April 16, 2010, May 3, 2010, and July 21, 2010, whereas Mr. Chandler's application is dated July 2, 2009. 
We note the "time of application" requirement must
 
necessarily allow some time to pass between the application and
 the physical examination that the Medical Board may require of
 applicants under ERS rules. See HAR § 6-22-3(b). In this case,
 
the Medical Board relied on FCEs based on examinations of
 Chandler conducted February 12, 2010.
 
On appeal, ERS now contests a claim they attribute to
 
Chandler, "[i]nasmuch as [Chandler] does claim that the
 Hearing[s] Officer erred in not considering his medical records
 dated on or after July 3, 2009, the Hearings Officer [Lee] did
 not err, as she properly followed HRS § 88-284 . . . ." ERS's
 contentions on appeal and ERS Board's affirmation of the Medical
 Board's certifications raise the question: are the medical
 reports based on examinations of Chandler after July 2, 2009
 properly considered as evidence of his physical and mental
 condition "at the time of application" or not? Read together 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the Medical Board's determination that the March 30, 2010,
 
April 16, 2010, May 3, 2010, and July 21, 2010 reports by Drs.
 Olsen and Puana were too late to be considered "at the time of
 application[,]" ERS's contention on appeal that Hearings Officer
 Lee properly considered medical records dated after July 3, 2009
 provides an overly narrow interpretation of HRS § 88-284(a)(1). 
"[A]t the time of application" is not statutorily 
defined; we may therefore attribute to this phrase its ordinary meaning. See Gillan v. Gov't Employees Ins. Co., 119 Hawai
'i 
109, 115, 194 P.3d 1071, 1077 (2008). In this case, the ordinary meaning of "at the time of application[,]" read in light of regulatory provisions permitting the Medical Board to require and rely on medical examinations of the applicant during a post-application period, includes examinations completed during a reasonable period pre- and post-dating Chandler's July 2, 2009 application. 
C. 	Hearings Officer Lee's exclusion of Chandler's
untimely exhibit submissions
 
Chandler contends the ERS Board's Final Decision
 
upholding Hearings Officer Lee's Recommended Decision constituted
 reversible error because the preponderance of the evidence
 clearly established Chandler's entitlement to ordinary disability
 retirement benefits. As discussed below, whether Hearings
 Officer Lee, the ERS Board, and the circuit court clearly erred
 by failing to find the preponderance of the evidence supporting
 Chandler's disability benefits claim is bound up with Chandler's
 claim that Hearings Officer Lee's refusal to consider his
 exhibits was an error amounting to a denial of his substantive
 rights.
 
In applying for ordinary disability retirement
 
benefits, Chandler was responsible for "furnishing all medical
 evidence available or which can be made available to [Chandler]
 pertaining to [his] disability, including reports of [his] 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
personal physician and consultant physicians, hospital and
 
laboratory reports, and x-rays." HAR § 6-26-7(a). The Medical
 Board is responsible for reviewing medical reports submitted to
 them and may disregard untimely submitted medical reports. HAR
 §§ 6-22-3(a) and (b). After submitting its own certifications
 and findings, the Medical Board is permitted to consider
 additional medical reports "[u]pon receipt of prior approval of
 the [ERS] board," and under the condition that the additional
 medical reports "relate to the condition of the member at the
 time of the application and any determination of disability shall
 be related to the condition of the member at the time of
 application." HAR § 6-22-10. 
While these provisions govern our review of Hearings 
Officer Lee's Recommended Decision to exclude Chandler's tardily submitted medical evidence, Chandler urges us to allow a "good faith effort exception in administrative agency matters" in light of Chandler's pro se status. (Citing Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai
'i 297, 314, 219 P.3d 1084, 1101 (2009)) ("Pleadings 
prepared by pro se litigants should be interpreted liberally."). 
It is undisputed that Chandler was not represented in
 
ERS claim proceedings until approximately March 30, 2011. ERS
 contested the characterization of Chandler as "unable to
 understand his responsibilities" because he complied with
 deadlines for submitting evidence and position letters. 
"[Chandler] complied with those deadlines and he did in fact
 submit additional medical records along with a position letter,
 and I believe that that shows that he understood what was
 required of him in this process." Chandler's compliance with
 deadlines, however, does not demonstrate that he understood how
 the legal standard of the "preponderance of the evidence" applied
 to his case nor the legal distinction between "disabled" statuses
 under SSA and ERS criteria. For this reason, ERS's allegation
 that "[Chandler] has not set forth a reason why he did not submit
 the medical records that he now wants included in the record[,]" 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
demonstrates their misunderstanding of the effect of Chandler's
 
pro se status. Chandler contends the reason he did not submit
 medical records to supplement the SSA Decision and reports from
 Drs. Olsen and Puana, is that he did not know that a SSA finding
 of disability differed from an ERS finding of disability under
 HRS § 22-484.
 
Chandler contends that a liberal interpretation of his
 
application and appeal from the Medical Board's certification
 would have anticipated his ignorance of the distinction between
 SSA and ERS disability requirements and therefore Hearings
 Officer Lee should have accommodated his later efforts to
 supplement the record.
 
According to the schedule set by Hearings Officer
 
Ramil, Chandler was permitted to submit additional evidence until
 October 15, 2010 and the Medical Board would file their response
 by November 15, 2010. Hearings Officer Lee explained her
 decision to exclude Chandler's medical evidence: (1) his
 submissions were untimely; (2) they were not provided for in the
 August 11, 2011 Order; and (3) the Medical Board was not afforded
 an opportunity to respond to Chandler's new evidence.
 
The Medical Board's November 15, 2010 Position
 
Memorandum contained citations to facts and a detailed legal
 argument supporting the Medical Board's rejection of the SSA
 disability findings. The Medical Board's cursory medical report
 filed on March 15, 2010 preceded this submission and summarily
 stated that Chandler's incapacity is not likely to be permanent
 and he should not be retired. Chandler was not able to review
 Flores' medical reports until he filed his appeal from the
 Medical Board's report. Although Chandler was permitted to
 respond to the Medical Board's November 15, 2010 position
 statement, Hearings Officer Lee did not permit him to submit
 medical evidence with that response. "If a party has not had any
 opportunity to respond to an argument made for the first time in
 the last permitted paper, an additional paper, whether reply or 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
surreply, may be allowed." David F. Herr, et al., § 3.08 Reply
 
Papers, Motion Prac. (2013). Allowing further responses is
 "necessary to prevent ambush" of the party receiving the new
 information. Id. The underlying purpose of "prevent[ing]
 
ambush[,]" would therefore not be served unless Chandler could
 have gleaned from the medical report and supporting documents,
 that he was responsible for submitting medical evidence of a
 disability under two separate agency standards. Id. As Chandler
 
contends, expecting a pro se litigant to have understood the
 legal distinctions between the evidentiary weight of his
 submissions in an SSA as opposed to an ERS proceeding is
 unrealistic. Viewed in light of his then-pro se status,
 Chandler's Position Memorandum and its attached exhibits
 appropriately took up an opportunity to respond to the Medical
 Board's reliance on Flores' findings and differences between the
 SSA and ERS criteria.
 
Agency proceedings are meant to have relatively less
 
rigid procedural and pleading processes than formal trials. See
 
Cariaga v. Del Monte Corp., 65 Haw. 404, 409, 652 P.2d 1143, 1147
 (1982) ("[t]he administrative tribunal or agency has been created
 in order to handle controversies arising under particular
 statutes. It is characteristic of these tribunals that simple
 and non-technical hearings take the place of court trials and
 informal proceedings supersede rigid and formal pleadings and
 processes.").
 
We do not reverse an agency's decision based on
 
procedural matters unless those errors affected the substantial
 rights of the appellant. See Application of Wind Power Pac.
 
Investors-III, 67 Haw. 342, 343, 686 P.2d 831, 832-33 (1984)
 (refusing to reverse a Public Utilities Commission decision based
 on procedural irregularities because the irregularities
 complained of do not prejudice the substantial rights of the
 appellant) (citing HRS § 91-14(g)); Survivors of Timothy Freitas,
 Dec. v. Pac. Contractors Co., 1 Haw. App. 77, 85, 613 P.2d 927, 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
933 (1980) (Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board's
 
failure to state whether it had applied presumption that claim
 was for covered work injury did not prejudice substantial rights
 where there was no reasonable doubt that employee's fatal
 accident was not work connected) (citing HRS § 91-14(g)).
 
ERS asserts that even if Hearings Officer Lee erred by
 
excluding Chandler's evidence, such an error was "harmless"
 because she, and the ERS Board, could have reasonably reached the
 same conclusions as they did if they had considered Chandler's
 exhibits. According to the ERS, because the excluded exhibits
 would not affect the conclusion that Chandler failed to establish
 his incapacity is likely to be permanent, the exclusion of these
 exhibits did not affect Chandler's substantial rights and
 therefore this court should not reverse the circuit court's
 order. See HRS § 91-14(g).
 
Chandler's excluded exhibits include a letter from Dr.
 
Kaan to Dr. Olsen, dated December 18, 2007, indicating that
 Chandler had been out of work for a month and was suffering
 increasing pain. Although ERS correctly notes that Dr. Kaan
 recommended nonoperative treatment, a weight reduction program,
 and physical therapy, Dr. Kaan also stated, "[a]s a last resort,
 we can consider doing an L4-5 interbody fusion, but there is no
 guarantee as to whether this would alleviate his symptoms." 
(Emphasis added.) Dr. Kaan's statement suggests nonsurgical
 treatment was recommended because the prognosis after surgical
 treatment is not "guarantee[d.]" Dr. Kaan's report does not, as
 ERS contends, support a finding that Chandler does not suffer a
 permanent incapacitation.
 
Chandler's Exhibit 2 included Dr. Bratton's
 
psychological assessment, which SSA relied upon. ERS Board
 emphasizes Dr. Bratton's conclusion that Chandler "could attend
 regularly a low stress job site" as evidence that Chandler was
 not incapacitated for non-psychologically stressful employment. 
ERS attributes significance to Dr. Bratton's psychological report
 that contradicts Hearings Officer Lee's interpretations. 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hearings Officer Lee concluded that the absence of Dr. Bratton's
 
report from materials available for the Medical Board review was
 a reason that it reached a different conclusion from that of SSA. 
Between the ERS Board and Hearings Officer Lee's conclusions, the
 import of Dr. Bratton's report is, alternately, that it shows
 Chandler is not incapacitated for low stress work, and that it
 would have shown the Medical Board evidence that Chandler is
 "disabled" and therefore would have brought the Medical Board's
 conclusion closer towards SSA's disability findings. Further,
 while SSA findings of disability are not binding on the Medical
 Board, we note SSA also reached a conclusion contrary to ERS
 Board's interpretation of Dr. Bratton's report. See HAR § 6-22­
5. Rather than concluding, with ERS, that Dr. Bratton's report
 
showed Chandler's capacity for low stress employment, SSA
 concluded that Dr. Bratton's "comprehensive psychological
 assessment . . . determined that [Chandler] was not able to meet
 the normal demands of a low stress job on a daily basis, 'due to
 a combination of an existing bipolar disorder, now expressed as
 depression, along with cumulative effects of multiple closed head
 traumas.'" The inconsistent weight given to Dr. Bratton's report
 by the ERS Board and Hearings Officer Lee, in addition to SSA's
 fuller citation to Dr. Bratton's report, supports the conclusion
 that the ERS incorrectly asserts that Dr. Bratton's statements
 sustain a finding that Chandler is not permanently incapacitated. 
ERS Board misrepresents Dr. Cazin's medical report,
 
which was based on his examination of Chandler on February 26,
 2009. The ERS Board characterizes Dr. Cazin's report by stating,
 "but for [Chandler's] lower back pain, 'there is no physical
 limitation to the working ability of [Chandler.]'" Dr. Cazin's
 quoted statement, however, is preceded by the following:
 
The patient does not have medical insurance anymore since he
last [sic] his job. This is an abnormal and unjust and very
damaging situation for the patient. It should be corrected
 immediately.
 
MEDICAL STATEMENT:
 
19
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because of his chronic low back pain, [Chandler] is very
uncomfortable doing any work-related activities and also not
doing any activity since he states that recently for four
nights he was 'screaming all night' because of pain.
 
Otherwise, there is no physical limitation to the working
ability of the patient demonstrated by today's examination.
 
Although Dr. Cazin was not asked to comment on
 
Chandler's financial or insurance situation, a more extensive
 
quotation from his report shows Dr. Cazin's statement that
 Chandler had "no physical limitation" was offered in the context
 of a more general opinion concerning the immediacy of the need
 for resources to be devoted to relieving Chandler's discomfort
 and pain. Dr. Cazin's overall assessment of Chandler's condition
 rather supports a conclusion contrary to that urged by the ERS
 Board.
 
Finally, ERS contends "[t]he records not considered by
 
the ERS Board and the Hearing[s] Officer . . . mirror the records
 considered by the Hearing[s] Officer." The ERS cites opinions
 offered by Flores, Dr. Smith, and Dr. Puana that Chandler should
 lose weight as evidence supporting its contention of harmless
 error. Neither Dr. Smith nor Dr. Puana stated Chandler could
 regain capacity for full-time employment as a result of weight
 loss, but rather that he would "benefit" from diet and exercise
 (Dr. Smith) and Chandler "needs to loose [sic] weight and [get]
 physical exercise" (Dr. Puana). Flores initially concluded that
 the results of his own examination of Chandler on February 12,
 2010 "do not qualify [Chandler] for the critical physical demands
 of full-time, full duty work as School Custodian II, according to
 the job description used." It was not until he reviewed Dr.
 Smith's March 10, 2010 report that Flores offered the contrary
 conclusion, also on March 10, 2010, that if Chandler followed Dr.
 Smith's diet recommendations and completed extensive work
 conditioning, "more likely than not" Chandler would be able
 recover and resume full time, full duty work as School Custodian. 
Flores' readiness to reach a conclusion contrary to his earlier
 February 12, 2010 examination based on Dr. Smith's report
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suggests that Flores' own medical examination was not completely
 
reliable. The record does not support the ERS Board's contention
 that reports excluded by Hearings Officer Lee "mirror[s]"
 included evidence so as to demonstrate their exclusion from the
 record to be harmless error. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, we vacate the March 6, 2013 "Order
 
Dismissing with Prejudice Appellant Joseph K. Chandler's Appeal"
 and the Final Judgment filed April 8, 2013 both entered in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit and remand this case for
 proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 31, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Ted H.S. Hong
for Appellant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Patricia Ohara
 
Kyle K. Chang
Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellee-Appellee.
 
21
 