NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. CAAP-13-0000104 and CAAP-13-0000108
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
COMPLAINANT/DISPUTE RESOLUTION CDR.2769.8 AND APPLICATION
FOR AFTER-THE-FACT STREAM CHANNEL ALTERATION PERMIT
STREAM DIVERSION WORKS PERMIT AND PETITION TO AMEND
INSTREAM FLOW STANDARDS (SCAP.2898.8) FOR LESLIE AINA
WEIGHT/ROBERT SCOTT HENDERSON AND DR. DAVID JUNG/MRS.
DORA OKAZAKI AINAKO BRANCH STREAM AND AINAKO STREAM,
HILO, HAWAII
APPEAL FROM THE COMMISSION ON WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
(CASE NO. CCH-HA11-1)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
This appeal involves disputes between neighboring
subdivision residents regarding the origin of, and rights
relating to, the flow of water through their properties.  David
Jung, M.D., Malinee Jung, Dora Okazaki, Ronald Okazaki, Norman
Purves, Maren Hauschidlt-Purves, and Tamae Shindo (collectively,
Complainants) and Leslie Aina Weight and Robert Scott Henderson
(collectively, Applicants) are all residents of and neighbors in
the Ainako Subdivision.  This subdivision consists of property
that was previously owned and subdivided by Hilo Sugar Company.
The Commission on Water Resource Management (Commission) held a
contested case hearing and issued a decision on the disputes
underlying this appeal.    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Ainako Stream runs through the Ainako Subdivision. 
There is a watercourse that branches from the Ainako Stream,
referred to in this case as "Branch Stream 1," and a second
geological feature referred to as "Branch 2/Drainage Channel." 
At the time the Commission held its contested case hearing,
Branch Stream 1 was connected to the Ainako Stream through a
flood control gate located on the property of Leslie Aina Weight
(Weight), and Branch 2/Drainage Channel had no connection with
Ainako Stream and was typically dry.  
Among other things, the Complainants and the Applicants
disputed whether Branch Stream 1 had previously been connected to
Ainako Stream at another point further downstream and whether
Branch 2/Drainage Channel had ever been connected to Ainako
Stream.  The Complainants asserted that over time, the flow in
Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel had been
significantly reduced.  The Complainants attributed this
reduction to the Applicants' and their family members'
obstruction of alleged connections between Ainako Stream and
Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel and to Weight's
alleged manipulation of the amount of water flowing into Branch
Stream 1 by changing the height of the flood control gate on her
property.  The Applicants denied that the connections alleged by
Complainants ever existed and denied that Weight had been
manipulating the height of the flood control gate.  The
Applicants attributed the reduction in water flow to reduced
rainfall and the construction of the Akolea Ditch in the 1980s,
which reduced the amount of surface runoff and water entering 
Ainako Stream above Branch Stream 1. 
The Complainants filed a petition with the Commission,
seeking to revoke the registration for, and to remove, the flood
control gate on the Weight property; to restore the alleged
historical connections between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1
and Branch 2/Drainage Channel; and to increase the water flow to
Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel.  After holding a 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
contested case hearing, the Commission denied the Complainants'
petition.  
The Commission ruled that the historical origin for
Branch Stream 1 was its present location at the existing flood
control gate; that there was no prior connection between Branch
Stream 1 and Ainako Stream at another point further downstream as
contended by Complainants; and that even if there had been such a
prior connection, (1) it was likely that water flowed toward
Ainako Stream rather than from Ainako Stream in this connection,
and (2) there was no evidence of the flow pattern or amount of
water flowing in such connection.  The Commission also ruled that
Branch 2/Drainage Channel was a drainage channel with its origin
on land that had never been a branch of the Ainako Stream.  The
Commission noted that the Complainants did not own property along
Ainako Stream but only along Branch Stream 1 or Branch 2/Drainage
Channel and thus did not have riparian rights to use Ainako
Stream waters.  The Commission also concluded that the
Complainants did not have riparian rights to water flowing in
Branch Stream 1, which the Commission found was water obtained
from Ainako Stream though a man-made diversion or through rain
runoff, and that the Complainants did not have riparian rights to
water flowing in Branch 2/Drainage Channel, which the Commission
found was water from rain runoff.  Pursuant to its regulatory
authority over stream diversions, the Commission ordered Weight
to monitor the amount of water diverted by the flood control gate
at the head of Branch Stream 1 on a monthly basis and to submit a
report annually.  It also required Weight to maintain the height
of the flood control gate in a fixed position at five inches.
The Complainants and Intervenor Gary Meltzer
(collectively, "Appellants") appeal and Weight cross-appeals from
the Commission's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Decision and Order" (Decision and Order).  On appeal, the
Appellants contend that the Commission erred in: (1) determining
that the origin of Branch Stream 1 was at its current point of
connection to the Ainako Stream, rather than a point further
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
downstream; (2) determining that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was
not a branch stream of Ainako Stream; (3) determining that
Complainants do not have riparian rights; and (4) failing to
revoke Weight's registration for the flood control gate, which
Appellants claim was based on Weight's false and misleading
statements.  
On cross-appeal, Weight contends that the Commission
erred in: (1) requiring Weight to conduct monthly monitoring and
submit annual reports to the Commission on the amount of water
diverted by the flood control gate; and (2) requiring Weight to
keep the flood control gate in a fixed position at five inches
without permitting her to adjust the gate for purposes of
maintenance and repairs or to protect against flooding.
As explained below, we affirm the Commission's Decision
and Order.
BACKGROUND
The Ainako Stream originates from springs above Hilo.  
The stream flows between several residential lots in the Ainako
Subdivision, passing under four streets before it terminates in a
boggy area about 1.3 miles from its origin.1/  Although Ainako
Stream typically flows year round, its flow varies from month to
month and year to year.
I.  
The dispute underlying this appeal centers around the
origin of, and rights relating to, water in Branch Stream 1 and
Branch 2/Drainage Channel.  At the time of the contested case
hearing, the existing configuration and character of Branch
Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel were as follows:
Branch Stream 1 originates at a flood control gate on
the Weight property.  As Ainako Stream passes along the east side
of the Weight property, some of its water is diverted to a flood
control gate and through a culvert to form a second watercourse,
referred to as Branch Stream 1.  A diversion dam was built across
1/ In about 1947, the Hilo Sugar Company established the Ainako
Subdivision by subdividing property it owned into residential lots. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
half the width of Ainako Stream, which has the effect of raising
the level of Ainako Stream so that a portion of its waters flows
to the flood control gate.  It appears that without the diversion
dam, no water would flow from Ainako Stream to the flood control
gate, except during times of heavy rain.  Exactly when the
diversion dam and flood control gate were originally constructed
is unknown, but they have been at the same location from at least
the 1950s.  Evidence suggests that they may have been constructed
by Hilo Sugar Company, as the location of the diversion dam and
flood control gate correspond to the location of a temporary
sugar cane flume, used to transport cane down to the mill, which
is shown on a 1924 Hilo Sugar Company field map. 
From the flood control gate on the Weight property,
Branch Stream 1 flows makai through the Weight property, between
the Weight and Henderson properties, then past the Okazaki
property, the Shindo property, and finally the Jung property. 
Branch Stream 1 ends about one-half mile from it origin in the
same boggy area as the Ainako Stream.  Other than at the flood
control gate on the Weight property, there is no connection
between the Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1.
Branch 2/Drainage Channel is located between Ainako
Stream and Branch Stream 1.  Branch 2/Drainage Channel is
typically dry and has water flow only during heavy or prolonged
rains.  Branch 2/Drainage Channel forms part of the boundary
between the Weight and Marsh properties, passes through a culvert
under Kokea Street, and terminates after forming the boundary
between the Okazaki and Purves properties.  At the time of the
contested case hearing, there was no connection between Ainako
Stream and Branch 2/Drainage Channel.
II.
Complainants claimed that Ainako Stream had previously
been connected to Branch Stream 1 at a point downstream of its
current connection at the flood control gate on the Weight
property, and that Ainako Stream had also previously been
connected to Branch 2/Drainage Channel.  Complainants' claims
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
were based primarily on a 1947 subdivision map, entitled "File
Plan 427," that was filed in June 1947 in conjunction with the
creation of the Ainako Subdivision by Hilo Sugar Company.2/   
File Plan 427 depicts a segment connecting Ainako Stream to
Branch Stream 1 which attaches to Ainako Stream about 170 feet
downstream of the current flood control gate on the Weight
property.  This segment is referred to as "Branch 1a."  File Plan
427 also depicts a "side channel" beginning at the current
location of the flood control gate on the Weight property and
ending at the point where Branch 1a connects to Branch Stream 1. 
This side-channel segment follows the path of the current
beginning portion of Branch Stream 1 and is referred to as
"Branch 1b."  File Plan 427 also depicts a solid straight line
from Ainako Stream to Branch 2/Drainage Channel.
A.
The Commission rejected Complainants' claim that the
historical origin of Branch Stream 1 was Branch 1a, and it
determined that the historical origin of Branch Stream 1 was its
current origin at Branch 1b.  The Commission concluded that the
only evidence supporting Complainants' claim that Branch 1a was
the origin of Branch Stream 1 was File Plan 427 and that all
other evidence showed that Branch 1b was the origin of Branch
Stream 1.    
In support of its finding that Branch 1b was the origin
of Branch Stream 1, the Commission cited: (1) the testimony of
several long-time residents and others familiar with Ainako
Stream during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s that the only
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 from at
least 1956 was the flood control gate at the current origin of
Branch 1b, and that they had never seen a connection at the
location of Branch 1a; (2) an aerial photograph taken in 1956, 
2/ The Complainants also relied on a 1954 subdivision map and a 1954 Tax
Map Key map.  But the evidence indicated that these 1954 maps were based on
File Plan 427, and not on any contemporaneous survey.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
showing a connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at
Branch 1b, but no connection at Branch 1a; (3) a 1954
architectural drawing of the Weight house and property showing a
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at Branch
1b, but not at Branch 1a; (4) testimony by Weight and Robert
Scott Henderson (Henderson) that from at least the 1950s, the
location of Branch 1a as depicted on File Plan 427 was a grassy
lawn with no lateral channels or waterways connecting Ainako
Stream with Branch Stream 1; (5) evidence that the location of
the purported connection between Ainako Stream and Branch 1a is
solid bedrock and "water would have had to run literally uphill"
to get over obstructions at that location for water to have
flowed from Ainako Stream to Branch Stream 1 through Branch 1a;
and (6) evidence that there is a solid, unbroken rock wall along
Ainako Stream at the location of the purported connection between
Ainako Stream and Branch 1a, which has been in existence since at
least 1958.
The Commission further found and concluded that the
Branch 1b side-channel and Branch 1a depicted on File Plan 427
could have been part of a single watercourse that originated at
the current origin of Branch 1b.3/  In other words, even if
Branch 1a existed prior to the 1950s, water would have flowed
from Ainako Stream into Branch 1b and then down Branch 1b into
Branch 1a, and not from Ainako Stream into Branch 1a.  The
Commission explained that Branch 1b, rather than Branch 1a, was
the more reasonable historical origin of Branch Stream 1 because:
(1) Branch 1b is further upstream of Ainako Stream than Branch
1a; (2) where Branch 1a purportedly connects to Ainako Stream is
solid bedrock and water would have to run uphill to flow from
Ainako Stream to Branch Stream 1 through Branch 1a; and (3)
Ainako Stream is four feet below the edge of the rock wall at the 
3/ The Commission noted that even if File Plan 427 depicted Branch 1a as
a stream route, it did not reveal whether the purported stream was flowing, or
man-made versus natural.  File Plan 427 also did not show in what direction
the purported stream would be flowing.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
location of the purported connection between Ainako Stream and
Branch 1a.4/  
The Commission concluded that even if there had been a
connection between Branch 1a and Ainako Stream in the past, no
evidence had been presented as to Branch 1a's stream flow. 
Without such stream flow evidence, the Commission ruled that
Complainants lacked an evidentiary basis for their request to
increase the flow in Branch Stream 1.
B.  
With respect to Branch 2/Drainage Channel, the
Commission found and concluded that: (1) Branch 2/Drainage
Channel is a drainage channel, with its origin on land, that has
never been physically connected to Ainako Stream; and (2) that
water does not usually flow in Branch 2/Drainage Channel, but
only flows during periods of rain, when runoff enters it.  The
Commission found that File Plan 427 did not support the
Complainants' claim that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was previously
a branch stream of the Ainako Stream.  The Commission found that
Complainants had misinterpreted a solid straight line on File
Plan 427 running from Ainako Stream to Branch 2/Drainage Channel
as depicting a stream and showing a connection between the two,
when this straight line did not depict a stream, but was a survey
chord marked with survey coordinates that was used to designate
the boundary between subdivided properties. 
In support of its finding that Branch 2/Drainage
Channel was a drainage channel, and not a stream, and that it had
never been connected to Ainako Stream, the Commission cited: (1)
testimony of long-time residents and others familiar with the
area that from at least 1958, there had been no connection
between Ainako Stream and Branch 2/Drainage Channel; and (2)
evidence that Branch 2/Drainage Channel is typically dry and has
4/ The Commission also noted that: (4) the culvert after the flood
control gate at Branch 1b "is placed onto an unaltered pahoehoe lava surface
in a natural low spot through which water would have flowed"; and (5) "without
the rock dam in Ainako Stream, there would be no flow in [Branch Stream 1]
under average conditions, even with the artificially deepened channel carved
into the rock base of the flood control gate[.]"
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
water flow only during heavy or prolonged rains.  The Commission
noted that the only testimony that Branch 2/Drainage Channel had
been a running stream came from the Okazakis, who described it as
"slow running."  The Commission found that this testimony was
consistent with the observations of others that Branch 2/Drainage
Channel only flowed during periods of prolonged or heavy rain.
C.
The Commission found that the Complainants did not own
property along Ainako Stream but only along Branch Stream 1 or
Branch 2/Drainage Channel and thus did not have riparian rights
to use Ainako Stream waters.  The Commission concluded that the
Complainants did not have riparian rights to water flowing in
Branch Stream 1 because such water was obtained from Ainako
Stream though a man-made diversion or through rain runoff to
which riparian rights did not attach.  The Commission found that
the Complainants' request to remove the flood control gate and
divert up to 50 to 100 percent more water from Ainako Stream into
Branch Stream 1 for non-riparian uses would expose Weight to the
risk of flooding and would adversely affect the riparian rights
of residents who lived along Ainako Stream.  The Commission also
concluded that the Complainants did not have riparian rights to
water flowing in Branch 2/Drainage Channel, which the Commission
found was water from rain runoff to which riparian rights did not
attach.  
Pursuant to its regulatory authority over stream
diversions, the Commission ordered Weight to monitor the amount
of water diverted by the flood control gate at the head of Branch
Stream 1 on a monthly basis and to submit a report annually.  It
also required Weight to maintain the height of the flood control
gate in a fixed position at five inches, which was the
approximate level that the old gate had been fixed in place for
decades.5/  
5/ During the contested case hearing, the Applicants presented evidence
that the old gate, which Henderson had replaced in 2009, had been fixed and
rusted in place and could not be moved for decades.      
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
The procedural history of this case is as follows:
Between April and July 2010, Applicants Weight and
Henderson: (1) submitted a late Registration of Stream Diversion
Works and Declaration of Water Use for a rock dam diversion and
flood control gate on Ainako Stream on the Weight property; (2)
filed a second and separate late Registration of Stream Diversion
Works and Declaration of Water Use for ornamental ponds A and B
on Branch Stream 1; (3) filed a Stream Channel Alteration Permit
application for ornamental pond C on Branch Stream 1; and (4)
requested that the registration result in the issuance of
certificates of use.  In July 2010, the Commission staff: (1)
determined that the rock dam diversion and flood control gate on
Ainako Stream on the Weight property were developed and in use
before the 1987 enactment of the State Water Code, were
registered as existing Stream Diversion Works, and did not
require a Stream Diversion Works Permit; and (2) the diversion of
Ainako Stream at Branch Stream 1 and the instream flow were
considered a late Declaration of Existing Stream Diversion Works
and Declaration of Water Use.  The Commission staff also
determined that ornamental pond A pre-dated the Water Code and
was considered a late Declaration of Existing Water Use, but that
ornamental ponds B and C were constructed within the past two
years and could not be considered Declarations of Existing Water
Use for registration purposes.
In December 2010, Complainants filed a
Complaint/Dispute Resolution (Petition) with the Commission
against Applicant Weight, seeking to: (1) revoke the registration
for the flood control gate on the Weight property; (2) remove the
flood control gate and restore the alleged historical Branch 1a
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1; (3) restore
the alleged historical connection between Ainako Stream and
Branch 2/Drainage Channel; and (4) restore free surface water
flow to Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel. 
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In May 2011, Applicants submitted an application for an
after-the-fact Stream Channel Alteration Permit, Stream Diversion
Works Permit, and Petition to Amend Instream Flow Standard with
respect to Branch Stream 1, ornamental ponds B and C along Branch
Stream 1, construction of a rock retaining wall along Branch
Stream 1, replacement of a bridge over Branch Stream 1, and the
patching of leaks in Branch Stream 1.
The Commission decided to hold a contested case
hearing.  Commissioner Lawrence Miike was appointed as the
hearings officer.  Prior to the contested case hearing, the
following persons were admitted as parties: Applicants Weight and
Henderson; Complainants David Jung, Malinee Jung, Dora Okazaki,
Ronald Okazaki, Norman Purves, Maren Hauschidlt-Purves, and Tamae
Shindo; and Intervenors Meltzer, Fred Koehnen, Carolyn Koehnen,
Margaret Oda, Bret Marsh, Martin Eisgruber, and Cheri
Eisgruber.6/  After the contested case hearing, the Hearings
Officer issued his "Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
Law, and Decision and Order" (Proposed Decision and Order).  
On January 23, 2013, the Commission issued its Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order (Decision and
Order), which largely adopted the Proposed Decision and Order. 
In its Decision and Order, the Commission denied the
Complainants' Petition: (1) to revoke the registration for the
flood control gate, to remove the flood control gate, and to
restore the alleged historical connection at Branch 1a between
Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1; (2) to restore the alleged
historical connection between Ainako Stream and Branch 2/Drainage
Channel; and (3) to restore free surface water flow to Branch
Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel.  The Commission further
ruled that Applicants were in violation of Hawaii Revised
6/ Before the start of the contested case hearing, Margaret Oda, Martin
Eisgruber, and Cheri Eisgruber withdrew their applications to intervene. 
Intervenor Bret Marsh also withdrew as a party, but testified at the contested
case hearing as a witness for Applicant Weight.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Statutes (HRS) § 174C-71(3)(A) (2011)7/ and fined them $700 for:
(1) patching leaks in Branch Stream 1; (2) constructing a rock
retaining wall along Branch Stream 1; and (3) constructing
ornamental ponds B and C without obtaining a Stream Channel
Alteration Permit and a Stream Diversion Works Permit from the
Commission.  The Commission, however, approved Applicants' after-
the-fact Stream Channel Alteration Permit and Stream Diversion
Works Permit for patching the leaks, constructing the rock wall,
and constructing ponds B and C.  The approval of these permits
was conditioned on Applicants permanently maintaining the flood
control gate at five inches, its approximate historical level. 
The Commission also required Applicants to monitor the amount of
water diverted by the flood control gate on a monthly basis and
to submit a report annually to the Commission.  The Commission
ruled that Applicants "were not required to submit the petition
to amend the interim instream flow standard for [Branch Stream 1]
(and Ainako Stream), because there have been no change in the
standards since their adoption in October 1988."
DISCUSSION
I.
We first address the issues raised by Appellants in
their appeal.  Appellants contend that the Commission erred in:
(1) determining that the origin of Branch Stream 1 was at its
current point of connection to the Ainako Stream at Branch 1b,
rather than a point further downstream at Branch 1a; (2)
determining that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was a drainage channel
and not a branch stream of Ainako Stream; (3) determining that
Complainants do not have riparian rights; and (4) failing to
revoke Weight's registration for the flood control gate, which 
7/ HRS § 174C-71(3)(A) provides: 
(A) The commission shall require persons to obtain a permit from
the commission prior to undertaking a stream channel alteration;
provided that routine streambed and drainageway maintenance
activities and maintenance of existing facilities are exempt from
obtaining a permit[.]
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Appellants claim was based on Weight's false and misleading
statements.  
At the time relevant to this case, the State Water
Code, HRS Chapter 174C, provided that "[j]udicial review of rules
and orders of the [C]ommission under this chapter shall be
governed by chapter 91."  HRS § 174C-12 (2011).  HRS § 91-14(g)
(2012) sets forth the standards of review for agency decisions
and provided:
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
Findings of fact are reviewable under the clearly
erroneous standard.  In re #Îao Ground Water Management Area
High-Level Source Water Use Permit Applications, 128 Hawai# i 228,
238, 287 P.3d 129, 139 (2012).  Conclusions of law "are freely
reviewable to determine if the agency's decision was in violation
of constitutional or statutory provisions, in excess of statutory
authority or jurisdiction of agency, or affected by other error
of law."  Id.  A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions
of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. 
Id.  When mixed questions of fact and law are presented, "an
appellate court must give deference to the agency's expertise and
experience in the particular field," and "[t]he court should not
substitute its own judgment for that of the agency."  Id.  A
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
finding of fact or a mixed determination of fact and law is
clearly erroneous "when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence
to support the finding or determination, or (2) despite
substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, the
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction
that a mistake has been made."  Id.  (block quote format and
citation omitted).  
Appellate review of agency decisions, such as the
Commission's decision in this case, is "qualified by the
principle that the agency's decision carries a presumption of
validity, and appellant has the heavy burden of making a
convincing showing that the decision is invalid because it is
unjust and unreasonable in its consequences." Id. (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).  "Additionally, courts
decline to consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain
whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or to
review the agency's findings of fact by passing upon the
credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially
the findings of an expert agency dealing with a specialized
field."  In re Hawaiian Electric Company , 81 Hawai #i 459, 465,
918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996).  "[I]t is the province of the trier of
fact, and not an appellate court, to determine the credibility of
witnesses and to assess the weight and effect of the evidence,"
and those determinations, generally, will not be disturbed on
appeal.  State v. Aplaca , 96 Hawai #i 17, 23, 25 P.3d 792, 798
(2001); In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawai# i 443, 454, 979 P.2d
39, 50 (1999).
A.
Appellants contend that the Commission erred in
determining that the origin of Branch Stream 1 was at its current
point of connection to the Ainako Stream at Branch 1b, rather
than a point further downstream at Branch 1a.  We disagree. 
Appellants' contention is based on their arguments that the
Commission erred in assessing the credibility of the witnesses
and the weight of the evidence in making this determination. 
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Applying the applicable standard of review, we conclude that the
Commission did not clearly err in determining that the origin of
Branch Stream 1 was at its current point of connection to the
Ainako Stream at Branch 1b, and not at Branch 1a. 
Applicants presented significant evidence that from at
least 1956, the only connection between Ainako Stream and Branch
Stream 1 was at the flood control gate on the Weight property at
the head of Branch 1b.  Weight's family bought her property in
about 1954, and they moved into a house built on the property in
1956.  Weight testified that the flood control gate at the head
of Branch 1b was already in place when she moved onto the
property in 1956.  The location of the flood control gate is
consistent with the location of a temporary sugar cane flume,
installed to transport sugar cane down to the mill, shown in a
1924 Hilo Sugar Company field map.  Weight testified that at the
time she moved onto the property, the only connection between
Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 was through the flood control
gate on her property.  Weight further testified that there was no
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at a
location further downstream at Branch 1a, as claimed by
Complainants, as there was a solid rock wall along Ainako Stream
and a grassy lawn between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 in
this area.
Weight's testimony was corroborated by other long-time
residents of the Ainako Subdivision and people familiar with the
Ainako Stream, who testified that based on their personal
observations and recollections going back to the 1960s and 1970s,
the only connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 was
at the flood control gate at the head of Branch 1b.  Applicants
also submitted: (1) photographs of the Weight property from 1956
and 1958 showing that at the purported location of Branch 1a,
there was a solid rock wall along Ainako Stream and a grassy lawn
between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1; (2) a 1954
architectural drawing of the Weight house and property showing a
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at Branch
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1b, but no connection at Branch 1a; (3) an aerial photograph
taken in 1956, which was obtained from the archives of C. Brewer
and Company, a successor to Hilo Sugar Company, showing a
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at Branch
1b, but no connection at Branch 1a.8/
Complainants mainly relied on File Plan 427, a 1947
subdivision map which depicted a stream route connecting Ainako
Stream to Branch Stream 1 at Branch 1a.9/  However, the
Commission found that the markings on File Plan 427 did not show
that Branch 1a was the origin of Branch Stream 1.  The markings
on File Plan 427 did not show whether the purported stream at
Branch 1a was flowing, or whether it was man-made versus 
natural.  Nor did File Plan 427 show in what direction any water
in Branch 1a was flowing.  The Commission cited evidence that
where Branch 1a connects to Ainako Stream on File Plan 427, there
is solid bedrock and that water would have to run literally
uphill to flow from Ainako Stream to Branch Stream 1 through
Branch 1a; Ainako Stream is four feet below the edge of the rock
wall, which runs along Ainako Stream, at the location of the
purported connection between Ainako Stream and Branch 1a; and
8/ Appellants claim that the Hearings Officer erred in admitting the
aerial photograph at the contested case hearing because it was disclosed by
Weight after the deadline to submit exhibits.  We disagree.  The Commission's
rules grant the Hearings Officer authority to control the conduct of the
hearing and to "exercise discretion in the admission or rejection of
evidence."  Hawai #i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-167-59(a) (1988).  The
record indicates that the aerial photograph was disclosed late because it had
recently been discovered by a witness from C. Brewer and Company, while he was
archiving the company's aerial photographs.  We conclude that the Hearings
Officer did not abuse his discretion in admitting the aerial photograph. 
Appellants do not specify how they were prejudiced by the late disclosure or
what they could have done if the photograph was disclosed earlier.  In any
event, any error in the Hearings Officer's admission of the aerial photograph
was harmless, as the aerial photograph was cumulative of other evidence
showing the lack of connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at
Branch 1a.
9/ The Complainants also relied on the testimony of Dora Okazaki who
claimed that in the 1990's, she saw a connection between Ainako Stream and
Branch Stream 1 at Branch 1a, which she later observed had been covered up by
landscaping.  However, her testimony was inconsistent and lacking in detail
and was refuted by the testimony of several witness and photographic exhibits
which showed that from at least the 1950's, there was no connection between
Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at Branch 1a.
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Branch 1b is further upstream of Ainako Stream than Branch 1a. 
Based on this and other evidence, the Commission concluded that
Branch 1b and Branch 1a could have been part of a single
watercourse, which originated at the current origin of Branch 1b. 
In other words, that water would have flowed from Ainako Stream
into Branch 1b and then down Branch 1b into Branch 1a.  Based on
the evidence presented, we conclude that the Commission did not
clearly err in finding that the more reasonable historical origin
for Branch Stream 1 was its current point of connection to Ainako
Stream at the flood control gate at the head of Branch 1b, rather
than a connection to Ainako Stream at Branch 1a.10/
B. 
Appellants' contention that the Commission erred in
determining that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was a drainage channel
and not a branch stream of Ainako Stream is without merit.  The
Commission found that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was a drainage
channel, with its origin on land, that has never been physically
connected to Ainako Stream.  We conclude that the Commission did
not clearly err in making this determination.  
Applicants presented significant evidence to support
the Commission's determination.  This included: (1) testimony of 
long-time residents and people familiar with the Ainako Stream
who testified that based on their personal observations and
recollections dating back to the 1950s, there was no connection
between Ainako Stream and Branch 2/Drainage Channel; (2) evidence
that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was a drainage ditch that was
nearly always dry and only has water flow during heavy or
prolonged rains; and (3) a 1954 architectural drawing of the
Weight house and property, photographs of the Weight property
from 1956 and 1958, and a 1956 aerial photograph that all showed
10/ The Commission further concluded that even if there had been a
historical connection between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 through Branch
1a, this would not entitle Complainants to the relief they requested, which
was to increase the flow from Ainako Stream into Branch Stream 1.  The
Commission noted that Complainants had not presented any evidence of the
historical stream flow in Branch 1a, such as its flow pattern (perennial,
intermittent, or drainage) or the amount of the flow.  Therefore, there was no
evidentiary basis to support or quantify their request for increased flow.     
   
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
there was no connection between Ainako Stream and Branch
2/Drainage Channel.
Complainants again relied primarily on File Plan 427 to
support their claim that Branch 2/Drainage Channel was a branch
stream of Ainako Stream.  However, the Commission found that
Complainants' reliance on File Plan 427 was misplaced because a
straight line marking on File Plan 427, which Complainants
interpreted as depicting a direct connection between Ainako
Stream and Branch 2/Drainage Channel, was in fact a survey chord,
which marked the boundary between two lots.  The Commission's
reading of the straight-line marking on File Plan 427 as a survey
chord, and not a stream route, was supported by the testimony of
a map expert, the fact that survey coordinates were written next
to the line, and the fact that the line itself was straight,
which is not the normal course of a natural stream.  We conclude
that the Commission did not err in its interpretation of the
straight-line marking on File Plan 427 as a survey chord and not
a stream route.  As interpreted by the Commission, File Plan 427
actually supports the Applicants' position, rather than
Complainants' position, because it indicates that there was no
connection between Ainako Stream and Branch 2/Drainage Channel
when the Ainako Subdivision was established.
C.
Appellants argue that the Commission erred in
concluding that Complainants had no riparian rights with respect
to the flows in Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel.11/ 
11/ We note that Intervenor Meltzer, whose application to be a party to
the contested case hearing stated objectives similar to the Complainants, is
one of the Appellants.  Unlike the other Appellants, Meltzer did not own
property along either Branch Stream 1 or Branch 2/Drainage Channel, and thus
he could not assert riparian rights with respect to Branch Stream 1 or Branch
2/Drainage Channel.  Meltzer owned property along Ainako Stream, but he did
not submit written testimony for, testify at, or participate in the contested
case hearing, and he does not appear to have asserted riparian rights with
respect to Ainako Stream.  The Commission found that based on Meltzer's stated
objectives in applying to be a party, he would have supported the transport of
additional Ainako Stream waters to Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage
Channel.  The Commission, however, determined that Meltzer's rights as a
riparian landowner with respect to Ainako Stream did not include the right to
transport Ainako Stream waters to non-riparian lands, a determination that
Appellants do not challenge on appeal.       
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Appellants' claim that Complainants have riparian rights with
respect to Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel is
founded on Appellants' contentions that Branch 1a was the natural
and historical origin for Branch Stream 1 and that Branch
2/Drainage Channel was connected to, and was a branch stream of,
Ainako Stream.  However, we have upheld the findings of the
Commission rejecting both of these contentions, and therefore,
these contentions do not support Appellants' claim that
Complainants have riparian rights.  
Appellants also claim that Complainants would be
entitled to riparian rights with respect to Branch Stream 1 if
Branch Stream 1 was a natural branch stream of Ainako Stream
through Branch 1b.  On appeal, Appellants challenge the
Commission's determination that Branch Stream 1 is not a natural
branch stream of Ainako Stream through Branch 1b because without
the diversion dam before the flood control gate, no water would
flow from Ainako Stream to Branch Stream 1 through Branch 1b,
when Ainako Stream is at its typical water level.  Applicants,
however, presented substantial evidence that the diversion dam
raised the level of Ainako Stream at a point above the flood
control gate, and that without the diversion dam, no water would
flow from Ainako Stream into Branch Stream 1 through Branch 1b
under normal conditions.12/  We conclude that the Commission did
not clearly err in finding that without the diversion dam, water
would not flow from Ainako Stream into Branch Stream 1 under
normal conditions.
The Commission also found that the relief sought by
Complainants, which was to increase the flow from Ainako Stream
into Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel, would 
12/ The Applicants also presented evidence that the diversion from Ainako
Stream into Branch Stream 1 through Branch 1b may have been constructed by
Hilo Sugar Company for a temporary sugar cane flume long before the Ainako
Subdivision was established.  Applicants introduced a 1924 Hilo Sugar Company
field map which showed a temporary sugar cane flume that began in the current
location of the diversion dam and flood control gate.
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
negatively affect the interests of landowners Koehnen, Marsh, and
Weight.  The Commission found that these landowners owned
property along Ainako Stream and thus had riparian rights to
Ainako Stream waters.  
The Complainants sought to increase the flow into
Branch Stream 1 by restoring the alleged historical connection
between Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1 at Branch 1a and by
removing the flood control gate at the head of Branch 1b.  The
Complainants sought to increase the flow into Branch 2/Drainage
Channel by restoring its alleged historical connection to Ainako
Stream.
Koehnen, Marsh, and Weight opposed the changes
requested by Complainants.  Koehnen, who relied on water flow
from the Ainako Stream to run a hydroelectric plant he built
along the stream the 1980s, opposed any additional diversion from
Ainako Stream that would reduce its flow.  Marsh opposed the
modification of the flood control levees along the Ainako Stream
that would be required to connect Ainako Stream to Branch Stream
1 through Branch 1a and to connect Ainako Stream to Branch
2/Drainage Channel.  He feared that modification of the flood
control levees along Ainako Stream would expose his property to
extreme flooding and erosion.  Weight opposed the removal of the
flood control gate because she feared it would expose her
property to flooding during heavy rains.  The Commission found
that without the flood control gate, Weight and other property
owners downstream on Branch Stream 1, including the Complainants,
are at risk for flooding.
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that Complainants
have failed to demonstrate that the Commission erred in
determining that they lacked riparian rights with respect to the
flows in Branch Stream 1 and Branch 2/Drainage Channel and in
denying their request for increased flow into Branch Stream 1 and
Branch 2/Drainage Channel.
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
D.
Appellants contend that the Commission erred in 
failing to revoke Weight's registration for the flood control
gate, which Appellants claim was based on Weight's false and
misleading statements.  Appellants' claim that Weight's
registration for the flood control gate should be revoked because
she made false and misleading statements in obtaining the
registration was thoroughly litigated at the contested case
hearing.  After evaluating the conflicting evidence presented by
the parties, the Commission denied Complainants' Petition to
revoke Weight's registration for the flood control gate.  We
conclude that Appellants have failed to provide a valid basis for
overturning the Commission's decision on this issue.   
II.
On cross-appeal, Weight contends that the Commission
erred in: (1) requiring Weight to conduct monthly monitoring and
to submit annual reports to the Commission on the amount of water
diverted by the flood control gate; and (2) requiring Weight to
keep the flood control gate in a fixed position at five inches
without permitting her to adjust the gate for purposes of
maintenance and repairs or to protect against flooding.  We
affirm the Commission's decisions challenged by Weight.
A.
The Commission did not err in requiring Weight to
monitor and report the amount of water diverted from Ainako
Stream into Branch Stream 1 by the flood control gate.  The
Commission registered the rock dam diversion and flood control
gate at the head of Branch 1b, which predated the State Water
Code, as an existing Stream Diversion Works.  Hawai #i
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-168-7 (1988) provides, in
relevant part:
(a) The owner or operator of any well or stream
diversion works from which water is being used shall provide
and maintain an approved meter or other appropriate device
or means for measuring and reporting total water usage on a
monthly (calendar or work schedule) basis. . . .
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(b) The owner or operator of any well or stream
diversion works or battery of such water sources shall file
a report of total water usage on a regular monthly (calendar
or work schedule) basis to the commission on forms provided
by the commission on or before the end of the month
following the month for which water usage is to be reported.
. . .
(c) At the discretion of the commission, requirements
for measuring and reporting monthly water usage may be
lessened, modified, or exempted for owners or operators of
small, individual wells or stream diversion works.  The
lessening, modification, or exemption of such requirements
shall be approved, disapproved, or otherwise decided by the
commission on a case-by-case basis.
(Emphasis added).
The Commission was authorized under HAR § 13-168-7 to
impose the monitoring and reporting requirements for water
diverted by the flood control gate and flowing into Branch Stream
1.  Weight contends that the monitoring and reporting
requirements were unduly onerous and unnecessary.  However,
Weight had been monitoring the water flow from the flood control
gate into Branch Stream 1 for two years prior to the contested
case hearing, and she does not demonstrate that these
requirements are unduly onerous.  
The current flood control gate is adjustable, and a
significant point of controversy between the Complainants and
Applicants was the Complainants' allegation that Weight had been
manipulating the height of the flood control gate in a manner
that adversely affected the Complainants.  In light of this
controversy, it was reasonable for the Commission to impose the
monitoring and reporting requirements on Weight.  The monitoring
and reporting requirements were also necessary to ensure that
Weight complies with the condition of her after-the-fact Stream
Channel Alteration Permit and Diversion Works Permit that
requires her to maintain the flood control gate at a fixed level
of five inches.  Under these circumstances, we conclude that the
Commission did not abuse its discretion in imposing the
monitoring and reporting requirements on Weight.
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.
The Proposed Decision and Order by the Hearings Officer
imposed the condition, which was adopted by the Commission in its
Decision and Order, that "the adjustable flood control gate at
the diversion on Ainako Stream into [Branch Stream 1] shall be
set at five inches, to approximate the opening of the old gate in
its fixed position of three and one-half inches with a jagged
bottom."13/  However, in its Decision and Order, the Commission
did not adopt the Hearings Officer's additional proposal that
"Applicants may adjust the gate for maintenance and repairs of
their properties in and along [Branch Stream 1], and to lower the
gate in periods of heavy rain if flows from Ainako Stream
threaten to exacerbate flooding from runoff from [Branch Stream
1's] banks."  Weight contends that the Commission erred in
failing to adopt this aspect of the Hearings Officer's proposal. 
We disagree.
As noted, a significant point of controversy between
the Complainants and Applicants was the Complainants' allegation
that Weight had been manipulating the height of the flood control
gate to suit her purposes and to their detriment.  Complainants
sought the removal of the flood control gate in its entirety and
vigorously opposed granting Weight any discretion to control the
height of the gate.  
In support of her application to register the flood
control gate as an existing Stream Diversion Works and in
opposing Complainants' Petition, Weight represented that the
current adjustable flood control gate was installed and its level
was set to replicate the historic flood control gate, which had
been stuck at the same level for decades.  Weight represented
that the historic flood control gate may have existed in or
before 1924 as a device to control water flowing into Hilo Sugar
Company's temporary flume systems; that the historic flood
13/ In its Decision and Order, the Commission approved the Applicants'
after-the-fact Stream Channel Alteration Permit and Diversion Works Permit
subject to this condition. 
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
control gate had been frozen in place for decades, since at least
the 1960s, at a level of 3.5 to 4 inches, but also with a jagged
or rusted bottom making the gap larger; that the new adjustable
flood control gate installed in 2009 was set with a five-inch gap
to approximate the fixed setting of the historic gate; that she
sought to maintain the status quo with respect to the proportion
of water that had been diverted from Ainako Stream into Branch
Stream 1 by the historic flood control gate; and that she would
negotiate any alteration in the proportion of water diverted into
Branch Stream 1 with the Commission and other property owners
along Ainako Stream and Branch Stream 1.  Applicants also
represented that with the flood control gate set at its
historical gap, the Branch Stream 1 channel fills to nearly an
overflowing level during periods of high storm flow, "but does
not create any conditions conducive to flooding hazzard."
In addition, despite Weight's representation that she
never changed the height of the flood control gate, Complainants
presented evidence at the contested case hearing that the height
of the adjustable flood control gate had been changed, and Weight
subsequently admitted doing so on a few occasions.  Intervenors
Koehnen and Marsh, who own property along Ainako Stream and
generally supported the Applicants' positions, indicated that
they favored keeping the flood control gate at its historical
level.  As noted by the Commission, the flood control gate was
registered as an existing Stream Diversion Works, and if Weight
wishes to maintain the flood control gate as an adjustable gate,
she would need to obtain a Stream Diversion Works Permit.  Thus,
it appears that Weight could seek a permit that would give her
the authority to adjust the height of the flood control gate.
Under these circumstances, we cannot say that the
Commission abused its discretion in fixing the height of the
flood control gate at five inches and in failing to adopt the
Hearings Officer's proposal giving Weight authority to adjust the
height of the gate for certain purposes.
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Commission's
Decision and Order.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, October 31, 2017. #
On the briefs:
John S. Carroll
and
Christopher A. Dias
for David Jung, M.D., Malinee 
Jung, Dora Okazaki, Ronald 
Okazaki, Norman Purves, Maren 
Hauschidlt-Purves, Tamae Shindo 
and Gary Meltzer,
Appellants/Cross-Appellees.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Paul Alston
Thomas E.Bush
Mei-Fei Kuo
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Leslie Aina Weight,
Appellee/Cross-Appellant.
Linda L.W. Chow
Cindy Y. Young
Deputy Attorneys General
for Commission on Water
Resource Management,
Appellee.
25