FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
CIRILO POGOSO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs.
 
JEFF SARAE and CITY & COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS, CORPORATIONS,
and/or OTHER ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000402
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1172-06(RAN))

 
SEPTEMBER 22, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FOLEY and REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Cirilo Pogoso (Pogoso) filed a

 
lawsuit arising out of an automobile accident against Defendant-
Appellee Jeff Sarae (Sarae), a Honolulu Police Department
 officer, and his employer, Defendant-Appellee City and County of
 Honolulu (City). Sarae was on duty and pursuing another vehicle
 to issue a traffic citation when the accident occurred. Pogoso's
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complaint alleged that the accident was caused by Sarae's
 
negligence, which included Sarae's "reckless and careless"
 operation of his vehicle.
 
Sarae and the City (collectively, Defendants) filed a
 
motion for summary judgment, arguing the Sarae was "entitled to
 immunity protection under the doctrine of conditional privilege." 
If applicable, this doctrine would shield Sarae from liability
 unless his actions were "motivated by malice and not by an
 otherwise proper purpose." Towse v. State, 64 Haw. 624, 632, 647
 
P.2d 696, 702 (1982). The Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court)  granted Defendants' motion based on its
conclusion that the doctrine of conditional privilege applied and
 there was no basis to find that Sarae had acted with malice. 
On appeal, Pogoso argues, among other things, that the
 
Circuit Court erred in applying the common law doctrine of
 conditional privilege because Sarae was subject to a duty of care
 prescribed by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-26 (2007)
 under the circumstances of this case. Pogoso further argues that
 there were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether
 Sarae had satisfied his statutory duty of care, and therefore,
 the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in
 Defendants' favor.
 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in applying the doctrine of conditional privilege because
 the Legislature's enactment of HRS § 291C-26 takes precedence
 over any common law conditional privilege that might otherwise
 apply to Sarae's conduct in this case. HRS § 291C-26 applies to
 drivers of "authorized emergency vehicle[s,]" which includes a
 police officer, like Sarae, driving a police car "when in the
 pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law[.]" HRS 
§ 291C-26(a). HRS § 291C-26 grants such drivers a privilege to
 disregard certain traffic laws, such as the prohibition against
 speeding, running a red light, or making an improper turn. HRS 
1The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
2
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 291C-26(b). However, HRS § 291C-26 further provides that these
 
exemptions "shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
 emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
 safety of all persons, nor . . . protect the driver from the
 consequences of the driver's reckless disregard for the safety of
 others." HRS § 291C-26(d). 
We construe HRS § 291C-26(d) to impose a negligence
 
duty of care, but a specialized one that must take into account
 the privilege granted to an emergency vehicle driver to disregard
 certain traffic laws, the obligation of other motorists to yield
 the right-of-way, and the nature of the emergency to which the
 driver is responding. We further conclude that Pogoso raised
 genuine issues of material fact as to whether Sarae could be
 found liable under this specialized negligence standard. We
 therefore vacate the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in
 favor of Defendants and remand the case for further proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Pogoso's lawsuit was based on a traffic accident that
 
occurred at the intersection of Paki and Kapahulu Avenues at
 approximately 12:25 a.m. At this intersection, Paki Avenue has
 
two westbound lanes and a single eastbound lane, and there are
 
traffic lights at the intersection. Pogoso was stopped in his
 car at the intersection in the left westbound lane of Paki
 Avenue. Another motorist, Evan Anderson (Anderson), was behind
 Pogoso waiting to make a left turn onto Kapahulu Avenue. 
Anderson drove around Pogoso into the right lane and made a left
 
turn in front of Pogoso's car onto Kapahulu Avenue. 
Sarae, who was on duty in a marked blue and white
 
patrol car, was headed westbound on Paki Avenue. Sarae saw
 
Pogoso stopped at a red light, with Anderson directly behind
 Pogoso, in the left westbound lane of Paki Avenue. Sarae
 observed Anderson make "an unsafe lane change" from the left lane
 to the right lane to go around Pogoso, and then make an improper
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
left turn onto Kapahulu Avenue. Sarae pursued Anderson from the
 
right westbound lane of Paki Avenue to issue him a traffic
 citation. While Sarae was turning left in front of Pogoso in
 pursuit of Anderson, Sarae's patrol car and Pogoso's vehicle
 collided.
 
II.
 
Pogoso filed a Complaint in Circuit Court against
 
Defendants Sarae and the City arising out of this incident. In
 the Complaint, Pogoso alleged that he was involved in a traffic
 accident with Sarae that was caused by Sarae's "negligent acts
 and/or omissions," which included Sarae's "reckless and careless"
 operation of his motor vehicle. Pogoso asserted that as a result
 of Sarae's negligent acts and omissions, Pogoso had sustained
 personal injuries and other damages for which he sought recovery.
 
Defendants filed a motion for summary judgment on
 
Pogoso's Complaint, arguing that Sarae was entitled to immunity
 under the doctrine of conditional privilege. Defendants asserted
 that under this doctrine, Sarae was immune from liability unless
 Pogoso could show by clear and convincing evidence that Sarae (1)
 was motivated by actual malice and (2) that he acted for an
 improper purpose.
2 In support of their motion, Defendants
 
submitted Sarae's declaration in which he stated that prior to
 the accident, he did not know Pogoso or Anderson and that he did
 not perform his duties "for any malicious or improper purpose." 
Defendants argued that because there was no genuine issue of
 material fact that Sarae had not acted with malice and for an
 improper purpose, Sarae was immune from liability based on his
 claim of conditional privilege. Defendants further argued that
 
2Defendants inaccurately described the requirements for the conditional
privilege doctrine in their motion for summary judgment and in their brief on
appeal by contending that it requires proof of (1) actual malice and (2) an
improper purpose as two separate elements which must both be proven. The
 conditional privilege doctrine requires proof that the government official was
"motivated by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose." Towse, 64 Haw.
 
at 632, 647 P.2d at 702. The lack of a proper purpose is part of the
definition of malice, and proof of an improper purpose is not an additional
element besides malice that must separately be proven.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if Sarae was immune from liability, then the City could not be
 
held vicariously liable for his acts.
 
In opposing Defendants' motion for summary judgment,
 
Pogoso argued that HRS § 291C-26(d), HRS § 291C-65(b) (2007), and
 Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 15-4.4(c) (1990)
 established the standard of care owed by Sarae under the
 circumstances of this case. Pogoso asserted that these
 legislative enactments superceded any conditional privilege that
 might otherwise apply and entitled him to recover upon a showing
 of negligence. Pogoso argued that there were genuine issues of
 fact regarding whether Sarae had met the applicable standard of
 care which precluded the Circuit Court from granting summary
 judgment in favor of Defendants.
 
III.
 
In their summary judgment pleadings, the parties
 
presented evidence that provided conflicting versions of the
 circumstances that caused the accident. During the hearing on
 Defendants' motion for summary judgment, the Circuit Court
 indicated that there appeared to be "inconsistencies in the
 individuals' versions or their perspective as to what happened"
 that would normally preclude summary judgment. However, the
 Circuit Court concluded that Sarae was entitled to qualified
 immunity under the conditional privilege doctrine. Based on its
 determination that Pogoso had failed to raise a genuine issue of
 material fact to contravene Sarae's declaration that Sarae was
 not motivated by malice, the Circuit Court granted Defendants'
 motion for summary judgment. The Circuit Court entered its
 Judgment on March 21, 2012, in favor of Defendants and against
 Pogoso as to Pogoso's Complaint, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Pogoso argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting summary judgment based on the doctrine of conditional
 privilege. Pogoso argues that provisions of the Statewide
 Traffic Code and the Traffic Code of the City and County of
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Honolulu, HRS § 291C-26(d), HRS § 291C-65(b), and ROH 15-4.4(c), 
establish the applicable duty of care owed by Sarae under the
 circumstances of this case and supercede the common law doctrine
 of conditional privilege. He further argues that there were
 genuine issues of material fact under the negligence duty of care
 prescribed by these provisions which preclude summary judgment.
 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in applying the doctrine of conditional privilege in
 granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants. We hold that
 HRS § 291C-26 takes precedence over any conditional privilege
 that might otherwise apply and that HRS § 291C-26(d) establishes
 the duty of care owed by Sarae under the circumstances of this
 case. We construe HRS § 291C-26(d) as imposing a specialized
 negligence standard that imposes a duty of reasonable care, but
 one that must take into account the privilege granted under HRS 
§ 291C-26(b) to an emergency vehicle driver to disregard certain
 traffic laws, the obligation of other motorists to yield the
 right-of-way, and the nature of the emergency to which the driver
 is responding. In other words, a negligence standard that does
 not treat the emergency vehicle driver the same as an ordinary
 motorist, but focuses on what a reasonably prudent emergency
 vehicle driver would have done under the circumstances presented. 
We conclude that Pogoso raised genuine issues of material fact as
 to whether Sarae could be found liable under this standard. We
 therefore vacate the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment
 and remand the case for further proceedings.
 I.
 
The Circuit Court agreed with Defendants that the
 
common law doctrine of conditional privilege protected Sarae from
 liability unless Pogoso could demonstrate that Sarae acted with
 malice. We conclude that in doing so, the Circuit Court erred.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has recognized and 
established a qualified immunity for "non-judicial governmental officials, when acting in the performance of their public duty," 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which is referred to as a conditional privilege. Towse, 64 Haw. 
at 631, 647 P.2d at 702. This conditional privilege "effectively 
shields the official from liability" unless the injured party can demonstrate by clear and convincing proof "that the official had been motivated by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose." Id. at 631-32, 647 P.2d at 702. The supreme court has indicated that for non-defamation cases, the term "malice" for purposes of the conditional privilege should be defined "in its ordinary and ususal sense" to mean "'the intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful act,' 'reckless disregard of the law or of a person's legal rights,' and 'ill will; wickedness of heart.'" See Awakuni v. Awana, 115 Hawai
'i 126, 141, 165 P.3d 
1027, 1042 (2007) (brackets omitted) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 977 (8th ed. 2004)).
3 This court has applied the 
conditional privilege in lawsuits alleging certain tortious conduct filed against police officers. See Woodard v. Tabanara, 
No. 30096, 2011 WL 2611288, at *2-3 (Hawai
'i App. June 30, 2011) 
(SDO); Sanchez v. County of Kaua 'i, No. CAAP-14-0000903, 2015 WL 
4546861 (Hawai 'i App. July 28, 2015) (Mem.). 
However, the conditional privilege is a common law 
doctrine. The law is clear that legislative enactments have priority over and supercede the common law. In re Water Use 
Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 130, 9 P.3d 409, 442 (2000) 
("The legislature may, subject to the constitution, modify or abrogate common law rules by statute."); Fujioka v. Kam, 55 Haw. 7, 10, 514 P.2d 568, 570 (1973) ("[O]ur state legislature may, by 
3
In Awakuni, the Hawai' i Supreme Court recognized that the "reasonable
person" test for determining malice, which was applied in Towse, "clearly was
intended for purposes of analyzing the [conditional] privilege in a claim fordefamation[.]" Awakuni, 115 Hawai' i at 141, 165 P.3d at 1042. The supreme
court in Awakuni concluded that it had adopted the "reasonable person" testfor malice "for use in the defamation context[,]" and it did not apply thattest in Awakuni, which was a non-defamation case. Id. Based on Awakuni
, this
court and the United States District Court for the District of Hawai' i have 
used the definition of malice in "its ordinary and usual sense" in determiningwhether the conditional privilege applied in non-defamation cases. 
See 
Sanchez v. County of Kaua' i, 
CAAP-14-0000903, 2015 WL 4546861, at *3 (Hawai' i 
App. Jul. 28, 2015); Wereb v. Maui County, 727 F. Supp. 2d 898, 924 (D. Haw.2010). 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislative act, change or entirely abrogate common law rules
 
through its exercise of the legislative power under the Hawaii

 
State Constitution[.]"); Saranillio v. Silva, 78 Hawai 'i 1, 13, 
889 P.2d 685, 697 (1995) ("[W]e are constrained to give effect to
 the plain meaning of the statute [that is consistent with the 
legislative purpose], even if it results in the derogation of a
 common law rule.").
 
We conclude that HRS § 291C-26 supercedes and takes
 
precedence over any conditional privilege that might otherwise
 apply to Sarae and that HRS § 291C-26 establishes the duty of
 care owed by Sarae under the circumstances of this case.
4
    
In enacting HRS § 291C-26, the Legislature clearly intended to

 
establish standards that govern and control the activities of
 emergency vehicle drivers, including the conduct engaged in by
 
5
Sarae in this case. HRS 291C-26  applies, in relevant part, to
4We assume, without deciding, that in the absence of legislative
enactments, the conditional privilege doctrine would be applicable to Sarae's
conduct in this case. We note, however, that even where there is nocontrolling legislative enactment, "[a] non-judicial government official isnot afforded a [conditional] privilege in all cases[,]" but must be "acting inthe performance of [his or her] public duty" and "must fall within theparameters of Barr v. Mateo, [360 U.S. 564, 573-74 (1959)][.]" Towse, 64 Haw.
at 631 & n.9, 647 P.2d at 702 & n.9 (internal quotation marks and citationomitted). For example, in Slingluff v. State, 131 Hawai' i 239, 244-50, 317
P.3d 683, 688-94 (App. 2013), we held that prison doctors employed by thegovernment are not shielded from medical malpractice claims by the conditionalprivilege doctrine because the rationale for establishing the privilege didnot justify extending it to this situation. In deciding this case, we neednot determine the scope of the conditional privilege doctrine. 
5 HRS § 291C-26, entitled "Authorized emergency vehicles," provides:
 
(a) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an
actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but
not upon returning from a fire alarm and vehicles used by police
officers while in the performance of a police function, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to
the conditions herein stated.
 
(b)	 The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
 
(1) 	Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of this
chapter;
 
(2)	 Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but
only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation;
 
(continued...)
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[t]he driver of an authorized emergency vehicle," which includes
 
6
 police vehicles, "when responding to an emergency call or when
in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law[.]" 
HRS § 291C-26(a). The statute grants such emergency vehicle
 drivers the privilege to disregard certain traffic laws, such as
 those prohibiting speeding and running a red light, and as
 relevant to Sarae's conduct, laws "governing direction of
 movement or turning in specified directions[.]" HRS § 291C­26(b). 
While exempting these drivers from the requirements of

 
certain traffic laws, HRS § 291C-26 further states that its
 provisions "shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
 emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
 safety of all persons, nor shall [the] provisions protect the
 
5(...continued)
(3) Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver
does not endanger life or property; 
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movementor turning in specified directions; 
(5) Drive on the shoulder and median of roadways; and 
(6) Drive in controlled-access roadways, highways, andfacilities. 
(c) The exemptions granted in subsection (b) to an
authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the vehicle is
making use of authorized audible and visual signals, except as
otherwise provided by county ordinance. This subsection shall not
 apply to police vehicles.
 
(d) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall those provisions
protect the driver from the consequences of the driver's reckless
disregard for the safety of others.
 
6At the time relevant to this case, the term "authorized emergency
vehicle" was defined to include 
fire department vehicles, police vehicles, ambulances, ocean
safety vehicles, public safety law enforcement vehicles, and
conservation and resources enforcement vehicles authorized and
 approved pursuant to section 291-31.5 that are publicly owned and
other publicly or privately owned vehicles designated as such by a
county council.
 
HRS § 291C-1 (2007).
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
driver from the consequences of the driver's reckless disregard
 
for the safety of others." HRS § 291C-26(d). Because HRS 
§ 291C-26 evinces the Legislature's clear purpose to establish
 the standards applicable to Sarae's conduct in this case, HRS 
§ 291C-26 trumps any common law conditional privilege that would
 otherwise apply. See Morais v. Yee, 648 A.2d 405, 410 (Vt. 1994)
 
(holding that where the Vermont Legislature enacted a statute
 similar to HRS § 291C-26, which established a statutory duty and
 liability for a breach of that duty for drivers of authorized
 emergency vehicles, the judicially created doctrine of qualified
 immunity did not apply). Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in
 applying the doctrine of conditional privilege, instead of the
 standards set forth in HRS § 291C-26, in granting summary
 judgment in favor of Defendants. 
II.
 
A.
 
While the Legislature's intent to establish the duty of
 
care owed by authorized emergency vehicle drivers is clear, the
 duty of care actually imposed is subject to debate and requires
 us to engage in statutory construction. When construing a
 statute,
 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to
the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute itself.
And we must read statutory language in the context of the
entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with
 its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a
statute, an ambiguity exists. . . .
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, "[t]he meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, with
which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may be
compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.
Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids in
determining legislative intent. One avenue is the use of
 legislative history as an interpretive tool."
 
This court may also consider "[t]he reason and spirit of the
law, and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it
. . . to discover its true meaning."
 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lingle v. Hawai 'i Gov't Emps. Ass'n, 107 Hawai 'i 178, 183, 111 
P.3d 587, 592 (2005) (ellipsis points and brackets in original) 
(quoting Guth v. Freeland, 96 Hawai 'i 147, 150, 28 P.3d 982, 985 
(2001)). "Laws in pari materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each other." HRS § 1–16 (2009). 
B.
 
Having determined that HRS § 291C-26 establishes the
 
duty of care owed by Sarae under the circumstances of this case,
 we turn to the question of what is the duty of care prescribed by
 the statute. On this question, the statute is not a model of
 clarity. HRS § 291C-26(d) provides:
 
The foregoing provisions [of HRS § 291C-26 (which provide
exemptions from certain traffic laws)] shall not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor
shall those provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of the driver's reckless disregard for the
safety of others.
 
(Emphases added). Thus the statute refers to both (1) "the duty
 
to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons" and (2)
 the absence of protection for the "reckless disregard for the
 safety of others." 
HRS § 291C-26 is part of Hawai
'i's Statewide Traffic 
Code and adopted language from the Uniform Vehicle Code.7 
Numerous other states that, like Hawai 'i, adopted traffic codes 
which incorporated provisions from the Uniform Vehicle Code enacted statutes with language nearly identical or very similar to HRS § 291C-26(d). Courts in other states have struggled with the question of exactly what standard of care is imposed by their statute. These courts have come to a variety of conclusions, with the major division being between a negligence standard based 
7
Hawai'i adopted a statewide traffic code, which incorporated provisions
from the Uniform Vehicle Code, to bring Hawai' i in conformance with the 
Federal Highway Safety Program Standard on Codes and Laws. See State v. Chen, 
77 Hawai' i 329, 337, 884 P.2d 392, 400 (App. 1994) (citing H. Stand. Comm.
Rep. No. 157, in 1971 House Journal, at 742; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 685, in
1971 Senate Journal, at 1102). The legislative history of HRS § 291C-26 doesnot provide any significant insight on how to interpret HRS § 291C-26(d). 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on the "due regard" language and a recklessness standard based on
 
the "reckless disregard" language.
 
A significant number of states have construed their
 
statute to impose a negligence standard of care. E.g., City of
 
Baltimore v. Fire Ins. Salvage Corps, 148 A.2d 444, 446-48 (Md.
 1959); Stenberg v. Neel, 613 P.2d 1007, 1009-10 (Mont. 1980);
 Mason v. Bitton, 534 P.2d 1360, 1362-64 (Wash. 1975) (en banc);
 City of Little Rock v. Weber, 767 S.W.2d 529, 532-33 (Ark. 1989); 
Day v. State ex rel. Utah Dep't. of Public Safety, 980 P.2d 1171,
 1176-81 (Utah 1999); see also Brummett v. County of Sacremento,
 582 P.2d 952, 955-56 (Cal. 1978). On the other hand, a
 significant number of states have also construed their statute to
 impose a recklessness standard of care. E.g., Saarinen v. Kerr,
 
644 N.E.2d 988, 990-93 (N.Y. 1994); Rochon v. State, 862 A.2d
 801, 803-06 (Vt. 2004); City of Amarillo v. Martin, 971 S.W.2d
 426, 428-32 (Tex. 1998); Robbins v. City of Wichita, 172 P.3d
 1187, 1193, 1195-98 (Kan. 2007). 
The basic policy considerations associated with the
 
choice between the negligence and recklessness standards are: (1)
 the need to safeguard the public and compensate victims, 
emphasized by those who favor the negligence standard; and (2)
 the need to prevent the risk of civil liability from deterring
 emergency personnel and police officers from acting decisively
 and resolutely in performing their jobs, emphasized by those who
 favor the recklessness standard. The policy choice is one that
 is ultimately controlled by the Legislature, which may amend the
 statute if it disagrees with our interpretation of HRS § 291C­26(d).
 
C. 
We construe HRS § 291C-26(d) to impose a negligence
 
standard of care, joining a significant number of states that
 have reached this result. See Martin, 971 S.W.2d at 429 (stating
 
that "most courts have interpreted provisions [with language like
 HRS § 291C-26(d)] to impose liability for negligence"). We
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that this interpretation is the most natural reading of
 
the statutory language, as the phrase "due regard" is typically
 construed as imposing a negligence standard. See Fire Ins.
 
Salvage, 148 A.2d at 447; Stenberg, 613 P.2d at 1009-10; Day, 980
 P.2d at 1176-77; Weber, 767 S.W.2d at 532-33; Maple v. City of
 Omaha, 384 N.W.2d 254, 261-62 (Neb. 1986).
8
 
The negligence standard is more compatible than the
 
recklessness standard with the Legislature's emphasis on safety
 concerns in granting emergency vehicle drivers a limited
 privilege to disregard certain traffic laws. For example, while
 HRS § 291C-26 grants the driver of an emergency vehicle the
 privilege to "[e]xceed the maximum speed limits[,]" the statute
 restricts that privilege by only allowing it to be used "so long
 as the driver does not endanger life or property[.]" HRS § 291C­26(b)(3). Similarly, the emergency vehicle driver's privilege to
 "[p]roceed past a red stop signal or stop sign," can only be
 exercised "after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
 operation[.]" HRS § 291C-26(b)(2). In addition, HRS § 291C-65,
9
 
a related provision of the Statewide Traffic Code, requires other
 
8Indeed, even courts that have ultimately construed their statute to
impose a recklessness standard have indicated (by their analysis) that the
phrase "due regard" is typically construed to impose a negligence standard.
See Saarinen, 644 N.E.2d at 991-92; Rochon, 862 A.2d at 804-05. 
9HRS § 291C-65, entitled "Operation of vehicles on approach of
authorized emergency vehicles," provides:
 
(a) Except as otherwise provided by county ordinance, upon
the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals, the driver of every other
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive
to a position clear of any intersection and parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the highway
or the nearest edge or curb when the highway has multiple lanes or
when the highway is a divided highway or one-way street and shall
stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle is passed, except as otherwise directed by a police
officer.
 
(b) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of
an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motorists to yield the right-of-way upon the approach of an
 
authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual
 signals. HRS § 291C-65 further provides, however, that "[t]his
 section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
 emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
 safety of all persons using the highway." HRS § 291C-65(b). 
These legislative expressions of concern with the need to protect
 public safety support our construction of HRS § 291C-26(d) as
 imposing a negligence standard, which is more protective of
 public safety than a recklessness standard.
 
HRS § 291C-65(b) is also noteworthy in that it refers
 
to the duty of an emergency vehicle driver "to drive with due
 regard for the safety of all persons using the highway[,]" but
 does not contain any reference to the "reckless disregard for the
 safety of others." Reading HRS § 291C-26(d) together with HRS 
§ 291C-65(b) supports our conclusion that the Legislature
 intended HRS § 291C-26(d) to impose a negligence standard of
 care. See Maple, 384 N.W.2d at 303-05 (reading provisions almost
 
identical to HRS § 291C-26(d) and HRS § 291C-65(b) together in 
concluding that the Nebraska Legislature intended to impose a
 negligence standard of care). 
Our reading of HRS § 291C-26(d) as imposing a
 
negligence standard is also consistent with the standard of care
 imposed by the City and County of Honolulu in ROH § 15-4.4,
10 the
 
10ROH § 15-4.4, entitled "Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles,"
provides:
 
(a)	 The provisions of this traffic code regulating the
operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to
authorized emergency vehicles, as hereinbefore defined;
except as follows: a driver when operating any such vehicle
in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer may:
 
(1) 	Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this
traffic code;
 
(2) 	Proceed past a red light or stop signal or stop sign,
but only after slowing down as may be necessary for
safe operation;
 
(continued...)
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
City's counterpart to HRS § 291C-26. ROH § 15-4.4(c) expressly
 
uses the term "ordinary negligence" rather than "due regard" in
 imposing duties on drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
Although a county ordinance cannot trump a state statute, the
 negligence duty of care adopted by the City in its ordinance on
 the same subject matter provides useful guidance and insight into
 the City's policy choice on this subject. 
Finally, we conclude that the broad reach of HRS 
§ 291C-26 supports our view that the Legislature intended to
 impose a negligence standard. HRS § 291C-26 applies not only to
 the typical emergency situations of drivers responding to an
 emergency call or fire alarm or police pursuing a law violator,
 but also applies to "vehicles used by police officers
[11] while in
 
the performance of a police function[.]" HRS § 291C-26(a). We
 conclude that the Legislature's expansion of HRS § 291C-26 beyond 
10(...continued)
(3) 	Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property;
 
(4) 	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement
or turning in specified directions so long as he or
she does not endanger life or property.
 
(b) 	The exemptions provided for herein with reference to the
movement of an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only
when the driver of such vehicle sounds a siren, bell or
exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and the
vehicle displays a lighted red lamp, or in the case of the
Honolulu police department only, a lighted blue lamp,
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle as a warning to
others.
 
(c) 	The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the
driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or
her ordinary negligence or reckless disregard of the safety
and property rights of others. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
11The term "police officer" is defined to mean "every officer authorized
to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic
regulations." HRS § 291C-1.
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
typical emergency situations indicates that it intended the more
 
conventional and customary negligence standard to apply.12
 
D.
 
Although we conclude that the "due regard" language of
 
HRS § 291C-26(d) imposes a negligence standard of care, we
 further conclude that it is a specialized negligence standard,
 one that must take into account the unique responsibilities of
 and circumstances faced by emergency vehicle drivers. The
 privilege granted to emergency vehicle drivers by HRS § 291C­26(b), which permits them to disregard certain traffic laws,
 recognizes the unique role and responsibilities of emergency
 vehicle drivers. Thus, the presumption of negligence that an 
ordinary motorist would face for violating traffic laws does not
 apply to an emergency vehicle driver who violates the laws
 specified in HRS § 291C-26(b) pursuant to the statutory
 privilege. See City of Sacramento v. Superior Court, 182 Cal.
 
Rptr. 443, 448 (Cal. Ct. App. 1982) (stating that the purpose of
 a California statute providing traffic law exemptions to
 emergency vehicle drivers "is to avoid the presumption of
 negligence that arises from the violation of a safety rule or
 regulation"). 
In addition, HRS § 291C-65 requires other motorists to
 
yield the right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized
 emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals. The
 obligation of other motorists to yield the right-of-way is a
 factor that must be considered in evaluating the reasonableness
 of the actions taken by an emergency vehicle driver. 
12We note that some courts have justified their construction of their
version of HRS § 291C-26(d) as imposing a recklessness standard by asserting
that otherwise the "reckless disregard" language would be rendered surplusage.
See Rochon, 862 A.2d at 804; Martin, 971 S.W.2d at 430. We do not find this
 analysis to be persuasive because under the same reasoning, construing the
statute to impose a recklessness standard would render the "due regard"
language surplusage. We read HRS § 291C-26(d) as establishing a negligence
duty of care but also imposing liability for reckless conduct. We note that
 this appears to be no different than criminal statutes which often provide
that an offense can be committed based on overlapping mental states with
different degrees of culpability, namely, that the defendant can commit the
offense by acting intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly.
 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, the unique responsibilities of and special
 
circumstances confronting emergency vehicle drivers must be
 
considered, including the nature of the emergency to which the
 driver is responding. 
That standard of conduct which is reasonable under all the
 
circumstances must, of course, take into consideration the
unusual circumstances confronting the driver of an emergency
vehicle, that is, the emergency which necessitates immediate
action and the duty imposed upon the driver to take
reasonable, necessary measures to alleviate the emergency.
 
Siburg v. Johnson, 439 P.2d 865, 870 (Or. 1968) (internal
 
quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Accordingly, the negligence standard applicable to
 
emergency vehicle drivers must take into account their privilege
 under HRS § 291C-26(b) to disregard certain traffic laws, the
 obligation of other motorists to yield the right-of-way, and the
 nature of the emergency to which the driver is responding. Under
 this specialized negligence standard, the conduct of an emergency
 vehicle driver in operating his or her vehicle is not "measured
 by exactly the same yardstick as the actions of the operators of
 conventional vehicles." Fire Ins. Salvage, 148 A.2d at 448. 
Rather,
 
[t]he urgency of their missions demands that they respond to
calls with celerity and as expeditiously as is reasonably
possible. . . . When dealing with the operation of emergency
vehicles, it is particularly appropriate to recognize that
negligence and reasonable care are relative terms and their
 application depends upon the situation of the parties and
the degree of care and vigilance which circumstances
 
reasonably impose.
 
Id. In other words, in applying the "due regard" negligence
 
standard imposed by HRS § 291C-26(d), the focus should be on what 
a reasonably prudent emergency vehicle driver would have done
 under the circumstances presented. 
III.
 
Having determined that HRS § 291C-26(d) imposes a
 
negligence standard of care, we address whether the Circuit
 Court's grant of summary judgment was appropriate. We review the
 grant of summary judgment de novo under the same standard
 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
utilized by the Circuit Court. Durette v. Aloha Plastic 
Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 71 (2004); 
Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai 'i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 267 (1996). 
The grant of summary judgment is appropriate 
if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories,
and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material
fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that fact
would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the
essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted
 by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other words, we
must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn
 therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing
the motion.
 
Durette,  105 Hawai 'i at 501, 100 P.3d at 71 (block quote format 
and citations omitted). The court "must not make credibility
 
determinations" or resolve conflicting evidence in ruling on a
 motion for summary judgment. Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co., 133
 
Hawai
'i 332, 359, 328 P.3d 341, 368 (2014). 
In their summary judgment pleadings, the parties
 
presented conflicting versions of the circumstances surrounding
 the accident and how it occurred. In opposing Defendants' motion
 for summary judgment, Pogoso submitted his declaration, which
 described the accident as being caused by Sarae "unexpectedly,
 and without any warning" "turn[ing] directly in front of me." 
Pogoso also stated that prior to the collision, Sarae did not
 activate his siren or display flashing lights. Pogoso's
 declaration stated in pertinent part:
 
3. 
On July 18, 2009, around 12:30 a.m., I was
stopped at a red light in the left lane in the westbound
direction of Paki Avenue at the intersection of Kapahulu
Avenue. . . . As the light turned green, a red car
[(Anderson's car)] in the right lane unexpectedly turned
left in front of me right before I was going to drive
[13] 
 After that happened, I slowly
 straight onto the Ala Wai.proceeded drove into the intersection when Officer Sarae

unexpectedly, and without any warning, also veered in front
of me from the right lane. Our vehicles collided.
 
13In the westbound direction, Paki Avenue becomes Ala Wai Boulevard
after the Kapahulu Avenue intersection. 
18
  
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Officer Sarae was operating a Honolulu Police
Department car. I did not see Officer Sarae's vehicle until
 
the collision.
 
5. On the date of the subject incident, and prior
to the collision, Officer Sarae's vehicle only displayed
illuminated blue lights but they were not flashing.
 
6. On the date of the subject incident, and prior
to the collision, Officer Sarae's vehicle did not have his
siren or any other noise sounding.
 
7. Officer Sarae turned directly in front of me
without warning when my light was green, causing the
collision.
 
On the other hand, in support of their motion for
 
summary judgment, Defendants submitted Sarae's declaration and
 
statements made by Anderson. In his declaration, Sarae stated
 that prior to the collision, he passed along the right side of
 Pogoso's vehicle with Sarae's "blue strobe light flashing and
 [his] siren operating in the chirping mode." When Pogoso's
 vehicle did not move, Sarae "slowly entered the intersection[,]"
 making sure he could enter the intersection safely before making
 his left turn. Sarae stated that as he entered the intersection
 and was making a left turn onto Kapahulu Avenue, Pogoso drove
 forward, striking Sarae's police vehicle and causing minor damage
 to the driver's side rear quarter panel area of Sarae's vehicle.
 
Defendants also submitted statements Anderson made
 
after he was stopped by Sarae and in Anderson's deposition. 
According to Anderson, he was behind Pogoso's car on Paki Avenue
 waiting to make a left turn onto Kapahulu Avenue. Pogoso's
 vehicle was stopped on a green light and did not move forward
 even after the traffic light changed from red to green again. 
When the light turned green a third time, Anderson drove around
 Pogoso's vehicle, which remained stopped, by going into the right
 lane and then turned left into Kapahulu Avenue. 
Anderson gave differing accounts of his recollection of
 
Sarae's use of a siren and blue lights, stating that they came on
 "as soon as [Anderson] turned"; that he saw blue lights and heard
 a siren "right after" he turned; and that he heard a siren
 "within a couple seconds" after making the turn and less than 100
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
yards past the intersection. Anderson could not recall whether
 
Sarae activated the strobe lights on his police vehicle. 
Anderson believed that Sarae was driving on Kapahulu Avenue prior
 to stopping Anderson and had not been behind Anderson on Paki
 Avenue.
 
At oral argument, Defendants' counsel conceded that if
 
HRS § 291C-26(d) was applicable (rather than the conditional
 privilege) and was construed to impose a negligence duty of care,
 then the question of whether Sarae had violated his duty of care
 was a question for the jury. We agree with this concession. 
Given the conflicting evidence presented regarding the
 circumstances surrounding the accident and how it occurred, we
 conclude that there were genuine issues of material fact that
 precluded the grant of summary judgment. Accordingly, the
 Circuit Court erred in granting Defendants' motion for summary
 judgment. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment and remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs:
 
Melvin Y. Agena
(Law Offices of Melvin Y. Agena)
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
John P. Moran
 
Deputy Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
for Defendants-Appellees
 
20
 