NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-14-0001105 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAMES MCDANIEL, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0755(1)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant James McDaniel (McDaniel) appeals 
from the June 18, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and Probation 
Sentence (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1 After a plea of no contest, the 
Circuit Court convicted McDaniel of one count of Theft in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 708-831
2 (2014). McDaniel was sentenced to four years 
probation with the special terms and conditions that he, inter 
alia, serve one day of imprisonment, pay $2,867.18 in 
restitution, refrain from alcohol and drug use, submit to drug 
and alcohol testing and assessment, and perform 200 hours of 
community service. 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2 HRS § 708-831 then provided, in relevant part, " Theft in the 
second degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of theft in the second
degree if the person commits theft: (a) Of property from the person of
another; (b) Of property or services the value of which exceeds $300[.]" NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, McDaniel contends: (1) the Circuit Court 
affirmatively misled him as to the availability of a deferred 
acceptance of no contest (DANC) plea; (2) he received ineffective 
assistance of trial counsel; and (3) the Circuit Court erred by 
imposing discretionary probation conditions regarding drug and 
alcohol use without a factual basis.3 McDaniel asserts trial 
counsel was ineffective for failing to: (a) explain the evidence and charges against him; (b) to investigate witnesses; (c) file a 
post-sentencing motion to withdraw his plea; and (d) timely file 
a notice of appeal. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues 
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve 
McDaniel's points on appeal as follows: 
I. 
1. McDaniel's core claim in points of error one and 
two is that he could not have knowingly, voluntarily, and 
intelligently entered a no contest plea seeking deferment because 
he was statutorily ineligible for deferred acceptance of his 
plea. McDaniel argues the Circuit Court affirmatively misled him 
as to his statutory eligibility for the DANC plea. 
McDaniel asserts that he was statutorily ineligible for 
a DANC plea under either HRS § 853-4(a)(6) and/or (8)
4 (2014) due 
3 McDaniel's points of error have been restyled for clarity and
reordered chronologically. McDaniel's first and fourth points of error
regarding ineffective assistance of trial counsel have been combined. 
4 HRS § 853-4 provides, in relevant parts: 
(a) This chapter shall not apply when: 
. . . . (6) The defendant has been convicted of any offense
defined as a felony by the Hawaii Penal Code or
has been convicted for any conduct that ifperpetrated in this State would be punishable asa felony; 
. . . . 
(continued...) 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to a prior felony conviction in California. The State disagrees, 
asserting without argument that the crime identified as a felony 
in the presentencing investigation report (PSI) "does not in fact 
reflect a felony conviction." Nevertheless, the PSI, based on 
information purportedly taken from the National Crime Information 
Center, represents that McDaniel was convicted of a felony in 
California and the parties point to no other evidence in the 
record to the contrary. A person is ineligible for a DANC plea 
under HRS § 853-4(a)(8) where the person has "a prior conviction 
for a felony committed in any state[.]" Therefore, McDaniel was 
not eligible for a DANC plea. 
McDaniel asserts the Circuit Court misled him as to the 
availability of a DANC plea based on its conduct at sentencing. 
We disagree. Even if we were to interpret the Circuit Court's 
ruling at sentencing in this fashion, it could not have 
influenced the prior entry of McDaniel's no contest plea.5 
2. McDaniel asserts ineffective assistance of counsel 
for trial counsel's failure to seek a post-sentencing withdrawal 
of plea pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
4(...continued)
(8) The defendant has a prior conviction for a
felony committed in any state, federal, or
foreign jurisdiction[.] 
5 In any event, we disagree with McDaniel's interpretation of the
Circuit Court's decision at sentencing as evidence the court determined he wasineligible for a DANC plea. The Circuit Court stated: 
It appears to the Court that Defendant is likely again toengage in a criminal course of conduct, and that the ends ofjustice and welfare of society do require that the Defendantshall presently suffer the penalty imposed by law. 
And that would include telling the probation officer
that you have, basically, only a speeding ticket on themainland, but it turns out you had petty theft, theft, andpossession of dangerous weapons and forgery convictions,which you obviously knew about and didn't tell her about.One of the many reasons why I'm denying your request for adeferral, but I'm granting probation. 
Rather than a ruling that McDaniel was ineligible for a DANC, it appears thecourt believed it was within its power to grant a DANC plea but decided not togrant the motion because McDaniel was insufficiently candid with the probationofficer. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 32(d)  when it became clear McDaniel was ineligible for a 
DANC plea. 6
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held: 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel,
[the appellate court] looks at whether defense counsel'sassistance was within the range of competence demanded ofattorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and mustmeet the following two-part test: 1) that there werespecific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack ofskill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors oromissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfythis second prong, the defendant needs to show a possibleimpairment, rather than a probable impairment, of apotentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not proveactual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (citations, footnote, and quotation marks omitted). 
McDaniel's counsel may have erred by not taking steps 
to file an HRPP Rule 32(d) motion to withdraw his no contest plea 
once it became clear, when he received the PSI revealing 
McDaniel's prior felony conviction, that McDaniel was not 
eligible for a DANC plea. The PSI was signed and completed on 
June 10, 2014, and served on trial counsel. During sentencing, 
on June 18, 2014, trial counsel specifically stated, "We've 
reviewed the PSI." It was incumbent on trial counsel to conduct 
a careful factual and legal investigation to develop a predicate 
upon which informed decisions could be made. See State v. 
Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 70–71, 837 P.2d 1298, 1307 (1992) (regarding 
adequate investigation necessary to inform counsel's decision to 
call certain witnesses). Thus, McDaniel's counsel's failure to 
recognize, factually and/or legally, McDaniel's ineligibility for 
6 HRPP Rule 32(d) provides: 
Withdrawal of Plea.  A motion to withdraw a plea of guilty or
of nolo contendere may be made before sentence is imposed or
imposition of sentence is suspended; provided that, tocorrect manifest injustice the court, upon a party's motionsubmitted no later than ten (10) days after imposition ofsentence, shall set aside the judgment of conviction andpermit the defendant to withdraw the plea. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a DANC plea was an error or omission reflecting a lack of skill, 
judgment, or diligence. 
The second issue is whether McDaniel has demonstrated 
potential prejudice resulting from the error or omission. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i at 513-14, 78 P.3d at 326-27. An HRPP Rule 
32(d) motion should be made "to correct manifest injustice[.]" "Manifest injustice occurs when a defendant makes a plea 
involuntarily or without knowledge of the direct consequence of 
the plea." State v. Nguyen, 81 
Hawai# i 279, 292, 916 P.2d 689, 
702 (1996). In Kimsel, this court held manifest injustice occurs where a defendant enters a no contest plea after being 
misinformed by the court that he is eligible for a deferred 
acceptance of that plea. State v. Kimsel, 109 Hawai# i 50, 58, 
122 P.3d 1148, 1156 (App. 2005). The same logic should apply to trial counsel's advice given prior to that plea. 
However, as the effectiveness of McDaniel's trial 
counsel is being raised for the first time on appeal, the record 
does not reveal what steps trial counsel took to determine 
McDaniel's criminal record prior to advising McDaniel regarding 
any plea negotiations nor does McDaniel specifically assert that 
trial counsel failed to inform him of the direct consequences of 
his no contest plea. The record does support the notion that 
trial counsel knew or should have known of McDaniel's felony 
conviction, and consequent ineligibility for a deferral, no later 
than at sentencing, by which time he had reviewed the PSI. 
Again, McDaniel does not specifically assert what effect this 
knowledge would have had on his decision to enter a no contest 
plea. Nevertheless, there is a colorable argument that manifest 
injustice occurred as a result of trial counsel's ignorance of 
McDaniel's prior record and its effect on his decision to accept 
the government's offer of a plea agreement and to enter a no 
contest plea.
7 Therefore, on remand, McDaniel will be allowed to 
7 Similarly, the record is inadequate to review McDaniel's other
allegations in support of his ineffective assistance of trial counsel claim. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fully develop the factual basis for his ineffective assistance of 
counsel claim through a petition under HRPP Rule 40. 
3. McDaniel also challenges the Circuit Court's 
imposition of bans on alcohol and drug use as special terms of 
his probation as, he argues, there was no factual basis for these 
restrictions. The State agrees that the Circuit Court did not 
have a sufficient factual basis for imposing discretionary 
conditions J, K, and L,  McDaniel's sentence should be vacated, 
and the case should be remanded for re-sentencing. We review the record to determine if the State's concession is well-founded. 
Territory v. Kogami, 37 Haw. 174, 175 (Terr. 1945) (while a 
prosecutor's confession of error is "entitled to great weight," 
before a conviction is reversed, "it is incumbent upon the 
appellate court to ascertain first that the confession of error 
is supported by the record and well-founded in law and to 
determine that such error is properly preserved and 
prejudicial"). 8
In Kahawai, the Hawai# i Supreme Court stated, 
We hold that a sentencing court may not impose discretionary
conditions of probation pursuant to Hawai #i Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 706-624(2) (1993) unless there is a factual basis inthe record indicating that such conditions "are reasonablyrelated to the factors set forth in [HRS §] 706-606" andinsofar as such "conditions involve only deprivations of 
8 The conditions at issue provide: 
J. You must not possess, use or consume any alcohol,
unprescribed or illegal drug including medicalmarijuana unless specifically authorized to usemedical marijuana by written order of the court, norpossess any drug-related paraphernalia or be in thepresence of anyone using any illegal drugs/medicalmarijuana/alcohol/drug related paraphernalia. 
K. You must submit to urinalysis and other drug/alcoholtesting protocol (by hair, urine, blood, breath orother appropriate testing methods) at your own expenseas directed by your probation officer[.] 
L. You must submit to drug/alcohol assessment at your ownexpense as directed by your probation officer. If deemed necessary, obtain and maintain substance abusetreatment as directed by or at the discretion of yourprobation officer until clinically discharged with theconcurrence of your probation officer. You shall beresponsible for payment of such treatment. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liberty or property[,]" that they "are reasonably necessary
for the purposes indicated in [HRS §] 706-606(2)[.]" HRS§ 706-624(2). 
State v. Kahawai, 103 Hawai# i 462, 462-63, 83 P.3d 725, 725-26 
(2004). 
Here, McDaniel was convicted of Theft in the Second 
Degree in violation of HRS § 708-831(1)(b). Like in Kahawai, 
there were no allegations that McDaniel had problems with drugs 
in relation to this case. 
Additionally, McDaniel's PSI made no 
mention of drug or alcohol use by McDaniel in relation to the case. Moreover, no request was made by the prosecutor to impose 
these conditions. 
Therefore, we conclude the State's concession is well-
founded. 
II 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the June 18, 2014 
Judgment of Conviction without prejudice to the filing of an HRPP 
Rule 40 petition on the basis of ineffective assistance of 
counsel and vacate the Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit 
Court of the Second Circuit and remand for resentencing. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 27, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew S. Kohm,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Richard K. Minatoya,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7 