FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
–––O0O–––
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MUSTAFA BAKER, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000115
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0078)
 
SEPTEMBER 29, 2017
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE AND CHAN, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY CHAN, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Mustafa Baker (Baker) appeals from 
the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered on January 29, 
2016 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1 
The State of Hawai 'i (State) charged Baker with two counts of 
Sexual Assault in the First Degree (Counts 1 and 2) and one count of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree (Count 3). Right before 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided .
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury selection, the circuit court dismissed Count 3 without
 
prejudice because the complaint failed to allege the essential
 element that the defendant and complaining witness (CW) were not
 married to each other.
2 After a jury trial, Baker was found
 
guilty of Counts 1 and 2:
 
Count 1:	 Sexual Assault in the First Degree (penis into
genital opening), in violation of HRS § 707­
730(1)(a).3
 
Count 2:	 Sexual Assault in the First Degree (penis into
anal opening), in violation of HRS § 707­730(1)(a).
 
The circuit court sentenced Baker to consecutive terms of
 
imprisonment of twenty years on Count 1 and twenty years on
 Count 2.
 
On appeal, Baker contends (1) the circuit court erred
 
when it found that Baker's January 8, 2013 statement to the
 Honolulu Police Department (HPD) was voluntarily, knowingly, and
 intelligently made; (2) the circuit court erred when it redacted
 "I've been raped as a kid" from Baker's statement to HPD; (3) the
 
2
 Section 707-732 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) (2014)
provides in relevant part:
 
§ 707-732 Sexual Assault in the third degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the third
degree if:
 
. . . .
 (c) 	 The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
with a person who is at least fourteen years old
but less than sixteen years old or causes the
minor to have sexual contact with the person;
provided that:
 
(i)	 The person is not less than five years older
than the minor; and
 
(ii) The person is not legally married to the minor;
. . . . 
3
 HRS § 707-730 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-730 Sexual Assault in the first degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the first
degree if:
 
(a) 	 The person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by strong
compulsion;
. . . .
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court erred when it sentenced Baker to consecutive terms
 
of imprisonment; and (4) the imposition of consecutive terms of
 imprisonment by a judge instead of by a jury violated the Sixth
 Amendment and Due Process clause.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On December 31, 2012, CW, who was a seventeen-year-old
 
minor at the time, and a friend went to Kailua District Park
 around 2:30 p.m. There, they met up with Baker, drank Jack
 Daniels and Bacardi, smoked marijuana, and may have also used
 acid and methamphetamine.
 
At around 5:30 p.m., a marked police car drove towards
 
the group. In response, CW ran into the boys' bathroom to hide.
 Sometime later, Baker's minor relative GK arrived at the park.
 
When CW started walking out of the bathroom, she saw
 
Baker and GK coming towards her, one of them holding a bottle.
 Baker and GK then proceeded to punch and hit CW. CW lost
 consciousness after GK hit her in the head with the bottle.
 
Before CW lost consciousness, she was wearing all of
 
her clothes. When CW regained consciousness, she was completely
 naked and Baker had his penis inside of her vagina. At that
 moment, CW testified that she tried to fight back, but the more
 she fought, the more Baker and GK would punch and kick her. GK
 then said "he want[ed] to try," and put his penis in CW's vagina
 to have sex with her. After GK ejaculated, Baker turned CW
 around and "put his penis in [her] butt." CW testified, "I was
 telling him to stop, because it hurts. And he didn't really care
 what I said. And he just kept going." CW also testified that
 sometime after GK ejaculated, Baker put his penis back into her
 vagina and "ke[pt] going until he ejaculate[d]." CW testified
 that while Baker was having sex with CW, Baker "was dragging
 [her] all over," and CW "was bleeding from head to toe."
 
After the assault, CW heard either Baker or GK say to
 
the other "[c]ome on. We got to go. The bus is here." After
 Baker and GK left, CW "crawled to the light" and asked a
 bystander to call 911.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Gregory Suares, the emergency room physician who
 
treated CW, testified that CW had a broken jaw in two places,
 
multiple lacerations to her head, scalp, and face, including
 significant lacerations requiring suturing to the top of both
 eyes and her lower lip, and abrasions and contusions on her body,
 including her hip and knees. Dr. Wayne Lee, an examining
 physician for the Sex Abuse Treatment Center (SATC), testified
 that he detected redness and swelling in the area of CW's
 external genitalia. He also detected tears or lacerations to
 CW's genitalia, which were consistent with trauma, and multiple
 tears or lacerations to CW's anus.
 
On January 8, 2013 at 6:45 p.m., HPD Detective Brian
 
Tokita (Detective Tokita) interviewed Baker (Interview). During
 the Interview, Baker informed Detective Tokita that when he was
 about twelve years old, he took Ritalin for ADHD (Attention
 Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder) for about a year until his father
 took him off of it because he did not think Baker needed it.
 
Baker also told Detective Tokita that he had smoked
 
"weed" the day before the Interview, in the afternoon. Detective
 Tokita asked Baker if he was well enough to give a statement, and
 Baker replied that he was. Detective Tokita then proceeded to
 read Baker his constitutional rights from HPD Form 81, entitled
 "Warning Persons Being Interrogated of Their Constitutional
 Rights."
 
Baker began telling Detective Tokita his account of
 
what happened on the night of the assault. In response,
 Detective Tokita told Baker that he knew that was not true.
 Baker continued telling his account, and again, Detective Tokita
 told Baker that he knew Baker's story was untrue:
 
Q: Okay, Mustafa, I know that's . . that's not how it
went. 
A: I no blame nobody, I not saying nothing. That's what 
I know. I'm not defending myself, nothing, I just
giving my story. 
Q: Okay, you know . . . 
A: This is a sad case . . . 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q: . . . (inaudible) 
A: . . . I have . . I have sisters. I have nieces. I've 
been raped as a kid. I no wish this on nobody. I no 
pull that shit. 
Detective Tokita told Baker that he knew Baker and GK
 
beat CW and sexually assaulted her. Detective Tokita further
 
told Baker that he was "big on owning up." Throughout the
 Interview, Detective Tokita and Baker discussed whether Baker had
 beat CW. Baker never admitted to beating CW, other than just
 throwing her to the ground.
 
Detective Tokita also claimed that he had DNA evidence
 
that Baker had sex with CW, and attempted to get Baker to admit
 that he had both vaginal and anal sex with CW. At first, Baker
 only admitted to putting his penis in CW's vagina, but not in her
 anus. However, eventually, Baker said, "I ain't going to argue
 with you no more," and admitted that he put his penis in CW's
 vagina and anus.
 
On January 16, 2013, Baker was charged with two counts
 
of Sexual Assault in the First Degree (Counts 1 and 2) and one
 count of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree (Count 3).
 
On March 25, 2015, the State filed "Prosecution's
 
Motion to Determine Voluntariness of Defendant's Statement to Law
 Enforcement" (Voluntariness Motion) to determine the
 voluntariness of Baker's statement made to Detective Tokita on
 January 8, 2013. On March 31, 2015, a hearing was held on the
 Voluntariness Motion. Detective Tokita testified at the hearing
 and admitted that at the time of the Interview, he did not have
 any objective DNA evidence despite having told Baker that he had
 "irrefutable evidence of his participation" in the assault.
 
Baker's counsel also asked Detective Tokita whether
 
Baker stated that he had smoked marijuana in the twenty-four
 hours prior to the Interview. Detective Tokita answered "yes,"
 but testified that he clarified with Baker during the Interview
 that actually, "the 24 hours had passed and it was now evening
 the next day . . . ." The court then asked Detective Tokita
 about his opinion of Baker's sobriety during the Interview:
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Can I ask in your observation of
him, observation both of his demeanor and in terms of what
he said, was there any indication to you that he was feeling
the effects of the marijuana?
 
[Detective Tokita]: No. And I even verbally
asked him if he was well enough to give a statement, and he
said yes. 
At the end of the hearing, Baker's counsel argued that
 
the audio recording of the Interview revealed "a lot of cajoling,
 
and . . . some pretty clear denials, and . . . a lot of
 intimidation by [Detective Tokita] . . . ." In response, the
 State argued that "Mr. Baker, despite any sort of marijuana use,
 was very lucid and was certainly able, at least in the very
 beginning, to pedal [sic] the account that he wanted to until
 Detective Tokita pushed him further."
 
The circuit court took the Voluntariness Motion under
 
advisement so it could listen to the audio recording of the
 Interview, and issued its ruling by minute order on April 1,
 2015. In the minute order, the circuit court made the following
 findings and conclusions:
 
The court has reviewed the recording of defendant's
January 8, 2013, statement to police and duly considered
testimony, other exhibits, and arguments of counsel, and
based thereon, finds and concludes as follows:
 
1.	 Before providing any substantive statement, the
defendant was administered his Miranda rights and
thereafter elected to waive those rights and provide a
statement to police.
 
2.	 Although the defendant only completed the 8th Grade,
the DVD demonstrates that he answered police questions
readily and responsively, unless he reasonably wanted
to think about the question and his answer. He
 displayed no signs of any inability to understand
questions or to respond appropriately to any given
question.
 
3.	 Defendant initially opted to deny any participation in
the salient events at issue, but then admitted that he
had been a participant.
 
4.	 During the interview, Honolulu Police Detective Brian
Tokita engaged in apparently deceptive assertions
regarding intrinsic facts and urged defendant to tell
the truth, sometimes using an insistent tone, but did
not use deliberate falsehoods extrinsic to the facts
 of the alleged offenses that were of a type reasonably
likely to procure an untrue statement or to influence
an accused to make a confession regardless of guilt. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 511 (1993).
Where the defendant wanted to deny certain
allegations, he did so.
 
5.	 Considering the totality of the evidence, the court
concludes that the State has proven by a preponderance
of the evidence that defendant gave the bulk of his
January 8, 2013, statement voluntarily, knowingly, and
intelligently. Under the totality of the
circumstances, devices used by the detective did not
amount to mental coercion and did not cause
 defendant's will to be overborne.
 
6.	 However, the court will deny the motion as to page 39
through page 43 in the transcript, wherein the
detective sought to get the defendant to admit that he
directed [GK] to hit and assault the complaining
witness, which [GK] did not want to do. Furthermore,
the State will redact the pronoun "she" in questions
inasmuch as that suggests that the detective is
reciting material from the complaining witness'
statements.
 
On April 1, 2015, the circuit court dismissed Count 3
 
without prejudice because the complaint failed to allege the
 
essential element that the defendant and CW were not married to
 each other.
 
On April 7, 2015, out of the presence of the jury, the 
State proposed redacting the statement, "I have been raped as a kid," made by Baker during the Interview. Baker's counsel opposed the redaction, arguing that the statement supported the contention that Baker would not be violent in sexual activities because he has been a victim of violence. The circuit court granted the State's request to exclude the statement under Rule 403 of the Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE). 
On April 10, 2015, the jury returned its verdicts
 
finding Baker guilty as charged in Counts 1 and 2.
 
On September 29, 2015, the State filed "Prosecution's
 
Motion for Consecutive Sentencing Scheme" (Motion for Consecutive
 Sentencing). On January 29, 2016, the circuit court held a
 sentencing hearing, and granted the Motion for Consecutive
 Sentencing, sentencing Baker to forty years of imprisonment.
 
On January 29, 2016, the "Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence" was filed.
 
On February 29, 2016, Baker filed his Notice of Appeal.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Voluntariness of Statement
 
We apply a de novo standard of appellate review to the
ultimate issue of the voluntariness of a confession. We
 
thus examine the entire record and make an independent
determination of the ultimate issue of voluntariness based
 upon that review and the totality of the circumstances
surrounding the defendant's statement.
 
State v. Gella, 92 Hawai 'i 135, 142, 988 P.2d 200, 207 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted) 
(quoting In re John Doe, 90 Hawai 'i 246, 251, 978 P.2d 684, 689 
(1999)). "However, it is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." Gella, 92 Hawai
'i at 142, 988 P.2d at 207 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Our review of whether a defendant's statement was in fact
 
coerced requires determination of whether the findings of
the trial court are clearly erroneous. A finding of fact is
clearly erroneous when, although there is evidence to
support it, the reviewing court, on the entire evidence, is
left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake
 has been committed.
 
Id. (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted) 
(quoting State v. Buch, 83 Hawai 'i 308, 321, 926 P.2d 599, 612 
(1996)).
B. Admissibility of Evidence under HRE Rule 403
 
"Evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 403, which 
require a 'judgment call' on the part of the trial court, are 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion." Costales v. Rosete, 133 
Hawai'i 453, 466, 331 P.3d 431, 444 (2014) (quoting Tabieros v. 
Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai 'i 336, 350-51, 944 P.2d 1279, 1293-94 
(1997)). "A trial court abuses its discretion when it 'clearly exceed[s] the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.'" State v. Garcia, 135 Hawai
'i 361, 368, 351 
P.3d 588, 595 (2015) (quoting State v. Merino, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 
211, 915 P.2d 672, 685 (1996) (citations omitted)). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Sentencing
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
State v. Mundon, 121 Hawai 'i 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009) 
(quoting State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai 'i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 
451 (2006)). 
"The weight to be given the factors set forth in HRS §
 
706-606 in imposing sentence is a matter generally left to the
 
discretion of the sentencing court, taking into consideration the
 circumstances of each case." State v. Akana, 10 Haw. App. 381,
 
386, 876 P.2d 1331, 1334 (1994).
D. Constitutional Questions
 
"'We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on 
the facts of the case. Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard.'" State v. 
Vaimili, 135 Hawai
'i 492, 499, 353 P.3d 1034, 1041 (2015) 
(quoting State v. Pratt, 127 Hawai 'i 206, 277 P.3d 300 (2012) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted)).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Voluntariness of Baker's Statement
 
In his first point of error, Baker argues that the
 
statements he made during the Interview with Detective Tokita
 were not voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made, and
 rather, were a product of coercion. Therefore, Baker argues that
 the entire Interview should have been inadmissible. We disagree.
i. Baker's mental and physical condition
 
Baker contends that during the Interview, he was "still
 
feeling the effects of [drug] withdrawal," "still feeling the
 
effects of ADHD," and "suffering from stress, fear and
 
9
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exhaustion."
 
A defendant's mental and physical condition can be part of
the totality of circumstances relevant to the issue of the
voluntariness of his or her custodial statements. However,
in the absence of insanity or mental depletion, neither the
voluntary character nor the admissibility of a confession is
affected by the mental instability of the person making it.
Rather, the person's mental state is relevant only to the
weight and effect to be given to the confession by the trier
of fact.
 
State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 480-81, 849 P.2d 58, 60-61
 
(1993).
 
Although it is unclear whether Baker had smoked
 
marijuana more than twenty-four hours prior to the Interview, or
 whether Baker was "feeling the effects of [drug] withdrawal"
 during the Interview, Baker told Detective Tokita that he was
 well enough to give a statement. Detective Tokita's statement
 that Baker had taken an "intox" several hours prior to the
 Interview also suggests that Baker was sober at the time of the
 Interview. At no time during the Interview did Baker suggest
 that his ADHD was having an effect on his mental or physical
 condition during the Interview itself. Rather, Baker's ADHD was
 brought up by Detective Tokita to suggest that perhaps the ADHD
 had caused Baker to "snap" on the night of the assault.
 
With regard to Baker "suffering from stress, fear and 
exhaustion" during the Interview, this argument was not raised at the hearing on the Voluntariness Motion nor during trial, and was raised for the first time on appeal. "As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]" Asato v. Procurement 
Policy Bd., 132 Hawai
'i 333, 354 n.22, 322 P.3d 228, 249 n.22 
(2014) (quoting State v. Moses, 102 Hawai 'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 
940, 947 (2003)). Regardless, we conclude that this argument lacks merit. 
"A confession may be rendered involuntary by
 
impermissible police conduct." Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 503, 849
 
P.2d at 70 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). At
 no point during the Interview did Baker complain that he was
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exhausted or tired. During the Interview, Baker stated that he
 
was scared, however, he did not indicate that his fear was caused
 by any improper conduct by Detective Tokita.
 
Q: So what, why did you hit her and why did you hit her
like that? I mean was it the alcohol, you just like
snapped or like . . . 
A: I was scared. 
Q: Scared of what, though? A: I didn't want to remember. Q: You didn't want to remember what happened? A: Yes. Q: So what are you going . . . A: And I'm still fuckin' scared and shit. 
After reviewing the transcript and audio recording of the
 
Interview, we conclude that Baker's statement that he was "still"
 scared did not stem from any impermissible police conduct. The
 audio recording of the Interview reveals that Detective Tokita
 kept a calm tone of voice throughout the Interview. In addition,
 the recording shows that Baker was lucid throughout the
 Interview, as demonstrated by his tone of voice, his ability to
 tell multiple versions of what happened on the night of the
 assault, his responsive answers to Detective Tokita's questions,
 and his consistent denial of beating CW.
 
Therefore, it is apparent from the "totality of
 
circumstances" that Baker's mental and physical condition at the
 time of the Interview with Detective Tokita did not render his
 statement involuntary.
ii. Detective Tokita's tactics
 
We next consider Baker's argument that his statement
 
was rendered involuntary because Detective Tokita "constant[ly]
 
badger[ed]" Baker and "did not merely use falsehoods regarding
 intrinsic facts or 'exhortations to tell the truth.'" In
 particular, Baker seems to allege that Detective Tokita
 improperly 1) suggested that Baker beat CW and assaulted CW
 anally, 2) raised the threat of media publicity, and 3) lied to
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Baker about having physical evidence linking him to the assault.
 
In Kelekolio, the defendant argued that the detective
 
interviewing him acted improperly by challenging the completeness
 
of the defendant's story and by urging him to tell "the whole
 story." In rejecting this argument, the supreme court held that
 "[m]ere advice from the police that it would be better for the
 accused to tell the truth when unaccompanied by either a threat
 or promise does not render a subsequent confession involuntary."
 Id. at 505, 849 P.2d at 70 (citations and quotation marks
 omitted).  The Kelekolio court further noted that "the
 proposition that a police interrogator's unwillingness to accept
 a suspect's initial version of events at face value amounts to
 'coercion' per se is not only naive and disingenuous, but falls
 of its own weight; were we to accept it, the legitimate right of
 law enforcement agencies to seek voluntary confessions would be
 rendered nugatory." Id.
 
In the instant case, Detective Tokita refused to accept
 
Baker's "initial version[s] of events" that he had not been
 involved in a sexual assault, had not beaten CW, and had not
 assaulted CW anally. Detective Tokita persistently urged Baker
 to "come clean" and "own up." However, Detective Tokita never
 made any threats or promises to Baker.
 
We are also unconvinced that Detective Tokita "raised
 
the threat of media publicity" during the Interview.
 
Q:	 . . . . You know, I'm giving you a shot by telling me
and this is how you . . how you want to be remembered,
dude?
 
A:	 No.
 
. . . . 
Q:	 . . . . Let me tell you what it sounds like on the outside.
The girl's a minor. So she's not an adult.
 
A:	 Yeah.
 Q:	 Okay, so in . . in people's minds, you know, if this
hits the media, it would be . . .
 
A: 	 I know.
 Q: 	 . . . twenty-three year old boy rapes a fucking
juvenile and how does that sound?
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A: That's not me.
 
. . . .
 Q: I know you're not like that. . . . But it's time to
come clean. You got . . you got to responsibility for
what you did, you know what I'm saying? 
A: Right. 
Q: When you go to court, you think people want to hear
somebody that's going to fucking deny, deny when the
evidence is like insurmountable against them, butthey're just going to deny, deny to the bitter end . . . 
A: No. 
Q: . . . or you think they're be . . they want to hear
somebody that's you know what, fuck, I made a mistake,
period. I made a mistake, that's . . that's not me,but I made a fucking mistake, I did and I'm sorry.What do you think they want to hear? 
A: The truth. 
Again, Detective Tokita's line of questioning was directed at
 
getting Baker to tell the truth. Detective Tokita never
 threatened to publicize the details of the assault if Baker did
 not tell a particular story. Rather, Detective Tokita advised
 Baker to tell his side of the true story, and insinuated that
 people would rather hear Baker own up to his actions than deny
 the truth, which, under Kelekolio, would constitute "[m]ere
 advice from the police that it would be better for the accused to
 tell the truth . . . unaccompanied by either a threat or promise
 . . . ." Id.
 Baker also argues that Detective Tokita improperly lied
 
to Baker about having physical evidence linking him to the
 assault. In Kelekolio, the defendant argued that the HPD
 detective, Detective Kim, had deliberately misrepresented the
 existence of incriminating evidence of sexual activity and
 bruises on the complainant, thus coercing a confession from
 Kelekolio. Id. at 505, 849 P.2d at 71. In resolving this claim,
 
the supreme court formulated a rule to measure the legitimacy of
 the use of "deception" by the police in eliciting confessions or
 inculpatory statements from suspects and arrestees, which
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
is that employment by the police of deliberate falsehoods
intrinsic to the facts of the alleged offense in question
will be treated as one of the totality of circumstances
surrounding the confession or statement to be considered in
assessing its voluntariness; on the other hand, deliberate
falsehoods extrinsic to the facts of the alleged offense,
which are of a type reasonably likely to procure an untrue
statement or to influence an accused to make a confession
 regardless of guilt, will be regarded as coercive per se,
thus obviating the need for a "totality of circumstances"
analysis of voluntariness.
 
Id. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73 (emphasis added).4 The Kelekolio
 
court noted that an "example[] of [an] intrinsic falsehood[]
 
would [be a] misrepresentation[] regarding the existence of
 incriminating evidence as . . . physical evidence linked to the
 victim found in the defendant's car, see [People v. Thompson, 50
 Cal. 3d 134, 150, 785 P.2d 857, 863 (1990)] . . . ." Kelekolio,
 
74 Haw. at 511, 849 P.2d at 73. Accordingly, the supreme court
 held that Detective Kim's deliberate misrepresentations regarding
 the existence of evidence of sexual activity and bruises
 incriminating Kelekolio were falsehoods intrinsic to the facts of
 the alleged offense, and were to be considered as a part of the
 totality of circumstances surrounding Kelekolio's statement. Id.
 
at 513, 849 P.2d at 74. The supreme court further held that
 because Detective Kim's "misrepresentations were not of a type
 that would reasonably induce a false confession," his "use of
 deception did not render Kelekolio's inculpatory statements
 involuntary." Id.
 
4
 The Kelekolio court noted that this rule was to be applied on a
 
case-by-case basis, and was not intended to be a bright line rule:
 
Notwithstanding our holding, we emphasize that we are not
purporting to enunciate a bright line per se rule that the
use of intrinsic factual deception cannot, given the
totality of circumstances surrounding any given statement,
result in an involuntary confession. Rather, the rule that
we formulate today merely declines to foreclose the
admissibility of confessions, as a per se matter, procured
in part through the use of this kind of deception. Such
confessions remain subject to "totality of circumstances"
analysis . . . and may still be the product of interrogation
techniques that are "'so offensive to a civilized system of
justice'" that "'they must be condemned'" under principles
of due process . . . 
.
 
Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 513-14, 849 P.2d at 74 (citations omitted).
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Detective Tokita's misrepresentations to Baker
 
were substantially similar to the misrepresentations made by
 
Detective Kim to Kelekolio. During the Interview, Detective
 Tokita told Baker multiple times that he had physical evidence
 that Baker had sexually assaulted CW, when in fact, Detective
 Tokita had no such physical evidence. Pursuant to Kelekolio,
 Detective Tokita's misrepresentations regarding the existence of
 physical evidence incriminating Baker were falsehoods intrinsic
 to the facts of the alleged offense, to be considered as a part
 of the totality of circumstances surrounding Baker's statement.
 
Based on our consideration of the totality of the
 
circumstances surrounding Baker's statement, we conclude that
 Detective Tokita's questioning was not of a type that would
 reasonably induce a false confession, thus, Detective Tokita's
 questioning tactics did not render Baker's statements
 involuntary.
B. Exclusion of "I've been raped as a kid" under HRE Rule 403
 
In his second point of error, Baker contends that the
 
circuit court erred when it redacted "I've been raped as a kid"
 
from Baker's statement made during his Interview with Detective
 Tokita. Specifically, Baker argues that the statement was
 improperly excluded under HRE Rule 403 because the statement was
 relevant to support the inference that as a victim of rape
 himself, Baker would not and did not subject CW to "strong
 compulsion,"
5
 a required element of sexual assault in the first
degree under HRS § 707-730(1)(a). Baker also argues that the
 exclusion of the statement deprived him of his constitutional
 right to present a complete defense.
 
5
 HRS § 707-700 (2014) defines "strong compulsion": 
"Strong compulsion" means the use of or attempt to use one
or more of the following to overcome a person:
 
(1) A threat, express or implied, that places a person in
fear of bodily injury to the individual or another
person, or in fear that  the person or another person
will be kidnapped;
(2) A dangerous instrument; or
(3) Physical force.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRE Rule 403 provides that "[a]lthough relevant,
 
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially
 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
 issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue
 delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative
 evidence." (Emphasis added.) The commentary of HRE Rule 403
 explains that the rule seeks to prevent "engendering juror
 prejudice . . . sympathy . . . potential for confusion or
 distraction . . . . [or] an undue tendency to suggest decision on
 an improper basis, commonly, though not necessarily, an emotional
 one." HRE Rule 403 cmt. The Rules of Evidence seek to bar
 prejudicial evidence of slight probative value that "tends to
 distract the trier of fact from the main question of what
 actually happened on the particular occasion. . . . despite what
 the evidence in the case shows actually happened." 
See HRE Rule
 
404 cmt. (citations omitted).
 
In excluding the statement, "I've been raped as a kid,"
 
the circuit court explained:
 
THE COURT: Okay. And your record is made. I
 
have three problems.
 
Number one, "I've been raped as a kid." If
 
there's nothing more, we just really have no -- very little
idea as to what that precisely means. "As a kid," I mean,
what age are we talking about? What does "rape" mean? I
 mean, this is a boy. And it could be touching. It could be
 a number of things.
 
But, more than that, I think the inference that
the defense wants the jury to draw is that because he's been
raped as a kid he wouldn't rape someone else. And I don't
 -- and there are -- that might be an inference. But you
could infer as well that, you know, kids who are abused
become abusers themselves. So I think that's something that
we should mention.
 
But more -- the more importantly, I think the
tendency is to feel sorry for someone. And as we know from
 the jury instructions, sympathy is absolutely verboten as to
the jury. I think that that creates undue prejudice, which
substantially outweighs this inference that the defense
wishes the jury to draw, which as I say, it's one inference.
But I don't think the only possible inference.
 
And so, under 403, I'm going to deny the
defense's request to include this one portion of the
sentence.
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 
in excluding the challenged statement.
 
As offered by Baker, and not by the State, Baker's
 
statement that he was raped as a child constitutes hearsay, but
 Baker sought to use the statement for the truth of the matter
 asserted. See HRE Rules 801 and 803(a)(1). Baker's claim that
 
he had been raped as a child was devoid of any significant
 details or surrounding circumstances, such as the nature of the
 alleged rape, when it occurred, and who the perpetrator was.
 Also, as noted by the circuit court, even if Baker had been
 subjected to rape as a child, this does not necessarily suggest
 that he would not have subjected another person to sexual assault
 by strong compulsion. Therefore, the statement had little
 probative value in proving that Baker did not subject CW to
 strong compulsion.
 
On the other hand, the statement's potential for
 
unfairly prejudicing, confusing, or misleading the jury was quite
 high. As stated above, it is unclear what the term "rape," as
 used by Baker, entailed, and therefore, the statement could have
 easily confused or misled the jury. More notably, the statement
 could have elicited sympathy from the jury, which could have
 caused them to make their decision on an emotional basis, or
 distracted them from the main question of what actually happened
 on the night of the assault.
 
Next, we address Baker's claim that the exclusion of 
the statement deprived him of his constitutional right to present a complete defense that he did not subject CW to strong compulsion. "The due process guarantee of a fair trial under the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution and article 1, section 14, of the Hawai
'i Constitution confers upon 
the accused in criminal proceedings 'a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.'" State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai
'i 229, 
246, 925 P.2d 797, 814 (1996) (quoting State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 185, 787 P.2d 671, 672 (1990)), amended on reconsideration in part, 83 Hawai
'i 545, 928 P.2d 39 (1996). This right, 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
however, may be subject to appropriate limitations imposed by the 
rules of evidence. See State v. Pond, 118 Hawai 'i 452, 463-64, 
193 P.3d 368, 379-80 (2008). 
In any event, Baker was able to present other evidence
 
that he did not subject CW to strong compulsion. For instance,
 the jury was presented with Baker's Interview with Detective
 Tokita, which revealed Baker's consistent denials of beating CW.
 GK, who allegedly committed the assault with Baker, also
 testified at Baker's trial that Baker did not beat CW or cause
 any of her injuries.
 
[State]: Okay. So you're telling us today that defendant
did not cause any injuries to [CW] that
night. Is that what you're saying? 
[GK]: Yes. 
[State]: You caused all the injuries on her body? [GK]: Yes. 
. . . . 
[Defense]: And so, like on line 26, he asks you, "You
bashed her over the head with the bottle. I 
know you did." And you answered, "I did." Now,[Baker] never hit -- you never saw [Baker] hit[CW] with a bottle, correct? 
[GK]: No. 
[Defense]: Never saw [Baker], [CW], hit [CW] -- [Baker],
hit [CW] with his fist? 
[GK]: Yeah. [Defense]: Never saw him kick? [GK]: Never. [Defense]: Never saw rip off any clothes? [GK]: No. 
Therefore, we conclude that Baker was able to present a complete
 
defense that he did not subject CW to strong compulsion.
 
Accordingly, Baker has failed to establish that the 
circuit court "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or . . . disregarded rules of principles of law or practice" in excluding Baker's statement that he "was raped as a kid." See State v. 
Merino
, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 211, 915 P.2d 672, 685 (1996) (citations 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omitted).
C.	 Imposition of Consecutive Sentencing
 
In his third point of error, Baker argues that the
 
circuit court's imposition of two consecutive sentences
 
constituted an abuse of discretion and "cruel and unusual
 punishment."
i.	 Abuse of discretion
 
Under HRS § 706-668.5 (Supp. 2016), the court may order
 
that multiple terms of imprisonment run consecutively or
 concurrently upon consideration of the factors set forth in HRS §
 706-606.
6 HRS § 706-606 (2014) provides:
 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to be
imposed, shall consider:
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and the
 
history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) 	 The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) 	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
promote respect for law, and to provide just
punishment for the offense;
(b) 	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c) 	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed educational
or vocational training, medical care, or other
correctional treatment in the most effective
 manner;
(3) 	 The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) 	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been
found guilty of similar conduct.
 
In ordering that Baker's two twenty-year terms of
 
imprisonment run consecutively, the circuit court gave the
 
following reasoning:
 
6
 HRS § 706-668.5 provides in relevant part:
 
HRS § 706-668.5 Multiple sentence of imprisonment. (1) If
multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a defendant,
whether at the same time or at different times, or if a term
of imprisonment is imposed on a defendant who is already
subject to an unexpired term of imprisonment, the terms may
run concurrently or consecutively. Multiple terms of
imprisonment run concurrently unless the court orders or the
statute mandates that the terms run consecutively.
(2) The court, in determining whether the terms
imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or
consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in
section 706-606.
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: What about -- okay. Well, you know,
it's a tough -- it's not the easiest decision. The
 
defendant has little to no record. He's young. He has
 family support. On the other side of the ledger, this girl
was -- you know, she was a minor, and I -- you know, I take
judicial notice of the files and records and of the trial
proceedings. And the injuries were quite serious. She had
 facial fractures, jaw broken in two places, facial
lacerations which will result in permanent scars.
 
And I remember her testifying –– Mr. Baker. 
I
 
remember her testifying on the stand, and she seemed
terrified. I also did listen to the entire statement that
 the defendant gave to the police, and I believe that he did
not completely tell the truth. He said, among other things,
that it was [GK] who did everything, and, in fact, [GK] got
up at the trial and tried to testify to that effect. And
 the jury obviously did not buy it. They did not believe
him.
 
But let's see. The -- in the face of that, I
know that the complaining witness testified unequivocally to
identify the defendant as the person who did rape her not
once but twice and described his conduct in detail. The
 defendant has taken no responsibility at any time, and he
even told the police that at the end of this episode, he
tried to help the girl and she said no. He stood up, pulled
himself –- put his clothes on, or whatever it was he did, I
can't remember, but he stood up and he said, "Come on, let's
go. The bus is coming." And left -- they left them –– they
left the girl there. That's –– 
You know, sexual assault is always violent, but
this was vicious. And I feel for the family because, as is
often the case, they take it in the neck whether you go for
20 or 40, Mr. Baker. And they're going -- you know, it
happens a lot, and I'm sorry for that. But that's not
 something the Court –– well, it's something the Court can
consider, but it's, you know -- it's one of many factors.
 
I have to look -- in deciding whether
consecutive is appropriate here, I have to look at the
factors under 706-606, I think it is, and those include the
nature and circumstances of the offense. And, Mr. Baker,
this was one of the most vicious sexual assaults I have ever
 seen.
 
History and characteristics of the defendant -­
I take it that you -- there's -- I'm sure there's a good
side to you, and that's what your family sees. But the
 facts of this case show another side certainly.
 
And the Court also has to consider the need for
 
the sentence to reflect the seriousness of the offense -­very serious -- to promote respect for the law and to
provide just punishment for the offense and to afford
adequate deterrence to criminal conduct and to protect the
public from further crimes of the defendant. I don't know
 if 20 years is going to be sufficient.
 
So I consider all of that in accordance with the
 
factors under 706-606, and I am going to grant the motion
for consecutive sentencing. So in Count I you will serve a
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
term of imprisonment of 20 years, and in Count II you will
serve a term of imprisonment of 20 years. The second
 count's sentence will run consecutive to the first count.
 
On appeal, Baker argues that the circuit court "gave
 
little to no consideration to Baker's personal history." We
 
disagree. The circuit court considered Baker's minimal criminal
 record, young age, and family support, and the effect that
 Baker's incarceration would have on his family. The circuit
 court also recognized that Baker surely had a "good side to
 [him]," but focused on his characteristics brought to light by
 the instant assault.
 
Baker further argues that his forty-year sentence is
 
inconsistent with "the need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar records who have been
 found guilty of similar conduct," by pointing out that GK, who
 committed the assault with Baker, would be facing considerably
 less jail time than Baker, since GK was a minor at the time of
 the assault. We previously held that "there is no constitutional
 requirement that the court impose uniform sentences on multiple
 defendants involved in the same criminal activity, and a
 disparity among the sentences does not establish that any
 particular defendant's sentence is excessive. The court has
 discretion to make the punishment fit the crime, as well as the
 needs of the individual defendant and the community." State v.
 
Teves, 4 Haw. App. 566, 572, 670 P.2d 834, 838 (1983).
 Here, both Baker and GK were involved in the same or very similar
 criminal activity. However, GK was sentenced to a much shorter
 term of imprisonment because GK was a minor at the time of the
 assault. Accordingly, the disparity among Baker's and GK's
 sentences does not establish that Baker's sentence is excessive.
 
We next address Baker's contention that the circuit 
court improperly considered Baker's refusal to take "responsibility at any time" in imposing Baker's enhanced sentence. 
In State v. Kamana 'o, 103 Hawai 'i 315, 316, 82 P.3d 
401, 402 (2003), the supreme court held that "a sentencing court may not impose an enhanced sentence based on a defendant's 
21
  We conclude that the circuit court also gave adequate
 
consideration to the remaining factors under HRS § 706-606. The
 
circuit court addressed the seriousness of CW's injuries and the
 viciousness of the assault, demonstrating that the court examined
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I R
 EPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
refusal to admit guilt with respect to an offense the conviction of which he intends to appeal." However, the Kamana
'o court 
noted: 
We are aware that it is well settled that a sentencing court
may consider a defendant's lack of remorse in assessing the
likelihood of successful rehabilitation. See, e.g., Jennings
 v. State, 339 Md. 675, 664 A.2d 903, 910 (1995) ("[A]
sentencing court may consider, on the issue of a defendant's
prospects for rehabilitation, the defendant's lack of
remorse."); State v. Tiernan, 645 A.2d 482, 486 (R.I.1994)
(holding that the sentencing court properly considered the
"defendant's refusal to acknowledge guilt for the limited
purpose of assessing defendant's potential for
rehabilitation"); State v. Clegg, 635 N.W.2d 578, 581
(S.D.2001) ("[A] defendant's remorse and prospects for
rehabilitation are proper considerations in sentencing.");
State v. Fuerst, 181 Wis.2d 903, 512 N.W.2d 243, 247
(Ct.App.1994) ("[A] sentencing court does not erroneously
exercise its discretion by noting a defendant's lack of
remorse as long as the court does not attempt to compel an
admission of guilt or punish the defendant for maintaining
his innocence."); cf.  State v. Nooner, 114 Idaho 654, 759
P.2d 945, 946-47 (Ct.App.1988) (concluding that, inasmuch as
the sentencing court "did not rely solely upon Nooner's
continued denial of guilt" after his conviction, such a
consideration, "in light of all the evidence presented, did
not constitute error").
 
Id. at 321, 82 P.3d at 407.
 
In stating that "[Baker] has taken no responsibility at
 
any time," the circuit court did not appear to be considering
 
Baker's maintenance of his innocence, but rather, his lack of
 remorse. This is supported by the circuit court's following
 remarks regarding how right after the assault, Baker and GK left
 CW alone without calling for help. The circuit court did not
 attempt to compel Baker to admit his guilt, nor did it punish
 Baker for maintaining his innocence. Because the sentencing
 court, under HRS § 706-606(2)(d), must consider the need for the
 sentence to provide the defendant with effective correctional
 treatment, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 considering Baker's "lack of remorse in assessing the likelihood
 of successful rehabilitation." Id.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the nature and circumstances of the offense under HRS § 706­
606(1), and the need for the sentence to reflect the seriousness
 of the offense under HRS § 706-606(2)(a). The circuit court also
 stated the need for Baker's sentence "to afford adequate
 deterrence to criminal conduct and to protect the public from
 further crimes of the defendant," demonstrating the court's
 consideration of HRS § 706-606(2)(b)-(c). In light of all of
 this, in considering the kinds of sentences available pursuant to
 HRS § 706-606(3), the circuit court expressed that it did not
 think that a twenty-year term of imprisonment, in other words,
 having Baker's two sentences run concurrently, would be
 sufficient.
 
Accordingly, Baker has failed to establish that the 
circuit court's imposition of consecutive sentencing was "arbitrary or capricious," showed a "rigid refusal to consider the defendant's contentions," or "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason . . . ." See Mundon, 121 Hawai
'i at 349, 219 P.3d at 1136 
(quoting Kahapea, 111 Hawai 'i at 278, 141 P.3d at 451).
ii. Cruel and unusual punishment
 
Baker also contends that the circuit court's imposition
 
of two consecutive sentences constitutes "cruel and unusual
 
punishment." Baker argues that he should not serve the maximum
 sentence of imprisonment because his actions on the night of the
 assault were due in large part to drugs and alcohol consumption.
 Baker also noted that his natural parents were drug addicts, he
 was homeless for most of his life, he had no prior criminal
 record, and he was working to support his family.
 
The standard by which punishment is to be judged under the
'cruel and unusual' punishment provisions of both the UnitedStates and Hawai' i Constitutions is whether, in the light of
developing concepts of decency and fairness, the prescribedpunishment is so disproportionate to the conduct proscribedand is of such duration as to shock the conscience of reasonable persons or to outrage the moral sense of thecommunity. 
Kahapea, 111 Hawai 'i at 282, 141 P.3d at 455 (citations and 
brackets omitted). 
As noted by the circuit court at sentencing, this
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual assault was particularly vicious. CW testified that
 
during the assault, Baker "was dragging [her] all over" and CW
 "was bleeding from head to toe." After the assault, Baker and GK
 caught the bus home and left CW to fend for herself. The assault
 left CW with a broken jaw, multiple lacerations, and several
 abrasions on her body, including her genitalia and anus. Both of
 CW's eyelids were so heavily lacerated that "a piece of her
 eyelid was actually hanging down, hanging from her eyelid over
 her eye," and her upper lip had a wound so deep that her upper
 teeth were visible through the wound. Tatiana Tovar, a crisis
 worker for SATC, testified that she remembered this case very
 well "because it was probably the most difficult case [she] ever
 did at SATC."
 
Accordingly, we conclude that Baker's forty-year
 
sentence is not so disproportionate to his crimes nor of such
 duration as to shock the conscience of reasonable persons or to
 outrage the moral sense of the community, in light of developing
 concepts of decency and fairness.
iii. Apprendi violation
 
In his final point of error, Baker contends that the
 
circuit court's imposition of consecutive sentencing by a judge
 violated Baker's rights under the Sixth Amendment and Due Process
 clause because "any fact that increases the penalty for a crime
 beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a
 jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt." Apprendi v. New
 
Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 490 (2000).
 
However, Apprendi and its progeny do not prohibit a 
sentencing court judge from making factual findings necessary to impose consecutive sentences. See Kahapea, 111 Hawai
'i at 
278-80, 141 P.3d at 451-53 (dismissing the proposition that Apprendi or Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004), proscribes consecutive term sentencing by a trial judge); Oregon v. Ice, 555 U.S. 160 (2009) (confirming the constitutionality of
 the practice of allowing sentencing courts to determine the facts
 necessary to impose consecutive sentences); see also State v.
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hussein, 122 Hawai 'i 495, 229 P.3d 313 (2010) (upholding the 
trial judge's imposition of consecutive sentences). In Kahapea, 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court explained: 
Admittedly, stacking Kahapea's multiple sentences together
has the effect of enhancing the length of his incarceration
beyond ten years, the statutory maximum for one first-degree
theft, see HRS § 706-660, supra note 8. Nevertheless, none
of Kahapea's five individual terms of imprisonment exceeded
the statutory maximum. . . . [T]he logic of the Apprendi
 
rule [does] not apply to consecutive term sentencing . . . .
 
Kahapea, 111 Hawai 'i at 279, 141 P.3d at 452. 
Similarly, Baker's two twenty-year sentences, stacked
 
together, enhanced his term of imprisonment beyond twenty years,
 
the statutory maximum for one count of sexual assault in the
 first degree. See HRS §§ 707-730 and 706-659 (2014). However,
 
neither of Baker's two individual terms of imprisonment exceeded
 the statutory maximum. Therefore, Baker's sentence of
 consecutive terms of imprisonment by a judge did not deprive him
 of his constitutional right to a trial by jury.
 
Baker seems to concede that the ruling in Kahapea 
allows a sentencing judge to impose consecutive terms of imprisonment without having the jury find any aggravating facts beyond a reasonable doubt. However, Baker argues that State v. Auld, 136 Hawai
'i 244, 361 P.3d 471 (2015), which was decided 
after Kahapea, shows that "[t]here is a slowly evolving recognition of the definition of 'elements' under Apprendi," therefore, the State should have to prove to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt the aggravating circumstances that qualify Baker for consecutive sentencing. We disagree. 
In Auld, the supreme court examined the Apprendi "fact 
of prior conviction" exception, which "excepts the 'fact of prior conviction' from the requirement that a jury find, beyond a reasonable doubt, those facts increasing the penalty for a crime." Auld, 136 Hawai
'i at 252, 361 P.3d at 479 (quoting 
Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 489). This exception is based "on the fact that prior convictions have themselves been subject to the sixth amendment right to a jury trial and the accompanying requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Maugaotega, 115 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 432, 446 n.15, 168 P.3d 562, 576 n.15 (2007) (citations 
omitted).
 
Specifically, the Auld court scrutinized the Apprendi
 
"fact of prior conviction" exception and its application to
 
sentencing for repeat offenders under HRS § 706-606.5. The court
 held that repeat offender sentencing under HRS § 706-606.5 must
 be found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt because it involves
 more than a mere finding of fact of a prior conviction:
 
First, it must be proven that a prior conviction belongs to
the defendant. Second, the prior conviction must beenumerated under HRS § 706-606.5(1) or (4). Third, theprior conviction must have occurred within the time frameset forth under HRS §§ 706-606.5(2), (3), or (4). Lastly,Hawai'i case law requires proof that a defendant subject to
mandatory minimum sentencing as a repeat offender wasrepresented by counsel, or had waived such representation,at the time of the prior conviction. 
Auld, 136 Hawai 'i at 254, 361 P.3d at 481. 
We conclude that Auld is not inconsistent with Kahapea
 
or Apprendi. Auld clarifies that Apprendi's "fact of prior
 
conviction" exception does not apply to repeat offender
 
sentencing under HRS § 706–606.5 because factual findings beyond
 the mere presence of a prior conviction are required in order to
 impose repeat offender sentencing under that specific statute.
 Because such factual findings would enhance a defendant's
 sentence beyond the ordinary penalty prescribed for the offense,
 they must be found by a jury. Kahapea, which established that
 
facts increasing a defendant's term of imprisonment solely by
 means of consecutive sentencing may be found by a judge, is
 distinguishable from Auld inasmuch as consecutive sentencing,
 unlike repeat offender sentencing under HRS § 706-606.5, does not
 enhance a defendant's sentence beyond the ordinary penalty
 prescribed for each count. Therefore, Auld is inapplicable here,
 and we rest upon Kahapea in concluding that Baker's consecutive
 sentence was properly imposed upon facts found by the circuit
 court judge.
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence" entered on January 29, 2016 in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Dwight C.H. Lum,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
27
 