 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000107
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PHILIP CEDILLOS, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
v. PATRICIA MASUMOTO, Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 12-1-2171)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Philip Cedillos (Cedillos) appeals
 
from the Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession, both
 
filed on January 17, 2013, in the District Court of the Second
 Circuit, Wailuku Division (District Court).
1
 
On appeal, Cedillos contends the District Court erred
 
by: (1) granting Defendant-Appellee Patricia Masumoto (Masumoto)
 
leave to file a counterclaim for summary possession; (2) allowing
 
the counterclaim for summary possession to be adjudicated prior
 to hearing Cedillos's complaint; (3) denying his request to
 establish a rental trust fund pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 521-78 (2006); (4) granting summary possession based on a
 
finding that he failed to pay rent for November 2012; and (5)
 
denying a stay of the writ of possession.
 
1
 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Cedillos's points of error as follows:
 
(1) We consider Cedillos's claim that the District
 
Court erred by allowing Masumoto to file a counterclaim for
 summary possession in light of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's 
holding that:
 
"Since the decision whether to allow [a] counterclaim
to be pleaded is a matter of judicial discretion, it
can be reversed on appeal only if the party can
demonstrate that the court abused its discretion." 6
 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane,
Federal Practice & Procedure: Omitted Counterclaims §
1430 ([3d ed.] 1983).
 
Shanghai Investment Co. v. Alteka Co., 92 Hawai 'i 482, 492, 993 
P.2d 516, 526 (2000), overruled on other grounds by Blair v. Ing, 
96 Hawai 'i 327, 331 n.6, 31 P.3d 184, 188 n.6 (2001)). Cedillos 
must also show undue prejudice by allowance of Masumoto's counterclaim. Id. at 493, 993 P.2d at 527. On appeal, Cedillos 
failed to provide any argument as to how the District Court abused its discretion in allowing Masumoto to file a counterclaim or state how he was prejudiced when the District Court allowed the counterclaim to be filed. Therefore, this contention is without merit. 
(2) Cedillos argues that the District Court erred by
 
adjudicating Masumoto's claim for possession of the premises
 prior to hearing his complaint. Cedillos's complaint raised a
 number of claims, including a "claim" for retaliatory eviction,
 in violation of HRS § 521-74 (2006). However, retaliatory
 eviction is an affirmative defense. Contrary to Cedillos's
 contention, the District Court did not prevent him from
 presenting evidence of retaliatory eviction as a defense to
 Masumoto's claim for possession.
 
"The court has the discretion in a summary possession 
case to sever the issue of a determination of the landlord's right to summary possession from other issues." KNG Corp. v. 
Kim, 107 Hawai
'i 73, 79 n.10, 110 P.3d 397, 403 n.10 (2005). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the District Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
adjudicating Masumoto's summary possession claim prior to
 considering Cedillos's complaint.
 
The District Court found that Masumoto was entitled to
 
possession of the premises on two grounds, i.e., Cedillos failed
 to pay rent for November 2012 and Cedillos remained on the
 premises despite receiving a forty-five day notice to vacate.
 
HRS § 521-74 states, in part:
 
§ 521-74 Retaliatory evictions and rent
increases prohibited.  (a) Notwithstanding that the
tenant has no written rental agreement or that it has
expired, so long as the tenant continues to tender the
usual rent to the landlord or proceeds to tender
receipts for rent lawfully withheld, no action or
proceeding to recover possession of the dwelling unit
may be maintained against the tenant, nor shall the
landlord otherwise cause the tenant to quit the
dwelling unit involuntarily, nor demand an increase in
rent from the tenant; nor decrease the services to
which the tenant has been entitled, after: 
(1) The tenant has complained in good faith to

the department of health, landlord, building
department, office of consumer protection, or any
other governmental agency concerned with
landlord-tenant disputes of conditions in or affecting
the tenant's dwelling unit which constitutes a
violation of a health law or regulation or of any
provision of this chapter; or
 (2) The department of health or other
governmental agency has filed a notice or complaint of
a violation of a health law or regulation or any
provision of this chapter; or
 (3) The tenant has in good faith requested
repairs under section 521-63 or 521-64. 
Cedillos had the burden of proving retaliatory eviction
 
under HRS § 521-74 by a preponderance of the evidence. Windward
 
Partners v. Delos Santos, 59 Haw. 104, 117, 577 P.2d 326, 334
 
(1978) (retaliatory eviction is an affirmative defense). 
Cedillos claims that Masumoto was prohibited from maintaining a
 proceeding for possession of the premises under HRS § 521-74
 because he tendered rent for November 2012. 
However, even assuming that the District Court
 
erroneously found that Cedillos did not tender rent for November
 2012, Cedillos did not prove that he complied with HRS § 521­74(a)(1), (2), or (3). Cedillos did not testify nor present
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other evidence that he made a complaint that constituted a
 
violation of a health law, regulation, or any provision of HRS
 Chapter 521. Nor did Cedillos prove that the department of
 health or any other governmental agency filed a notice or
 complaint of violation of a health law, regulation or any
 provision of HRS Chapter 521. Lastly, while there was some
 evidence introduced that repairs were made to the property, the
 record demonstrates that those issues were resolved to Cedillos's
 satisfaction. In Exhibit F, admitted into evidence, an email
 from Cedillos to Masumoto dated February 18, 2012, Cedillos
 stated, "Pat, you have demonstrated that you want to - and have ­complied with all the rental codes that are applicable. In
 addition you have made great improvements to your property that
 you did not have to make." In Exhibit Q, admitted into evidence,
 an email from Cedillos to Masumoto dated August 8, 2012, Cedillos
 stated "I don't think that $82.86 for materials and labor is
 unreasonable to bring the firewall unit separation up to Code. 
It is a done deal now and the units are safe." Masumoto
 testified that Cedillos made improvements to the rental unit and
 that he deducted it from his rent. Thus, Cedillos failed to
 carry his burden under HRS § 521-74(a) and he was not entitled to
 invoke the defense of retaliatory eviction. Cedillos does not
 challenge the District Court's determination that Masumoto was
 entitled to possession based upon the forty-five day notice to
 vacate. Therefore, Masumoto was entitled to possession of the
 premises on that ground even if she failed to prove that Cedillos
 failed to pay rent for November 2012.
 
(3) We conclude that the District Court did not err by
 
denying Cedillos's request to establish a rental trust fund. The
 record indicates that, in his request to establish a rental trust
 fund, Cedillos requested that the District Court order Masumoto,
 the landlord, to deposit money to a rental trust fund "for
 improper rental overpayments." The plain language of HRS § 521­78 allows the District Court to order a tenant, not a landlord,
 to deposit disputed rent into the rent trust fund. See HRS
 
§ 521-78(a).
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) Even assuming that the District Court erred by
 
finding that Cedillos failed to tender or pay rent for November
 
2012, it was harmless error. As explained above, the District
 Court also found that Cedillos failed to vacate the premises
 after receiving a forty-five day notice to vacate and Cedillos
 failed to establish retaliatory eviction. Therefore, Masumoto
 was entitled to possession of the premises, regardless of whether
 Cedillos tendered or paid rent for November 2012. 
(5) The District Court did not err by denying
 
Cedillos's request to stay the writ of possession. Cedillos
 
2
cites HRS § 666-14 (1993)  in support of his claim that the
District Court was required to issue a stay of a writ of

 
possession. Cedillos claims that he made an oral motion to stay
 issuance of a writ of possession pending tender of payment, but
 the District Court denied it without hearing any argument. 
Cedillos further claims that he filed a written motion for stay
 on January 14, 2013, prior to issuance of the writ of possession
 issued on January 17, 2013.
 
Court minutes indicate that the District Court denied 
Cedillos's oral motion for stay. 
However, no transcript of the 
proceeding was provided by Cedillos. Because the factual basis for Cedillos's claim that the District Court failed to hear any arguments on the oral motion is not in the record on appeal, this court cannot effectively review the merit of the claim. State v. 
Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). Cedillos has 
failed to carry his burden of proving error in the record on this point. Id. Cedillos's written motion, received on January 14, 
2013 and denied on January 31, 2013, stated "Defendant Movant 
2
 HRS § 666-14 states:
 
§666-14 Writ stayed how, in proceedings for
nonpayment of rent.  The issuing of the writ of possession
shall be stayed in the case of a proceeding for the
nonpayment of rent, if the person owing the rent, before the
writ is actually issued, pays the rent due and interest
thereon at the rate of eight per cent a year and all costs
and charges of the proceedings, and all expenses incurred by
plaintiff, including a reasonable fee for the plaintiff's
attorney.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
offer[s] payment pursuant to HRS 666-14 for stay of writ of
 
possession," but failed to comply with HRS § 666-14, which
 requires actual payment prior to issuance of writ of possession
 in order to obtain a stay. Cedillos only offered to pay Masumoto
 an unspecified amount prior to issuance of the writ of
 possession. 
Therefore, the District Court's Judgment for Possession
 
and Writ of Possession, both filed on January 17, 2013, are
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 27, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Philip Cedillos
Pro Se Plaintiff/CounterclaimDefendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Matson Kelleyfor Defendant/CounterclaimPlaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 