 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0001117
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRANDON SAK TACHINO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-1445)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon Sak Tachino (Tachino)
 
appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; Notice of
 
Entry" entered on April 29, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the

 
1
First Circuit  (circuit court).  Tachino was found guilty of
 
Hindering Prosecution in the Second Degree pursuant to Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 710-1030 (2014).
2
   
On appeal Tachino contends that (1) the circuit court
 
erred when it failed to determine that the deputy prosecuting
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 
2
 HRS § 710-1030 provides:
 
§710-1030 Hindering prosecution in the second degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of hindering prosecution in
the second degree if, with the intent to hinder the
apprehension, prosecution, conviction, or punishment of
another for a crime, he renders assistance to such person.
 
(2) Hindering prosecution in the second degree is a
misdemeanor.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney (DPA) made improper comments during closing argument;
 
(2) Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) did not present 
enough evidence to support a conviction; and (3) the trial court violated Tachino's right to bail pending an appeal. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Tachino's
 points of error as follows and vacate and remand.
I. Background
 
On May 1, 2012, Officer Charles Rezentes (Officer
 
Rezentes) went to an apartment on Waiawa Road to execute a
 
federal arrest warrant for Porsha Cornelio (Cornelio). Officer
 Rezentes was returning to the apartment for the fourth time in an
 effort to locate Cornelio. During prior visits to the apartment,
 Officer Rezentes had warned Nohelani Peters (Peters), who is
 Cornelio's sister, and Tachino, who is Peters's boyfriend, that
 if they knew where Cornelio was and did not inform the police,
 they would be arrested for hindering prosecution. 
On May 1, 2012, Peters answered the door and told
 
Officer Rezentes that Cornelio was not there but allowed Officer
 Rezentes to look in the apartment. Officer Joseph Lefcourt
 (Officer Lefcourt), who was also searching the apartment,
 testified that he asked Tachino if Cornelio was in the apartment
 and Tachino responded that he did not know where she was. 
Another officer located Cornelio in the attic of the apartment. 
Officer Rezentes then informed Tachino that he was
 
going to be arrested. Officer Rezentes testified that when
 Tachino was placed under arrest, Tachino stated: "I don't know
 what to do, I live with Porsha's mom." Tachino testified that he
 did not remember making that statement. Tachino also testified
 that he told Officer Lefcourt that he did not know Cornelio was
 in the apartment. Officer Lefcourt testified that, after telling
 Tachino he would be arrested, Officer Lefcourt escorted Tachino
 around the apartment so that Tachino could pack a bag for his
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
baby and during that time Tachino's only comments were concerning
 
his baby. 
On November 15, 2012, Tachino was charged with
 
Hindering Prosecution in the Second Degree pursuant to HRS 
§ 710-1030.
II. Discussion
 
A. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Tachino first contends that the DPA made improper
 
comments during closing arguments about Tachino's post-arrest
 silence, which violated Tachino's right to remain silent and
 which was not harmless. Tachino objected to the DPA's comments
 and requested a mistrial, which the circuit court denied. 
We consider three factors in evaluating whether 
improper prosecutorial comments warrant a new trial: "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai
'i 235, 
252, 178 P.3d 1, 18 (2008) (quoting State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai 'i 
38, 47, 79 P.3d 131, 140 (2003)) (internal quotation marks omitted). “Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which requires an examination of the record and a determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction.” State 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(internal citations and quotation marks omitted). If there has been prosecutorial misconduct, we also consider whether the double jeopardy clause of the Hawai
'i Constitution bars retrial 
of the defendant. Id. at 416, 984 P.2d at 1242. 
1. The nature of the conduct
 
The first factor in evaluating prosecutorial misconduct
 
is the nature of the prosecutor's conduct. "Although a
 prosecutor has wide latitude in commenting on the evidence during
 closing argument, it is not enough that . . . his comments are
 based on testimony 'in evidence'; his comments must also be
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
'legitimate.'" Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai 'i at 253, 178 P.3d at 19. 
Comments during closing argument are not legitimate when they 
contravene a defendant's fundamental right to remain silent. Id. 
at 254, 178 P.3d at 20. In Mainaaupo, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that "the DPA's comments were not 'legitimate' because, in contravention of [the defendant's] fundamental right to remain silent, the DPA argued the unreasonable inference that [the defendant] was guilty in light of his post-arrest silence, that is, his failure to act like an 'innocent person' . . . ." Id. 
(citation omitted). The court also held that, regardless of 
3
whether the defendant had been given his Miranda  warnings, "the
right against self-incrimination attached at least as of the time
 of the arrest, because the right to remain silent derives from
 the Constitution and not from the Miranda warnings themselves." 
Id. at 252, 178 P.3d at 18 (citation, footnote, and internal
 quotation marks omitted).
 
In this case, the DPA made comments during his closing
 
argument regarding Tachino's failure to, essentially, profess his
 innocence after being arrested. The DPA stated that Tachino "had
 every opportunity to tell Officer Lefcourt, Hey, you know, don't
 arrest me; I - - I didn't know she was here[.]" After Tachino
 objected to the DPA's comment, the DPA also stated that Tachino
 "had every opportunity to let Officer Lefcourt know, and he only
 asked questions about his daughter." 
The DPA's comments were not legitimate because they
 
contravened Tachino's right to remain silent. It is reasonable
 that the jury could have interpreted the DPA's remarks as
 comments on Tachino's post-arrest silence. Therefore, the first
 factor in evaluating prosecutorial misconduct, the nature of the
 prosecutor's comments, weighs in favor of a new trial.
2. Curative instruction
 
The second factor in evaluating prosecutorial
 
misconduct is the promptness of a curative instruction. In
 
3
 Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
general, "a curative instruction [is] sufficient to cure 
prosecutorial misconduct because it presumes that the jury heeds the court's instruction to disregard improper prosecution comments." Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai
'i at 255, 178 P.3d at 21 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
In this case, the circuit court did not give a curative
 
instruction regarding the DPA's statements that Tachino
 challenged. Therefore, this factor also weighs in favor of a new
 trial.
 
3. Strength and weakness of the evidence
 
The third factor in evaluating prosecutorial misconduct 
is the strength and weakness of the evidence. The evidence must be overwhelmingly in favor of the prosecution to overcome the prejudice that the improper comment caused. See Mainaaupo, 117 
Hawai
'i at 255, 178 P.3d at 21; Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i at 415, 984 P.2d 
at 1241. 
The State relied on the testimony of Officer Rezentes
 
and Officer Lefcourt. In particular, the DPA relied on Officer
 Rezentes's testimony that Tachino told Officer Rezentes: "I don't
 know what to do, I live with Porsha's mom." However, Tachino
 testified that he did not know that Cornelio was in the apartment
 and that he did not even know there was an attic. The case
 mainly turns on Tachino's credibility and whether the jury
 believed he did not know Cornelio was in the attic. The evidence
 of criminal conduct was not overwhelming in this case.
 
All three factors used in evaluating prosecutorial
 
misconduct weigh in favor of Tachino.
4. Double jeopardy
 
Under the double jeopardy clause of article I, section 
10 of the Hawai
'i Constitution, "reprosecution of a defendant 
after a mistrial or reversal on appeal as a result of prosecutorial misconduct is barred where the prosecutorial misconduct is so egregious that, from an objective standpoint, it clearly denied a defendant his or her right to a fair trial." Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 423, 984 P.2d at 1249. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tachino does not argue that double jeopardy applies to
 
this case and only requests a new trial. Moreover, the DPA's
 
comments regarding Tachino's post-arrest silence were not so
 egregious as to prevent a retrial. Therefore, a new trial is not
 barred by double jeopardy.
B. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
Tachino also contends that the State failed to adduce
 
substantial evidence to support his conviction. Specifically,
 Tachino contends that he could not have hindered prosecution
 because he did not know Cornelio was present in the apartment. 
"[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution . . . ." State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i 382, 391, 910 P.2d 695, 704 (1996) 
(citation omitted). The test on appeal of whether there was sufficient evidence to support a conviction "is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Id. at 391-92, 910 P.2d at 704-05 (citation omitted). 
The State presented two police officers as witnesses
 
who testified against Tachino. Both officers testified that
 Cornelio was clean, drawing the conclusion that she did not
 permanently live in the attic and it is likely that someone
 living in the two bedroom apartment would have seen her there. 
Tachino also testified to the facts of the case and denied that
 he knew Cornelio was present. In viewing the evidence in the
 light most favorable to the State, there was "substantial
 evidence" to show that Tachino rendered assistance to Cornelio. 
Therefore, there was sufficient evidence to render a guilty
 verdict against Tachino.
C. Right to Bail Pending Appeal
 
Tachino contends that the circuit court violated his
 
right to bail pending appeal when it executed a mittimus. 
Tachino also acknowledges that this issue is likely moot because
 Tachino was eventually released on bail and his sentence is
 currently stayed pending the appeal, but that the public interest
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7exception to the mootness doctrine applies.  
The record is unclear as to whether and/or why Tachino
was incarcerated after the judgment.  At all relevant times, the
circuit court granted bail to Tachino, although his bail amount
was increased from $2,000 to $4,000 on May 28, 2013.  To the
extent that there may have been an error when the circuit court
executed the mittimus on May 28, 2013, it is undisputed that the
circuit court corrected the error on May 31, 2013, when it filed
an Order Striking Mittimus filed May 28, 2013.  Thus, the issue
is moot and none of the exceptions to the mootness doctrine
apply.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence; Notice of Entry entered on April 29,
2013, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is vacated.  The
case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 30, 2015.
On the briefs:
William K. Li, 
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
James M. Anderson, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge