NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000648
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON FKA THE BANK OF NEW YORK, AS TRUSTEE
FOR THE CERTIFICATEHOLDERS OF THE CWABS, INC., ASSET-BACKED
CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2007-10, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOSEPH ALBERT SPIELMAN AND ELLEN SPIELMAN, Defendants-Appellants,
and
U.S. REIF/MJW WAIMEA FEE, LLC AND WAIMEA RETAIL, LLC,
Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1139)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee The Bank of New York Mellon (BONY )
filed suit to foreclose on a note and mortgage allegedly made by
Defendants-Appellants Joseph Albert Spielman ( Joseph) and Ellen
Spielman ( Ellen) (collectively, the Spielmans ).1  On August 6,
2015, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit2 entered findings of
fact, conclusions of law and an order granting BONY's motion for
summary judgment and interlocutory decree of foreclosure, and a
judgment in favor of BONY and against the Spielmans and other
defendants (Foreclosure Judgment).  The Spielmans filed a timely
notice of appeal.  We affirm the Foreclosure Judgment.
1The Spielmans are referred to by their given names when necessary
to avoid confusion.
2The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Procedural History
BONY filed the complaint below on April 25, 2012.  
BONY claimed to be the assignee of a note (the Countrywide Note)
and mortgage made by the Spielmans and originally given to
Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. on June 5, 2007.  Copies of the
Countrywide Note (endorsed in blank), the mortgage, and the
assignment of mortgage were attached as exhibits to BONY's
complaint.  BONY alleged that the Spielmans were in default of
the note, and sought to foreclose on the mortgage.
The Spielmans answered the complaint on June 26, 2012. 
They responded to the allegations in the complaint concerning
execution and delivery of the Countrywide Note and mortgage by
stating:
3.With respect to the allegations contained within
Paragraphs 3 [concerning the note] and 4 [concerning the
mortgage] of said Complaint, [the Spielmans] say that the
documents referenced therein speak for themselves, except
that they deny each and every interpretation of said
documents made by [BONY] and leave [BONY] to its proof at
trial.
All other allegations in the complaint were denied.
BONY took the Spielmans' oral depositions and
subpoenaed documents from Hawaii Escrow & Title, Inc.  On
December 8, 2014, BONY filed a motion for summary judgment and
decree of foreclosure (MSJ ).  The MSJ was supported by a
declaration of BONY's loan servicing agent authenticating, among
other things, the Countrywide Note and mortgage.  Excerpts from
Ellen's deposition and documents from Hawaii Escrow & Title were
also attached to the MSJ.
BONY's evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to
the Spielmans, established that the Spielmans were indebted to
Fremont Investment & Loan ( Fremont) under a note and mortgage
executed in 2006.  Proceeds from the Countrywide loan were used
to pay off the Fremont loan and obtain a release of the Fremont
mortgage.  The Spielmans also received $170,878.57 in cash when
the Countrywide loan closed.  The Spielmans do not dispute that
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
they made payments under the Countrywide Note until June 2009,
when they defaulted on the loan.
The Spielmans filed a memorandum in opposition to which
was attached a declaration of Joseph that stated, among other
things:
5.I did not sign the Note dated June 5, 2007
(Exhibit 1 to BONY's Motion for Summary Judgment and
Exhibit 4 to the Deposition Transcript); my signature does
not appear on said Note.
6.I did not sign the Mortgage dated June 5, 2007
(Exhibit 2 to BONY's Motion for Summary Judgment and
Exhibit 5 to the Deposition Transcript); my signature does
not appear on said Mortgage.
. . . .
8.All of the signatures of my name that appear on
said Note and said Mortgage were forged.
9.I do not know who forged my name on said Note
and said Mortgage.
The Spielmans also filed the transcript of Joseph's deposition,
which had been taken on August 18, 2014.  In it, Joseph admits
signing the Making Home Affordable Program Request for
Modification and Affidavit on July 16, 2012 ( Request for
Modification).  Joseph also testified that his attorney sent the
Request for Modification and related documents — all signed by
Joseph — to BONY's attorney on July 23, 2012.  The loan number
referenced on the Request for Modification is the same as the
loan number on the note that was attached to BONY's complaint and
BONY's MSJ.  Joseph did not receive a response to his Request for
Modification from BONY.
The MSJ was heard on April 15, 2015.  The Spielmans did
not contest that BONY was the holder of the note.  They argued:
As this Court is probably aware, this case is quite
different than most of the cases that are in foreclosure
today, as the note has the forged signature on it.  My
client didn't sign it.  He's testified as to such.  He's
been deposed.  And that deposition was submitted to the
Court in full, so that the Court can get the full context of
what exactly happened and how this mortgage and note had
came to have my client's forged signature on it.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . .
THE COURT: Your factual issue is the fact that it's
not the signature of your client?
[COUNSEL]: That's exactly correct, sir.
THE COURT: Do you have anything, other than his
declaration, to indicate it's not his signature?
[COUNSEL]: His declaration, and his deposition
testimony.  And I think that's enough to put the issue into
dispute.
The circuit court took the MSJ under advisement.  On August 8,
2015, the circuit court entered findings of fact, conclusions of
law and an order granting BONY's MSJ, and the Foreclosure
Judgment.  This appeal followed.
Standard of Review
Summary judgment decisions are reviewed de novo. 
Association of Apartment Owners of Maalaea Kai, Inc. v. Stillson,
108 Hawai#i 2, 7, 116 P.3d 644, 649 (2005).  "Summary judgment
will be upheld 'if the pleadings, depositions, answers to
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the
affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of
material fact and the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a
matter of law.'"  Id. (citation omitted).  A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or
refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or
defense asserted by the parties.  Nozawa v. Operating Engineers
Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 342, 418 P.3d 1187, 1198
(2018).
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e)
(2000) requires that affidavits supporting or opposing a motion
for summary judgment "shall be made on personal knowledge, shall
set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and
shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify
to the matters stated therein."  "HRCP Rule 56(e) does not
preclude an affidavit from being self-serving. . . . [A] party's
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
self-serving statements that otherwise comply with HRCP Rule
56(e) can be utilized to defeat summary judgment. . . . HRCP Rule
56(e) does not require a statement in an affidavit to be
corroborated in order to be a qualifying affidavit under the
rule."  Nozawa, 142 Hawai#i at 339, 418 P.3d at 1195 (citations
and footnote omitted).
Discussion
The Spielmans' opening brief contains five points of
error; the first three are premised upon Joseph's denial of
having signed the Countrywide Note and mortgage.  Ellen did not
deny signing the note and the mortgage, or being in default of
the loan.  Accordingly, summary judgment was appropriate as
against Ellen.
Joseph is barred from challenging the validity of the
Countrywide Note.  Hawai#i has adopted the Uniform Commercial
Code, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) Chapter 490 ( UCC).  Article 3
of the UCC applies to negotiable instruments such as the
Countrywide Note.  HRS § 490:3-308 (2008) provides, in relevant
part:
(a)In an action with respect to an instrument, the
authenticity of, and authority to make, each signature on
the instrument is admitted unless specifically denied in the
pleadings.
(Emphasis added.)  HRCP Rule 7 (2000) provides:
(a) Pleadings .  There shall be a complaint and an
answer; a reply to a counterclaim denominated as such; an
answer to a cross-claim, if the answer contains a cross-
claim; a third-party complaint, if a person who was not an
original party is summoned under the provisions of Rule 14;
and a third-party answer, if a third-party complaint is
served.  No other pleading shall be allowed, except that the
court may order a reply to an answer or a third-party
answer.
Joseph's answer to BONY's complaint denied only BONY's "inter-
pretation" of the note, and affirmatively alleged that the note
spoke for itself.  Joseph did not deny signing the Countrywide
Note.  Because Joseph's pleading failed to specifically deny that
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
he signed the Countrywide Note, the circuit court did not err in
determining that Joseph "made, executed and delivered" the note
to Countrywide.  In re Tyrell, 528 B.R. 790, 794-95 (Bankr.
D. Haw. 2015) (applying HRS § 490:3-308(a)).
Even if Joseph's answer had specifically denied that he
signed the Countrywide Note, the validity of the note is not a
material fact in this case because the uncontroverted evidence
established that the Spielmans ratified the Countrywide Note. 
BONY established, and the Spielmans did not controvert, that
proceeds from the Countrywide Note were applied to pay off the
Spielmans' Fremont note, that the Spielmans received a release of
the Fremont mortgage and $170,878.57 in cash when the Countrywide
loan closed, and that the Spielmans made payments under the
Countrywide Note until June 2009 before defaulting on the loan. 
Joseph testified in deposition, "I remember writing checks to
Fremont.  It was Fremont then Countrywide."  In addition, Joseph
admitted signing a Request for Modification sent by his attorney
to BONY's foreclosure attorney on July 23, 2012.  Joseph ratified
or affirmed his debt under the Countrywide Note.  See Stillson,
108 Hawai#i at 13-14, 116 P.3d at 655-56 (discussing Hawai# i
Supreme Court's adoption of Restatement of the Law of Agency's
definitions for "ratification" and "affirmance"); see also
HRS § 490:3-403(a) (2008) ("An unauthorized signature may be
ratified for all purposes of this article.") .  By ratifying and
affirming his debt under the note, Joseph also ratified and
affirmed the mortgage that secured the debt.  Cf. Bank of Am.,3
3Comment 3. to Uniform Commercial Code Section 3-403 states:
The last sentence of subsection (a) allows an unauthorized
signature to be ratified.  Ratification is a retroactive
adoption of the unauthorized signature by the person whose
name is signed and may be found from conduct as well as fro
express statements.  For example, it may be found from the
retention of benefits received in the transaction with
knowledge of the unauthorized signature.  Although the
forger is not an agent, ratification is governed by the
rules and principles applicable to ratification of
unauthorized acts of an agent.m
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai#i 361, 371 n.17, 390 P.3d 1248,
1258 n.17 (2017) (stating that "the security follows the debt")
(citing HRS § 490:9–203(g) & cmt. 9 (2008) (codifying the common
law rule that a transfer of an obligation secured by a security
interest or other lien on personal or real property also
transfers the security interest or lien)).  The circuit court did
not err in granting BONY's MSJ and entering the Foreclosure
Judgment.
Because we affirm the Foreclosure Judgment based upon
Ellen's non-opposition and Joseph's ratification or affirmance of
the debt, we need not address the Spielmans' contention that the
circuit court should have rejected BONY's equitable subrogation
argument.
The Spielmans' final argument is that the Countrywide
Note and mortgage are void under HRS § 480-12 (2008).  The
statute provides:
Any contract or agreement in violation of this chapter
is void and is not enforceable at law or in equity.
HRS Chapter 480 declares as unlawful "[u]nfair methods of
competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the
conduct of any trade or commerce[.]"  HRS § 480-2(a) (2008).  The
Spielmans' briefs fail to identify any act of, or conduct by,
BONY that was allegedly unfair or deceptive.  Their only argument
is that "the practice endorsed by the bank in creating the Note
and Mortgage allowed for fraud and forgery."  The uncontroverted
evidence is that it was Countrywide, not BONY, that created the
note and mortgage.  There is no evidence in the record of unfair
methods of competition or unfair or deceptive acts or practices
by Countrywide, or by BONY.  The Spielmans failed to establish
any violation of HRS Chapter 480.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Conclusion
Based upon the foregoing, the Foreclosure Judgment
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on August 6,
2015, is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 6, 2020.
On the briefs:
David B. Rosen,
David E. McAllister,
Justin S. Moyer,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Gary V. Dubin,
Richard T. Forrester,
for Defendants-Appellants. Associate Judge
Eric H. Tsugawa,
Leila M. Rothwell Sullivan,
for Defendants-Appellees.
(No brief filed.) Associate Judge
8