        
     
    
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals 
CAAP-23-0000489 
17-JUN-2025 
09:23 AM 
Dkt. 44 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000489 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
VIRGINIA  CHIN,  Petitioner-Appellee,  v. 
RICHARD  CHIN,  Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  FAMILY  COURT  OF  THE  THIRD  CIRCUIT 
(CASE  NO.  3FDA-23-0000469) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(Leonard,  Acting  Chief  Judge,  Nakasone  and  Guidry,  JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant  Richard  Chin  (Richard)  appeals 
from  the  July  31,  2023  Order  for  Protection  (Order  for 
Protection)  entered  by  the  South  Kohala  Division  of  the  Family 
Court  of  the  Third  Circuit  (Family  Court).1 
Richard  raises  two  points  of  error  on  appeal, 
contending  that  the  Family  Court  erred  when:   (1)  it  continued 
the  "show-cause  hearing"  beyond  the  15-day  deadline  set  forth  in 
Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS)  §  586-5(b)  (2018);   and  (2)  it 
concluded  that  Richard  failed  to  show  cause  that  an  order  of 
protection  was  unnecessary  based  on  the  facts  adduced  at  the 
evidentiary  hearing  held  on  July  31,  2023. 
2
1 The Honorable Jill M. Hasegawa presided. 
2 The Honorable Joseph Florendo presided.          
        
         
        
      
       
         
          
         
       
          
     
         
  
      
      
    
     
     
      
        
      
       
         
      
 
         
          
       
      
       
         
        
          
   . . . . 
   . . . . 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve 
Richard's points of error as follows: 
Richard's second point of error is dispositive. 
Richard argues that the Order for Protection must be reversed 
because there was insufficient evidence to support it. It is 
undisputed that the Order for Protection was based on alleged 
"domestic abuse," in particular, an allegation of "extreme 
psychological abuse" as defined in HRS § 586-1 (2018 & Supp. 
2021), which provides, in relevant part: 
§ 586-1 Definitions. As used in this chapter: 
"Domestic abuse" means: 
(1) Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the 
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, 
or assault, extreme psychological abuse, 
coercive control, or malicious property damage 
between family or household members; or 
"Extreme psychological abuse" means an intentional or 
knowing course of conduct directed at an individual that 
seriously alarms or disturbs consistently or continually 
bothers the individual, and that serves no legitimate 
purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a 
reasonable person to suffer extreme emotional distress. 
(Emphasis added). 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  evidentiary  hearing,  the 
Family  Court  ruled  as  follows: 
So in looking at whether or not domestic abuse occurs, 
as the Court explained at the start of this hearing, there 
are a number of different things. There's the 
coercive-control factor, but there's also the extreme 
psychological abuse. There's actual physical harm, bodily 
injury, assault, or the threat of physical harm, injury, or 
assault. 
In hearing the testimony of the parties and reviewing 
the texts, as to the coercive control, I struggled on this 
2          
         
 
        
              
          
        
        
            
        
        
     
         
         
            
          
        
          
      
         
   
  
     
          
          
           
       
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because I understand the parties are going through a very 
bitter divorce. 
And yes, Mr. Chin, quote, texted things he shouldn't 
have. But Ms. Chin kind of gave as good as she got on some 
of those text messages in terms of the coercive control in 
terms of parties' behaviors. Neither party's behaviors was 
exemplary or -- and that behavior needs to stop. 
And so I didn't really find that. But what I did find 
concerning and more the psychological abuse or the threat 
was the text regarding the tour boat discovers woman 
floating in deep waters off Oahu. 
I understand, Mr. Chin, if I picked on that article, 
to her it might have said something completely different. 
But looking at the action and what was in the text, it was 
disturbing. And in light of all of the other information 
regarding the parties, after reviewing the evidence, I am 
finding that there is a sufficient basis to grant an Order 
for Protection making a finding of abuse. 
And I'm gonna grant the Order for Protection for a 
period of one year. 
(Emphasis  added). 
Richard  argues,  inter  alia,  that  the  Family  Court  did 
not  find,  nor  did  Petitioner-Appellee  Virginia  Chin  (Virginia) 
offer  any  evidence  that  the  text  was  "part  of  a  course  of 
conduct"  that  seriously  alarmed  or  disturbed  consistently  or 
continually  bothered  Virginia. 
In
  her  Answering  Brief,  Virginia  points  to  no  other 
action  evidenced  in  the  record  constituting  an  act  of  extreme 
psychological  abuse  and,  upon  review,  we  find  none.   In  fact, 
Virginia  points  to  that  single  text  as  sufficient  to  meet  the 
statutory  requirement  for  establishing  extreme  psychological 
abuse  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence. 
3 
As set
 forth above, the statutory requirements for 
extreme psychological abuse involve a course of conduct. It is 
well recognized in Hawai i  law that  a course of conduct involves 
a pattern or series of acts, i.e., multiple acts, not a single 
3 Virginia makes no citations to the record whatsoever. 
3          
    
   
  
         
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
act.   See,  e.g.  HRS  §  604-10.5(a)  (2016)  ("'Course  of  conduct' 
means  a  pattern  of  conduct  composed  of  a  series  of  acts  over  any 
period  of  time  evidencing  a  continuity  of  purpose.");  Daoang  v. 
Perry,  155  Hawai i  157,  165,  557   P.3d  886,  894  (2024)  (citing 
Duarte  v.  Young,  134  Hawai i  459,  463,  342  P.3d  878,  882  (App. 
2014)  ("a  single  act  does  not  constitute  a  'course  of 
conduct'")).   Accordingly,  Richard's  single  text  does  not 
constitute  a  course  of  conduct  under  HRS  §  586-1  and  the  District 
Court  clearly  erred  in  entering  the  Order  for  Protection  based  on 
that  single  act,  notwithstanding  the  acrimony  between  the  parties 
who  were  in  the  midst  of  their  bitterly  contentious  divorce. 
For these reasons, the
 Family Court's Order for 
Protection is reversed.4 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai i,  June  17,  2025.  
On  the  briefs:  /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
Daniel  S.  Peters, 
for  Respondent-Appellant. /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Associate  Judge 
E.F.  Cash-Dudley, 
for  Petitioner-Appellee. /s/  Kimberly  T.  Guidry 
Associate  Judge 
4 Accordingly, we need not address Richard's first point of error. 
4 