FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
SCOTT SPITTLER, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
v.
PAUL R. CHARBONNEAU, JANICE CHARBONNEAU, Defendants/Counterclaim
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
and
ELIZABETH THERESA SCHMIDT, Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-
Claimant,
and
DOE 2 Through DOES 20, Defendants
NO. CAAP-16-0000069
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 3CC09-1-0007)
SEPTEMBER 4, 2019
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, CHAN AND HIRAOKA, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J.
This case arose from a dispute between neighbors over
plants.  Plaintiff-Appellant Scott Spittler ( Spittler) appeals
from the First Amended Final Judgment ( Judgment) entered by the
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court ) on January 8,1
1The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2016, and the order partially granting and partially denying a
motion for partial summary judgment filed by Defendants-Appellees
Paul R. Charbonneau and Janice Charbonneau (collectively, the
Charbonneaus) entered by the Circuit Court on August 2, 2013 (PSJ
Order).  For the reasons explained below, we affirm the
Judgment.2
I.
Spittler and the Charbonneaus own adjoining property in
Kapoho on Hawai #i island.  They disputed the location of their
common boundary.  On January 8, 2009, Spittler filed a "Complaint
for Trespass and Damages" against the Charbonneaus.  The
complaint alleged that between 1984 and 2006 the Charbonneaus
planted a number of ironwood,  loulu palm,  and coconut palm
trees, some of which were planted on Spittler's property. 
Spittler claimed that the Charbonneaus agreed to remove their
trees from Spittler's property and to be bound by a neutral
survey of the boundary between the parties' properties, but have
not done so.  On July 23, 2007, a branch from one of the
Charbonneaus' trees allegedly fell, struck Spittler, and damaged
Spittler's greenhouse covering.  Spittler's complaint alleged
that the Charbonneaus' trees have "an extensive root system, have
created a poor growing environment, and continue to present
danger to person, real property, and agricultural products of
[Spittler]."  Spittler also claimed that Paul Charbonneau4 3
2Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claimant Elizabeth Theresa
Schmidt, the former co-owner of Spittler's property, is not a party to this
appeal.
3"Ironwood" is the name commonly given in Hawai #i to trees of the
Casuarina family, native to Australia and so called because of their very hard
wood.  They are commonly used as windbreaks, such as along the Kohala Mountain
Road on Hawai #i island, at Waim ânalo, O #ahu, and Hanalei, Kaua #i, near the
pier.  Elbert L. Little, Jr. & Roger G. Skolmen, U.S. Dept. of Agric., Common
Forest Trees of Hawaii 86-92 (1989),
http://www.hear.org/books/cftoh1989/pdfs/cftoh1989.pdf.
4Loulu, of the genus Pritchardia, is a medium-sized fanpalm native
to Hawai #i.  Common Forest Trees of Hawaii at 82-84.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
screamed profanities and called the police after Spittler pruned
coconut fronds that were hanging into Spittler's property.  The
complaint listed the following causes of action: (1) trespass to
property; (2) breach of contract; (3) breach of implied covenant
of good faith and fair dealing; (4) negligence; (5) misrepresen-
tation; (6) unfair and deceptive trade practices; (7) punitive
damages;  (8) nuisance; (9) detrimental reliance; (10) inten-
tional infliction of emotional distress; and (11) quiet title.5
On January 29, 2009, the Charbonneaus filed an answer
and a counterclaim.  They alleged that they acquired their
property in 1980; their ironwood trees were planted in 1983 "as a
windbreak under a program administered by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service"; Spittler acquired his
property in 1999; in 2006 Spittler claimed to own the land on
which the Charbonneaus' ironwood trees were planted and demanded
that the trees be removed; and since 2007 Spittler has trespassed
on the Charbonneaus' property, cut down and killed numerous
ironwood and palm trees, and directed loud music and noise toward
the Charbonneaus' property to interfere with the Charbonneaus'
use and enjoyment of their property.  The counterclaim also
alleges that in November 2008 Spittler fired a rifle from his
property at Paul Charbonneau, who was standing on his own
property.  The counterclaim listed the following causes of
action: (1) quiet title; (2) injunctive relief; (3) intentional,
reckless, or negligent destruction of property; and (4) punitive
damages .6
On June 13, 2013, the Charbonneaus filed a motion for
partial summary judgment on the first (trespass) and eighth
(nuisance) counts of Spittler's complaint.  Spittler's opposition
was filed on July 3, 2013, and an errata was filed on July 10,
5"[A] claim for punitive damages is not an independent tort, but is
purely incidental to a separate cause of action."  Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co.
(Hawai#i), 76 Hawai #i 454, 466, 879 P.2d 1037, 1049 (1994) (citation omitted).
6See Ross, 76 Hawai #i at 466, 879 P.2d at 1049 (punitive damages is
not an independent tort).
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2013.  The Charbonneaus' reply was filed on July 9, 2013.  The
motion was heard on July 11, 2013.   The PSJ Order was entered on
August 2, 2013; the order contained the following provisions
relevant to this appeal:7
The Court finds as follows:
. . . .
2.With respect to the issue regarding branches,
leaves and roots, the uncontroverted material facts are that
trees are located on the Charbonneau property but the
branches [and] leaves from those trees overhang onto the
[Spittler] property, and the leaves from the trees may fall
from those trees onto the [Spittler] property and the roots
from those trees might intrude into the [Spittler] property. 
These intrusions only interfere with plant life on the
[Spittler] property.  Under Whitesell v. Houlton, 2 Haw.
App. 365, 632 P.2d 1077 (1981), [Spittler]'s claims for
relief based on trespass are not appropriate.  Further the
intrusion by way of overhanging branches, leaves and roots
into the [Spittler] property that results in damage to plant
life is not a nuisance and not compensable.
Based upon the above findings
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED as follows:
. . . .
2.[The Charbonneaus'] motion for partial summary
judgment seeking to dismiss that portion of the First Cause
of Action of Spittler's Complaint . . . alleging trespass
caused by the intruding roots, branches and leaves onto the
[Spittler] property from trees and plants on [the
Charbonneaus'] property[] is hereby granted, and that
portion of the First Cause of Action of Spittler's Complaint
. . . [is] hereby dismissed.
3.[The Charbonneaus'] motion for partial summary
judgment seeking to dismiss the Eighth Cause of Action [of]
Spittler's Complaint . . . alleging nuisance caused by the
intruding roots, branches and leaves onto the [Spittler]
property from trees and plants on [the Charbonneaus']
property[] is hereby granted, and the Eighth Cause of Action
of Spittler's Complaint . . . [is] hereby dismissed.
The parties eventually agreed to a partial settlement
of all claims except counts one (trespass) and eight (nuisance) —
which were the subjects of the PSJ Order — and eleven (quiet
title) of Spittler's complaint.  The terms of the settlement were
7The record on appeal does not contain a transcript of the hearing.
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
placed on the record on July 30, 2013.  A stipulation for entry
of a judgment was filed on February 4, 2014; the stipulation
recited a resolution of the quiet title claim based on a land
survey and an existing boundary pin.  A judgment was filed on
February 26, 2014.  Spittler filed a notice of appeal but we
dismissed the appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction.  The
First Amended Final Judgment was entered on January 8, 2016. 
This appeal followed.
II.
Standard of Review
An appellate court reviews a trial court's grant or
denial of summary judgment de novo using the same standard
applied by the trial court.  Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local
Union No. 3, 142 Hawai #i 331, 338, 418 P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). 
"Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a
judgment as a matter of law."  Id. at 342, 418 P.3d at 1198
(citations and brackets omitted).
Issues Presented
The parties do not dispute that branches of trees
located on the Charbonneaus' property hang over Spittler's
property, that leaves falling from those trees land on Spittler's
property, and that the roots of those trees have grown into
Spittler's property.  This appeal presents two legal issues:
(1) do those conditions constitute a nuisance for which the
Charbonneaus are liable to Spittler; and (2) do those conditions
constitute a trespass by the Charbonneaus upon Spittler's
property?
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Nuisance
In a state known for its lush foliage, there appears to
be only one reported appellate decision, Whitesell v. Houlton, 2
Haw. App. 365, 632 P.2d 1077 (1981), addressing when a plant that
naturally encroaches upon a neighboring property can constitute a
nuisance.   In Whitesell, branches of a banyan  tree located on
Houlton's property overhung the Whitesells' property.  The
Whitesells rented equipment and cut the intruding branches. 
After a storm damaged the tree, the Whitesells hired a profes-
sional tree trimmer who cut the branches back to Houlton's
property line.  The Whitesells sought to recover their costs from
Houlton.  Houlton contended he had no duty to cut the branches
extending into the Whitesells' property and was therefore not
liable for the cost of doing so.  We surveyed cases from a number
of other jurisdictions and noted that "[i]t has long been the
rule in [Hawai #i] that if the owner knows or should know that
[their] tree constitutes a danger, [they are] liable if it causes
personal injury or property damage on or off of [their]
property."  Id. at 367, 632 P.2d at 1079 (citation omitted).  We
then adopted a modified version of the Virginia rule set forth in
Smith v. Holt, 174 Va. 213, 5 S.E.2d 492 (1939), overruled in
part by Fancher v. Fagella, 274 Va. 549, 554, 650 S.E.2.d 519,
521 (2007).  We held:9 8
[N]on-noxious plants ordinarily are not nuisances[.] 
[O]verhanging branches which merely cast shade or drop
leaves, flowers, or fruit are not nuisances[.]  [R]oots
which interfere only with other plant life are not
nuisances[.]  [O]verhanging branches or protruding roots
constitute a nuisance only when they actually cause, or
there is imminent danger of them causing, sensible harm to
property other than plant life, in ways other than by
8In Medeiros v. Honomu Sugar Co., 21 Haw. 155 (1912), the plaintiff
was injured when a tree fell onto a public highway where the plaintiff was
operating a horse-drawn hearse.  The cause of action was for negligence, not
nuisance.
9"A 'banyan' tree is a large evergreen tree of the fig family
(moraceae).  Generally, its branches send out aerial roots which grow down
to the soil to form secondary trunks."  Whitesell, 2 Haw. App. at 365 n.1, 632
P.2d at 1078 n.1.
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
casting shade or dropping leaves, flowers, or fruit[.] 
[W]hen overhanging branches or protruding roots actually
cause, or there is imminent danger of them causing, sensible
harm to property other than plant life, in ways other than
by casting shade or dropping leaves, flowers, or fruit, the
damaged or imminently endangered neighbor may require the
owner of the tree to pay for the damages and to cut back the
endangering branches or roots and, if such is not done
within a reasonable time, the damaged or imminently
endangered neighbor may cause the cutback to be done at the
tree owner's expense.
2 Haw. App. at 367-68, 632 P.2d at 1079.  Under Whitesell the
Charbonneaus' trees could be considered a nuisance if: (1) they
were "noxious"; or (2) they caused, or there was an imminent
danger of them causing, "sensible harm"  to property other than
plant life other than by "casting shade or dropping leaves,
flowers, or fruit."  Id.10
The Virginia Supreme Court subsequently cited Whitesell
in adopting what it referred to as the "Hawaii Rule," which
"holds that living trees and plants are ordinarily not nuisances,
but can become so when they cause actual harm or pose an imminent
danger of actual harm to adjoining property."  Fancher, 274 Va.
at 554, 650 S.E.2d at 521.  The Virginia court noted that the
"Virginia Rule" had been "subject to the just criticism that the
classification of a plant as 'noxious' depends upon the viewpoint
of the beholder."  Id. at 555, 650 S.E.2d at 522.  The court then
overruled Smith v. Holt "insofar as it conditions a right of
action upon the 'noxious' nature of a plant that sends forth
invading roots or branches into a neighbor's property."  Id.
In Whitesell we did not define the word "noxious" or
formulate a test to determine when a plant could be considered
"noxious."  The difficulty inherent with characterizing a plant
as "noxious" is illustrated by this case.  Spittler argues that
ironwood trees are "noxious" based upon a "high risk" rating of
"12" contained in the Hawaii Pacific Weed Risk Assessment web-
10The phrase "sensible harm" comes from Smith v. Holt, in which the
Virginia Supreme Court stated "there must be not merely a nominal but such a
sensible and real damage as a sensible person, if subjected to it, would find
injurious[.]"  174 Va. at 215, 5 S.E.2d at 493 (citation omitted).
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
site.  That website does not use the word "noxious" and states
only that the "small-cone ironwood" is "[u]sed in [Hawai #i] for
windbreaks at higher elevations.  Wood used for fuel."  It does
not indicate that the ironwood is "physically harmful or
destructive to living beings," which is the definition of
"noxious" contained in the Merriam-Webster dictionary.   Hawai #i
cases have characterized gorse,  lantana,  and klu  as "noxious
weeds."  Each of those plants (unlike the ironwood) has thorns
that pose the potential for causing injury to animals or people. 
Yet, of those plants only gorse appears in the "List of Plant
Species Designated as Noxious Weeds for Eradication or Control
Purposes"  maintained by the Hawai #i Department of Agriculture
pursuant to Hawaii Administrative Rules ( HAR) § 4-68-10(e) (eff.1615 14 131211
11Hawaii-Pacific Weed Risk Assessment,  Jul. 12, 2012, 8:20 AM.
Casuarina Cunninghamiana.  www.hpwra.org  (last visited Aug. 23, 2019). 
12Noxious, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/noxious (last updated Aug. 22,
2019).
13Freddy Nobriga Enter., Inc. v. State, Dep't of Hawaiian Home
Lands, 129 Hawai #i 123, 127, 295 P.3d 993, 997 (App. 2013).  Gorse (Ulex
europaeus) is a compact shrub bearing many branches that have been modified
into sharp spines or thorns that can penetrate clothing, snap off in the
flesh, and produce burning, painful sores.  Edward Y. Hosaka & Alan Thistle,
University of Hawai #i, Noxious Plants of the Hawaiian Ranges 17-18 (1954),
http://www.hear.org/articles/npothr1954/npothr1954_hires.pdf.
14Paris v. Vasconcellos, 14 Haw. 590 (1903).  Lantana (Lantana
camara) is a woody shrub.  Noxious Plants of the Hawaiian Ranges at 24.  It
has been described as
a thorny bush of rapid growth, able to withstand success-
fully long periods of [drought].  It bears a large quantity
of seeds and these are freely scattered by birds, wind and
water, all agencies beyond the control of [humans].  Once it
has entered a section of the country, it spreads rapidly,
and finally, if left to itself, forms a dense, tangled mass.
Paris, 14 Haw. at 594.  See also Sylva v. Wailuku Sugar Co., 19 Haw. 681, 688
(1909).
15Christian v. Waialua Agric. Co., 33 Haw. 34, 41 (1934).  Klu
(Acacia farnesiana) is a branching shrub that "is a pest in pastures because
of its long needle-like thorns.  Even the animals avoid this plant."  Noxious
Plants of the Hawaiian Ranges at 23-24. 
16HAR § 4-68-10 at 68-10 through 68-14,
http://hdoa.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/Chapter-68.pdf.
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1992).17  Ironwood trees do not appear in the HAR § 4-68-10(e)
list, nor are they mentioned in Hosaka's and Thistle's monograph,
Noxious Plants of the Hawaiian Ranges (Univ. of Haw. 1954).
Our use of the word "non-noxious" in Whitesell was
superfluous.  A noxious plant — i.e., one that is "physically
harmful or destructive to living beings" — is one that actually
causes, or that could pose an imminent danger of causing,
material harm to persons or to property other than plant life;
conversely, a plant that actually causes, or that poses an
imminent danger of causing, material harm to persons or property
other than plant life may be considered noxious.  We note that
certain plants, such as coconut palms, are capable of causing
material injury to persons or to property other than plant life
just by dropping fronds or nuts.  We also note that tree roots
can, under some circumstances, pose imminent trip hazards without
damaging property other than plant life.  We therefore modify our
holding in Whitesell for when a plant can be considered a
nuisance.  Plants whose overhanging branches cast shade or drop
leaves, flowers, or fruit, or whose roots interfere only with
other plant life, are not nuisances.  Overhanging branches or
protruding roots constitute a nuisance when they actually cause,
or there is imminent danger of them causing, material harm to a
person or to property other than plant life.  When overhanging
branches or protruding roots actually cause, or there is imminent
danger of them causing, harm to a person or to property other
than plant life, the damaged or imminently endangered neighbor
may require the tree's owner to pay for the damage and to cut
17HAR § 4-68-10 provides, in relevant part:
Procedure for the designation of noxious weeds. (a)
The head [of the state Department of Agriculture's division
of plant industry] shall direct a continuous program of
study and evaluation of potential noxious weed species.
. . . .
(e)The list of plant species designated as noxious
weeds, adopted by the board on June 18, 1992, and located at
the end of this chapter is made a part of this section.
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
back the endangering branches or roots and, if that is not done
within a reasonable time, the damaged or imminently endangered
neighbor may cause the cutback to be done at the tree owner's
expense.  And as we stated in Whitesell, "a landowner may always,
at [their] own expense, cut away only to [their] property line
above or below the surface of the ground any part of the
adjoining owner's trees or other plant life."  2 Haw. App. at
368, 632 P.2d at 1079.
In this case, the parties dismissed Spittler's claim
arising from the branch from one of the Charbonneaus' trees
allegedly falling, striking Spittler, and damaging Spittler's
greenhouse covering.  The only dispute before us concerns
"overhanging branches which merely cast shade or drop leaves,
flowers, or fruit," and "roots which interfere only with other
plant life."  Under those facts, the Charbonneaus' trees do not
constitute a nuisance and the Circuit Court did not err in
granting partial summary judgment on the eighth count of
Spittler's complaint.
Trespass
The parties do not cite, nor have we found, a reported
Hawai#i appellate decision reciting the elements of the tort of
trespass.  However, in cases involving claims of trespass we have
referred to the Restatement (Second) of Torts (Restatement)
.  See
Anderson v. State, 88 Hawai# i 241, 247, 965 P.2d 783, 789 (App.
1998) (citing Restatement § 161 (Am. Law Inst. 1965)); Memminger
v. Summit at Kâne#ohe Bay Ass'n, No. 30383, 2013 WL 2149732 (Haw.
App. May 17, 2013) (SDO) (citing Restatement § 158 (Am. Law Inst.
1965)).  Restatement § 158 states:
One is subject to liability to another for trespass,
irrespective of whether [they] thereby cause[] harm to any
legally protected interest of the other, if [they]
intentionally
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(a)enter[] land in the possession of the other, or
cause[] a thing or a third person to do so, or
(b)remain[] on the land, or
(c)fail[] to remove from the land a thing which
[they are] under a duty to remove.
Restatement § 161 states:
(1)A trespass may be committed by the continued presence
on the land of a structure, chattel, or other thing which
the actor has tortiously placed there, whether or not the
actor has the ability to remove it.
(2)A trespass may be committed by the continued presence
on the land of a structure, chattel, or other thing which
the actor's predecessor in legal interest therein has
tortiously placed there, if the actor, having acquired
[their] legal interest in the thing with knowledge of such
tortious conduct or having thereafter learned of it, fails
to remove the thing.
Restatement § 6 (Am. Law Inst. 1965) states:
The word "tortious" is used throughout the Restatement of
this Subject to denote the fact that conduct whether of act
or omission is of such a character as to subject the actor
to liability under the principles of the law of Torts.
Finally, Restatement § 166 (Am. Law Inst. 1965) states:
Except where the actor is engaged in an abnormally dangerous
activity, an unintentional and non-negligent entry on land
in the possession of another, or causing a thing or third
person to enter the land, does not subject the actor to
liability to the possessor, even though the entry causes
harm to the possessor or to a thing or third person in whose
security the possessor has a legally protected interest.
Accordingly, we hold that a person whose plant, located on the
person's property, drops leaves, flowers, or fruit onto
neighboring property, or whose plant's roots interfere only with
other plant life on neighboring property, is not liable to the
neighboring property owner for trespass.   Although the Circuit
Court did not rely upon the Restatement to grant partial summary18
18If that person's plant causes physical harm to a person, or damage
to property, located on neighboring property, the person would be potentially
liable in tort to the injured person or to the owner of the damaged property. 
See Medeiros, 21 Haw. 155.
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
judgment to the Charbonneaus on the first count of Spittler's
complaint, the Circuit Court reached the correct result.  An
appellate court "may affirm a grant of summary judgment on any
ground appearing in the record, even if the circuit court did not
rely on it."  Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai #i 137, 140, 870 P.2d
1281, 1284 (1994).
III.
For the foregoing reasons, the First Amended Final
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on
January 8, 2016, is affirmed.
On the briefs:
Brooks L. Bancroft
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant-Appellant.
Robert J. Crudele
for Defendants/Counterclaim 
Plaintiffs-Appellees.
12