FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--–
 
CAAP-11-0000644
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
DENNIS HERN, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(1DTA-11-00302)
 
CAAP-12-0000528
 
STATE OF HAWAI
'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
JOSEPH B. A. LEDBETTER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(1DTA-11-03926)
 
MARCH 27, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
1
In these consolidated appeals,  the District Court of
the First Circuit (District Court) dismissed the charges against 
1 We consolidated the appeals for decision by order filed on
March 19, 2013. 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendant-Appellant Dennis Hern (Hern) and Defendant-Appellant 
Joseph B. A. Ledbetter (Ledbetter) (collectively, "Defendants") without prejudice for violation of the speedy trial requirements set forth in Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48 
(2000).
2 HRPP Rule 48(b) provides that "the court shall, on 
motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within" the time required by HRPP Rule 48. 
On appeal, Defendants contend that the District Court
 
erred in dismissing their charges without prejudice, instead of
 with prejudice. They also contend that the District Court erred
 in failing to make adequate findings to justify its dismissals
 without prejudice. In Hern's case, the District Court stated
 that it was following its "typical practice" in dismissing the
 charge without prejudice. In Ledbetter's case, the District
 Court did not provide any reason for its dismissal without
 prejudice.
 
We conclude that, pursuant to the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court's decision in State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 (1981), in determining whether to dismiss a case with or without prejudice for violation of the time limits set forth in HRPP Rule 48, the trial court is required to consider, among others, each of the following three factors: "[(1)] the seriousness of the offense; [(2)] the facts and the circumstances of the case which led to the dismissal; and [(3)] the impact of a reprosecution on the administration of [HRPP Rule 48] and on the administration of justice" (hereinafter, the "Estencion factors"). Estencion, 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (quoting 
18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2) of the federal Speedy Trial Act).
3 We 
2 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided over the
proceedings relevant to Hern's appeal, and the Honorable Lono J.
Lee presided over the proceeding relevant to Ledbetter's appeal.
3 The court in Estencion cited to 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(1) for
 
the quoted language. However, the quoted language appears in
(continued...)
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
further conclude that the trial court must "clearly articulate
 
[the] effect" of the Estencion factors and any other factor it
 considered in rendering its decision. United States v. Taylor,
 
487 U.S. 326, 336 (1988). We need not automatically remand every
 case in which the trial court's findings are deficient, if the
 record is otherwise sufficient for this court to determinate
 whether the trial court abused its discretion. However, we will
 remand the case for the trial court to make the appropriate
 findings where: (1) the record affirmatively shows that the trial
 court failed to consider the Estencion factors; (2) the record is
 inadequate to permit meaningful review of the trial court's
 exercise of discretion; or (3) the trial court's findings are
 deficient and an inordinate burden would be placed on this court
 to conduct a searching review of the record necessary to
 determine whether the trial court abused its discretion. 
Applying these principles, in Hern's appeal, we
 
conclude that the District Court erred in relying on its "typical
 practice," rather than considering the required Estencion factors
 under the particular circumstances of Hern's case, in its
 dismissal of the charge without prejudice. In Ledbetter's case,
 the District Court failed to provide any explanation for its
 decision, and we conclude that the record is inadequate for this
 court to meaningfully review whether the District Court properly
 exercised its discretion in dismissing the charge without
 prejudice. Accordingly, we vacate the judgments dismissing the
 charges without prejudice and remand the cases with instructions
 that the District Court (1) consider the required Estencion
 factors; and (2) make findings that clearly articulate the effect
 
3(...continued)
both 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(1) (relating to time limits for filing
an indictment) and 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2) (relating to time
limits for commencing trial). Because these consolidated appeals
involve dismissals for violating the time limits for commencing
trial, we will refer to 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2). 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the Estencion factors and any other factor it considered in
 
rendering its decision. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
On January 21, 2011, Hern was arrested and Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged him by complaint with 
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3) (Supp. 2012). On that same date, Hern was arraigned in the District Court and released to appear. Hern filed the following pretrial motions: (1) an April 18, 2011, "Motion to Compel Production of Laser Device Manuals and/or Materials" (Motion to Compel--Laser); an April 25, 2011, "Motion to Compel Breath Sample or, in the Alternative, Cobra Data, or to Impose Sanctions Including the Exclusion of BrAC Result" (Motion to Compel--Breath); and a May 13, 2011, "Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction" (Motion to Dismiss--Jurisdiction). 
At a hearing held on May 17, 2011, the District Court
 
granted the Motion to Compel--Laser, subject to a protective
 order; denied the Motion to Dismiss--Jurisdiction; and ordered
 the State to submit a supplemental memorandum in opposition to
 Hern's Motion to Compel--Breath. At a hearing on June 29, 2011,
 the District Court denied the Motion to Compel--Breath. 
On August 18, 2011, Hern filed a motion to dismiss for
 
violation of the speedy trial time limits set forth in HRPP Rule
 48. On August 23, 2011, the District Court held a hearing on
 
Hern's motion to dismiss for violation of HRPP Rule 48. The
 District Court acknowledged that in setting the trial date, it
 had believed that the time needed to rule on the Motion to
 Compel--Breath was excludable under HRPP Rule 48. However, upon
 further review, the District Court concluded that this time
 
4
period was not excludable  and that as a result, the time limits
of HRPP Rule 48 had been violated. The District Court granted
 
4 HRPP Rule 48(d)(2) provides that the time period to decide
"requests/motions for discovery" "shall be deemed not to be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement."
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hern's motion to dismiss "in part" and dismissed the OVUII charge
 
without prejudice.
 
In response, Hern orally requested that the District
 
Court reconsider and dismiss the case with prejudice:
 
[Defense counsel]: Your Honor, I would ask you to
reconsider and dismiss it with prejudice just for the sheer
volume of time that has passed since this was charged, and
we have been back a number of times, as you know, on this
case already. 
The District Court denied Hern's request to dismiss the case with
 
prejudice, stating:
 
THE COURT: Well, you've been back, but primarily that
has to do with your motions, and that's why we've been here
a lot of times. And I wanted to get a good record for -­especially for your motion to compel. So -- and my typical
practice on Rule 48, as you know, is to dismiss without
prejudice, so that's -- that's what I'll rule.
 
(Emphasis added.) The District Court entered its judgment
 
dismissing the charge without prejudice on August 23, 2011. 
II.
 
On August 29, 2011, Ledbetter was arrested for OVUII
 
and released after posting bail. On September 7, 2011, the State
 charged Ledbetter by complaint with OVUII, in violation of HRS 
§ 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3). On December 6, 2011, Ledbetter
 filed four motions to compel. On December 9, 2011, the parties
 appeared in court and the State stated it was ready for trial. 
Ledbetter stated that he had not received discovery. The
 District Court (Judge David W. Lo) continued the case and charged
 the time to the State. 
At a hearing held on February 13, 2012, the State
 
served Ledbetter with its memorandum in opposition to Ledbetter's
 motions to compel. The proceedings were continued to March 1,
 2012, for a hearing on Ledbetter's motions to compel. On March
 1, 2012, the District Court (Judge Lono J. Lee) denied
 Ledbetter's motions to compel and set trial for April 30, 2012.
 
On April 27, 2012, Ledbetter filed a motion to dismiss
 
for violation of the speedy trial time limits set forth in HRPP
 Rule 48. Ledbetter claimed that 221 countable days had elapsed
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
under HRPP Rule 48, which exceeded the six months permitted under
 
the rule. On April 30, 2012, the District Court (Judge Lono J.
 Lee) held a hearing on Ledbetter's motion to dismiss. The State
 stated that it was not ready to proceed to trial because two
 police officers were sick, and it represented that the HRPP Rule
 48 time period did not run until May 12, 2012. The parties
 argued about the appropriate HRPP Rule 48 computation. After
 hearing the argument, the District Court indicated that in
 reliance on Judge Lo's previous ruling, which charged time to the
 State, it was determining that HRPP Rule 48 has been violated. 
The District Court granted the motion to dismiss without
 prejudice, but did not state a reason for its dismissal without
 prejudice. The District Court entered its judgment dismissing
 the charge without prejudice on April 30, 2012.
 
III.
 
On February 14, 2012, this court filed an order 
dismissing Hern's appeal for lack of jurisdiction. We ruled that the District Court's judgment dismissing Hern's charge without prejudice was not a final appealable judgement because there was no final adjudication on the merits and no sentence imposed against Hern, citing State v. Kilborn, 109 Hawai' i 435, 127 P.3d 
95 (App. 2005) (holding that a district court judgment is not a final judgment appealable by the defendant unless it includes the final adjudication and the final sentence), and United States v. Tsosie, 966 F.2d 1357 (10th Cir. 1992) (holding that the dismissal of a criminal charge without prejudice under the federal Speedy Trial Act was not a final decision that could be appealed). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court accepted Hern's application 
for writ of certiorari and vacated this court's order dismissing Hern's appeal for lack of jurisdiction. The supreme court concluded that the District Court's judgment dismissing Hern's case without prejudice was an appealable final judgment pursuant to HRS § 641-12 (Supp. 2012). In support of its decision, the supreme court cited State v. Kalani, 87 Hawai' i 260, 953 P.2d 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1358 (1998), which held that there is appellate jurisdiction over
 
a State's appeal from the dismissal of a charge without prejudice
 pursuant to HRS § 641-13(1) (authorizing the State to appeal from
 a judgment or order dismissing a criminal charge). The supreme
 court remanded the case to this court for disposition.
5
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
HRPP Rule 48(b) provides in relevant part:
 
Except in the case of traffic offenses that are not
punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on motion of
the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice
in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within six
months:
 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense
based on the same conduct or arising from the same criminal
episode for which the arrest or charge was made[.]
 
5 It appears that the Hawai' i Supreme Court is drawing a
distinction between the ability of a defendant to appeal the
dismissal of a charge without prejudice in circuit court casesversus district court cases. HRS § 641-11 (Supp. 2012)authorizes appeals in criminal proceedings "[f]rom circuitcourts," and HRS § 641-12 (Supp. 2012) authorizes appeals incriminal proceedings "[f]rom district courts." HRS § 641-11permits "[a]ny party aggrieved by the judgment of a circuit courtin a criminal matter" to appeal to this court, and furtherprovides that "[t]he sentence of the court in a criminal caseshall be the judgment." In State v. Kim, 109 Hawai' i 59, 60, 122
P.3d 1157, 1158 (App. 2005), we noted that the Hawai' i Supreme
Court had dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction thedefendant's appeal from the circuit court's dismissal of hiscriminal charge without prejudice pursuant to HRPP Rule 48. We stated that "[o]n August 12, 2003, the Hawai' i Supreme Court
dismissed Kim's appeal, stating that the court lackedjurisdiction because the appeal was not authorized by HRS §§ 641­11 (1993) or 641-17 (1993) (appeal allowed only from a judgmentof conviction or a certified interlocutory order)." Id. HRS §
641-12 permits appeals "from all final decisions and finaljudgments of district courts in all criminal matters." Unlike HRS § 641-11, HRS § 641-12 does not specifically define a finaldecision or judgment of the district court in criminal matters tomean the "sentence of the court." 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The six-month time limit for the commencement of trial is subject
 
to a number of exceptions, or "excluded periods," set forth in
 HRPP Rule 48(c) and (d). 
HRPP Rule 48 does not include any specific criteria for 
the court to apply in determining whether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice. HRPP Rule 48(b) simply states that "the court shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice in its discretion[.]" However, in Estencion, the Hawai' i Supreme Court judicially adopted factors 
that trial courts are required to consider in deciding whether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice. 
Unlike HRPP Rule 48, the federal Speedy Trial Act, 18
 
U.S.C. § 3161 et seq., includes specific factors that courts are
 required to consider in making this decision and provides as
 follows:
 
In determining whether to dismiss the case with or without
prejudice, the court shall consider, among others, each of
the following factors: the seriousness of the offense; the
facts and circumstances of the case which led to the
 dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on the
administration of this chapter and on the administration of
justice.
 
18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2). In Estencion, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
adopted this language of the federal Speedy Trial Act "as a 
requirement to [HRPP] Rule 48(b)" in order "[t]o eliminate confusion and to help the trial court in the exercise of its discretion[.]" Estencion, 63 Hawai' i at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044. 
Accordingly, based on Estencion, in determining whether
 
to dismiss the charges against Hern and Ledbetter with or without
 prejudice, the District Court was required to consider each of
 the Estencion factors: "[(1)] the seriousness of the offense;
 [(2)] the facts and the circumstances of the case which led to
 the dismissal; and [(3)] the impact of a reprosecution on the
 
6
administration of [HRPP Rule 48][ ] and on the administration of
6 The portion of 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2) adopted by the
(continued...)
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
justice." Id. 7 The District Court was also permitted to
 
consider whether Defendants were prejudiced by the HRPP Rule 48
 
violation. Although the presence or absence of prejudice to a
 defendant is not a required factor for the trial court to
 consider, it is a relevant factor that the court may properly
 consider in deciding whether to dismiss the charge with or
 
6(...continued)
Hawai'i Supreme Court in Estencion refers to "the administration
of this chapter." The chapter referenced in 18 U.S.C. §
3162(a)(2) is 18 U.S.C. Chapter 208, entitled "Speedy Trial,"which contains provisions analogous to those contained in HRPPRule 48. 
7 We reject Defendants' argument that we should adopt the
factors identified in State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 647 P.2d 705(1982), for the trial court to consider in determining whether todismiss a charge with or without prejudice for violation of HRPPRule 48. In Moriwake, the Hawai' i Supreme Court addressed the
question of whether the trial court had abused its discretion ininvoking its inherent power to dismiss with prejudice anindictment for manslaughter following two hung jury mistrials onthe charge. The supreme court identified the following factorsthat the trial court should consider in deciding whether todismiss a charge with prejudice following one or more mistrials: 
(1) the severity of the offense charged; (2) the
number of prior mistrials and the circumstances of
the jury deliberation therein, so far as is known;
(3) the character of prior trials in terms of
length, complexity and similarity of evidence
presented; (4) the likelihood of any substantial
difference in a subsequent trial, if allowed; (5)
the trial court's own evaluation of relative case
 strength; and (6) the professional conduct and
diligence of respective counsel, particularly that
of the prosecuting attorney. 
Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712-13. Many of the Moriwake factors aredirected at the specific question of whether the charge should bedismissed after a mistrial and have no application to a pretrialdismissal for an HRPP Rule 48 violation. More importantly,Estencion is controlling Hawai' i Supreme Court authority on the
factors a trial court is required to consider under HRPP Rule 48.Accordingly, contrary to Defendants' contention, we conclude thatthe Moriwake factors are not the factors that the trial court is required to consider in determining whether to dismiss a chargewith or without prejudice for violation of HRPP Rule 48. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
without prejudice. State v. Coyaso, 73 Haw. 352, 358, 833 P.2d 
66, 69 (1992); State v. Kim, 109 Hawai' i 59, 66, 122 P.3d 1157, 
1164 (App. 2005); Taylor, 487 U.S. at 334. 
II.
 
We now turn to the question of whether the trial court
 
is required to make specific findings in support of its decision
 
to dismiss the charge with or without prejudice. In Taylor, the
 United States Supreme Court held that a trial court must make
 findings regarding the three factors the trial court was required
 to consider in deciding whether to dismiss a charge with or
 without prejudice under 18 U.S.C. 3162(a)(2) of the federal
 Speedy Trial Act. The Court reasoned as follows:
 
In the Speedy Trial Act, . . . Congress specifically
and clearly instructed that courts "shall consider, among
others, each of the following factors," § 3162(a)(2)
(emphasis added), and thereby put in place meaningful
standards to guide appellate review. Although the role of
an appellate court is not to substitute its judgment for
that of the trial court, review must serve to ensure that
the purposes of the Act and the legislative compromise it
reflects are given effect. Where, as here, Congress has
declared that a decision will be governed by consideration
of particular factors, a district court must carefully
consider those factors as applied to the particular case
and, whatever its decision, clearly articulate their effect
in order to permit meaningful appellate review. Only then
can an appellate court ascertain whether a district court
has ignored or slighted a factor that Congress has deemed
pertinent to the choice of remedy, thereby failing to act
within the limits prescribed by Congress.
 
Taylor, 487 U.S. at 336-37 (some emphasis added). 
In Estencion, the Hawai' i Supreme Court judicially 
adopted the statutory factors a trial court is required to 
consider under 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2) as requirements for HRPP Rule 48(b). We conclude that it is appropriate to similarly adopt the United States Supreme Court's requirements regarding the findings a trial court must make under 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2) and apply them to HRPP Rule 48(b). Accordingly, we hold that in determining whether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48(b), the trial court must not only consider the Estencion factors, but must also clearly articulate the effect of the Estencion factors and any other factor it considered in 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
rendering its decision. See Taylor, 487 U.S. at 336-37; see also 
HRPP Rule 12(e) (2007) ("Where factual issues are involved in 
determining a [pretrial] motion, the court shall state its essential findings on the record."); Moriwake, 65 Haw. 57 n.16, 647 P.2d at 713 n.16 (stating that where trial courts dismiss cases with prejudice based on their inherent power, it is incumbent upon trial courts to express their factual findings in writing to enable appellate courts to conscientiously review the trial courts' exercise of discretion); State v. Mageo, 78 Hawai' i 
33, 38, 889 P.2d 1092, 1097 (App. 1995) ("[T]rial courts exercising [their inherent power to dismiss a criminal case with prejudice] should issue written factual findings setting forth their reasons for dismissal with prejudice so that a reviewing court may accurately assess whether the trial court duly exercised its discretion."). The trial court's explanation of its consideration of the Estencion factors and the basis for its decision will permit meaningful appellate review. 
This does not necessarily mean, however, that we must
 
or will automatically remand every case in which the trial
 court's findings fail to meet the required standard. Even if the
 trial court's findings are deficient, where the record is
 sufficient for the appellate court to make a determination of
 whether the trial court abused its discretion, the appellate
 court may elect, at its option, to resolve the appeal on the
 merits. See United States v. Robinson, 389 F.3d 582, 587-89 (6th
 
Cir. 2004) (reviewing and affirming the trial court's dismissal
 without prejudice under the federal Speedy Trial Act even though
 the trial court failed to make any findings regarding the
 statutory factors); Taylor, 487 U.S. at 337-43 (conducting review
 of the trial court's federal Speedy Trial Act dismissal even
 though the trial court "did not fully explicate its reasons for
 dismissing [the charges] with prejudice"). However, where (1)
 the record affirmatively shows that the trial court failed to
 consider the Estencion factors; (2) the record is inadequate to
 permit meaningful review of the trial court's exercise of
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
discretion; or (3) the trial court's findings are deficient and
 
we decline to assume the burden of conducting a searching review 
of the record necessary to determine whether the trial court
 abused its discretion, we will remand the case for the trial
 court to make the appropriate findings. 
III.
 
Applying these principles to Hern's and Ledbetter's
 
appeals, we conclude as follows.
 
In Hern's case, the District Court's statement that it
 
was dismissing the charge without prejudice based on its "typical
 practice on [HRPP] Rule 48" affirmatively shows that the District
 Court failed to consider the Estencion factors. The District
 Court's statement indicates that it was relying on a blanket 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
practice or policy, instead of considering the Estencion factors
 
and exercising its discretion based on the particular
 circumstances of Hern's case. "[T]he existence of discretion
 requires its exercise[,]" and a court fails to properly exercise
 its discretion when it bases a decision on categorical rules, and
 not on the individual case before it. United States v. Miller,
 
722 F.2d 562, 565 (9th Cir. 1983). "Discretionary action must be
 exercised on a case-by-case basis, not by any inflexible blanket
 policy[.]" State v. Martin, 56 Haw. 292, 294, 535 P.2d 127, 128
 
(1975). We conclude that the District Court failed to consider
 the Estencion factors and failed to properly exercise its
 discretion in dismissing Hern's OVUII charge without prejudice. 
In Ledbetter's case, the District Court did not provide
 
any explanation for its decision to dismiss the charge without
 prejudice. In his motion to dismiss the charge, Ledbetter
 asserted that a significant portion of the delay was attributable
 to the State's failure to provide him with any discovery. In
 addition, the record is not complete. With the exception of the
 April 30, 2012, hearing in which the District Court dismissed the
 case without prejudice, the transcripts of other hearings held in
 the case were not made part of the record on appeal. We conclude
 that the record in Ledbetter's case is inadequate for this court
 to meaningfully review whether the District Court properly
 exercised its discretion in dismissing Ledbetter's OVUII charge
 without prejudice.
 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the judgments
 
dismissing Defendants' charges without prejudice, and we remand
 the case with instructions that in each case, the District Court
 (1) consider the Estencion factors in determining whether to
 dismiss the OVUII charge with or without prejudice and (2) make
 findings that clearly articulate the effect of the Estencion 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
factors and any other factor it considered in rendering its
 
decision. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard L. Holcomb
 
(Holcomb Law, LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant Dennis
Hern and Defendant-Appellant
Joseph B. A. Ledbetter 
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee in both
appeals
 
15
 