NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000435
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A.,
dba AMERICAS SERVICING COMPANY,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MARIANNE S. FONG, Individually and as Trustee of the 
Marianne S. Fong Revocable Trust Dated October 16, 2003,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
ONOMEA BAY RANCH OWNER'S ASSOCIATION, INC.; JOHN DOES 1-10;
JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE ENTITIES 1-10; AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0097)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
In this appeal arising out of a foreclosure action
initiated in 2010, Defendant-Appellant Marianne S. Fong,
individually and as trustee of the Marianne S. Fong Revocable
Trust Dated October 16, 2003 (Fong) appeals from the judgment
(Foreclosure Judgment), entered on May 2, 2016, in favor of
Plaintiff-Appellee Wells Fargo, N.A. dba Americas Servicing
Company (Wells Fargo), by the Circuit Court of the Third CircuitNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(circuit court).   Fong also challenges the underlying "Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All
Defendants on Complaint filed March 23, 2010" also filed on
May 2, 2016, by the circuit court.1
Fong argues that the circuit court should not have
granted summary judgment in favor of Wells Fargo because there
were genuine issues of material fact as to: (1) whether Fong was
actually in default; (2)  whether the lender-placed insurance
violated the mortgage agreement; (3) whether the increased
mortgage payments were legitimate; (4) whether payments made by
Fong were misapplied; and (5) whether the doctrine of unclean
hands applies.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we conclude that
Fong's appeal is without merit and affirm.
We review a trial court's award of summary judgment de
novo under the same standard applied by the trial court.  Nozawa
v. Operating Eng'rs Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai#i 331, 338, 418
P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018).  "Summary judgment is appropriate if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that
the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." 
Id. at 342, 418 P.3d at 1198 (citation and brackets omitted).  "A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause
of action or defense asserted by the parties."  Id. (citation
omitted).
1The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law.  This burden has two components.
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.  Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving
party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion.  This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai# i 462, 470, 99 P.3d
1046, 1054 (2004) (emphasis and citation omitted).
Where a plaintiff-moving party has satisfied its obligation
of showing, prima facie , that there is no genuine issue of
material fact and the plaintiff is entitled to a judgment as
a matter of law, the burden shifts to the defendant-non-
moving party to produce materials regarding any affirmative
defenses that have been raised pro forma  in the pleadings.
Ocwen Fed. Bank FSB v. Russell, 99 Hawai#i 173, 183, 53 P.3d 312,
322 (2002) (citation omitted).
[A] plaintiff-movant is not required to disprove affirmative
defenses asserted by a defendant in order to prevail on a
motion for summary judgment.  The plaintiff is only
obligated to disprove an affirmative defense on a motion for
summary judgment when the defense produces material in
support of an affirmative defense.  Generally, the defendant
has the burden of proof on all affirmative defenses, which
includes the burden of proving facts which are essential to
the asserted defense.
U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Castro, 131 Hawai# i 28, 41, 313 P.3d
717, 730 (2013) (citations, quotation marks, and footnote
omitted).
A party seeking foreclosure is entitled to summary
judgment and a foreclosure decree if the following elements are
established: (1) the existence of an agreement, (2) the terms of
the agreement, (3) default occurred as defined by the agreement,
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and (4) notice of default was given in accordance with the terms
of the agreement.  See Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw.
App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982).
Here, Wells Fargo attached certified copies of: (1)  the
March 12, 2007 Note by which Fong promised to pay $570,000.00
plus interest to MortgageIT, Inc. (MortgageIT) in exchange for a
loan; (2) the March 20, 2007 recorded Mortgage that Fong executed
with Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc., as nominee
for MortgageIT, that secured payment on the Note by encumbering
Fong's parcel of real property; (3) the Assignment of Mortgage,
recorded on October 12, 2009, assigning the Mortgage to Wells
Fargo; (4)  the loan history; (5) the July 26, 2009 letter
notifying Fong about her default and Wells Fargo's intention to
accelerate the loan and to foreclose on the Mortgage if the
default was not cured; and (6)  a Declaration of Indebtedness by
April Linn (Linn), a Vice-President of Wells Fargo, that
addressed the Note, Mortgage, Assignment of Mortgage, loan
history, notice of default letter, and balance due to Wells
Fargo.  Wells Fargo thus satisfied its initial burden of
production and the burden shifted to Fong to demonstrate specific
facts that present a genuine issue of material fact.2
Fong asserted several allegations in her memorandum in
opposition to Wells Fargo's motion for summary judgment,
including allegations that she did not default under the Mortgage
and Note and that the reason for her alleged default was the
increase in cost from the lender-placed hurricane insurance,
which she claims she was unaware of at the time.  Fong also
attached several exhibits in an addendum to her memorandum in
2Fong does not challenge Wells Fargo's standing.  See Tax Found. of
Hawai#i v. State, 144 Hawai#i 175, 192, 439 P.3d 127, 144 (2019) (clarifying that
standing is not an issue of subject matter jurisdiction).  Fong also did not
challenge below, and does not challenge on appeal, the admissibility of documents
attached to Linn's declaration.  See Price v. AIG Hawai#i Ins. Co., Inc., 107
Hawai#i 106, 112, 111 P.3d 1, 7 (2005) (holding that appellants could not
challenge the admissibility of evidence for the first time in an appeal from a
summary judgment ruling).
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
opposition, filed subsequent to Wells Fargo's reply memorandum to
Fong's memorandum in opposition.  In her addendum to her
memorandum in opposition, Fong also appears to assert that her
mortgage payments were not applied correctly and that she was not
given proper notice of the lender-placed hurricane insurance.
However, the record is devoid of any accompanying declaration or
affidavit to support Fong's allegations or her submitted
exhibits.  Thus, Fong's allegations and exhibits could not serve
as competent evidence to oppose Wells Fargo's motion for summary
judgment.  See Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e) ("[A]n
adverse party may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials
of the adverse party's pleading, but the adverse party's
response, by affidavits . . . , must set forth specific facts
showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.  If the adverse
party does not so respond, summary judgment, if appropriate,
shall be entered against the adverse party.").  Fong cannot rely
solely on the conclusory allegations in her memorandum in
opposition to create a genuine issue of material fact.  See
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116
Hawai#i 277, 301, 172 P.3d 1021, 1045 (2007) ("[A] party opposing
a motion for summary judgment cannot discharge his or her burden
by alleging conclusions, nor is he or she entitled to a trial on
the basis of a hope that he can produce some evidence at that
time." (Emphasis and citation omitted)).  Therefore, Fong failed
to demonstrate the existence of any genuine issue of material
fact and the circuit court accordingly did not err in entering
summary judgment in favor of Wells Fargo.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on the foregoing, the May 2, 2016 "Judgment on
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure
Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed March 23, 2010" entered
by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 6, 2019.
On the briefs:
Al Thompson,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Edmund K. Saffery,
Regan M. Iwao,
and Lynda L. Arakawa,
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn &
Stifel),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6