NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000926 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, A NATIONAL BANKING
ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR SARM 05-19XS,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
DYLAN THEDE, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
A
SSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF VILLAS ON THE PRINCE;
PRINCEVILLE II COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0114) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
This appeal arises out of a foreclosure decree entered 
by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court) against 
Defendant-Appellant Dylan Thede (Thede).  On November 30, 2017, 
the Circuit Court entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure (Foreclosure Decree), and the related Judgment (Foreclosure 
Judgment), both in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank National 
Association, a National Bank Association as Trustee for SARM 05-
19XS (U.S. Bank), and against Thede, Defendant-Appellee 
Association of Apartment Owners of Villas on the Prince, and  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant-Appellee Princeville II Community Association.1/ 
Thede appeals from the Foreclosure Decree and the 
Foreclosure Judgment.2/ He contends that the Circuit Court erred 
in granting U.S. Bank's motion for summary judgment and 
interlocutory decree of foreclosure (MSJ) by relying on "the 
hearsay testimony of U.S. Bank's declaring witnesses" to 
establish U.S. Bank's standing to foreclose on Thede's mortgaged property. He also summarily argues that the Circuit court erred in disregarding an expert report disputing the authenticity of the original note at issue in the foreclosure. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Thede's contentions as follows and vacate and remand. 
I. RELEVANT BACKGROUND 
On April 13, 2012, U.S. Bank filed a Complaint for 
Foreclosure (Complaint) in the Circuit Court. U.S. Bank alleged, 
among other things, that: (1) on June 1, 2005, Thede obtained a 
$612,000 loan (Loan) from Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. 
(Countrywide), by executing a promissory note (Note), secured by 
a mortgage (Mortgage) recorded with respect to real property 
located at 4141 Queen Emmas Dr., #1538, Princeville, Hawai# i 
96722 (P
roperty); (2) the Mortgage was assigned to U.S. Bank by 
an Assignment of Mortgage recorded on October 13, 2009; (3) Thede 
defaulted under the payment terms of the Note and Mortgage; (4) following written notice to Thede and his failure to cure the default, U.S. Bank exercised its option to accelerate the loan and to declare the entire principal due under the Note and secured by the Mortgage, plus interest, advances, and other charges, immediately due and payable; and (5) U.S. Bank was entitled to foreclose the Mortgage and to sell the Property. 
1/ The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided . 
2/ The Association of Apartment Owners of Villas on the Prince and
Princeville II Community Association did not appeal from the Foreclosure
Judgment and, as presumably nominal appellees, did not file answering briefs.See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(c). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On December 11, 2015, U.S. Bank filed its MSJ, which 
included an attached "Verified Declaration of Indebtedness." 
Ryan Cable (Cable) signed the declaration (Cable Declaration) and 
asserted that he had knowledge of, and was competent to testify 
to, "the matters stated [t]herein by virtue of [his] employment for Nationstar Mortgage LLC, the loan servicing agent for Plaintiff [U.S. Bank]." Cable declared, among other things, that "[o]n or about June 1, 2005, [Thede] . . . duly made, executed and delivered to Countrywide . . ., an Adjustable Rate Note ('Note') in the amount of $612,000.00[,]" which was attached as Exhibit "A" to the Cable Declaration. Cable also stated that "[U.S. Bank] is in possession of the Note." 
Thede filed a memorandum in opposition on October 27, 
2016, and a supplemental memorandum in opposition on April 12, 2017. In his supplemental memorandum, Thede argued that U.S. Bank had failed to establish its standing to foreclose under the supreme court's then-recently issued decision in Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017). In 
particular, Thede argued that U.S. Bank had not demonstrated it was the holder of the Note at the time the Complaint was filed. 
On June 19, 2017, U.S. Bank filed the "Affidavit of 
Bank of America, N.A. Re: Possession of Note as Prior Servicer." Nichole Renee Williams (Williams) signed the affidavit (Williams
Affidavit) which stated, in relevant part: 
1. I am authorized to sign this Declaration on
behalf of Bank of America, N.A. ("BANA"), which was the
prior servicer for the subject loan (the "Loan") forPlaintiff U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, A NATIONAL BANKINGASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR SARM 05-19XS. 
2. As prior servicer, BANA maintained records for
the Loan. As part of my job responsibilities for BANA, I amfamiliar with the type of records that were maintained byBANA in connection with the Loan. As such, I am authorizedto make this Declaration. 
3. The information in this Declaration is taken 
from BANA's business records. I have personal knowledge ofBANA's procedures for creating these records. They are: (a)made at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters recorded by persons with personal knowledge of theinformation in the business record, or from informationtransmitted by persons with personal knowledge; (b) kept inthe course of BANA's regularly conducted businessactivities; and (c) created by BANA as a regular practice. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 4. My knowledge is based on my review of BANA's
business records and files related to the mortgage loan
which is the subject of this foreclosure. 
5. On April 13, 2012, the Complaint for Foreclosure
was filed herein. A true and correct copy of the Complaintis attached as Exhibit "1". 
6. At the time the Complaint was filed, BANA was
the servicer for the Loan. 
7. On April 13, 2012, BANA was in possession of the
original Adjustable Rate Note dated June 1, 2005 in theprincipal amount of $612,000.00 executed by DYLAN THEDE infavor of Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. endorsed in blank("Note"). A true and correct copy of the Note is attachedas Exhibit "2". 
8. On or about March 31, 2014, servicing of the
Loan transferred to Nationstar Mortgage LLC. 
On August 1, 2017, U.S. Bank filed a supplemental 
declaration in support of its MSJ. Rebecca C. Wallace (Wallace)
signed the declaration (Wallace Declaration), which stated, in 
relevant part:  
1. I am authorized to sign this Declaration on
behalf of Plaintiff U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, A
NATIONAL BANKING ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR SARM 05-19XS ("Plaintiff") as an authorized signer of Nationstar MortgageLLC ("Nationstar"),which is Plaintiff's servicing agent forthe subject loan ("the loan"). 
2. Nationstar maintains records for the loan in its 
capacity as Plaintiff's servicer. As part of my jobresponsibilities for Nationstar, I am familiar with the typeof records maintained by Nationstar in connection with theLoan. As such, I am authorized to make this Declaration. 
3. Nationstar is the current loan servicer for 
Plaintiff and acts as the exclusive representative and agentof Plaintiff in the servicing and administering of mortgageloans referred to Nationstar, including the Loan beingforeclosed in this action. 
4. The information in this Declaration is taken 
from Nationstar's business records. I have personalknowledge of Nationstar's procedures for creating theserecords. They are: (a) made at or near the time of theoccurrence of the matters recorded by persons with personalknowledge of the information in the business record, or frominformation transmitted by persons with personal knowledge;(b) kept in the course of Nationstar's regularly conductedbusiness activities; and (c) created by Nationstar as aregular practice. 
5. On April 13, 2012, Plaintiff filed its Complaint
for Foreclosure ("Complaint"). 
6. At the time the Complaint for Foreclosure was
filed, Bank of America, N.A. ("BANA") was the servicer forthe Loan. 
7. Based on the affidavit executed by Nichole Renee
Williams on May 31, 2017 as an authorized representative of 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
BANA ("Affidavit"), BANA was in possession of the original
Adjustable Rate Note dated June 1, 2009 in the principalamount of $612,000.00 executed by Defendant DYLAN THEDE infavor of Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., endorsed in blank("Original Note"), when the Complaint was filed. . . . 
8. On 4/01/2014 , servicing of the Loan was
transferred from BANA to Nationstar. 
9. When the servicing rights of the Loan were
transferred to Nationstar, BANA transferred its servicingrecords pertaining to the Loan to Nationstar. Among therecords and documents was the Original Note. 
10. The records of prior servicers are regularly
used and relied upon by Nationstar in all dealings with allthe borrowers, in reporting all profit and loss on themortgage loans to the Plaintiff, in the preparation, filingand payment of income taxes dependent upon such information,and in evaluating Nationstar's own job performance. 
11. Before the records of prior servicers were
incorporated into Nationstar's own business records, itconducted an independent check into the records of priorservicers and found them in keeping with industrywide loanservicing standards and only integrated them intoNationstar's own business records after finding theserecords were made as part of a regularly conducted activity,met industry standards, and determined to be trustworthy. 
12. Nationstar maintains all the day to day loan
documents, records and accounting of payments on the Loanbeing foreclosed in this action including all documents andbusiness records acquired by Plaintiff when it purchased thesubject mortgage loan. 
13. Under the terms of Nationstar's servicing
arrangement, Plaintiff does not participate in, keep andmaintain any of the day to day loan documents, inputting ofaccounting data, saving of business records and allcommunications with borrowers. 
14. All declarations, affidavits, and exhibits filed
in support of Plaintiff's Motion for Summary JudgmentAgainst All Parties and for Interlocutory Decree ofForeclosure filed on December 11, 2015 are incorporated byreference. 
On August 7, 2017, Thede filed a further supplemental 
memorandum in response to the Wallace Declaration. Thede argued,
among other things, that Wallace and Williams: (1) were not qualified to authenticate U.S. Bank's business records; (2) failed to demonstrate personal knowledge that U.S. Bank was in possession of the Note when the Complaint was filed; and (3) offered inadmissible hearsay.  
On August 17, 2017, U.S. Bank filed an amended 
supplemental declaration signed by Wallace in support of its MSJ(Amended Wallace Declaration). The Amended Wallace Declaration 
appears to have corrected Paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Wallace  
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Declaration, as follows: 
8. On April 1, 2014, servicing of the Loan was
transferred from Specialized Loan Servicing LLC ("SLS") to
Nationstar[.] 
9. When the servicing rights of the Loan were
transferred to Nationstar, SLS transferred its servicingrecords pertaining to the Loan to Nationstar. Among therecords and documents transferred to Nationstar by SLS wasthe Original Note. Loan servicing records from BANA werealso included in the records and documents transferred from SLS to Nationstar. 
On September 14, 2017, U.S. Bank filed a further 
supplemental reply memorandum in support of its MSJ. 
Following a September 19, 2017 hearing on U.S. Bank's 
MSJ, the Circuit Court granted the MSJ and entered the 
Foreclosure Decree and the Foreclosure Judgment on November 30, 2017. Thede filed a timely notice of appeal. 
II. DISCUSSION 
In Reyes-Toledo, the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that to 
establish the right to foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must establish standing, or entitlement to enforce the subject promissory note, at the time the action was commenced. 139 Hawai
#i at 367-70, 390 P.3d at 1254-57. The "foreclosing 
plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing in foreclosure actions as '[s]tanding is concerned with whether the parties have the right to bring suit.'" Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254 (quoting 
Mottl v. Miyahira, 95 Hawai# i 381, 388, 23 P.3d 716, 723 (2001)). 
The supreme court further noted that "a foreclosing plaintiff does not have standing to foreclose on mortgaged property unless the plaintiff was entitled to enforce the note that has been defaulted on." Id. at 368, 390 P.3d at 1255 (citing Hanalei, BRC 
Inc. v. Porter
, 7 Haw. App. 304, 310, 760 P.2d 676, 680 (1988)). 
Here, it appears that the Circuit Court granted U.S. 
Bank's MSJ based in part on the copy of the "Adjustable Rate Note" that was attached to the Williams Affidavit (Attached 
Note). At the September 19, 2017 hearing, the court stated: 
I'm looking at the affidavit of Bank of America,
the one filed on June 19th, 2017, where they're
alleging that they had the documents –- the note atthe time the complaint for foreclosure was filed, so I 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
believe that would bring this matter in compliance
with the Reyes-Toledo situation. 
And when I look at the declaration, it talks
about Ms. Williams having personal knowledge andworking with these documents. 
So I'm –- I'm not willing to expand that every
time there's a statement in a declaration referring toa document, you have to attach the document. I'm not willing to expand it – that requirement. 
And so based on the Court's review of the 
documents submitted, the pleadings, the Court will begranting the motion for summary judgment. 
Thede contends that the Circuit Court erred in granting
U.S. Bank's MSJ by relying on "the hearsay testimony of U.S. 
Bank's declaring witnesses" to establish U.S. Bank's standing to foreclose. Thede also argues that U.S. Bank offered "no admissible evidence" that it possessed the Note when the Complaint was filed.  
"Under Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e) 
(2000) and Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai# i 
Rule 7(g) (1997), 'a declaration [or affidavit] in support of a summary judgment motion must be based on personal knowledge, contain facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the declarant [or affiant] is competent to testify as to the matters contained within the declaration.'" Wells Fargo Bank, 
N.A.
 v. Behrendt, 142 
Hawai# i 37, 44, 414 P.3d 89, 96 (2018) 
(quoting U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i 26, 30, 398 P.3d 
615, 619 (2017)). "Inadmissible evidence 'cannot serve as a basis for awarding or denying summary judgment.'" Id. (quoting 
Haw. Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka
, 94 Hawai# i 213, 221, 11 
P.3d 1, 9 (2000)). 
U.S. Bank contends that the Attached Note was 
admissible under the hearsay exception for records of regularly conducted activity pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 803(b)(6).
3/ U.S. Bank further argues that Williams and 
3/ HRE Rule 803(b)(6) (Supp. 2011) provides that the following are
not excluded by the rule against hearsay: 
A memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in
any form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, ordiagnoses, made in the course of a regularly conductedactivity, at or near the time of the acts, events,conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, as shown by the 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wallace were each a "qualified witness" with respect to the 
Attached Note, and each satisfied the standards set out in Mattos for admitting that document into evidence and establishing U.S. Bank's standing to foreclose. 
In Mattos and Behrendt, the supreme court reviewed the 
sufficiency of declarations similar in certain key respects to those at issue here, each of which attested to a promissory note and other documents relating to a foreclosure under the HRE Rule 803(b)(6) business records exception. See Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 
31, 398 P.3d at 620; Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 44-45, 414 P.3d at 
96-97. The court's decisions in Mattos and 
Behrendt are 
therefore dispositive as to whether HRE Rule 803(b)(6) may serve as a basis to admit the Attached Note into evidence. 
With respect to the Williams Affidavit, Williams did 
not aver that she was the custodian of records for BANA, Countrywide,
4/ or any other holder of the Note (e.g., U.S. 
Bank5/). Thus, the Attached Note is admissible under HRE Rule 
803(b)(6) only if the Williams Affidavit demonstrates that Williams is a "qualified witness" with respect to that document. See Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621; Behrendt, 142 
Hawai# i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97. 
The supreme court has held that a witness may be 
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6) 
testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness,
or by certification that complies with rule 902(11) ora statute permitting certification, unless the sourcesof information or other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness. 
(Emphasis added.) 
4/ The Cable Declaration stated that "[o]n or about June 1, 2005,
[Thede] . . . duly made, executed and delivered to Countrywide" the Note.(Emphasis added.) In addition, the Note identifies Countrywide as the"Lender" and, in turn, defines the "Note Holder" as the "Lender or anyone whotakes this Note by transfer and who is entitled to receive payments under thisNote." It therefore appears that Countrywide was the original holder of theNote. 
5/ The Cable Declaration states: "By Assignment of Mortgage recorded
on October 13, 2009 . . . the mortgagee's interest in the Mortgage wasassigned to [U.S. Bank]." Because the debt does not automatically follow thesecurity (Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai #i at 371 n.17, 390 P.3d at 1258 n.17), it is
not clear when U.S. Bank became the holder of the Note. The Williams Affidavit states that BANA was in possession of the Note on April 13, 2012,but does not indicate when BANA's possession commenced. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
even if the witness is not employed by the business that created 
the document or lacks direct, personal knowledge of how the document was created. See Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 
621; Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97. While there is 
"no requirement that the records have been prepared by the entity that has custody of them," the testifying witness "must have enough familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business that created the record to explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of business." Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 
45, 414 P.3d at 97 (quoting and citing Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32, 
398 P.3d at 621). 
The court in Behrendt further explained: 
Records received from another business and incorporated into
the receiving business' records may in some circumstances beregarded as 'created' by the receiving business.Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)when a custodian or qualified witness testifies that thedocuments were incorporated and kept in the normal course ofbusiness, that the incorporating business typically reliesupon the accuracy of the contents of the documents, and thecircumstances otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the document. 
Id. at 45, 414 P.3d at 97 (citation omitted) (citing Mattos, 140 
Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621. 
Here, as in Mattos and Behrendt, the Williams Affidavit 
does not establish that the Attached Note was received by BANA and then incorporated into BANA's records. In addition, like the declaration in Behrendt, the Williams Affidavit does not establish that Williams was familiar with the record-keeping system of Countrywide or any other prior holder of the Note. See 
142 Hawai# i at 46, 414 P.3d at 98 (declaration of loan servicer 
employee "ma[de] no assertions as to [the declarant's] familiarity with the record-keeping systems of Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note and allonges"). Thus, the Williams Declaration does not satisfy the foundational requirements to make Williams a qualified witness with respect to the Attached Note, and she could not authenticate it as a record of a regularly conducted activity under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
The Wallace Declaration, even as amended, was similarly 
deficient in providing the foundation necessary to admit the Attached Note under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). Wallace did not state 
9               
/s/ Alexa D.M. FujisePresiding Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that she was the custodian of records for Nationstar or any prior 
holder of the Note, so she had to demonstrate that she was a "qualified witness" with respect to the Attached Note. Yet she did not claim to be familiar with the record-keeping system of Countrywide or any other holder of the Note before BANA. Indeed, the Wallace Declaration does not specifically assert that Wallace was even familiar with BANA's record-keeping system. The Wallace Declaration also relies on the Williams Affidavit, which, for the reasons previously stated, is insufficient to admit the Attached Note under the business records exception. 
Absent the declaration of a "qualified witness" with 
respect to the Attached Note, U.S. Bank failed to establish its standing to foreclose. Because the Attached Note was not admissible as asserted, U.S. Bank did not meet its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of summary judgment. See Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 46, 414 P.3d at 98. Given our 
conclusion, we do not reach Thede's second issue on appeal. 
We therefore vacate the (1) Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure, and (2) Judgment, both entered on November 30, 2017, by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit. The case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 6, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin and
Frederick J. Arensmeyerfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Andrew J. Lautenbach and 
Sianha M. Gualano (Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 