NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000877
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RONDA LEE RAMOS ELSENBACH, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
PETER JOSEPH ELSENBACH, RONALD BEVERLY,
and JOHN DOES 1-25, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-199K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se Ronda Lee Ramos Elsenbach
 
(Ramos) appeals the following from Circuit Court of the Third
 
1
Circuit  (circuit court):
 
(1)
 "Order On Defendant Peter Joseph Elsenbach's Motion
 
To Dismiss Complaint With Prejudice, Filed Herein On November 1,
 
2013," entered December 31, 2013;
 
(2) "Order On Plaintiff Ronda Lee Ramos Elsenbach's
 
Motion For Substitution Of Parties And Request For Substitution
 Of Counsel, Both Filed Herein On December 23, 2013" (Order for
 
Substitution), entered on March 21, 2014;
 
(3) "Final Judgment Of Dismissal Of Civil Complaint For
 
Damages With Prejudice" (Final Judgment), entered March 21, 2014;
 and
 
(4) "Order Denying Plaintiff's Non-Hearing Motion To
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alter Or Amend And/Or Reconsider Final Judgment Of Dismissal Of
 
Civil Complaint For Damages With Prejudice, And Order On
 Plaintiff Ronda Lee Ramos Elsenbach's Motion For Substitution Of
 Parties, Both Entered And Filed On March 21, 2014, Which Was
 Filed Herein On March 31, 2014," entered May 9, 2014.
 
On appeal, Ramos contends the circuit court erred in
 
(1) denying Ramos' motion for substitution of parties under Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rules 25(a) or (c); (2) 
dismissing her complaint with prejudice for her alleged failure to take appropriate steps to substitute Defendant-Appellee, Peter Joseph Elsenbach (Elsenbach), deceased, with another party, 
pursuant to HRCP Rules 4 and 25(a)(1); and (3) issuing a final 
order and judgment dismissing the case as to all parties. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Ramos'
 appeal is without merit.
 I. HRCP Rule 25(a)(1)
 
The circuit court denied Ramos' Motion for Substitution
 
of Parties because she failed to follow the appropriate
 procedures for substituting a party, under HRCP Rules 4 and
 25(a)(1). Ramos contends that "this basis for dismissal is not
 correct and in error since service on [Thomas Yeh (Yeh), counsel
 
for Elsenbach] would be appropriate under HRCP Rule 5 when
 
serving a 'proper party' pursuant to HRCP Rule 25(a)(1)." We
 disagree.
 
Rule 25(a)(1) states:
 
Rule 25. SUBSTITUTION OF PARTIES.
 
(a) Death.
 (1) If a party dies and the claim is not thereby
extinguished, the court may order substitution of the proper
parties. The motion for substitution may be made by any
party or by the successors or representatives of the
deceased party and, together with the notice of hearing,
shall be served on the parties as provided in Rule 5 and
upon persons not parties in the manner provided in Rule 4
for the service of a summons, and may be served in any
judicial district. Unless the motion for substitution is
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
made not later than 120 days after the death is suggested
upon the record by service of a statement of the fact of the
death as provided herein for the service of the motion, the
action shall be dismissed as to the deceased party.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Contrary to Ramos' argument, Christopher Elsenbach
 
(Christopher) did not automatically become a party to Ramos'
 
lawsuit when he became a personal representative (PR) to
 
Elsenbach's estate. At the time Ramos filed her Motion for
 
Substitution of Parties, Elsenbach was the only other party in
 her lawsuit. Therefore, although Ramos' Motion for Substitution
 of Parties was an attempt to input Christopher as a party, he was
 not yet a party at the time she filed her motion. HRCP Rule
 25(a)(1) instructs that those persons who are not yet a party to
 the lawsuit shall be served pursuant to HRCP Rule 4. 
HRCP Rule 4 requires personal service upon the
 
individual. HRCP Rule 4(d)(1) provides, in pertinent part, that
 service of the summons and complaint shall be made
 
(1) Upon an individual other than an infant or an
incompetent person, (A) by delivering a copy of the summons
and of the complaint to the individual personally or in case
the individual cannot be found by leaving copies thereof at
the individual's dwelling house or usual place of abode with
some person of suitable age and discretion then residing
therein or (B) by delivering a copy of the summons and of
the complaint to an agent authorized by appointment or by
law to receive service of process. 
Ramos' Certificate of Service indicates that she served only
 
Elsenbach, through his attorney, Yeh, but did not attempt to
 serve Christopher or any agent of Christopher. Ramos failed to
 satisfy the procedure set forth under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) and Rule
 4. Therefore, the circuit court did not err in denying Ramos'
 
Motion for Substitution of Parties.
 II. HRCP Rule 25(c)
 
Ramos also argues that the circuit court should have
 
granted Ramos' Motion for Substitution of Parties, pursuant to
 HRCP Rule 25(c). Ramos contends that "a transfer of all assets
 held by [Elsenbach] was made to the PR and then the Trust and
 there is a large debt involved that is owed to [Ramos], which
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
brings HRCP Rule 25(c) into the picture since there was a
 
Transfer of Interest with the PR."
 
HRCP Rule 25(c) provides a process for substitution of
 
parties when a transfer of interest occurs, but still requires
 personal service to a non-party. HRCP Rule 25(c) provides 
(c) Transfer of Interest. In case of any transfer of
interest, the action may be continued by or against the
original party, unless the court upon motion directs the
person to whom the interest is transferred to be substituted
in the action or joined with the original party. Service of
the motion shall be made as provided in subdivision (a) of
this rule.
 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, substitution of a party pursuant to HRCP
 
Rule 25(c) still requires service as provided in HRCP Rule 25(a). 
As noted supra, HRCP Rule 25(a) and Rule 4 required that Ramos
 provide Christopher with personal service of the Motion for
 Substitution of Parties and notice of hearing. Thus, even
 assuming arguendo, when HRCP Rule 25(c) is applied to the facts
 of Ramos' case, her motion must fail because Christopher was not
 properly served under HRCP Rule 4.
 III. Dismissing Complaint as to Elsenbach
 
Ramos contends the circuit court erred in dismissing
 
Elsenbach as a party to her Complaint. HRCP Rule 25(a)(1)
 provides that "[u]nless the Motion for Substitution of Parties is
 made not later than 120 days after the death is suggested upon
 the record by service of a statement of the fact of the death as
 provided herein for the service of the motion, the action shall
 be dismissed as to the deceased party." The 120-day time period
 
2
is subject to extension under HRCP Rule 6(b),  at the discretion
2 [HRCP] Rule 6. Times
 
. . . .
 
(b) Enlargement. When by these rules or by a notice
given thereunder or by order of court an act is required or
allowed to be done at or within a specified time, the court
for cause shown may at any time in its discretion (1) with
or without motion or notice order the period enlarged if
request therefor is made before the expiration of the period
originally prescribed or as extended by a previous order or
(2) upon motion made after the expiration of the specified
period permit the act to be done where the failure to act

(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the circuit court.
 
On April 22, 2013, Yeh filed, with the circuit court, a
 
"Suggestion of Death Upon the Record [HRCP Rule 25]" (Suggestion
of Death), evidencing Elsenbach's death of natural causes. 
Attached to the Suggestion of Death was a Certificate of Service
 
showing the document was served that same day by mail to Ramos'
 counsel of record at that time. After the Suggestion of Death
 was returned to Yeh as "undeliverable as addressed unable to
 forward," he served the Suggestion of Death on the Chief Court
 Administrator/Chief Clerk of the circuit court on May 2, 2013,
 pursuant to HRCP Rule 5(b)(1)(c). Thus, the 120-day time period
 for Ramos to substitute parties began to run on May 2, 2013. See
 
HRCP Rule 25(a)(1). 
The circuit court extended the deadline for Ramos to
 
file her Motion for Substitution of Parties, but noted that
 "[t]he case will stand dismissed with prejudice against
 [Elsenbach] . . . unless [Ramos] takes the appropriate steps to
 seek . . . substitution of [Elsenbach], deceased, as a party, on
 or by December 23, 2013." As noted supra, Ramos filed a Motion
 for Substitution of Parties to substitute Christopher for
 Elsenbach, but failed to properly serve the motion upon
 Christopher, as required under HRCP Rules 4 and 25(a)(1).
 
Because Ramos failed to move for substitution of
 
parties within 120-days after Elsenbach served the Suggestion of
 Death and failed to "take the appropriate steps" to seek
 substitution by the circuit court's December 23, 2013 extended
 deadline, the circuit court did not err in dismissing Ramos'
 Complaint as to Elsenbach. 
IV. 	Dismissing Complaint as to all parties
 
Ramos argues that the circuit court erred when it
 
2(...continued)
was the result of excusable neglect; but it may not extend
the time for taking any action under Rules 50(b) 52(b),
59(b), (d) and (e) and 60(b) of these rules and Rule 4(a) of
the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure, except to the
extent and under the conditions stated in them.
 
5
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissed her Complaint as to all parties and not just Elsenbach
 
alone. We disagree. 
The circuit court's Order for Substitution ordered that
 
"this action and all claims contained in [Ramos'] Complaint,
 filed May 26, 2009, shall be and the same is dismissed with
 prejudice." The Final Judgment, finding that no party defendants
 remained in the lawsuit, entered judgment in favor of Elsenbach
 and dismissed Ramos' Complaint with prejudice.
 
Ramos' Complaint named three party defendants in her
 
lawsuit: Elsenbach, Ronald Beverly (Beverly), and "John Does 1­
25" (unknown defendants). By the time the circuit court
 
dismissed Ramos' Complaint, Ramos could not rely on Elsenbach as
 
a party defendant because, as noted supra, the circuit court
 properly dismissed Elsenbach as a party to Ramos' Complaint.
 Next, Ramos could not rely on Beverly as a party defendant
 because on April 25, 2011, the circuit court dismissed Beverly as
 a party to Ramos' Complaint. Finally, Ramos could not rely on
 her unknown defendants as party defendants to her Complaint
 because, in the five years since Ramos filed her Complaint, she
 at no time attempted to name or identify the unknown defendants,
 as required under HRCP Rule 17(d)(3).
3
 
3 [HRCP] Rule 17. Parties Plaintiff and Defendant; Capacity.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Unidentified Defendant
 (1) When it shall be necessary or proper to make a
person a party defendant and the party desiring the
inclusion of the person as a party defendant has been unable
to ascertain the identity of a defendant, the party desiring
the inclusion of the person as a party defendant shall in
accordance with the criteria of Rule 11 of these rules set
 forth in a pleading the person's interest in the action, so
much of the identity as is known (and if unknown, a
fictitious name shall be used), and shall set forth with
specificity all actions already undertaken in a diligent and
good-faith effort to ascertain the person's full name and
identity.
 
. . . .
 
(3) Any party may, by motion for certification, make
the name or identity of the party defendant known to the
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Given that at the time the circuit court dismissed
 
Ramos' Complaint with prejudice there were no party defendants
 
left in her lawsuit, the court's dismissal was proper. See HRCP
 
Rule 58.4
   
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the following entered in the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit are affirmed:
 
(1) "Order On Defendant Peter Joseph Elsenbach's Motion
 
To Dismiss Complaint With Prejudice, Filed Herein On November 1,
 2013," entered December 31, 2013;
 
(2) "Order On Plaintiff Ronda Lee Ramos Elsenbach's
 
Motion For Substitution Of Parties And Request For Substitution
 Of Counsel, Both Filed Herein On December 23, 2013," entered on
 March 21, 2014;
 
(3) "Final Judgment Of Dismissal Of Civil Complaint For
 
Damages With Prejudice," entered March 21, 2014; and
 
(4) "Order Denying Plaintiff's Non-Hearing Motion To
 
Alter Or Amend And/Or Reconsider Final Judgment Of Dismissal Of
 Civil Complaint For Damages With Prejudice, And Order On
 
3(...continued)
court within a reasonable time after the moving party knew

or should have known the name or identity of the party
defendant. The motion shall be supported by affidavit
setting forth all facts substantiating the movant's claim
that the naming or identification has been made in good
faith and with due diligence. When the naming or
identification is made by a plaintiff, it shall be made
prior to the filing of the pretrial statement by that
plaintiff, or within such additional time as the court may
allow. The court shall freely grant reasonable extensions of
the time in which to name or identify the party defendant to
any party exercising due diligence in attempting to
ascertain the party defendant's name or identity.
 
4 [HRCP] Rule 58. Entry of Judgment
 
Unless the court otherwise directs and subject to the
provisions of Rule 54 of these rules and Rule 23 of the
Rules of the Circuit Courts, the prevailing party shall
prepare and submit a proposed judgment. The filing of the
judgment in the office of the clerk constitutes the entry of
the judgment; and the judgment is not effective before such
entry. The entry of the judgment shall not be delayed for
the taxing of costs. Every judgment shall be set forth on a
separate document.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Plaintiff Ronda Lee Ramos Elsenbach's Motion For Substitution Of
 
Parties, Both Entered And Filed On March 21, 2014, Which Was
 Filed Herein On March 31, 2014," entered May 9, 2014.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 14, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Ronda Lee Ramos Elsenbach
 
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se.
 
Thomas L.H. Yeh 
Michael W. Moore
 Jill D. Raznov
 for Defendant-Appellee Peter
Joseph Elsenbach
and Specially Appearing on Behalf
of Christopher Elsenbach,
Personal Representative of the
Estate of Peter Joseph
Elsenbach. Presiding Judge

Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
Richard L. Rost

 
Specially Appearing on Behalf
of Christopher Elsenbach,
Personal Representative of the
Estate of Peter Joseph
Elsenbach.
 
8
 