NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000185
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LAUREN TAITO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1160)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lauren Taito (Taito) timely appeals
 
from the judgment of conviction and sentencing of the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1
 in Cr. Nos. 11-1-1160
and 11-1-0328.
 
On February 16, 2012, Taito was found guilty and
 
convicted of one count of Burglary in the Second Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-811 (1993) in
 
Cr. No. 11-1-1160 and three counts of Burglary in the Second
 
Degree in Cr. No. 11-1-0328, all of which occurred at a Public
 
Storage facility on December 24, 2010 and January 12, 2011
 
respectively. For each offense Taito was sentenced to a term of
 
five years probation to run concurrently with each other.
 
On appeal, Taito argues six main points: 
(1) that the
 
Circuit Court "erred in denying the defense motion for a mistrial
 
after [a retired police] officer gave his surprise unsolicited
 
1
 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
speech" as a potential juror during voir dire; (2) that the
 
Circuit Court "gravely erred in refusing to remove another juror
 
for cause"; (3) that the Circuit Court "erred in allowing a store
 
employee to vouch for the reliability of the electronic security
 
system, even though he was not an expert in that computer system
 
or electronic security in general"; (4) that the trial court
 
"erred in admitting evidence of prejudicial photographs which
 
lacked proper foundation"; (5) that the Circuit Court erred in
 
admitting partial copies of security reports; and (6) that the
 
defense motion for judgment of acquittal was wrongfully denied.2
 
Before examining Taito's asserted points of error, we
 
first consider the State's arguments regarding the procedural
 
sufficiency of the appeal.
 
(i) Notice of Appeal. While far from ideal, Taito's 
notice makes reference to both cases insofar as it refers to the 
Cr. No. 11-1-1160 case number, the counts in Cr. No. 11-1-0328, 
and attaches the terms of probation that pertain to both cases 
and counsel's order of appointment in Cr. No. 11-1-0328. We take 
this mixture of references to both criminal numbers as evidence 
of an intent to appeal from both cases and note that the State 
has addressed Taito's arguments with regard to each case as 
appropriate. State v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai' i 228, 235, 74 P.3d 
980, 984 (2003) (mistake in designating judgment appealed from should not result in loss of appeal so long as intent to appeal 
can be fairly inferred and appellee is not misled). 
(ii) Statement of Jurisdiction. Although HRAP Rule
 
12.1 mandates that the appellant file a statement of jurisdiction 
within ten days of the record on appeal being filed, "our 
appellate courts have ignored formal jurisdictional defects that 
are due to the derelictions of a criminal defendant's attorney." 
State v. Graybeard, 93 Hawai' i 513, 518, 6 P.3d 385, 390 
(App. 2000). 
2
 These final two points were raised and argued in the Opening
Brief, but not included in the Statement of Points of Error, in noncompliance
with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(iii) Timeliness of Opening Brief. The Opening Brief
 
was filed one day after the extended and firm due date set by
 
order of this court.3 However, in light of Taito's indigent
 
status and the fact that her counsel was court-appointed, we will
 not penalize Taito for this error of her counsel.
 
Despite the multitude of procedural and drafting
4
 
deficiencies with Taito's Opening Brief, upon careful review of
 
the record and the briefs submitted by the parties and having
 
given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues
 
raised, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we
 
resolve Taito's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The remarks made by a prospective juror during voir
 
dire did not taint the jury with bias because the Circuit Court
 
subsequently dismissed him from the jury pool and issued an
 
instruction to the other members of the jury and jury pool to
 
"disregard [the comments] entirely and not consider them at all
 
in your consideration of this case."
 
"[A]s a rule, juries are presumed to follow all of the 
trial court's instructions." State v. Knight, 80 Hawai' i 318, 
327, 909 P.2d 1133, 1142 (1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Outside of the other jurors named who were 
subsequently excused, Taito does not claim that any of the jurors 
that were actually seated were improperly influenced, and she 
points to no evidence that the jury was tainted by the subject 
comments. As Taito fails to point to any evidence that would 
overcome the presumption the jury complied with the Circuit 
3 The filing deadline was extended pursuant to the July 6, 2012
"Order Granting Attorney Andre' S. Wooten's June 27, 2012 Motion to Extend the
Due Date for Defendant-Appellant Lauren Taito's Opening Brief, and Order for
Andre' S. Wooten to Show Cause Why He Should Not be Sanctioned for Failing to
Timely File the Opening Brief in Violation of HRAP Rule 28." By order issued
on August 20, 2012, after an examination of Wooten's response, Wooten was
sanctioned for not filing the Opening Brief by the original June 18, 2012
deadline.
 
4
 There is, at best, scant citation to authority--statutory or
otherwise--or to the record on appeal as required by HRAP Rule 28(b).
Furthermore, there are multiple obvious typographical errors and repeating
"cut and paste" errors that indicate that the brief was not adequately
proofread before filing. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's instructions, Taito fails to satisfy her burden of 
establishing a prima facie showing that the possibility of juror 
misconduct could have "substantially prejudiced [her] right to a 
fair trial by an impartial jury." State v. Furutani, 76 Hawai' i 
172, 181, 873 P.2d 51, 60 (1994) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion in not declaring a mistrial or empaneling a new jury. 
(2) Taito fails to make a prima facie showing that she
 
was deprived of her right to an impartial jury through a
 
deprivation of her peremptory challenges. While it is true that
 
Taito exhausted her two allotted peremptory challenges in
 
removing two of the jurors that were previously challenged for
 
cause, "[s]o long as the jury that sits is impartial, the fact
 
that the defendant had to use a peremptory challenge to achieve
 
that result does not mean the Sixth Amendment was violated." 
Ross v. Oklahoma, 487 U.S. 81, 88 (1988) Contra Territory v. Lum
 
Dim, 23 Haw. 792 (Haw. Terr. 1917) ("refusal to sustain
 
challenges for proper cause, necessitating peremptory challenges
 
on the part of the accused, will be considered on appeal as
 
prejudicial, where the accused has been compelled subsequently to
 
exhaust all his peremptory challenges before the final selection
 
of the jury").
 
Taito does not present any relevant evidence in support
 
of the argument that the jury panel that convicted her was not
 
impartial. In addition, the issue of a deprivation of peremptory
 
challenges was not raised at trial. Taito "made no proffer that
 
[s]he would have excused another prospective juror had [s]he not
 
been forced to exercise one of [her] peremptory challenges, . . .
 
nor did [s]he request an additional peremptory challenge." State
 
v. Iuli, 101 Hawai' i 196, 205, 65 P.3d 143, 152 (2003) (citing to 
U.S. v. Martinez-Salazar, 528 U.S. 304, 317 (2000) (no denial or
 
impairment of right to peremptory challenges where there was no
 
request for an additional challenge and the impartiality of the
 
jury was not objected to)). Again, the Circuit Court did not
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse its discretion when it did not declare a mistrial or
 
empanel a new jury.
 
(3) The lay testimony offered by Raymond Mancao
 
(Mancao), the property manager of the Public Storage facility,
 
was properly admitted. Taito did not object at trial to the
 
admission of his testimony. Although Taito now challenges his
 
testimony as expert opinion for which he was not duly qualified
 
to render, Mancao did not need to be qualified as an expert
 
before testifying because his statements were not offered as
 
expert testimony under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 702. 
The testimony given was not regarding the soundness of the
 
technology of the security system, but was based on Mancao's
 
experience and perception as a user. Mancao testified about the
 
procedures that he used and that the security system worked well
 
enough to be relied upon in his business. As a lay witness,
 
Mancao's testimony demonstrated his personal knowledge of the
 
security system used and the training he received.
 
Taito has failed to show that the Circuit Court 
committed plain error. It was not an abuse of the Circuit 
Court's discretion to admit this testimony. See State v. Assaye, 
121 Hawai' i 204, 210, 216 P.3d 1227, 1233 (2009). 
(4) State's Exhibits 14 through 19 were properly
 
admitted into evidence. Although relying on HRE Rule 106, Taito
 fails to explain how the photographs in question were only
 
partial writings or recorded statements under the rule. 
Therefore, we could disregard this point. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
More importantly, the exhibits were properly admitted.
 
HRE Rule 901(a) provides that "[t]he requirement of
 
authentication or identification as a condition precedent to
 
admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a
 
finding that the matter in question is what its proponent
 
claims." This authentication is satisfied by "[t]estimony of
 
witness with knowledge . . . that a matter is what it is claimed
 
to be." HRE Rule 901(b)(1). Mancao testified that on
 
January 13, 2011, he inspected the storage units and that the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
photographs were "fair and accurate depictions of what [he]
 
viewed."
 
(5) The Circuit Court did not err in admitting State's
 
Exhibit 3, which was comprised of copies of the activity log that
 
covered the relevant time period but not the whole day. Taito
 
also appears to argue that the State's exhibits comprised of
 
surveillance video entered into evidence were incomplete, but
 
does not assert this as a point of error as required by HRAP
 
Rule 28(b)(4). More importantly, as to Exhibits 5 and 6, the
 
unredacted videos were in fact admitted into evidence. Exhibits
 
5A and 6A were excerpts.
 
Taito again cites to HRE Rule 106, but she does not
 
explain how the portion of the reports or video provided were
 
being used out of context or in a misleading way. Taito asserts
 
that "other persons, of unknown identity entered the self-storage
 
facility on the days in question as well." However, no argument
 
was made that the excerpted videos omitted footage of other
 
individuals leaving the facility with items that matched the
 
description of those stolen.
 
HRE Rule 106 is "an expression of the common law
 
doctrine of completeness," and is meant to address "the
 
misleading impression created by taking matters out of context"
 
and "the inadequacy of repair work delayed to a later point in
 
trial." Monlux v. General Motors Corp., 68 Haw. 358, 366, 714
 
P.2d 930, 935 (1986) (internal quotation marks and citations
 omitted). Despite Taito's contention that other persons entered
 
the storage facility on the day in question, she does not explain
 
how the reports provided omitted "any other part or any other
 
writing or recorded statement which ought in fairness to be
 
considered contemporaneously with it." HRE Rule 106.
 
(6) Taito's motion for a judgment of acquittal was not
 
wrongfully denied. This claim is not included in the Statement
 
of Points of Error in the Opening Brief, and thus does not comply
 
with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). HRS § 708-811 defines Burglary in the
 
Second Degree as when a person "intentionally enters or remains
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a crime
 
against a person or against property rights[.]" The State
 
adduced evidence of Taito's intentional unauthorized entrance to
 
the storage facility and the identification of items that she was
 
carrying out of the facility as belonging to the renters of the
 
units that were entered without permission. Examining this
 
evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, a
 
reasonable mind could fairly conclude that Taito committed
 
Burglary in the Second Degree. The motion for acquittal was
 
correctly denied.
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the February 16, 2012 Final
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentencing in Cr. Nos. 11-1-1160 and
 
11-1-0328 entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are
 
affirmed. We also direct that the appellate clerk serve a copy
 
of this Summary Disposition Order on the Office of Disciplinary
 
Counsel for appropriate action.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 14, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
André S. Wooten,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7
 