
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 



 

 


 

 


 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 


NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000439
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
 

LAWRENCE L. BRUCE, Defendant-Appellant, and
 

JUSTIN MCKINLEY, Defendant-Appellee
 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 14-1-0987)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J. and Leonard, J.
with Ginoza, J. concurring and dissenting separately)
 
 
 
Defendant-Appellant Lawrence L. Bruce (
Bruce) appeals
 
from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered on May 5,
 
1
2015 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
 
 
On appeal, Bruce contends:
 
(1) 
the evidence at trial was insufficient to support
 
his conviction for promoting prostitution in the second degree;
 
(2) the circuit court abused its discretion when it
 
allowed Detective Derek Stigerts (Stigerts) of the Sacramento
 
Police Department to testify as an expert on the commercial
 
sexual exploitation of women;
 
(3) Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) 
committed prosecutorial misconduct during its closing arguments that violated Bruce's constitutional right to a fair trial; and 
1
 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong signed the May 5, 2015 "Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence." The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided over the
proceedings. 

 

 

 
 
 


 
	 



 
	 

 
	 

 
	 
 


 


 

 
 

 

 
 



 
	 



 
	 

 
	 

 
	 
 


 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) the circuit court abused its discretion by allowing
 
 
 
a potential witness to assert her Fifth Amendment privilege
 
 
 
against self-incrimination.
 

I. BACKGROUND

 
On June 17, 2014, the grand jury indicted Bruce on one
 
 
 
count of promoting prostitution in the first degree in violation
 
 
 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1202(1)(a) (2014 Repl.)
 
 
 
and one count of sexual assault in the first degree in violation
 
 
 
of HRS § 707-730(1)(a) (2014 Repl.). The charge of promoting
 
 
 
2


 prostitution in the first degree,  which was related to the crime
 
 
 
that Bruce was ultimately convicted of following trial, stated:
 
 
 
COUNT 1:  On or between April 1, 2014 to and including
 

April 19, 2014, in the City and County of Honolulu, State of 


Hawai'i, [Bruce] did knowingly advance prostitution by
compelling or inducing [the Complaining Witness (CW)] by 


force, threat, fraud, or intimidation to engage in 


prostitution, and/or did knowingly profit from such conduct 


by another, thereby committing the offense of Promoting 


Prostitution in the First Degree, in violation of [HRS 


§ 712-1202 (1)(a)]. 
 
 
 
On December 24, 2014, the State filed a motion in
limine to introduce expert testimony by Stigerts "in the area of
 
 
 
sex trafficking, sexual exploitation of women and the dynamics of
 
 
 
the pimp-prostitute relationship."
 
 
 
 
2
 HRS § 712-1202 provides:
 
§712-1202 Promoting prostitution in the first degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting prostitution
in the first degree if the person knowingly:
 
(a) 	Advances prostitution by compelling or inducing
a person by force, threat, fraud, or
intimidation to engage in prostitution, or
profits from such conduct by another; or
 
(b) 	Advances or profits from prostitution of a
person less than eighteen years old.
 
(2) 	Promoting prostitution in the first degree is a
class A felony.
 
(3) 	As used in this section:
 
"Fraud" means making material false statements,
misstatements, or omissions.
 
"Threat" means any of the actions listed in section
707-764(1).
 
2
 
 

 

 

 









 

 





 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 
 

 

 









 

 





 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 5, 2015, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the various motions in limine filed, including the State's motion
 in limine to introduce testimony. At the close of the hearing,
 the circuit court stated:
 
Well, based on the hearing that we just had concluded, the
Court under Rule 702 of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence [(HRE)]
will allow [Stigerts] to testify as an expert. The Court
finds that based on his experience and training and his
prior qualification as to commercial sexual exploitation of
not only children but adults, he does possess knowledge in
regards to the field of prostitution that is not possessed
by the average trier of fact, and it is based on his
training and experience.
 
The Court further finds that it is relevant because
 
the time period in which [CW] allegedly was associated in
this case was from April 1st of 2014 through May 13, 2014,
so it would explain -- his testimony would assist the jurors
to understand the circumstances and explain why perhaps the
[CW] remained in the situation that she was in. So I will
allow [Stigerts] to testify as an expert.
 
Between January 12 and January 23, 2015, the circuit
 
court held a jury trial for Bruce and co-defendant Justin
 
3
McKinley (McKinley).  Stigerts was the first witness the State
 
 
 
called to testify. Stigerts testified about his experience
 
investigating commercial sexual exploitation cases as a police
 detective with the Sacramento Police Department's vice unit and
 the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Child Exploitation Task
 Force. The State moved to qualify Stigerts as an expert in the
 "area of commercial sexual exploitation of women and children[.]" 
McKinley objected and Bruce joined in the objection. The circuit
 court sustained the objection on the basis that the State needed
 to better clarify Stigerts' qualifications to testify as an
 expert in the commercial sexual exploitation of women.
 
The State then continued its examination of Stigerts,

 
who testified more specifically about his experience
 investigating adult prostitution cases and the "crossover"
 between adult and child prostitute cases. The State again moved
 to qualify Stigerts as an expert in the area of commercial sexual
 exploitation of women. McKinley objected on the basis of lack of
 
3
 McKinley was charged with one count of promoting prostitution in
the first degree, two counts of sexual assault in the first degree, and one
count of kidnapping.
 
3
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foundation and Bruce once again joined in the objection. Over
 
the objections of McKinley and Bruce, the circuit court qualified
 Stigerts as an expert in the area of "commercial sexual
 exploitation of women." Stigerts then testified to what he
 referred to as the "pimp-prostitute subculture," which is the
 lifestyle associated with illegal prostitution activities.
 According to Stigerts, the "pimp-prostitute subculture" involves
 "everything from the participants, which are the pimps,
 prostitutes, the customers, which are called tricks or johns, and
 law enforcement who actually investigates [sic] these crimes."
 
After Stigerts testified, the State called CW to 
testify against Bruce. CW made an in-court identification of Bruce as the man that she knew as "L-Way" and testified that she knew his first name was "Lawrence" but did not know his last name. CW testified that she began prostituting as Bruce's "girl" shortly after she arrived in Hawai
'i in the hopes of making 
enough money to return home to Alaska. She knew where to find Bruce after a man she knew as "Lando," who CW identified as a 
4
pimp she worked for in San Diego,  told her where Bruce's hostel
 
 
 
was located in Waikiki.
 
After meeting Bruce at his hostel, CW discussed the

 
details of her prostituting for him. Shortly thereafter, CW
 
became Bruce's "girl" by having sexual intercourse with him. As
 his "girl," she also "work[ed] for him," which meant that she
 
5
went on dates  with clients and gave the money she received from
 
 
 
the dates to Bruce without receiving a portion for herself. While
 
prostituting in San Diego, CW had an advertisement posted to a
 website called "Backpage," which she described as a "website
 where girls post their ads, their pictures, as prostitutes to
 make money." On or about April 1, 2014, Bruce used his tablet
 
4
 CW testified that "Lando" paid for her trip to Hawai' i and made 
the travel arrangements for her, but did not force her to go. CW testified 
that after she arrived in Hawai' i she lost contact with "Lando" and no longer
sent him any money. When asked by Bruce's counsel whether "Lando" was the"real L-Way," CW responded that "Lando" did not go by that name. 
5
 The term "date" appears to refer to a scheduled encounter between
a prostitute and client where the prostitute performs sexual acts for the
client in exchange for money.
 
4
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
computer to repost the text of CW's San Diego Backpage advertisement to the Hawai
'i location and used his "Vanilla 
6
card"  to pay the five-dollar fee to have her advertisement be
 
 
 
"number one on the list." Bruce set the price for CW's dates and
 
determined what types of acts she was to perform for clients.
 Bruce took possession of her identification card and social
 security card so that she "wouldn't be able to go nowhere."
 
CW testified that initially she lived with Bruce at a

 
hostel in Waikiki and that Bruce rented two rooms, one for
 sleeping and the other for dates (Date Room). CW testified that
 
on one occasion a client came to the Date Room to engage in
 
sexual conduct with CW. After the date was over and the client
 left, Bruce entered the Date Room and CW gave Bruce the money
 that she received from the client. When asked by the State why
 she gave the money to Bruce, CW responded that she was afraid of
 the consequences that she may receive from Bruce, including a
 fear that she would "get beat" by him, if she kept the money or
 did "something wrong." She testified that she was not okay with
 engaging in prostitution because she "was selling [her] body for
 money" and that felt like she was Bruce's "property."
 
CW testified that on or around April 11, 2014, she and
 
Bruce relocated to the Best Western Hotel by the Honolulu Airport
 after Bruce received a tip from McKinley that they could make
 more money prostituting in that location. CW and Bruce met with
 McKinley, who Bruce introduced to CW as "another pimp," and
 another woman, Keshawn Stewart (Stewart), at the Best Western
 
Hotel. Bruce updated CW's Backpage advertisement to reflect her
 
new location. Soon after arriving at the Best Western Hotel, CW
 and Stewart "[got] ready for dates, [got] dressed up, [did] our
 hair and makeup, and wait[ed] for calls." CW had her first date
 from that location on the second day.
 
On April 13, 2014, CW and Stewart were arrested for
 
prostitution after setting up a date with an undercover police
 officer. CW did not want to go on the date because "the guy
 
6
 CW testified that the "Vanilla card" is "like a Visa card that you
can put money on."
 
5
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sounded funny, like he was a cop." At the time CW received the
 call for the date, Bruce was sitting next to her and expressed
 that he wanted her to go. CW decided to go with Stewart on the
 date in order "[t]o make money." CW was arrested and Bruce's
 "baby mama," Jennie Ortegon (Ortegon), posted bail for CW. CW
 
returned to the Best Western Hotel with Bruce and McKinley.
 
CW testified that she did not want to continue
 
prostituting after her arrest because she felt prostituting
 
"wasn't for [her]." She expressed her feelings to Bruce, and he
 responded by telling her that he would help her to get home and
 would be there for her. However, after CW's arrest, Bruce had
 left the Best Western Hotel for about two days and had likely
 gone back to the hostel in Waikiki. As a result of his absence,
 McKinley called Bruce to tell him that CW was to become his
 property since Bruce left her behind.
 
CW testified that on April 19, 2014 Bruce returned to
 
the Best Western Hotel to retrieve his belongings and gave CW's
 identification card and social security card to McKinley. CW
 also testified that on April 19, 2014 she went on a date in
 response to a call set up on McKinley's phone, instead of the
 phone that she used when she worked for Bruce, which symbolized
 her switch from being Bruce's "girl" to being McKinley's "girl." 
During cross-examination by Bruce's counsel, CW testified that
 she chose to stop working for Bruce and to begin working for
 McKinley because she was not making enough money to get home by
 working for Bruce.
 
The State then called its expert in the field of
 
digital forensic examination of mobile devices and several
 Honolulu Police Department police officers who were involved in
 the case to testify. The State entered into evidence various
 text messages that were sent to and from a T-Mobile cellphone
 that was found on Bruce's person during his arrest (T-Mobile
 
cellphone).
 
After the State rested, Bruce moved to dismiss and for
 
a judgment of acquittal on his charges of promoting prostitution
 
in the first degree and sexual assault in the first degree. The
 
6
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 



 


 






 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 



 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 



 


 






 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court granted the judgment of acquittal on both charges
 based on insufficient evidence, but found that there still
 remained sufficient evidence to proceed on a charge for promoting
 prostitution in the second degree.
7
 
When testimony resumed, Stewart testified as McKinley's
 
sole witness and identified McKinley as her boyfriend. Stewart
 testified that Bruce had not lived at the Best Western Hotel with
 her and McKinley and that she met Bruce for the first time during
 trial.
 
After McKinley's defense rested, Bruce's counsel
 
attempted to call Ortegon to testify on behalf of Bruce. 
Ortegon, however, asserted her privilege against self-
incrimination and refused to testify. The circuit court did not
 compel Ortegon to testify.
 
Bruce then testified on his own behalf. Bruce
 
testified that he had not told CW that his name was "L-Way" and
 that there was no reason why anyone would call him "L-Way." He
 testified that the only nicknames he went by was "Larry" or
 "Bruce Bruce." Bruce believed the true "L-Way" was CW's former
 boyfriend from San Diego who also went by the nickname "Lando."
 Text messages that Bruce claimed were sent and received between
 Ortegon and the "real L-Way" while Ortegon was in possession of
 Bruce's T-Mobile cellphone, proved that he was not "L-Way."
 
Bruce denied ever managing CW as a prostitute, acting
 
as her pimp, setting prices for her prostitution activities, or
 maintaining her Backpage advertisement. Bruce testified that CW
 
7
 On January 26, 2015, the circuit court entered a Judgment of
Acquittal that acquitted Bruce of promoting prostitution in the first degree
and sexual assault in the first degree and added promoting prostitution in the
second degree as a charged offense.
 
HRS § 712-1203 (2014 Repl.) establishes the offense of promoting
prostitution in the second degree and provides:
 
§712-1203 Promoting prostitution in the second degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting prostitution
in the second degree if the person knowingly advances or
profits from prostitution. 
(2) Promoting prostitution in the second degree is a
class B felony.
 
7
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 









 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 









 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had never stayed with him at the hostel and denied using the
 
hostel to facilitate CW's dates with clients. He claimed that he
 did not know that CW, Stewart, and his girlfriend Ortegon all
 engaged in prostitution and claimed to have never "made money off
 of any girl by way of prostitution[,]" including CW. Bruce also
 denied ever having sexual intercourse with CW, although he
 testified that at one point he believed CW was flirting with him,
 and denied having ever gone to the Best Western Hotel. Moreover,
 Bruce claimed that CW never told him that she was trying to go
 back home to San Diego or Alaska.
 
The defense rested, and the State presented its closing
 
arguments repeatedly characterizing the case as a "sex
 trafficking" case without objection from Bruce or McKinley.
 
The State also stated:
 
So this whole thing about her lying and can't be
believed, well, the only people who can't be believed was
[Stewart] and [Bruce]. The fact of the matter is that they
treated her like she was property. And the odd thing about
it is that it's as if this all happened, like, back in the
1700's, 1800's, where we owned people, where people were
owned and disrespected and made to do things that they
didn't want to do.
 
But this crime happened in 2014, 2014, and we, as a
society, have evolved, you would think, but not to these two
gentlemen here. They didn't see her as anything more than a
piece of property to pass around, to mistreat, to humiliate,
intimidate, beat, and force. That is how they viewed her,
that is how they treated her. But she's not a piece of
property. I mean, she's somebody's daughter, she's
somebody's friend, she's a mother, she's a woman, she is a
person, and she deserves to be treated properly[.]
 
McKinley objected on the basis that the State's statements were
 
"a little bit far beyond arguing the evidence," but Bruce did not
 join. The circuit court overruled the objection.
 
On January 26, 2015, the jury returned a verdict
 
finding Bruce guilty of promoting prostitution in the second
 degree. The circuit court entered its Judgment of Conviction and
 Sentence on May 5, 2015, sentencing Bruce to ten years of
 incarceration.
 
On June 2, 2015, Bruce filed his notice of appeal.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Sufficiency of Evidence
 
8
 
 







 

 


 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 







 

 


 

 

 



 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellate courts in Hawaii review the sufficiency of 
evidence during a criminal trial as follows:
 
 
 '
Evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai 'i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 
960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every 
material element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Kalaola, 
124 Hawai
'i at 49, 237 P.3d at 1115 (quoting Richie, 88 Hawai 'i at 
33, 960 P.2d at 1241).
B. Expert Testimony
 
Whether expert testimony should be admitted at trial
rests within the sound discretion of the trial court and
 
will not be overturned unless there is a clear abuse of
 discretion. An abuse of discretion occurs when the
 decisionmaker exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party.
 
State v. Fukagawa, 100 Hawai 'i 498, 503, 60 P.3d 899, 904 (2002) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
C. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
 
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
 whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
 complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State
 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 (1998)).
D. Privilege Against Self-Incrimination
 
"Whether a trial court should compel a witness to
 
testify over the witness's assertion that his answer might tend
 to incriminate him or her is a matter within the sound exercise
 
9
  
 

 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of its discretion, and is thus reviewed for an abuse of 
discretion." State v. Kupihea, 80 Hawai 'i 307, 312, 909 P.2d 
1122, 1127 (1996) (internal citation omitted). "The circuit court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id. (quoting 
Kaneohe Bay Cruises, Inc. v. Hirata, 75 Haw. 250, 251, 861 P.2d 1, 3 (1993)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Sufficiency of Evidence
 
Bruce argues on appeal that the evidence introduced at 
trial was insufficient to support his conviction for promoting prostitution in the second degree because the State failed to present substantial evidence that he was "L-Way" –- the person that CW testified was her pimp in Hawai
'i. Bruce argues that CW 
was not a credible witness and, therefore, this court should disregard her testimony when reviewing the sufficiency of the State's evidence against him. 
"[A]n appellate court will not pass upon issues 
dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. 
Pomroy, 132 Hawai
'i 85, 95, 319 P.3d 1093, 1103 (2014). This is 
the general rule to which appellate courts adhere and a rule that Bruce acknowledges in his opening brief. Nevertheless, citing State v. Taylor, 130 Hawaii 196, 307 P.3d 1142 (2013), Bruce urges this court to abandon the general rule and reassess the credibility of CW's testimony on appeal. 
In Taylor, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court addressed whether 
the circuit court committed plain error when it failed to give a sua sponte jury instruction on the mistake of fact defense. Taylor, 130 Hawai
'i at 208, 307 P.3d at 1154. The supreme court 
held that it was ultimately the circuit court's responsibility, as opposed to being the jury's responsibility, to determine whether the defendant presented credible evidence to warrant giving a mistake of fact instruction. The supreme court instructed: 
10
 




 


 

 

 




 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[C]redible evidence" in this context means that the circuit
court should have concluded, based on the record that
existed at trial, that the evidence "offered reasonable
grounds for being believed," i.e., that "a reasonable juror
could harbor a reasonable doubt" as to the defendant's
 guilt, and should have given the unrequested mistake of fact
jury instruction.
 
Id. at 207, 307 P.3d at 1153. The supreme court noted:
 
We are aware that "credibility" is usually associated withsubjective believability. See, e.g., State v. West, 95Hawai'i 452, 464, 24 P.3d 648, 660 (2001) ("Appellate courts
must objectively review all the evidence and avoidcommenting on its subjective believability, especially thecredibility of the witnesses.") Appellate courts are,however, sometimes required to employ credibilitydeterminations. For example, "when an appellate courtreviews the sufficiency of the evidence, it examines whetherthere was substantial evidence to support the conclusion ofthe trier of fact. . . . Substantial evidence as to everymaterial element of the offense charged is credible evidencewhich is of sufficient quality and probative value to enablea person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion."State v. Gomes, 117 Hawai' i 218, 226, 177 P.3d 928, 936
(2008) (citation omitted). Thus, in the current context, weexamine whether the defendant met her initial burden to adduce evidence with reasonable grounds for being believed. 
Taylor, 130 Hawai 'i at 205 n.10, 307 P.3d at 1151 n.10 (brackets 
omitted). Reviewing the evidence presented during trial, the 
supreme court determined that the defendant "had not met her initial burden of adducing credible evidence of facts constituting the [mistake of fact] defense, and those facts were not supplied by the prosecution's witnesses[,]" therefore, the circuit court did not commit plain error when it failed to give a mistake of fact instruction. Id. at 208, 307 P.3d at 1154 
(footnote omitted). 
Taylor is distinguishable from the facts of this 
appeal. In the case at hand, we are tasked with determining whether the State adduced sufficient evidence to support Bruce's conviction, which is distinguishable from the issue in Taylor (i.e., whether there was credible evidence to warrant giving a defense instruction). We decline to expand the holding in Taylor by applying its rulings to cases outside the context of defense instructions. In criminal cases decided after Taylor, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has reaffirmed the general rule that the 
appellate courts are not to disturb the trier of fact's credibility determinations on appeal when analyzing whether the 
11
 
 

 

 
 


 
	 

 
	 

 

 
 
 

 
 


 
	 

 
	 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecution adduced sufficient evidence to support a defendant's conviction. See Pomroy, 132 Hawai
'i at 95, 319 P.3d at 1103 
(citing the general rule that the appellate courts are not to disturb a trier of fact's credibility determinations to hold that the prosecution provided substantial evidence to support the defendant's conviction); State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai
'i 361, 368, 
341 P.3d 567, 574 (2014) ("It is not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflicting evidence."); see also State v. Guyton, 135 Hawai
'i 372, 381, 351 P.3d 1138, 
1147 (2015) (holding that the State failed to provide sufficient evidence to support the defendant's conviction even after according deference to the district court's credibility determinations). Therefore, we proceed with our review of the sufficiency of the evidence against Bruce with the understanding that "[t]he question of credibility and the weight to be given the evidence is for the trier of fact to determine and is not disturbed on appeal." Pomroy, 132 Hawai
'i at 95, 319 P.3d at 
1103 (quoting State v. Ewing, 81 Hawai 'i 156, 165, 914 P.2d 549, 
558 (App. 1996)). 
Under HRS § 712-1203, "[a] person commits the offense 
of promoting prostitution in the second degree if the person knowingly advances or profits from prostitution." This definition incorporates the concept of "prostitution," which is a separate offense, under HRS § 712-1200 (2014 Repl.).
8 See 
Richie, 88 Hawai 'i at 29, 960 P.2d at 1237 ("It is clear that the 
definition of promoting prostitution in the second degree incorporates the concept of 'prostitution.'"). 
CW testified that she knew Bruce as "L-Way" and that
 
Bruce managed her advertisement page on Backpage to facilitate
 
8
 HRS § 712-1200 provides in pertinent part:
 
§712-1200 Prostitution. (1) A person commits the
offense of prostitution if the person:
 
(a) 	Engages in, or agrees or offers to engage in,
sexual conduct with another person for a fee; or
 
(b) 	Pays, agrees to pay, or offers to pay a fee to
engage in sexual conduct.
 
12
 
 



 







 

 
 



 







 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dates with clients looking for a prostitute. CW testified that 
Bruce instructed her to bring clients back to the hostel for dates and that Bruce set the price for sexual acts that she was to perform for paying clients. CW testified that, after every date, she gave the money from the client to Bruce without receiving any of the money for herself. CW also testified that she lived with Bruce at a hostel in Waikiki and that together they moved to the Best Western Hotel by the Honolulu Airport in the hopes of making more money from prostituting. Based on the record before us, the State presented sufficient evidence to support the jury's guilty verdict on the charge of promoting prostitution in the second degree. 
See Kalaola,  124 Hawai 'i at 
49, 237 P.3d at 1115. 
B. Stigerts' Testimony

 
Bruce challenges the admission of Stigerts' expert
 
 
 
testimony, arguing that (1) Stigerts did not qualify as an expert
 
 
 
in the field of "adult pimp-prostitute relationships"; (2)
 
 
 
Stigerts' testimony "did not assist the jury in comprehending or
 
 
 
understanding something not commonly known or understood"; and
 
 
 
(3) Stigerts' testimony improperly bolstered the credibility of
 
 
 
CW.
 
 
 
HRE Rule 702 governs the admission of expert testimony
 
 
 
at trial and provides:
 
 
 
Rule 702 Testimony by experts. If scientific,
technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the
trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a
 fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may
testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise. In
determining the issue of assistance to the trier of fact,
the court may consider the trustworthiness and validity of
the scientific technique or mode of analysis employed by the
proffered expert.
 
"Thus, a witness may qualify as an expert if he or she possesses 
a background in any one of the five areas contemplated by HRE Rule 702: knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education." Fukagawa, 100 Hawai
'i at 511, 60 P.3d at 912. 
 The Hawai'i Supreme Court has identified three 
determinations that the trial court must make before admitting expert testimony into evidence: 
13
 
 










 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 










 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) the witness is in fact an expert; (2) the subject matter
 

of the inquiry is of such a character that only persons of
 

skill, education, or experience in it are capable of a
 

correct judgment as to any facts connected therewith; and
 

(3) the expert testimony will aid the trier of fact to
 

understand the evidence or determine a fact in issue.
 
 
 
State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai 'i 8, 26 n.19, 904 P.2d 893, 911 n.19 
(1995) (emphasis and brackets omitted) (citing Larsen v. State 
Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 64 Haw. 302, 304, 640 P.2d 286, 288 (1982)).
1. Expert witness qualifications
 
With respect to determining whether a witness is an 
expert in a particular field, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
maintained: 
It is not necessary that the expert witness have the highest
possible qualifications to testify about a particular
matter, but the expert witness must have such skill,
knowledge, or experience in the field in question as to make
it appear that his opinion or inference-drawing would
probably aid the trier of fact in arriving at the truth.
Once the basic requisite qualifications are established, the
extent of an expert's knowledge of the subject matter goes
to the weight rather than the admissibility of the
testimony.
 
Fukagawa, 100 Hawai 'i at 504, 60 P.3d at 905 (ellipses omitted) 
(quoting Toyomura, 80 Hawai 'i at 26 n.19, 904 P.2d at 911 n.19). 
Stigerts testified that he had a bachelor's of science
 
degree in criminal justice from California State University,
 
Sacramento; had been with the Sacramento Police Department in
 California since 1991; became a detective with the police
 department in 2005; and began investigating adult and child
 prostitution cases in 2006 through his work with the police
 department's vice unit and with the Federal Bureau of
 Investigation's Child Exploitation Task Force. Stigerts has been
 involved in "well over 150" cases involving commercial sexual
 exploitation, with approximately thirty-five of those cases
 involving solely adults and thirty cases involving both adults
 and children. Stigerts conducted "over 250" interviews with
 prostitutes, with "[w]ell over a hundred" interviews with
 prostitutes that were eighteen years old or older, constituting
 
14
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





 

 
 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adult prostitutes.9 Stigerts also testified that, as a police
 
detective, he took classes on the subject of commercial sexual
 exploitation of children, which he stated was relevant to adult
 prostitution cases because the classes taught about the general
 "pimp-prostitute subculture." According to Stigerts, the "pimp­
prostitute subculture" describes the lifestyle of those involved
 in prostitution activities and involves "everything from the
 participants, which are the pimps, prostitutes, the customers,
 which are called tricks or johns, and law enforcement who
 actually investigates [sic] these crimes."
 
Bruce argues that, although Stigerts testified about
 
the similarities between child and adult prostitution, "the fact
 that a special task force had been created for child prostitution
 and that training courses and seminars were given specifically in
 the area of child sexual exploitation/prostitution evidenced that
 the subject was distinct and specialized." We disagree. 
Stigerts testified that the work of the vice unit and
 
special task force worked collaboratively and that if he knew a
 particular pimp well, he would work a case even if it involved
 adult prostitutes. In addition to Stigerts' extensive testimony
 about his experience investigating adult and child prostitution
 cases separately, he testified to how the two types of
 prostitution were indistinguishable and that the classification
 of a "child" prostitute versus an "adult" prostitute was legal
 fiction that has no impact on the dynamics between a pimp and
 prostitute and the psychology of prostitution. Stigerts
 testified that there was considerable "crossover" between the
 sexual exploitation of women and children. When the State asked
 Stigerts, "Is there a separate subculture that involves only
 children as prostitutes, or are they intermixed with adults?",
 Stigerts responded:
 
9
 In addition, Stigerts stated that when "an arrest is made of a
pimp, slash, exploiter" one of the things the vice unit or task force does is
"interview the subject." Stigerts testified that the vice unit and task force
has had several post-conviction interviews with pimps who agreed to speak
about the way the prostitution subculture operates. Stigerts indicated that
he talked to pimps about how the subculture operates "at least 20 times."
 
15
 
 














 

 

 


 

 


 


 
 

 
 














 

 

 


 

 


 


 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It's all intermixed. It all works pretty much the
same. There are a [sic] little differences when you're
talking about children, especially the younger that [sic]
they are. Again, when you're talking about adult commercial
trafficking and [an] underaged [sic] juvenile, it's all the
same, pretty much. Everything that I had found from talking
to either the adult -- the adult girls or the underaged
[sic] girls, whether it's the methods of recruitment, the
methods of control, the manipulation, it's all pretty much
the same whether it's a child or an adult. And, again, I
mean, we talk about if it's 17 and 300 days old, that's a
child in the legal definition, what we deal with. And, you
know, six months later, that's an adult. But the things
don't change on the way that she works as a prostitute.
 
Based on the supreme court's standard, Stigerts' 
testimony was sufficient to establish himself as an expert in the 
field of the commercial sexual exploitation of women. See 
Fukagawa, 100 Hawai 'i at 504, 60 P.3d at 905; see also United 
States v. Brooks, 610 F.3d 1186, 1195-96 (9th Cir. 2010) (holding that a detective's eight years of experience as a police officer, two and a half years in the vice unit, twenty to twenty-five full scale child prostitution investigations, fifty interviews with pimps and prostitutes, undercover work, attendance in several specialized trainings in child prostitution and training in child prostitution qualified her as an "expert on the business of prostitution and the relationships between pimps and prostitutes"). Because the State established that Stigerts satisfied the requisite qualifications to testify as an expert, Bruce's challenges to the extent of Stigerts' knowledge of the subject area goes to the weight, rather than the admissibility, of his testimony. See Fukagawa, 100 Hawai
'i at 504, 60 P.3d at 
905. Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 
by qualifying Stigerts as an expert in the area of commercial
 sexual exploitation of women.
2. Usefulness of expert testimony to jury
 
Bruce argues that the circuit court "did not specify
 
the basis for its conclusion that the dynamics of the pimp-
prostitute relationship was 'outside the ken of ordinary laity'
 and that it was necessary to present an expert on this topic." 
Bruce bases his contention in part on the fact that the public
 has access to some of the resources Stigerts references in his
 
16
 
 










 

 


 

 

 

 



 

 
 










 

 


 

 

 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
line of work.10 Bruce's argument is without merit.
 
Expert testimony is meant to assist the trier of fact 
by providing "a resource for ascertaining truth in relevant areas 
outside the ken of ordinary laity." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai 'i 
289, 298, 926 P.2d 194, 203 (1996) (quoting State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 51 (1990)). The Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court has previously held "[t]he common experience of a jury, in most cases, provides a sufficient basis for assessment of a witness' credibility[,]" thus making expert testimony on a witness' credibility inappropriate. Batangan, 71 Haw. at 556, 
799 P.2d at 51. The supreme court recognized an exception, however, in cases of sexual abuse of children because child sexual abuse "is a particularly mysterious phenomenon and the common experience of the jury may represent a less than adequate foundation for assessing the credibility of a young child who complains of sexual abuse." Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). The supreme court maintained that "[c]hild victims of sexual abuse have exhibited some patterns of behavior which are seemingly inconsistent with behavioral norms of other victims of assault" and noted: 
While jurors may be capable of personalizing the emotions of
victims of physical assault generally, and of assessing
witness credibility accordingly, tensions unique to trauma
experienced by a child sexually abused by a family member
have remained largely unknown to the public. The routine
indicia of witness credibility—consistency, willingness to
aid the prosecution, straight forward rendition of the
facts—may, for good reason be lacking. As a result jurors
may impose standards of normalcy on child victim/witnesses
who consistently respond in distinctly abnormal fashion.
 
Id. at 557, 799 P.2d at 51 (ellipsis and brackets omitted)
 
(quoting State v. Moran, 728 P.2d 248, 251 (1986)). 
This court has since applied the rationale in Batangan
 
to uphold use of expert testimony to explain a possible reason
 for a complaining witness's recantation in cases involving abuse
 
10
 During trial, Stigerts testified that he learned about the "pimp­
prostitute subculture" from various resources that are available to the
general public, including books, such as "Pimpology: The 48 Laws of the Game",
and films, such as "Pimps Up, Ho's Down" and "American Pimp."
 
17
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of a family member. See State v. Cababag, 9 Haw. App. 496, 507,
 
850 P.2d 716, 722 (1993) (holding that the family court did not
 abuse its discretion in permitting the use of an expert witness
 to testify that "at the trial of an alleged male batterer of a
 woman with whom he is living, where the woman recants her
 pretrial accusations that she was battered by the male, one
 reasonable explanation for the recantation is the battered
 housemate/spouse syndrome").
 
Similarly, expert testimony is appropriate in cases
 
involving the commercial sexual exploitation of women. In the
 case at hand, Stigerts testified about the various ways pimps
 control the women that work for them and explained that women who
 prostitute may behave in counterintuitive ways. Stigerts
 explained that the women engaged in prostitution often do not
 seek or accept help from law enforcement because they fear
 getting in trouble, as they are themselves engaged in illegal
 activities, do not have anyone to turn to for help, and continue
 prostituting because they have become isolated in an unfamiliar
 city or state. Stigerts also explained that a woman who
 prostitutes often fears that if she seeks help from law
 enforcement, her pimp or those associated with her pimp may see
 her as a "snitch" and seek retribution against her or her family. 
Stigerts testified that even when women begin prostituting
 voluntarily, "force, fraud, or coercion comes into . . . play" at
 some point.
 
Like cases of child sexual assault and abuse of 
household members as explained in Batangan, the common experience of the jury represents a less than adequate foundation for assessing the credibility of a witness who either currently is or previously was a part of the "pimp-prostitute subculture." See 
Batangan, 71 Hawai
'i at 557, 799 P.2d at 51. Other jurisdictions 
have recognized that "the relationship between prostitutes and pimps is not the subject of common knowledge" and it was appropriate for an expert to provide insight into such relationships to aid the jury's assessment of witnesses' credibility. See Brooks, 610 F.3d at 1196 (quoting United States 
18
 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 

 

 







 




 

 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 

 

 







 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Taylor, 239 F.3d 994, 998 (9th Cir. 2001)). Given the nature
 
of commercial sexual exploitation of women and the lack of common
 knowledge about the power dynamic between pimps and prostitutes,
 the circuit court did not err in allowing Stigerts to testify as
 an expert witness.
3. Bolstering the credibility of CW
 
Bruce argues that Stigerts' testimony impermissibly
 
bolstered the credibility of CW. Specifically, Bruce argues that
 "[b]y informing the jurors of what Stigerts believed were the
 typical behaviors of pimps and prostitutes, he implicitly vouched
 for [CW's] credibility in every instance where her claimed
 behavior or her claims as to the actions of Bruce was consistent
 with Stigerts' testimony."
 
In Batangan, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court recognized that 
expert testimony on any subject "carries the potential of bolstering the credibility of one witness and conversely refuting the credibility of another[,]" but maintained that "[s]uch testimony, by itself, does not render the evidence inadmissible." Batangan, 71 Haw. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52. Instead, "[t]he pertinent consideration is whether the expert testimony will assist the jury without unduly prejudicing the defendant." Id. 
The supreme court held: 
[W]hile expert testimony explaining 'seemingly bizarre'
behavior of child sex abuse victims is helpful to the jury
and should be admitted, conclusory opinions that abuse did
occur and that the child victim's report of abuse is
truthful and believable is of no assistance to the jury, and
therefore, should not be admitted.
 
Id.
 
Furthermore, as this court noted in State v. Mars,  116
Hawai'i 125, 170 P.3d 861 (App. 2007), in the context of a child 
sex abuse case:
 
 
 

 
[T]here is absolutely nothing wrong with expert
opinion testimony that bolster's [sic] the credibility of
the indicted allegations of sexual abuse, e.g., the victim's
physical examination showed injury consistent with sexual
abuse, or the victim's psychological evaluation was
consistent with sexual abuse. Establishing the credibility
of the indicted acts of sexual abuse is what the State's
 case is all about and is the purpose for such expert
testimony in the first place; the fact that such testimony
may also indirectly, though necessarily, involve the child's
credibility does not render it inadmissible.
 
19
 
 

 


 

 

 

 
 

 


 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
What is forbidden is expert opinion testimony that
 

"directly addresses the credibility of the victim," i.e.,
 

"I believe the victim; I think the victim is telling the



truth,"• or expert opinion testimony that implicitly goes to
 

the ultimate issue to be decided by the jury, when such
 

issue is not beyond the "ken"• of the average juror, i.e.,
 

"In my opinion, the victim was sexually abused." Although
 

the distinction may seem fine to a layman, there is a world
 

of legal difference between expert testimony that "in my
 

opinion, the victim's psychological exam was consistent with
 

sexual abuse,"•and expert testimony that "in my opinion, the
 

victim was sexually abused." In the first situation, the
 

expert leaves the ultimate issue/conclusion for the jury to
 

decide; in the second, the weight of the expert is put
 

behind a factual conclusion which invades the province of
 

the jury by providing a direct answer to the ultimate issue:
 

was the victim sexually abused?
 
 
 
Id. at 140, 170 P.3d at 876 (emphases added) (quoting Odom v.
 
State, 531 S.E.2d 207 (Ga. Ct. App. 2000)). 
Here, unlike in Batangan, Stigerts' testimony did not
usurp the function of the jury or exceed the scope of permissible

 
 
 
expert testimony. During Bruce's trial, Stigerts did not testify
 
 
 
to the believability of CW nor did he testify about Bruce's
 
 
 
culpability. Stigerts testimony was based on his own expertise
 
 
 
and experiences, and his testimony provided general background
 
 
 
information about the nature of "pimp-prostitute subculture,"
 
 
 
thus leaving the ultimate conclusions for the jury to determine. 
 

Stigerts' testimony was admitted to help the jury assess the
 
 
 
credibility of CW and was not unduly prejudicial against Bruce;
 
 
 
therefore, Stigerts' testimony was permissible.
 


 
C. Prosecutorial Misconduct

 
Bruce argues that his conviction should be reversed
 
 
 
because the State committed misconduct during [its] closing
 
 
 
argument by "using the inflammatory and prejudicial term 'sex
 
 
 
trafficking,' by comparing the incident to slavery[,] and by
 
 
 
making impermissible appeals to the jurors' emotions." 
 

With regard to the prosecution's closing argument, a
 

prosecutor is "permitted to draw reasonable inferences from
 

the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the
 

evidence. It is also within the bounds of legitimate
 

argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on
 

the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences 
 
 
 
from the evidence."
 
 
 
Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (quoting State v. 
Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997)). 
"[Appellate courts] evaluate[] claims of improper
 
20
  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 



 









 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 


 









 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements by prosecutors by first determining whether the 
statements are improper, and then determining whether the misconduct is harmless." State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai
'i 10, 14, 250 
P.3d 273, 277 (2011); see State v. Schnabel, 127 Hawai 'i 432, 
452-53, 279 P.3d 1237, 1257-58 (2012) (determining whether the prosecutor's statements amounted to misconduct before determining whether the misconduct was harmless). Appellate courts consider the following factors when determining whether a prosecutor's statements are harmless: "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." Rogan, 91 
Hawai
'i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (quoting Sawyer, 88 Hawai 'i at 
329 n.6, 966 P.2d at 641 n.6 (1998)).  If the State's prosecutorial misconduct was not harmless, appellate courts must then determine whether the double jeopardy clause of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution bars reprosecution of the defendant. Rogan, 91 
Hawai'i at 416, 984 P.2d at 1242. 
1. Characterizing case as a "sex trafficking" case
 
Bruce argues that by characterizing the case as a "sex
 
trafficking" case, the State misstated the law and misled the
 jury into believing that Bruce was involved in acts beyond the
 promoting prostitution in the second degree charge. Bruce argues
 that the term "'[s]ex trafficking' is an overly-broad term that
 includes prostitution, but includes other acts that were not at
 issue in this case."
 
During closing arguments, the State remarked:
 
So essentially what this case is about, this case is
about sex trafficking.  
Sex trafficking is alive and well in
Hawaii. Many of you probably haven't heard much of it, but
this case was really an opportunity to hear about a very
different part of the community, which is the pimp
prostitution or the pimp prostitute world.
 
Aside from what we already know about prostitution -­

I think most people would think about streetwalkers or they
think about escort services, maybe even massage parlors. I
 mean, that is the general concept that I think most people
have when we talk about prostitution, but this case really
is so much more than that. It is far more than just what we
see, what we may have common knowledge of, because it gave
us a glimpse into the world of prostitution and really what
happens behind the scenes with the people that are involved
in it -- the pimps, the prostitutes, and the people that
they associate with. 
21
 
 


 

 

 
 

 

 
 


 

 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Really, when we talk about sex trafficking, we're
 

talking about forced prostitution. I think what we all
 
 
 
heard from the expert was generally that it can come in two



forms, yeah. With an adult, it involves forced
 

prostitution, and it also can involve prostitution of
 

persons under the age of 18, which is not our case at all,
 

so really what we're talking about is forced prostitution in 


this case. 
 
 
 
. . . .
 
So sex trafficking is, generally speaking, it is

codified in our penal code under very specific sections. It
 
is called advancing prostitution or promoting prostitution, 


and you read all the instructions that the judge gave you, 


but I'm just going to go through these really quickly. 


(Emphases added.)
 
The State then continued on to describe the legal
elements of promoting prostitution in the first degree and second



11


degree,  while characterizing the offenses as "form[s] of sex
 
 
 
trafficking":
 
 
 
 
 
Promoting Prostitution in the First Degree. A person
 

commits the offense of Promoting Prostitution in the First
 

Degree if he knowingly advances by compelling or inducing a
 

person by force, threat, fraud, or intimidation, to engage
 

in prostitution; or it can be profits from the advancement
 

of prostitution by another who compels or induces another by 


force, fraud, intimidation, to engage in prostitution. 
 

Promoting Prostitution in the Second Degree, another
 

form of sex trafficking, a person commits the offense of
 

Second Degree Promoting Prostitution if he knowingly
 

advances or profits from prostitution. 
 

Now, here, it's really important for you to realize 


that the difference between Promoting I and Promoting II is
 

the coersive [sic] element. Promoting I requires force,
 

fraud, threat, or intimidation. Promoting Prostitution in
 

the Second Degree does not require that, so you should not
 

consider that if you're looking at Promoting Prostitution in 


the Second Degree, and that is specifically to [Bruce]. So 
 
 
 
that is a really important distinction to make between the 


two offenses. 


Advancing prostitution, the definition is out there. 


Really, ultimately, what you need to know is that a person 


causes or aids a person to commit or engage in prostitution. 


All you have to do is cause or aid. You can go through the 


rest of the definition, but causing or aiding someone to 


engage in prostitution. Doesn't require being a manager or 


having somebody employed. It really is just aiding them or 


causing them to engage in prostitution. 


Profits from prostitution, essentially, you just
 
11
 
 
 We note that although the circuit court acquitted Bruce of the
 

promoting prostitution in the first degree charge, the jury remained tasked
 

with determining whether McKinley was guilty of the offense. 
 

22
 
 

 




 

 
 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
profit from the proceeds of prostitution. That's what the
 
definition is. That's what you should go through. 
So these are very important, but the distinction
really is in Promoting I and Promoting II and the coercive
element in it.
 
Because Bruce did not object to the State's repeated 
use of the term "sex trafficking" at trial, we review the alleged 
errors for plain error. See State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 
513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003) ("If defense counsel does not object at trial to prosecutorial misconduct, this court may nevertheless recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous."); Hawai
'i Rules 
of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b) ("Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court."). "[Appellate courts] may recognize plain error when the error committed affects substantial rights of the defendant." Id. (quoting State v. 
Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i 390, 405, 56 P.3d 692, 707 (2002)). 
Misstatements of the law during closing arguments may constitute prosecutorial misconduct if the misstatements are prejudicial to the defendant. See State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai
'i 127, 142-44, 
176 P.3d 885, 900-02 (2008). 
We must first determine whether the State's use of the 
term "sex trafficking" was improper. See Schnabel,  127 Hawai 'i 
at 452, 279 P.3d at 1257 (determining whether a prosecutor's closing argument constituted misconduct as the first step in a prosecutorial misconduct analysis). In its answering brief, the State argues that the term "sex trafficking" is interchangeable with the applicable offense of promoting prostitution because, based on its plain meaning, the definition for "sex trafficking" and the legal definition of promoting prostitution have similar meanings. The term "sex trafficking" is a term of art with differing legal definitions based on one's jurisdiction. Compare 
N.Y. Penal Law § 230.34 (McKinney 2007) (listing a number of acts
 
 
 
that constitute "sex trafficking," including intentionally
 
 
 
advancing or profiting from prostitution by "unlawfully providing
 
 
 
to a person who is patronized, with intent to impair said
 
 
 
person's judgment . . . a narcotic drug or a narcotic
 
 
 
23

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
preparation") with Minn. Stat. § 609.321 (2011) (defining "sex
 trafficking" as "(1) receiving, recruiting, enticing, harboring,
 providing, or obtaining by any means an individual to aid in the
 prostitution of the individual; or (2) receiving profit or
 anything of value, knowing or having reason to know it is derived
 from an act described in clause (1)"); see also G.A. Res. 55/25,
 annex II, "Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
 in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the
 United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime"
 (Jan. 8, 2001) ("'Trafficking in persons' shall mean the
 recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of
 persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of
 coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of
 power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or
 receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a
 person having control over another person, for the purpose of
 exploitation."). Black's law dictionary defines "sex
 trafficking" as "[t]he act or practice of recruiting, harboring,
 transporting, providing, or procuring a person, or inducing a
 person by fraud, force, or coercion, to perform a sex act for
 pay." Black's Law Dictionary 1584 (10th ed. 2014).
 
During the time of Bruce's trial, "sex trafficking" was 
not an offense under the Hawaii Revised Statutes and Hawai
'i 
courts had not defined the term. Nevertheless, Hawai 'i statutory 
law and case law contained generalized references to the term "sex trafficking" or "human trafficking" in the context of promoting prostitution offenses. See State v. Vaimili, 135 
Hawai
'i 492, 494, 353 P.3d 1034, 1036 (2015) (describing the case 
as arising from the defendant's "convictions for sex trafficking related crimes based on his conduct as a pimp for the complaining witness" where the defendant was charged with kidnapping, terroristic threatening in the first degree, promoting prostitution in the first degree, and carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony); see also HRS § 706-650.5(3) (2014 Repl.) (establishing a "human trafficking victim services fund" to provide services to "victims of 
24
 
 
 

 






 



 

 




 
 
 

 






 



 

 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trafficking related to crimes under part I of chapter 712[,]"
which is a chapter entitled "Prostitution and Promoting
 
 
 
Prostitution" during Bruce's trial).12 During its closing
 
 
 
arguments, the State used the term "sex trafficking" with similar
 
 
 
generalized meaning.
 
 
 
 
Given that Hawai 'i had not assigned a specific legal 
meaning to the term "sex trafficking" at the time of Bruce's
 
 
 
trial and that common use indicates that the term is generally
 
 
 
related to promoting prostitution, we decline to hold that the
 
 
 
State's use of the term was improper and, thus, did not
 
 
 
constitute prosecutorial misconduct. See State v. Kiakona, 110
 
 
 
Hawai'i 450, 458, 134 P.3d 616, 624 (App. 2006) (holding that 
because the prosecutor's comments were not improper, there was no
 

prosecutorial misconduct).
 

 
2. Comments about a time "where people were owned"
 
Bruce argues that the State committed prosecutorial
 
 
 
misconduct when it stated:
 
 
 
The fact of the matter is that they treated [CW] like she
was property. And the odd thing about it is that it's as if
this all happened, like, back in the 1700's, 1800's, where
we owned people, where [sic] people were owned and
disrespected and made to do things that they didn't want to
do.
 
But this crime happened in 2014, 2014, and we, as a
society, have evolved, you would think, but not to these two
gentlemen here.
[13]
 
 
 
Bruce argues that the State's comments were "an obvious reference
 
 
 
th 
 
 th


to the slavery that occurred in America during the 18  and 19
 
centuries." Furthermore, Bruce argues that, "[a]s slavery is an
 
 
 
12
 We note that Hawai' i's promoting prostitution statues have been
amended and renamed since the completion of Bruce's trial. On July 5, 2016,
the Governor of the State Hawai' i signed into law Act 206, which changed the
title of HRS § 712-1202 from "promoting prostitution in the first degree" to"sex trafficking," while maintaining substantially the same elements of thecrime. H.B. 1902, H.D. 2, S.D. 1, C.D. 1, 28th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2016). In addition, Act 206 changed the name of HRS § 712-1203 from "promotingprostitution in the second degree" to "promoting prostitution," whilemaintaining the same elements of the offense. H.B. 1902, H.D. 2, S.D. 1, C.D.1, 28th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2016). 
13
 The circuit court subsequently struck the State's references to "the
1700 and the ownership of property" on January 26, 2015 and instructed the jury
that they "must disregard entirely any matter which the Court has ordered
stricken." [JTr doc 82 at 3] 
25
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extremely distasteful, inflammatory and prejudicial topic, the
 [State's] simile of the alleged acts by Bruce to slavery was a
 wholly improper appeal to the jurors’ emotions and prejudices."
 
"[C]losing argument affords the prosecution (as well as 
the defense) the opportunity to persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom." Rogan, 91 
Hawai
'i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 (citing Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i at 
145, 938 P.2d at 576). During closing arguments, the State argued that Bruce advanced CW's prostitution activities by "telling her what to do, what to charge, where to go if she caught a date[.]" The State's theory of the case was that Bruce and McKinley were "passing [CW] around like a piece of property," which was a characterization that CW introduced, and that "[t]hey were trying to make money off of her, and she wasn't doing her job." 
The State's comments may have alluded to the practice 
of slavery, but they did not improperly highlight irrelevant racial differences. Cf. State v. Shabazz, 98 Hawai
'i 358, 379­
82, 48 P.3d 605, 626-29 (App. 2002) (holding that the prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct when it repeatedly referred to the complaining witness as a "young local woman" and the defendants as "six African-American males" where race was not a relevant factor). The State's comments also did not appeal to the racial prejudices of the jury. Cf. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 412­
15, 984 P.2d at 1238-41 (holding that the State's description of the defendant as a "'black, military guy' was an improper emotional appeal that could have reasonably inflamed the jury"). The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeal has acknowledged the similarities between some systems of prostitution and slavery. See Coyote Pub., Inc. v. Miller, 598 F.3d 592, 600 (9th Cir. 2010) ("The federal government acknowledges the link between prostitution and trafficking in women and children, a form of modern day slavery."). Likewise, the State's remark was meant to highlight the similarities between slavery and prostitution so to further the State's theory of the case that CW was treated like a 
26
 	 


 









 

 

 

 

 

 	 


 










 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"piece of property." The State's suggestion that Bruce and 
McKinley's treatment of CW was akin to a form of modern day slavery was not improper and, therefore, did not constitute prosecutorial misconduct. See Kiakona, 110 Hawai
'i at 458-59, 
134 P.3d 616, 624-25. 
3.	 Referring to CW as "somebody's
daughter, . . . somebody's friend, . . . a
mother, . . . a woman"
 
Bruce also argues that the State committed
 
 
 
prosecutorial misconduct when it stated:
 
 
 
But this crime happened in 2014, 2014, and we, as a
society, have evolved, you would think, but not to these two
gentlemen here. They didn't see her as anything more than a
piece of property to pass around, to mistreat, to humiliate,
intimidate, beat, and force. That is how they viewed her,
that is how they treated her. But she's not a piece of
property. I mean, she's somebody's daughter, she's
somebody's friend, she's a mother, she's a woman, she is a
person, and she deserves to be treated properly -­
(Emphasis added.) Citing to Rogan, Bruce argues that the State's
 
comment impermissibly "induced the jurors to render a verdict
 based on their sympathy or emotions[,]" instead of the evidence
 and the law.
 
i. Propriety of the State's remarks
 
We hold that based on the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's 
analysis in Rogan, the State's remarks, when viewed in context, were improper and, thus, constituted prosecutorial misconduct. In Rogan, the defendant, Rogan, was charged with three counts of sexual assault in the first degree and five counts of sexual assault in the third degree. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 409, 984 P.2d 
at 1235. The twelve-year-old complaining witness testified that she invited Rogan, who was twenty-two years old on the day in question, to her family home while her mother and stepfather were away. Id. She alleged that Rogan subjected to her to various 
acts of sexual contact and penetration until the complaining witness's mother came home and interrupted Rogan. Id. at 409-10, 
984 P.2d at 1235-36. Rogan's testimony paralleled the complaining witness's, except that he denied any sexual contact or penetration took place. Id. at 409, 984 P.2d at 1235. During 
closing arguments, the prosecutor told the jury during its 
27
  
 








 

 

 

 

 











 



 

 









 

 
 








 

 

 

 

 











 



 

 









 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rebuttal:
 
There was one thing [that defense counsel mentioned] about,
you know, it was the parents who wanted the conviction and
somehow [the complaining witness] was coached. Yeah, you
can bet the parents wanted a conviction. This is every
mother's nightmare. Leave your daughter for an hour and a
half, and you walk back in, and here's some black, military
guy on top of your daughter. 
Id. at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (emphasis added). Rogan moved for a
 
mistrial based on prosecutorial misconduct, which the circuit
 court denied. Id. at 411, 984 P.2d at 1237. Rogan was convicted
 
of four counts of unlawful sexual contact, either as charged or
 as lesser included offenses. Id.
 
On appeal, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court noted: 
Arguments that rely on racial, religious, ethnic, political,
economic, or other prejudices of the jurors introduce into
the trial elements of irrelevance and irrationality that
cannot be tolerated. Of course, the mere mention of the
status of the accused as shown by the record may not be
improper if it has a legitimate bearing on some issue in the
case, such as identification by race. But where the jury's
predisposition against some particular segment of society is
exploited to stigmatize the accused or the accused
witnesses, such argument clearly trespasses the bounds of
reasonable inference of fair comment on the evidence.
 Accordingly, many courts have denounced such appeals to
prejudice as inconsistent with the requirement that the
defendant be judged solely on the evidence.
 
Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 (emphasis omitted) 
(quoting the 1979 Commentary, ABA Prosecution Function Standard
 
 
 
3-5.8(c) (3d ed. 1993)). The supreme court held that "Rogan's
 
 
 
race was not a legitimate area of inquiry inasmuch as race was
 
 
 
irrelevant to the determination of whether Rogan committed the
 
 
 
acts charged" and, therefore, "the deputy prosecutor's reference
 
 
 
to Rogan as a 'black, military guy' was an improper emotional
 
 
 
appeal that could foreseeably have inflamed the jury." Rogan, 91
 
Hawai'i at 414, 984 P.2d at 1240. The supreme court also 
addressed the prosecutor's characterization of Rogan's alleged
 
 
 
conduct as "every mother's nightmare":
 
 
 
The deputy prosecutor's inflammatory reference to Rogan's
race was further compounded by the statement that the
incident was "every mother's nightmare," which was a
blatantly improper plea to evoke sympathy for the
Complainant's mother and represented an implied invitation
to the jury to put themselves in her position. Like the
deputy prosecutor's reference to Rogan's race, the "every
mother's nightmare" comment was not relevant for purposes of
considering whether Rogan committed the acts charged.
 
28
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id.
 
Like the remarks at issue in Rogan, the State's 
reference to CW as "somebody's daughter, . . . somebody's friend, . . . a mother, . . . a woman" was not a legitimate area of comment and constituted an improper plea to emotion. See id. 
The impropriety of the State's remarks and irrelevance of CW's status as a daughter, friend, mother, and woman is evident when viewed within the context of the State's rebuttal arguments and theory of the case. Cf. Schnabel, 127 Hawai
'i at 452, 279 P.3d 
at 1257 (considering the context of the prosecutor's use of the term "mumbo jumbo" in reference to the court's jury instructions to determine that the prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct during closing arguments); State v. Meyer, 99 Hawai
'i 
168, 170-72, 53 P.3d 307, 309-11 (App. 2002) (holding that the prosecutor's reference to a law school professor during closing arguments, which the defendant argued exploited the prosecutor's personal knowledge, was "trivial and insignificant in the context of this case"). 
The State's theory of the case was that Bruce and
 
McKinley were using CW to make money for their personal gain and
 that they saw CW as nothing "more than a piece of property to
 pass around, to mistreat, to humiliate, intimidate, beat, and
 force." To counter Bruce and McKinley's purported view of CW,
 the State remarked, "But she is not a piece of property. I mean
 [CW is] somebody's daughter, she's somebody's friend, she's a
 mother, she's a woman, she is a person, and she deserves to be
 treated properly[.]"
 
CW's status as a daughter, friend, mother, and woman, 
while perhaps supported by the evidence, was not a disputed fact at trial and was not relevant to whether Bruce or McKinley did in fact view or treat CW as a "piece of property." See Rogan, 91 
Hawai
'i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 ("[T]he mere mention of the 
status of the accused as shown by the record may not be improper if it has a legitimate bearing on some issue in the case, such as identification by race." (quoting the 1979 Commentary, ABA Prosecution Function Standard 3-5.8(c) (3d ed. 1993))); cf. 
29
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shabazz, 98 Hawai 'i at 377, 48 P.3d at 624 (holding that "the 
reference to the race of the Defendants, and to Complainant's 
'local' origin as a code word for race, had . . . no legitimate bearing on some issue in the case, such as identification by race." (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)); but cf. Kiakona, 110 Hawai
'i at 458-59, 134 P.3d at 624-25 (holding that 
a prosecutor's references to "turf," "locals," and "haole tourists" during closing remarks were relevant to the defendant's motive and, therefore, did not constitute prosecutorial misconduct). Thus, the State's comments about CW's relationship to others did not bolster the validity of the State's theory of the case. See Rogan
, 91 Hawai 'i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239. 
Instead, the State's comments about CW's status as 
"somebody's daughter, . . . somebody's friend, . . . a mother, . . . a woman" were meant to humanize CW in the eyes of the jury evoking sympathy for her. Like the prosecutor's "every 
mother's nightmare" comment in 
Rogan, the State's comments about 
CW's status represented an implied invitation for the jury to place themselves in CW's position, or in the position of someone near to her, enticing the jury to render a decision based on emotional appeal rather than on the evidence that proved Bruce's guilt. See Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 414, 984 P.2d at 1240; see also 
Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai 'i 93, 127, 947 P.2d 961, 995 (App. 
1997) (noting that arguments urging jurors "to place themselves or members of their families or friend in the place of a person who has been offended and to render the verdict as if they or either of them or a member of their families were similarly situated" are considered improper (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted)), rev'd in part on other grounds, 86 Hawai
'i 84, 947 P.2d 952 (1997). Because the State's remarks 
invited the jury to render a verdict based on emotional appeal and facts irrelevant to whether Bruce was guilty or innocent of the offense charged, the State's comments were improper and constituted prosecutorial misconduct. Cf. State v. Pacheco, 96 
Hawai
'i 83, 95-97, 26 P.3d 572, 584-86 (2001) (holding that the 
prosecutor's characterization of the defendant as an "asshole" 
30
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constituted prosecutorial misconduct because it was irrelevant to
 
his guilt and "could only have been calculated to inflame the
 passions of the jurors and to divert them, by injecting an issue
 wholly unrelated to [the defendant's] guilt or innocence into
 their deliberations, from their duty to decide the case of the
 evidence.").
 
ii. Harmless error analysis
 
Because we concluded that the State's comments were 
improper so to constitute prosecutorial misconduct, we next evaluate whether the improper remarks were harmless based on the three Rogan factors: "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." Rogan, 91 
Hawai
'i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (quoting Sawyer, 88 Hawai 'i at 
329 n.6, 966 P.2d at 641 n.6). 
The first factor in our harmless error analysis, the 
"nature of the conduct," weighs in favor of Bruce. "Although this court has previously allowed the prosecution wide latitude when making closing remarks, a prosecutor's comments may not infringe on a defendant's constitutional rights[,]" Schnabel, 127 Hawai
'i at 453, 279 P.3d at 1258 (brackets and ellipses omitted) 
(quoting State v. Mattson, 122 Hawai 'i 312, 325, 226 P.3d 482, 
495 (2010)), including the constitutionally guaranteed right to a fair trial by an impartial jury. See Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 414, 
984 P.2d at 1240 (holding that the deputy prosecutor's racial comments represented a "brazen attempt to subvert the criminal defendant's right to a trial by an impartial jury as guaranteed by both the sixth amendment of the United States Constitution
[14] 
and article I, section 14 of the Hawai 'i Constitution[15]"). 
14
 The Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides,
"In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy
and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the
crime shall have been committed[.]" 
15
 Article I, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides, "In
all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy andpublic trial by an impartial jury of the district wherein the crime shall havebeen committed[.]" 
31
 
 




 















 

 
 




 















 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the State made its improper remarks during its 
rebuttal arguments in what appears to be a last ditch emotional 
plea to the jury. The State's remarks did to not help to "persuade the jury that its theory of the case [was] valid" nor did the remarks rebut statements made in the defenses' closing arguments. See Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 413-14, 984 P.2d at 1239-40 
(considering whether the deputy prosecutor's comments were made in support of the State's theory of the case or in rebuttal to defense counsel's closing argument so to be relevant). Instead, the State's remarks were improper pleas to evoke sympathy for CW, or those near to her, based solely on her status as a daughter, friend, mother, and woman. The State's improper remarks attempted to subvert Bruce's right to trial by an impartial jury and, therefore, the "nature of the conduct" weighs in favor of Bruce. See Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 414, 984 P.2d at 1240. 
As to the second factor, "a prosecutor's improper 
remarks are generally considered cured by the court's instructions to the jury, because it is presumed that the jury abided by the court's admonition to disregard the statement." Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 415, 984 P.2d at 1241 (quoting State v. 
McGriff, 76 Hawai 'i 148, 160, 871 P.2d 782, 794 (1994)). 
Although an objection was made to the State's comments, the circuit court overruled the objection and did not give a curative instruction.
16 Therefore, this factor also weighs heavily in 
16
 We note that McKinley objected to the State's remarks, but that
Bruce did not join in McKinley's objection. Several jurisdictions have
adopted the approach that the objection of one defendant's counsel
sufficiently preserves the issue for a co-defendant's appeal, even where the
co-defendant's counsel does not join in the objection during trial. See
 
United States v. Garcia, 291 F.3d 127, 140 (2d Cir. 2002) ("We presume that
the objection of a co-defendant is an objection for all defendants, and it is
sufficient to preserve the issue for appeal."); United States v. Pardo, 636
F.2d 535, 541 (D.C. Cir. 1980) ("We recognize that in certain situations, it
may be redundant and inefficient to require each defendant in a joint trial to
stand up individually and make every objection to preserve each error for
appeal."); United States v. Cassity, 631 F.2d 461, 466 (6th Cir. 1980) ("Under
these circumstances, we hold the remaining appellants did not waive their
fourth amendment objections by neglecting to perform the useless and purely
formal act of joining [co-defendant] Cassity in moving to suppress."); United
States v. Brown, 562 F.2d 1144, 1147 n.1 (9th Cir. 1977) ("[W]hen one
codefendant objects and thereby brings the matter to the attention of the
court, further objections by other defendants are unnecessary."); United
States v. Lefkowitz, 284 F.2d 310, 313 n.1 (2d Cir. 1960) ("We do not regard
(continued...)
 
32
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
favor of Bruce. See Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i at 415, 984 P.2d at 1241 
(holding that "the second factor – the promptness of a curative 
instruction – weighs heavily in favor of [defendant] Rogan inasmuch as no curative instruction was given."). 
The last factor that we must consider in determining 
whether the error was harmless is the strength/weakness of the evidence against Bruce. See id. at 415-16, 984 P.2d at 1241-42. 
Factors that appellate courts have considered when determining the strength of conviction is the number of witnesses who testified against the defendant and the forensic evidence supporting prosecution. See id. (citing State v. Ganal, 81 
Hawai
'i 358, 377, 917 P.2d 370, 389 (1996)) (holding that the 
evidence against the defendant was not overwhelming, considering that the prosecution's case hinged on the credibility of the complaining witness). In order for an appellate court to find that the third factor weighs against a defendant, the evidence against the defendant must be "'so overwhelming as to outweigh the prejudicial effect of the improper comments,' such that the improper comments 'might not have contributed' to the defendant's conviction[.]" Schnabel, 127 Hawai
'i at 456 n.49, 279 P.3d at 
1261 n.49 (brackets omitted) (quoting Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i at 415­
16, 984 P.2d at 1241-42). 
Here, the State failed to present overwhelming evidence
 
against Bruce. The State's case against Bruce rested on CW's
 testimony and various text messages purportedly made between
 Bruce, CW, and Ortegon. CW's testimony, however, directly
 conflicted with the testimonies of Stewart and Bruce. While CW
 testified that she had worked for Bruce as a prostitute and gave
 him the money she received from clients, Bruce denied receiving
 
16(...continued)
the failure of [defendant's] counsel to except as barring [defendant] from
 

seeking reversal for error in the charge; [co-defendant] exception called the
 

matter to the judge's attention and further exception would have been
 

fruitless."); 
People v. Bradford, 245 N.W.2d 137, 138 (Mich. Ct. App. 1976)
("[I]t is hardly necessary for one counsel to repeat the objection made by the
other when sufficient objections are interposed to direct the trial judge's
attention to the situation." (parentheses omitted) (quoting People v. Logie,
32 N.W.2d 458, 460 (Mich. 1948)). Similarly, we hold that, under the facts of
this case, McKinley's objections to the State's remarks sufficiently preserved
the issue for Bruce's appeal.
 
33
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any money from CW and claimed that he did not even know CW was a
 prostitute. CW testified that Bruce maintained her Backpage
 advertisements that were used to solicit clients looking for a
 prostitute, but Bruce denied doing so. CW testified that she
 stayed with Bruce in a hostel in Waikiki and, on at least one
 occasion, a client came to the hostel to engage in sexual
 intercourse with CW pursuant to Bruce's instructions. Bruce,
 however, denied that CW stayed with him at the hostel and denied
 using the hostel to facilitate CW's dates with clients. CW
 testified that she went to the Best Western Hotel with Bruce to
 make more money and that they met with McKinley and Stewart at
 the hotel; while Stewart countered that she never saw Bruce at
 the Best Western Hotel and that she met Bruce for the first time
 during his trial. Therefore, the witness testimony does not
 overwhelmingly prove Bruce's guilt.
 
Furthermore, the State's forensic evidence does little
 
to overwhelmingly tilt the scale in the State's favor. The
 circuit court entered into evidence various text messages dated
 April 18 and 19, 2014 that the State claimed were sent between CW
 and the unidentified T-Mobile cellphone that the State argued
 belonged to Bruce. The text messages suggest that Bruce
 encouraged CW to find dates and bring them back to the hostel.
 CW's testimony corroborated the State's position that the text
 messages were sent to her from Bruce and that Bruce would keep in
 contact with her through text messages. Bruce, however, denied
 sending the text messages to CW and testified that he was not
 always in possession of the T-Mobile cellphone, implying that,
 although the text messages were sent from his cellphone, someone
 other than himself could have sent the messages to CW.
 
In further support of Bruce's claim that the messages
 
were not from him, Bruce introduced, and the circuit court
 entered, evidence of text messages from April 13 and 14, 2014
 that were sent between the T-Mobile cellphone and another phone
 number that was listed in the T-Mobile cellphone's contacts as
 
34
 
 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
belonging to "L-Way."17 Bruce contended that the content of the 
text messages proved that his girlfriend, Ortegon, had possession 
of his cellphone during part of April 2014 and that she was cheating on him with the "real L-Way," who was also known as "Lando." Bruce claimed that the text messages were sent between Ortegon and the "real L-Way," that he had neither sent nor received any of the text messages between them, and that he did not own more than one cellphone during April 2014. The State offered no evidence to refute Bruce's claims that the cellphone was not always in his possession. Given the conflicting evidence, we cannot say that the State's evidence was "so overwhelming" as to outweigh the inflammatory effect of the State's comments during the rebuttal argument. See Rogan, 91 
Hawai
'i at 415, 984 P.2d at 1241. 
Because the relevant factors weigh against the State 
and in favor of Bruce, we hold that the State's remarks could have contributed to Bruce's conviction and, therefore, were not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 
412, 984 P.2d at 1238. 
iii. Double Jeopardy
 
Once an appellate court determines that the State's
 
prosecutorial misconduct was not harmless, the court must
 determine whether the double jeopardy clause of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution bars reprosecution of the defendant. Rogan, 91
 
Hawai'i at 416, 984 P.2d at 1242. In Rogan, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court held:
 
Accordingly, we hold, under the double jeopardy clause of
article I, section 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution, that
reprosecution of a defendant after a mistrial or reversal onappeal as a result of prosecutorial misconduct is barredwhere the prosecutorial misconduct is so egregious that,from an objective standpoint, it clearly denied a defendanthis or her right to a fair trial. In other words, we holdthat reprosecution is barred where, in the face of egregiousprosecutorial misconduct, it cannot be said beyond areasonable doubt that the defendant received a fair trial. 
17
 The State also admitted other incriminating text messages sent
between the T-Mobile cellphone and a phone number that was listed in the
contacts as "L-Way." Bruce, however, continued to testify that he neither
sent nor received the text messages in question because the T-Mobile cellphone
was not in his possession at the time.
 
35
 
 

 




 











 

 

 


 
 

 




 











 

 

 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 423, 984 P.2d at 1249 (footnotes omitted).
 
The Rogan court noted and emphasized:
 
[T]he standard adopted for purposes of determining whether
double jeopardy principles bar a retrial caused by
prosecutorial misconduct requires a much higher standard
than that used to determine whether a defendant is entitled
 to a new trial as a result of prosecutorial misconduct.
Double jeopardy principles will bar reprosecution that is
caused by prosecutorial misconduct only where there is a
highly prejudicial error affecting a defendant's right to a
fair trial and will be applied only in exceptional
circumstances such as the instant case. By contrast,
prosecutorial misconduct will entitle the defendant to a new
trial where there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction
(i.e., the error was not "harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt").
 
Id. at 423 n.11, 984 P.2d at 1249 n.11 (citation and emphasis 
omitted). Here, the State's remarks were not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, but they also did not constitute an "exceptional circumstance." Because the State's comments did not rise to the level of egregiousness necessary for double jeopardy to bar the reprosecution of Bruce, we vacate and remand his case for a new trial consistent with this opinion. Compare Shabazz, 
98 Hawai
'i at 383, 48 P.3d at 630 (holding that the prosecution's 
statements referring to the complaining witness as a "young local woman" and the defendants as "six African-American males" did not "r[i]se to that pinnacle of egregiousness that bars reprosecution"), with Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 424, 984 P.2d at 1250 
(holding that the prosecution's statement that "it was 'every mother's nightmare' to find 'some black, military guy on top of your daughter'" was so egregious that double jeopardy barred reprosecution of Rogan).
D. Privilege Against Self-Incrimination
 
Bruce argues that the circuit court "abused its 
discretion in failing to compel Ortegon to testify over her 
assertion of her Fifth Amendment privilege." Article I, section 10 of the Hawai
'i Constitution, which is nearly identical to the 
Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution,18 provides in 
18
 The Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides, in
pertinent part, "No person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be
(continued...) 
 
 
 
36
 







 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 







 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pertinent part that "[n]o person shall . . . be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against oneself." This privilege against self-incrimination "is not limited to an accused testifying at his or her own criminal trial, but applies to testimony of any witness at any proceeding, where the testimony might tend to show that the witness had committed a crime." Kupihea, 80 Hawai
'i at 313, 909 P.2d at 1128. "Moreover, the 
privilege against self incrimination extends not only to answers that would in themselves support a conviction, but to those that would furnish a link in the chain of evidence needed to prosecute." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
Territory of Hawaii v. Lanier, 40 Haw. 65, 72 (Haw. Terr. 1953)). This privilege, however, does not protect against "remote possibilities of future prosecution out of the ordinary course of law, but is confined to instances where the witness has reasonable cause to apprehend danger from a direct answer." Id. 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets, omitted) (quoting Hoffman v. United States, 341 U.S. 479, 486 (1951)). 
To sustain the privilege, it need only be evident from the
implications of the question, in the setting in which it is
asked, that a responsive answer to the question or an
explanation of why it cannot be answered might be dangerous
because injurious disclosure could result. The trial judge
in appraising the claim "must be governed as much by his or
her personal perception of the peculiarities of the case as
by the facts actually in evidence."
 
Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Hoffman, 341 U.S. at 486-87).
 
Evaluating Ortegon's invocation of the privilege
 
against self-incrimination, we hold that the circuit court did
 
not abuse its discretion by not compelling Ortegon to testify on
 Bruce's behalf. The circuit court was aware of the fact that CW
 and Stewart were arrested for prostitution and that CW claimed to
 have worked for Bruce, Ortegon's alleged boyfriend, at one point
 in time. The circuit court was also aware of the fact that
 sheriffs were present at the courthouse to arrest Ortegon on an
 outstanding bench warrant and that Bruce's testimony suggested
 
18(...continued)
a witness against himself[.]" 
 
 
 
37
 
 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Ortegon was also involved in prostitution. Given the 
setting in which Ortegon was to testify, there was a reasonable danger that Ortegon's testimony could have resulted in injurious disclosures about her own alleged prostitution activities. Thus, the circuit court's refusal to compel Ortegon to testify was not an abuse of the circuit court's discretion. See Kupihea, 80 
Hawai
'i at 312, 909 P.2d at 1127. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence"
 
entered on May 5, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 is vacated and this case is remanded for a new trial consistent
 with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 20, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
 

Deputy Public Defender
 

Office of the Public Defender 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
 
 Presiding Judge
 

Associate Judge
 

Sonja P. McCullen

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
38
 