NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000674
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CORBIT AHN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1428)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Corbit Ahn (Ahn) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for Murder in the Second
 
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5
 (1993) and Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in violation of
 HRS § 707-732 (Supp. 2013) entered by the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit (Circuit Court) on July 9, 2012.
1
 
In his sole point on appeal, Ahn argues that the
 
Circuit Court erred by admitting DNA-related evidence without
 adequate foundation, that absent that DNA-related evidence, there
 was no evidence that he "had [any] physical contact with the
 victim that could have been qualified as sexual contact or that
 could have caused the victim's death[,]" and consequently that
 there was insufficient evidence to prove every element of the
 charged offenses beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
1
 Then Circuit Court judge, the Honorable Richard W. Pollack,
presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a careful review of the point raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Ahn's point on appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
1.	 Ahn has failed to properly preserve his point for
 
consideration on appeal for at least two reasons. First, his
 point on appeal has not been properly presented as required by
 
2
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)  as he
fails to provide record citations for where the error occurred
 and where it was objected to and fails to quote the grounds for
 his objection and the full substance of the evidence admitted
3. 
Id. 
More importantly, it appears that Ahn failed to object
 
to the evidence complained of at trial. HRS § 641-16 (1993);4
 
5
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103 (a)(1);  see also State
2 HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) governs the points on appeal in an opening
brief and requires, in pertinent part,
 (4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency. Where applicable, each
point shall also include the following:
 (A)	 when the point involves the admission or
rejection of evidence, a quotation of the
grounds urged for the objection and the full
substance of the evidence admitted or
 rejected[.]
 
3 This last omission, beyond being a violation of our rule, makes
review of Ahn's point of error especially difficult as we are uncertain to
exactly what evidence his arguments pertain.
 
4 HRS § 641-16, "Judgment; no reversal when[,]" provides, in
pertinent part,
 
Except as otherwise provided by the rules of court, there
shall be no reversal for any alleged error in the admission
or rejection of evidence . . . unless such alleged error was
made the subject of an objection noted at the time it was
committed or brought to the attention of the court in
another appropriate manner.
 
HRE Rule 103(a)(1) provides,
 
(a) Effect of erroneous ruling. Error may not be predicated
upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a
(continued...)
 
2
 5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Wallace, 80 Hawai 'i 382, 410, 910 P.2d 695, 723 (1996) 
("'[T]he rule is well settled that evidence even though 
incompetent, if admitted without objection or motion to strike, is to be given the same probative force as that to which it would be entitled if it were competent.'" (quoting 2 Wharton's Criminal Evidence § 265 n.3 (14th ed. 1986)); see also State v. Winfrey, No. 28737 2009 WL 4988719 at *1 (Haw. Dec. 22, 2009) (Order Affirming Judgment on Appeal). 
Therefore, to review Ahn's point on appeal we must 
determine that the error constituted "plain error." See HRE 
Rule 103(d); Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b);6 
HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented.") It has long been held that "this power to deal with [plain] error is one to be exercised sparingly and with caution because the rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversary system[.]" State v. Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 56, 760 P.2d 670, 676 
(1988). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has refused to find plain 
error where the defendant failed to object to the foundation for evidence admitted at trial. See, e.g., Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i 382, 
910 P.2d 695; Winfrey, No. 28737 2009 WL 4988719. 
We are not inclined to notice plain error here. Ahn
 
did not object to the qualifications of the witness through which
 the DNA results were introduced, Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 Criminalist Samantha Kashimoto, who testified without objection
 that the HPD Laboratory had been certified by an outside entity,
 the equipment she used, consistent with HPD procedure, had
 undergone checks by outside personnel, that she was trained
 
5(...continued)
substantial right of the party is affected, and:

 
(1)	 Objection. In case the ruling is one admitting
evidence, a timely objection or motion to strike
appears of record, stating the specific ground of
objection, if the specific ground was not apparent
from the context[.]
 
6
 HRPP Rule 52(b) provides, "Plain errors or defects affecting
substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the
attention of the court."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consistent with manufacturer guidelines, that she had performed
 
the testing of the samples for DNA analysis herself, giving her
 personal knowledge of the procedures used, and that "every step
 of the analysis was documented and everything was technically
 reviewed by another qualified analyst." Under these
 circumstances, and in the absence of contradictory evidence
 identified by Ahn, we cannot conclude that the introduction of
 the DNA evidence was plain error.
 
Therefore, the July 9, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Lars Peterson,

for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Brandon H. Ito,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4
 