 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NOS. CAAP-15-0000651 AND CAAP-15–0000652 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
NO. CAAP-15-0000651 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
RUSSELL KAHO# OKELE, Defendant-Appellee
(CASE NO. 2DCW-14-0000531) 
AND 
NO. CAAP-15-0000652 
STATE OF HAWAI
#I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
HENRY M. NOA, Defendant-Appellee
(CASE NO. 2DCW-14-0000523) 
APPEALS FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
In August 2006, the State of Hawai# i charged Russell 
Kaho# okele
, Henry Maile Noa, and Nelson Armitage, all native 
Hawaiians, with entering the Kaho# olawe  island reserve without 
authorization, a petty misdemeanor in violation of Hawaii 
Administrative Rules section 13-261-10 (2002).1/ After trial, 
1/ The administrative rules provide, in relevant part: 
(a) Any person violating the rules in this chapter shall
be punished as provided in sections 6K-8 and 6K-8.5, Hawaii
Revised Statutes. 
Haw. Admin. R. § 13-261-5 (2002). 
No person or vessel shall enter or attempt to enter into
or remain within the reserve unless such person or vessel: (a)Is specifically authorized to do so by the commission or its
(continued...)  
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division 
("District Court"), found all three defendants guilty as charged. They appealed and this court affirmed. State v. Armitage, No. 
29794, 2013 WL 1829663 (Haw. Ct. App. Apr. 30, 2013). The Hawai# i Supreme Court vacated our decision, holding that, even 
though no party had raised the issue below or on appeal, the complaint must be dismissed without prejudice because the charges failed to reference the requisite state of mind of intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. State v. Armitage, 132 
Hawai# i 36, 40, 
319 P.3d 1044, 1048 (2014). The State re-filed charges against all three defendants on February 26, 2014. 
Armitage's re-filed case went to trial on December 3, 
2014, where he was acquitted. At a status conference on August 6, 2015, the District Court
/ dismissed the cases against 
Kaho# okele and Noa with prejudice under Hawai# i Rules of Penal 
Procedure ("HRPP") Rule 48 ("Rule 48")./ The State filed 32
1/(...continued)
authorized 
representative as provided in section 13-261-11;
or, 
(b) Is specifically authorized to do so through a 
written agreement approved by the commission[.] 
Haw. Admin. R. § 13-261-10(a), (b) (2002). 
The statute provides in relevant part: 
Any person who violates any of the laws or rules 
applicable to the island reserve shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than thirty days, or both, for each offense. Each day of each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 6K-8 (Supp. 2005). 
2/ The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely presided over the 2015 dismissals
and the subsequent motions for reconsideration. 
3/ The rule provides for dismissal, in relevant part: 
(b) By Court . Except in the case of traffic offenses
that are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, onmotion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or withoutprejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within6 months: 
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from
the filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on anyoffense based on the same conduct or arising from thesame criminal episode for which the arrest or charge was
(continued...) 
2  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motions to reconsider in both cases and, on August 28, 2015, the 
District Court denied the motions. 
The State appeals from the dismissals with prejudice of 
the charges against Kaho# okele  (appellate case no. CAAP-15-
0000651) and Noa (appellate case no. CAAP-15-0000652). Specifically, the State appeals from the "Order and Notice of Entry of Order" ("Kaho# okele Order"), and the "Decision and Order 
Denying State's Motion to Reconsider Order Dismissing Case with Prejudice Filed August 14, 2015" ("Kaho# okele Decision & Order") 
in District Court case no. 2DCW-14-0000531; and the "Order and 
3/(...continued)
made; or 
(2) from the date of re-arrest or re-filing of the
charge, in cases where an initial charge was dismissed
upon motion of the defendant; or 
(3) from the date of mistrial, order granting a
new trial or remand, in cases where such events requirea new trial. 
. . . . 
(c) Excluded Periods . The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement: 
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by collateral or other proceedings
concerning the defendant, including but not limited topenal irresponsibility examinations and periods duringwhich the defendant is incompetent to stand trial,pretrial motions, interlocutory appeals and trials ofother charges; 
(2) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by congestion of the trial docket whenthe congestion is attributable to exceptionalcircumstances; 
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and care caused by a continuance granted at the requestor with the consent of the defendant or defendant's counsel; 
(4) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by a continuance granted at the requestof the prosecutor if: 
(i) the continuance is granted because of
the unavailability of evidence material to theprosecution's case, when the prosecutor has exercised due diligence to obtain such evidenceand there are reasonable grounds to believe thatsuch evidence will be available at a later date[.] 
Haw. R. Pen. P. 48(b), (c)(1)-(4)(i) (2013). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Notice of Entry of Order" ("Noa Order"), and the "Decision and 
Order Denying State's Motion to Reconsider Order Dismissing Case with Prejudice Filed August 14, 2015" ("Noa Decision & Order") in District Court case no. 2DCW-14-0000532. Each of the orders was entered on August 28, 2015. The State contends that the District Court erred in charging the State with 247 days between December 3, 2014, when Noa and Kaho# okele filed notices of 
removing the case to federal court, and August 6, 2015, when a status hearing was held with the District Court. 
The State 
further contends that the District Court failed to consider required factors in dismissing both cases with prejudice. 
We vacate the dismissals and remand the cases for 
further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Consideration of a Rule 48 motion requires an 
assignment of responsibility for the period of time between 
arrest or charge and trial. Haw. R. Pen. P. 48(c). 
Although the 
State's challenge is focused on the District Court's allocation of 247 days after the removal of the case by Noa and 
Kaho# okele 
to the federal court, the context of that period within the entirety of the case proceedings is helpful in evaluating the District Court's conclusion that an allocation of excludable time is moot. Therefore, we address in some detail the pre-trial proceedings. 
(a) Hearings on April 3, 10 and 24, 2014 
Following the re-filing of charges against Armitage, 
Kaho
#okele, and Noa, the District Court4/ presided over a series 
of separate-but-related hearings for each of the three defendants. 
The initial arraignment and plea hearings were 
scheduled for April 3, 2014, but neither Noa nor Kaho# okele 
appeared, so the District Court continued the hearings to 
4/ The Honorable Kelsey Kawanao presided over all proceedings after
the charges were re-filed in February 2014, until the August 6, 2015 status
conference. 
4  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
April 10, 2014.5/ Kaho# okele was the only defendant to appear on 
April 10, and he requested a continuance until April 24, 2014, in 
his own case and on behalf of Noa and Armitage, so that the three cases could be consolidated. On April 24, 2014, the defendants appeared together and orally moved to consolidate their cases, but the District Court instructed them to make their motions in writing. The District Court continued the arraignment and plea hearings to May 29, 2014, to "deal with the consolidation," if requested in writing, to "deal with appointments of counsel," to finish the arraignment and plea, and to set pretrial and trial dates. 
(b) May 29, 2014 Arraignment & Plea 
At the May 29, 2014 hearing, the defendants stated that 
they wished to proceed pro se.  Before the court proceeded with arraignment, the defendants also informed the court that they no longer wished to consolidate their cases. Not guilty pleas were entered for all three defendants,
6/ and pre-trial hearings were 
then set for June 25, 2014. 
(c) June 25, 2014 Pre-Trial Hearing 
Noa and Kaho# okele each appeared pro se for their 
respective June 25, 2014 pre-trial hearings.7/ 
During Noa's hearing, the State informed the court that 
"defendant has an intent to file a motion which is disputing jurisdictional issues[.]" Noa explained that he intended to address, among other issues: due process; statute of limitations; alleged deficiency of charges in the amended complaint; failure to prosecute within one year, as "it [had been] eight years to the day" since the State filed its original complaint; and speedy 
5/ Apparently, due to some confusion between the return hearing date
referenced on the penal summons and the date written on the Return and
Acknowledgment of Service form by the serving officer. 
6/ During arraignment, Kaho #okele refused to enter a plea on the
charges against him due to his objections as to the court's jurisdiction, sothe court entered a plea of "not guilty" on his behalf. Noa also would not enter an explicit plea, claiming to not understand the charges against him,and the court also entered a plea of "not guilty" on Noa's behalf. 
7/ Armitage's pretrial hearing was scheduled for August 6, 2014. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial issues under the Sixth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution. In response to Noa's oral summary, the District Court instructed Noa "to file [the] document that [he] presented to the prosecutor" with the court and "to follow through with an appropriate declaration of what you believe the facts of the case are. . . ."
8/ The District Court then advised the parties of 
their respective briefing deadlines and scheduled a hearing on Noa's anticipated written motion to occur on August 27, 2014. Noa filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on June 25, 2014 and a supplement to the motion and declaration on July 17, 2014. 
During the portion of the hearing related to his case, 
Kaho# okele informed the court that he was making a "special 
appearance," and that the court had not answered the question that he had posed previously regarding its purported jurisdiction over Kingdom of 
Hawai# i nationals. Kaho# okele presented a motion 
which the District Court recognized as a "document . . . styled as a motion to dismiss with prejudice" that had been filed earlier that morning in Kaho# okele's case. The court determined 
that it was unclear whether Kaho# okele's statements made the 
"same argument as Mr. Noa made." The District Court told Kaho# okele "if you have anything you would like to add, such as a 
declaration, I recommend that you do file it so the Court can take notice of whatever facts that you are asserting in support of your motion." Then the District Court set the same briefing deadlines for Kaho# okele's motion as it did with Noa's and 
scheduled another hearing for August 27, 2014. 
(d) August 27, 2014 Hearings 
The defendants appeared together on August 27, 2014. 
The District Court explained to them that "[t]he three cases have not been consolidated. So the arguments that any of you would make [would not] bind any of the other two, because you only have 
8/ The court specifically explained what such a declaration should
address: 
You argued prejudice due to dimming of memories, due to
passage of time. You should set out in your declaration howyou feel you've been prejudiced specifically as to -- forexample, you asked a rhetorical question of what witnessescould you call. I . . . don't know that. But that's for you to show me. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
different defenses that may be inconsistent with each other at 
the trial." The District Court further explained that, although Noa's case file contained his motion to dismiss, the State's opposition, Noa's reply, and Noa's supplemental declaration, the court did not receive a filed motion to dismiss in Kaho# okele's 
case. Kaho# okele's
 case file did, however, contain the "State's 
memo in opposition," which suggested that Kaho# okele had served a 
copy of the motion to dismiss. The court soon discovered that "this pleading may have been filed in the case number indicated, 2P106-02018, which may have been the original case." The court ordered this misfiled document to be scanned into the proper record and determined that each defendant wished to join in the other's motion. 
Noa then re-asserted the arguments in his motion --
namely, that his motion to dismiss the complaint with prejudice was based on: (1)] lack of sufficiency of facts to support the mens rea verbiage, (2) the statute of limitations, and (3) general concerns for "judicial economy." The court took the matter under advisement and scheduled a further hearing for September 24, 2014. The court also sought to determine whether the parties desired to "go ahead and make further scheduling orders today to reserve court time for trial if that is necessary[.]" In response, the State requested that trial be set, but the defendants objected, so no trial was scheduled. 
(e) September 24, 2014 Hearings 
At the September 24, 2014 hearing, the defendants 
submitted further arguments to support their motions to dismiss. The court denied the motions and found that "there [was] insufficient evidence to allow the Court to find that defendants have suffered prejudice in preparing the defense of their case under the [Barker v. Wingo
, 407 U.S. 514 (1972)] analysis." The 
District Court informed the parties that regardless of any Rule 48 implications, "the earliest days" it could schedule for trial would be December 3, 2014, and the parties would have to file a motion to move the date, if desired. "[I]n an abundance of caution," the District Court then stated, "I am going to appoint private stand-by counsel for each of you. . . . So that 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there's no question about your being prejudiced by not knowing 
what to do at the trial."9/ Kaho# okele  interrupted the court 
several times, before turning to exit the courtroom while the court was still addressing the defendants. Another warning from the court was given, brief discussion was had regarding oral motions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, and the oral motions were denied. 
The court proceeded with the assignment of three 
private attorneys for each defendant to contact for representation. The record indicates that Noa double-checked and wrote down his three names, but Kaho# okele stated that one 
attorney already expressed his opinion that the case had no merit. "And as for the other two," Kaho# okele told the District 
Court, "you can give 'em my name and number and have 'em call me. And if they want to represent me and be my stand-by, maybe they can go to jail for me too." 
(f) The December 3, 2014 Trial-Date Hearings 
All three defendants appeared in court on December 3, 
2014, accompanied by stand-by counsel. At the outset, stand-by counsel for Armitage orally moved "for a two week continuance so that we can possibly present the Court with a brief as far as removal to Federal Court. I've discussed the issue with Mr. 
9/ Kaho #okele told the District Court that he could not "sit here and 
stomach any more of this fraud that's going on." The following exchange took
place as Kaho #okele  continued: 
I filed my motion. The prosecutor never answered my
motion. . . . 
You asked the State what is their position.
They wanted it in writing. We never put nothing in writingbecause your public defenders told us they cannot representus, that we sovereign heirs. 
Yet, you guys continue to perpetrate this
fraud. . . . 
Well, we'll put you on notice that there is war crimes
going on around here, and if this Court going to perjureitself, then I have no control . . . . 
THE COURT: Mr. Kaho #okele, are you referring to this
Court as being a war crime tribunal? 
MR. KAHO #OKELE: I'm referring to some of the
actions[.] 
The District Court warned Kaho #okele that he would be held in contempt of
court if he was not careful about what he was saying before deciding toappoint stand-by counsel. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Armitage. I believe two out of three of the cases here are in 
the same position." Stand-by counsel for Noa continued, "the case is ripe with Federal issues, albeit decided by the Supreme Court." The State, however, explicitly objected to any potential continuance due to the longevity of the case, "[t]he time is now to get this done." 
The District Court declined to grant the continuance: 
I'm not inclined to continue today's hearing. We have 
witnesses here. I believe the State is ready to proceed
based upon its representations. And the Court's view is that now is the time to get it done. 
If any removal was to have occurred, it should have
occurred long prior to today. I do understand and I'm not laying any kind of responsibility or blame on stand-bycounsel. You're stand-by and w[ere] not appointed to enterany appearances or representation, other than to providestand-by services at this trial. 
And I do appreciate the situation that you're in,
which is why I'm saying what I'm saying. The record will reflect that defendants waived their right to counsel,insisted that they proceed without counsel, and that's whythe Court went ahead and appointed you as stand-by counselto ensure that their rights are recognized with regard tothis trial. So that's what we're going to do today. 
The court then conducted Armitage's trial and acquitted him of 
all charges. Noa's trial was scheduled to take place after lunch. 
Over the lunch hour, Noa apparently filed a formal 
notice of removal. When the court reconvened, the court stated that it was in receipt of a notice of removal that had been filed that day and that "pursuant to this notice this matter has been removed and no further action shall be taken." The court then scheduled a status hearing for August 6, 2015, and released court-appointed stand-by counsel. The court made the same announcements and took the same actions in Kaho# okele's case. 
Neither the State nor the defendants objected to, or otherwise commented on, the court's decision to schedule the status hearing in eight months' time. 
(g) The August 6, 2015 Status Hearings 
The status hearings took place as scheduled on 
August 6, 2015. At Noa's hearing, the District Court began by inquiring into the status of the federal case and asked the 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties for "a case number, file or anything to reference it 
by[.]" Neither party provided that information. According to Noa's standby counsel, "[a]s far as we know the notice was filed, and I think at this point the Federal Court is the one that either remands it or not, or decides there is grounds for it, or the State can go up there and ask for a remand, which hasn't been done to date." Counsel for the State claimed, "I don't have access to the Federal Court system to actually confirm that there is a case number. But the representation's that it was properly filed." 
Notwithstanding any pending federal case, the State 
urged the District Court to "proceed with the trial and proceed with this case" because an unnamed statute "does allow for these proceedings to continue with the caveat that the judgment of conviction can not be entered." Noa's standby counsel, who at the December 3, 2014 hearing had expressed a willingness to serve as re-appointed counsel for the status hearing, responded with the following: 
On behalf of [Noa], as stand-by counsel, I would suggest
that he moves to dismiss the case or for violation of his right to a speedy trial. 
If [the State] had the right to go forward with the
trial and they did not, and that's the position thatcounsel's taking right now, it's a petty misdemeanor underadministrative -– Chapter 261 Subchapter Section 6K-8,penalty. 
And it says under it is that it's a petty misdemeanor.
If they had the ability to go forward, as they are nowtaking the position, then they have violated his right to aspeedy trial and it should be dismissed. 
The District Court construed counsel's suggestion as an oral 
motion to dismiss that, pursuant to HRPP Rule 12, the court had "discretion to hear" regardless of whether the motion was submitted in writing. 
The court then made clear its intent to make a Rule 48-
ruling that day, after which the State argued that the issue of who is responsible for the delay "needs to be briefed" so that "the Court can make the proper findings, and the Court can make a determination of whether or not it should be dismissed with or without prejudice." Moreover, the State explained that "[t]his notice of removal was done at the defendant's request[, t]he 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
status was set at the defendant's request[,]" and as such, the 
State urged the court to charge "any time between the [December 3, 2014] notice of removal that was supposedly filed with the Federal Court" to Noa, rather than to the State. The District Court, however, concluded that it would "follow . . . Rule 48 that this Court has to dismiss if trial's not given within six months." 
When the State attempted to clarify whether the court 
was "therefore making a finding of fact that the time from the notice of removal to [the status hearing] is charged to the State" in order to support its conclusion that Rule 48 was violated the court answered, in relevant part: 
Oh, and I'm not -- I'm not saying it's the State's
fault. I'm not saying it's the defense fault. But I do 
recall, and I'm sure counsel's well aware, on Rule 48 thatit's a shared responsibility to bring the accused a speedytrial. So it's a shared responsibility, shared duty of duediligence. 
Although the court recognized that "various motions were filed 
[regarding the right to a speedy trial], but Judge Kawano heard them, denied them[,]" and although the "moving paper [made no] mention of Rule 48[,]" it determined that the right encompassed by that rule is constitutional in nature, and under the facts of the case, there was "obviously a clear violation" of the rule.
/  10
10/ The District Court explained why it believed that the matter did
not require briefing or an analysis of responsibility for any of the periods
of delay: 
I find that Rule 48 was violated based on just the length ofthe delay, as well as the non-setting of the trial withinthe after [sic] the refiling, as well as the date that wasgiven to Mr. Noa and the prosecution for the status. And no trial date set. 
So, I'm not granting it based on the arguments made
[before Judge Kawano], because although I respect [Noa's]choice of citizenship, I do feel that even Hawaiian citizensare nationals [and] are not immune from the law --
. . . . 
. . . I also respect and I will follow the
Constitution as -- the Hawaii State Constitution, as well as
Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 48 that requires atrial to be set within six months. 
So it has not been set and/or completed for that
matter. 
So I'm going to be dismissing this and I do want to
cite, however, Mr. Noa's page four of his June 25th, 2014
(continued...) 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, the District Court dismissed the charge against Noa with 
prejudice for violation of HRPP Rule 48. 
Kaho# okele's status hearing took place a few hours 
after Noa's. At the outset, the District Court indicated that, "based on the Court's explanation in Mr. Noa's case," it was inclined to dismiss for a violation of HRPP Rule 48. Like Noa, Kaho# okele spoke very little during the hearing, but unlike Noa, 
Kaho# okele did not appear with any standby counsel. After some 
colloquy between the court and the State, the court also dismissed
 Kaho# okele's case with prejudice. 
(h) Motion for Reconsideration and Findings of
Fact/Conclusions of Laws
The State filed motions for reconsideration in the 
Kaho# okele and Noa cases on August 14, 2015. The District Court 
heard the motions on August 28, 2015, denied them, and affirmed 
the August 6, 2015 dismissals with prejudice. In anticipation of its decision, the court prepared the following findings of fact ("FOFs") and conclusions of law ("COLs") for the parties:
 11/
FINDINGS OF FACT 
1. The alleged violation occurred in 2006, over 9 years
ago. 
. . . . 
10. On June 25, 2014, Defendant[s] filed [their] Motion to
Dismiss Complaint.2/ 
. . . . 
19. The court minutes as well as the audio transcript of
proceedings on December 3, 2014 is devoid of anycolloquy or waiver of time from Defendant[s] or Statein regards to whom the time of eight month continuancebe charged to for Rule 48 purposes. 
20. At no time prior to the status hearing on August 6,2015, did the State or court follow up with the 
10/(...continued)
motion. Although it's already ruled by Judge Kawano denyingthe same. 
Page four, last paragraph, it says in the interest of
judicial economy this action needs to be dismissed withprejudice. And in the words of my kupuna, enough already. 
11/ In both cases, the FOFs follow the same wording and content and
the same numbering sequence until FOF 14. Thereafter, FOFs referring toKaho #okele are one number behind in sequence from Noa's.  The FOFs here are 
taken from the Noa Decision and Order. 
12 ____________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Federal court re: the removal. 
21. At no time prior to the August 6, 2015 status hearing
did the State or Defendant[s] file a Motion forReconsideration of the Court's December 3, 2014decision to cancel trial and set for status on August6, 2015, eight months away. 
22. At no time after the December 2014 canceled trial date did any party, the State or Defense file pursuant toRule 12.2(b) a Motion for advancement or continuanceof trial. 
23. There was no indication that Defendant waived his constitutional right to a speedy trial at theDecember 3, 2015 court date. 
24. The number of days from December 3, 2015 [sic]canceled trial date to the August 5, 2014 [sic] statusdate is 247 which is more than 180. 
2/ . . . Despite the State's Motion stating that
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss requests dismissal forspeedy trial at p.3, Defendant's Motion does notmention Hawaii Rule Penal Procedure ("H.R.P.P."), Rule48, however on page 4 mentions the 6th Amendment tothe United States Constitution and explains how the 8year lapse in time has prejudiced his right to preparefor trial. 
(Footnote omitted.) 
The State timely filed its Notice of Appeal in each 
case on September 2, 2015. The cases were consolidated for 
disposition on February 13, 2019. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
On appeal, the State contends that the District Court 
erred: (A) "in making Finding of Fact No. 25";/ (B) "by not 
mak[ing] any FOF or [COLs] regarding dismissal with prejudice 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 48" and pursuant to the three-factor test enunciated in State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 (1981); and (C) "by failing to provide FOFs and COLs that Appellant[s'] constitutional right[s] to a speedy trial [were] violated." 12
12/ We construe this as a challenge to FOF 24 of the Noa Decision &
Order, FOF 25 of the Kaho #okele  Decision & Order, and footnote 5 to those
FOFs, which is essentially a COL despite not being labeled as such. 
13  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
HRPP Rule 48 
This court reviews a trial court's denial of HRPP Rule 
48 motion to dismiss under both the "clearly erroneous" and
"right/wrong" tests: 
A trial court's findings of fact (FOFs) in deciding anHRPP 48(b) motion to dismiss are subject to theclearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to supportthe finding, the appellate court is left with thedefinite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed. However, whether those facts fall withinHRPP 48(b)'s exclusionary provisions is a question oflaw, the determination of which is freely reviewablepursuant to the "right/wrong" test. 
State v. Abregano, 136 Hawai# i 489, 497, 363 P.3d 838, 846 (2015) 
(quoting State v. Samonte
, 83 Hawai# i 507, 514, 928 P.2d 1, 8 
(1996)); see also State v. Cenido, 89 Hawai# i 331, 334, 973 P.2d 
112, 115 (App. 1999) ("In reviewing the grant of an HRPP Rule 48 
motion to dismiss, we apply the same standard [as when the motion is denied]."). 
Constitutional Right to Speedy Trial 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. 
Thus, we review questions of 
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard."  State v. 
Pratt, 127 Hawaii 206, 212, 277 P.3d 300, 306 (2012) (quoting State v. Hanapi
, 89 Hawai# i 177, 182, 970 P.2d 485, 490 (1998)). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. HRPP Rule 48; Estencion Factors 
The State's first point of error contends that the 
District Court erred in finding that "[t]he number of days from 
December 3, 2015 [sic] canceled trial date to the August 5, 2014 [sic] status date is 247 which is more than 180." 
According to 
the State, "those 247 days are not chargeable to the State because the delay was caused by [Noa]'s filing indicat[ing] that he would remove this matter to federal court." To that end, the State asserts that "only 175 days chargeable to the State elapsed." As such, the State argues that Noa's FOF 24 and 
Kaho# okele's  FOF 25 are both "clearly erroneous as there is no 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence to support [those] finding[s]." 
We construe the State's point of error as challenging 
the District Court's decision to charge the State with the 247 
days after the notice of removal was filed by Noa and Kaho# kele 
and the subsequent status conference. In identical footnotes in both the Noa Decision & Order and the Kaho# okele Decision & 
Order, the District Court stated: 
The State's Motion breaks down whom it thinks the time for 
each continuance should  be attributed, however this Court
believes those items are moot as this court held that there is a violation of H.R.P.P. Rule 48 pursuant to [Kaho #okele's 
FOFs] 24 and 25, supra , and violation of Article VI of the
U.S. Constitution and Article I Section 14 of the Hawaii State Constitution. 
We agree with the State that the District Court erred. 
"Rule 48 accords defendants the right to seek dismissal 
if they are not brought to trial within six months," but it "does 
not compel courts to bring defendants to trial within any given time frame (irrespective of excludable periods)." State v. 
Lindsey, No. 30390, 2013 WL 2383005, at *4 (Haw. Ct. App. May 31, 2013) (Reifurth, J., concurring). HRPP Rule 48 "provides courts with an incentive to mitigate undue delays." Id.  Pursuant to 
Rule 48(c), however, certain periods of delay are excluded from this calculation. Specifically, excludable time periods include, in relevant part: 
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by collateral or other proceedings concerning the
defendant , including but not limited to penal
irresponsibility examinations and periods during which the
defendant is incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions,interlocutory appeals and trials of other charges.
[13/] 
(2) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by congestion of the trial docket when thecongestion is attributable to exceptional circumstances;[and] 
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial and 
are caused by a continuance granted at the request or withthe consent of the defendant or defendant's counsel[.] 
Haw. R. Penal P. 48(c) (emphasis and footnote added). Based on 
the rule's language alone, then, the District Court's conclusion 
13/ Additionally, "[f]or purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this rule,
the period[s] of time, from the filing through the prompt disposition of the
following motions filed by a defendant, shall be deemed to be periods of delayresulting from collateral or other proceedings concerning the defendant:motions to dismiss, to suppress, . . ." Haw. R. Penal P. 48(d)(1). 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the issue of "whom . . . the time for each continuance 
should be attributed . . . [is] moot" is incorrect and vacated. In light of our conclusion regarding the District Court's failure to consider any time that should be excluded from the 180-day calculation under HRPP Rule 48, we need not address the State's second point of error. However, we note for purposes of the remand that if the 180-day period is exceeded, the District Court must consider the various factors outlined in Estencion, 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044, when deciding whether to dismiss this case with or without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48 as the State highlights under its second point. 
B. Constitutional Right To A Speedy Trial The District Court, while noting once during the status 
conference that there exists a constitutional right to a speedy trial, appeared to base its decision to dismiss the two cases exclusively on the basis of an HRPP Rule 48 violation. There were no arguments made outside of Rule 48, and no discussion of anything more or less that needed to be proven in order to establish a constitutional violation. 
Nevertheless, the Kaho# okele  Decision and Order and the 
Noa Decision and Order (i) note that the defendant's earlier-filed motion to dismiss "mention[ed]" the 6th Amendment to the United States Constitution; (ii) concludes that the State's proposed breakdown of responsibility for the delay between charging and trial was "moot" because "there is a violation of [HRPP] Rule 48 pursuant to Finding of Facts 24 and 25, supra, and violation of Article VI of the U.S. Constitution and Article I Section 14 of the Hawaii State Constitution"; (iii) quotes the two constitutional provisions as COL 1 and COL 2; and (iv) notes the standards for determining whether dismissal with or without prejudice is appropriate under HRPP Rule 48 and under the constitutions as COL 7 and COL 8 without discussing which was appropriate or why. 
The State argues in its third point of error that the 
District Court erred when it determined that Noa's constitutional right to a speedy trial had been violated without making findings with respect to the four factors enumerated by the Supreme Court 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the United States in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 530 (1972) 
(identifying the four factors as "[l]ength of delay, the reason for the delay, the defendant's assertion of his right, and prejudice to the defendant"). See State v. Lau, 78 Hawai# i 54, 
62, 890 P.2d 291, 299 (1995) (quoting State v. Wasson,
 76 Hawai# i 
415, 419, 879 P.2d 520, 524 (1994)) (noting further that these so-called "Barker Factors" were adopted by the Supreme Court of Hawai# i in State v. Almeida, 54 Haw. 443, 509 P.2d 549 (1973)). 
Although the District Court addressed the third Barker factor in FOF 10 n.2, the court's failure to analyze factors i, ii, and iv amounts to error. Therefore, the District Court erred to the extent that it dismissed the charges against Kaho# okele and Noa 
with prejudice based on any constitutional right to a speedy trial. 
V. DISPOSITION 
Based on the foregoing, the Kaho# okele Order, the 
Kaho# okele Decision and Order, the Noa Order, and the Noa 
Decision and Order, all filed on August 28, 2016, are vacated and 
the cases are remanded to the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division, for proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 15, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
John D. Kim,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Henry M. Noa,Pro Se Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
17 