 
      NOT  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
  
                     
      
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000395 27-JUN-2025 07:53 AM Dkt. 77 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000395 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
MARK VAN PERNIS, Appellant-Appellant, 
v. 
EXAMINER OF DRIVERS, DRIVER LICENSE DIVISION, VEHICLE 
REGISTRATION & LICENSING, DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, 
COUNTY OF HAWAI‘I, Appellee-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CCV-22-0000208) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.) 
This secondary appeal arises from a circuit court 
order vacating the suspension of the appellant's driver's 
license for mental or physical infirmity under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 286-119  due to an inadequate record for review, 
and remanding for a new hearing. We affirm.  1
1 HRS § 286- 119(a)(1) (2020) provides for a suspension of a
driver's license by the examiner of drivers without hearing if the examiner 
"[h]as reasonable cause to believe that the licensee" is "afflicted withmental or physical infirmities or disabilities" such that the licensee cannot  
          
 
 
   
  
  
  
                     
 
 
   
  
 
   
    
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Self-represented Appellant Mark Van Pernis (Van 
Pernis) appeals from the (1) March 22, 2023 "Findings of Fact 
[(
FOFs)], Conclusions of Law, and Order Vacating the Decision 
and Order of the Hawaii County Department of Finance Vehicle 
Registration and Licensing Division, Dated September 21, 2022, 
and Remanding with Instructions" (Order Vacating Suspension); (2) March 22, 2023 "Judgment on Appeal" (Judgment); and (3) May 30, 2023 "Order Denying [Van Pernis]'s Motion for Reconsideration of the [Order Vacating Suspension]" (Order Denying Reconsideration),  all filed and entered by the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).   
3 2
On appeal, Van Pernis argues that: the Circuit Court 
cannot remand for a "new record"; that the suspension of his license was improper; and all claims against him should be dismissed.
4 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Van 
Pernis's contentions as follows. 
safely operate a motor vehicle. Subsection (b) provides the licensee a right 
to a hearing to challenge the suspension. Following the hearing, a person whose license is suspended may appeal to the circuit court, under HRS § 286-
129. 
2 No argument is made regarding the Order Denying Reconsideration. 
It is waived. See Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
3 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided. 
4 While the Amended Opening Brief does not contain a points of 
error section, we are able to discern Van Pernis's contentions. See Erum v. 
Llego, 147 Hawaiʻi 368, 380- 31, 465 P.3d 815, 827 -28 (2020) (affording liberal 
review to pleadings by self- represented litigants "to facilitate access to 
justice" and to afford opportunity for appellate review (citation omitted)). 
2  
          
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First License Suspension 
On April 6, 2021, Hawaiʻ i Police Department (HIPD) 
Officer Mara Gaertner (Officer Gaertner) filed a "Request for 
Revocation of Driver's License Pending Complete Medical 
Examination" (First Request). The First Request for license revocation stated that on April 6, 2021, Van Pernis was involved in a car accident, where he struck a parked vehicle. When Officer Gaertner arrived on scene, the officer observed Van Pernis sitting on a rock wall. As Van Pernis stood up, Officer Gaertner observed Van Pernis to be "extremely off balance" to 
the point that Van Pernis fell down. Van Pernis stated that he 
"had suffered a brain injury" and "had a stroke two years ago." Officer Gaertner noted that Van Pernis had been in four traffic accidents within the past two years. 
On April 21, 2021, Appellee-Appellee Examiner of 
Drivers, Driver License Division, Vehicle Registration and 
Licensing Department of Finance, County of Hawaiʻi (licensing 
examiner) sent a letter to Van Pernis, suspending Van Pernis's 
driver's license pursuant to HRS § 286-129 until Van Pernis obtained a medical report by a neurologist that Van Pernis was capable of safe driving. 
On April 22, 2021, Donald K. Nikaitani, M.D. 
(
Dr. Nikaitani) deemed Van Pernis "capable of safe driving." 
On May 3, 2021, the licensing examiner sent a letter 
to Van Pernis, requesting that he also submit a report by a neurologist. 
On May 13, 2021, Van Pernis requested a hearing. On May 17, 2021, the licensing examiner sent a letter 
to Van Pernis that his case was being referred to the Medical Advisory Board (Medical Board) for their review and recommendation, and reinstated Van Pernis's driver's license. 
3  
          
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 20, 2021, the licensing examiner sent a letter 
to Dr. Nikaitani, requesting further clarification on Van 
Pernis's brain injury and stroke. 
On June 8, 2021, Dr. Nikaitani submitted another 
medical report regarding the brain injury and stroke. The report deemed Van Pernis safe to drive. 
On June 15, 2021, Van Pernis sent an email to the 
licensing examiner, that he never suffered from a stroke or brain injury, and that Dr. Nikaitani's original medical report was correct. That same day, the licensing examiner requested 
the Medical Board to advise of the medical fitness of Van 
Pernis. 
Second License Suspension While the First Request for license revocation was 
pending, on February 4, 2022, HIPD Officer Miexia Ahloy (Officer Ahloy) filed a "Request for Revocation of Driver's License Pending Complete Medical Examination" (Second Request). The 
Second Request for license revocation stated that Van Pernis 
struck the rear bumper of another car while backing out of a parking stall. Upon arrival, Officer Ahloy observed that Van Pernis had "slurred speech" and was "unsteady." Officer Ahloy performed a Standardized Field Sobriety Test on Van Pernis, during which Van Pernis alerted Officer Ahloy that he had "an 
inoperable brain condition." Officer Ahloy determined that Van 
Pernis suffered from a health condition and that he "was not safe to operate a vehicle on a public roadway." 
On February 14, 2022, the licensing examiner sent 
another letter to Van Pernis, indicating that his license was suspended and requesting that he submit a favorable medical 
report that he was capable of safe driving. 
4  
          
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 15, 2022, Dr. Nikaitani submitted another 
medical report. The report deemed Van Pernis safe for driving. 
On March 31, 2022, Van Pernis was notified that his 
case was being referred to the Medical Board. Van Pernis's 
medical reports, traffic abstract, and Officer Ah Loy and 
Officer Gaertner's requests were sent to the Medical Board. 
On April 13, 2022, the licensing examiner sent a 
letter to Van Pernis, in which the Medical Board requested Van Pernis retake the road test administered by a driver rehabilitation specialist, and that it would review the results 
and make a determination on the suspension of his license. 
Hearing 
Pursuant to Van Pernis's request, a contested case 
hearing was set for July 1, 2022 regarding the suspension of Van Pernis's driver's license. At the hearing, Van Pernis argued, inter alia, that there was no reasonable cause to revoke his license, and that his doctor indicated that he could safely 
operate a vehicle. 
On September 21, 2022, the licensing examiner filed 
its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and 
Order" (Order of Suspension), which found that: Van Pernis never received a medical report from a neurologist; there was reasonable cause to suspend Van Pernis's license after two 
communications from police officers that Van Pernis could not 
safely operate a motor vehicle; and Van Pernis never took a road test administered by a driver rehabilitation specialist. The Order of Suspension suspended Van Pernis's license; required Van Pernis to take a road test with a driver rehabilitation specialist; and stated that the licensing examiner would review 
the results of the road test. 
5  
          
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appeal to the Circuit Court 
Van Pernis appealed the Order of Suspension to the 
Circuit Court. The Circuit Court reviewed Van Pernis's appeal under HRS § 91-14(g). Following a hearing, the Circuit Court 
filed its March 22, 2023 Order Vacating Suspension and remanded 
the case back to the licensing examiner for a new hearing. The Order Vacating Suspension explained that there was an inadequate record of the July 1, 2022 contested case hearing due to no transcript, and insufficient findings by the licensing examiner for the Circuit Court to conduct its review. The Circuit Court 
entered the March 22, 2023 Judgment and denied Van Pernis's 
subsequent March 31, 2023 motion for reconsideration on May 30, 2023. Van Pernis timely appealed. 
Van Pernis's primary challenge in this appeal is that 
remand is improper and the proceedings against him should be dismissed. Van Pernis also argues that "estoppel," "double jeopardy," and "due process" "prevent[] the remand." 
Van Pernis's reliance on Yamada v. Nat. Disaster 
Claims Comm'n, 54 Haw. 621, 513 P.2d 1001 (1973), abrogated
by Morgan v. Plan. Dep't, Cnty. of Kauai, 104 Hawaiʻ i 173, 86 
P.3d 982 (2004), is misplaced because Yamada is inapposite. 
Yamada concerned whether an administrative commission could 
reconsider its prior decision on its own, and did not involve 
the exercise of an affected individual's statutory right to judicial review. See HRS §§ 286-119(b) and 286-129. 
HRS § 91-14(g), regarding "[j]udicial review of 
contested cases," provides that: "Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions for further proceedings"; or "it may 
reverse or modify the decision and order" if the agency's 
decision violated any of the grounds set forth in (g)(1) through 
6  
          
 
 
   
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(g)(6). (Emphasis added.) The Circuit Court was authorized to 
vacate the licensing examiner's decision and order a remand for a new hearing to be conducted. Van Pernis's various arguments that remand was improper lack merit. 
In light of our resolution, we need not address Van 
Pernis's challenge to certain FOFs in the Circuit Court's Order Vacating Suspension and arguments regarding the evidence before the Medical Board. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the (1) March 22, 
2023 Order Vacating Suspension; (2) March 22, 2023 Judgment; and 
(3) May 30, 2023 Order Denying Reconsideration, all filed and 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii ‘, June 27, 2025. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Katherine G. LeonardMark Van Pernis, Acting Chief JudgeSelf-represented Appellant- Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  Associate JudgeRyan K. Thomas,  Deputy Corporation Counsel, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidryfor Appellee-Appellee. Associate Judge  
7 