 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000518 16-DEC-2024 08:00 AM Dkt. 49 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000518 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
CORY KAI SARMIENTO, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 5PC1310000442) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Cory Kai Sarmiento appeals from 
the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's August 23, 2021 "Order 
Denying Without Prejudice Defendant Sarmiento's Motion for Return of Fines, Fees, and Restitution, and for the Expungement of the Arrest and Charge and Record in this Case" (Order Denying Fines and Expungement).
  1
As a brief background, this court vacated Sarmiento's 
conviction of various offenses in the underlying case. On 
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remand, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai‘ i moved to dismiss the 
case with prejudice, and the circuit court granted the motion. 
Providing no statutory authority, Sarmiento then moved 
for the expungement of "all portions of this instant case from 
his record" and the return of any fines, fees, and restitution paid pursuant to the vacated judgment of conviction and sentence. The State opposed the request for expungement. 
The circuit court denied without prejudice Sarmiento's 
request (1) "for expungement of his arrest record" explaining that the Attorney General was the proper entity from which to request expungement and (2) for reimbursement of fines, fees, and restitution where there was no evidence of the amounts paid: 
1. Defendant Sarmiento's request for expungement of 
his arrest record is denied without prejudice. Pursuant to 
[Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS)] section 831- 3.2, the proper 
entity to process an expungement of arrest record request 
is the State of 
Hawaiʻi Department of the Attorney General. 
2. Defendant Sarmiento's request for reimbursement 
of fines, fees, and restitution paid in this case is denied
without prejudice. There is no record of any amounts paid to the Fifth Circuit Court in this case; but there may be 
amounts paid by Defendant Sarmiento to the State of Hawaiʻ i 
Department of Public Safety. 
Mr. Sarmiento may inquire
with the Department of Public Safety as to amounts 
previously paid for this case. 
(Emphases omitted.) Sarmiento timely appealed. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
2   
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1)  Sarmiento first argues the circuit court "erred 
by refusing to order an expungement[.]" (Emphasis omitted.) 
HRS § 831-3.2 (Supp. 2019) provides in pertinent part 
as follows: 
§831-3.2   Expungement orders. (a) The attorney 
general, or the attorney general's duly authorized 
representative within the department of the attorney general, upon written application from a person arrested for, or charged with but not convicted of a
crime, or found eligible for redress under chapter
661B, shall issue an expungement order annulling, canceling, and rescinding the record of arrest[.] 
  
(Emphasis added.) Statutory interpretation is reviewed de novo. 
Barker v. Young
, 153 Hawaiʻi 144, 148, 528 P.3d 217, 221 (2023). 
HRS § 831-3.2 confers the attorney general with the 
power to expunge arrest records. 
And nothing in HRS § 831-3.2 
gives the circuit court the authority to expunge Sarmiento's 
arrest record. In sum, the circuit court did not err in denying Sarmiento's request to expunge his arrest record. 
Sarmiento then argues the circuit court should have 
used its inherent powers pursuant to HRS § 603-21.9(6) (2016) to grant his request. Sarmiento asserts that "the issue involved 
expungement of [his] arrest record relating to charges against 
him which were dismissed" and the circuit court "could have therefore ordered this record expunged[.]" 
HRS § 603-21.9(6) vests the circuit court with the 
power: 
3   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
To make and award such judgments, decrees, orders, and 
mandates, issue such executions and other processes, and do
such other acts and take such other steps as may be 
necessary to carry into full effect the powers which are or 
shall be given to them by law or for the promotion of 
justice in matters pending before them. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Assuming, without deciding, the circuit court has the 
power to expunge Sarmiento's record, the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion under the circumstances in this case, where Sarmiento did not follow the statutory process set forth in HRS § 831-3.2(a) and, thus, did not demonstrate that judicial action was "necessary" under HRS § 603-21.9(6). See generally State v.
Cooley
, 123 Hawai‘i 293, 295, 233 P.3d 713, 715 (App. 2010) 
(noting the appellate courts "review a trial court's exercise of its inherent powers for abuse of discretion"). 
(2) Sarmiento also contends the circuit court erred 
in denying his request for reimbursement of fines, fees, and restitution paid. 
The circuit court's order noted that there was no 
record of amounts paid to the circuit court. 
With no record of 
amounts paid to the circuit court, there was no amount for the circuit court to order as reimbursement. As to any amounts Sarmiento may have paid to the Department of Public Safety, the circuit court denied Sarmiento's request without prejudice to 
Sarmiento inquiring with the Department of Public Safety as to 
the amounts he paid. 
4   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because there was no evidence that Sarmiento paid any 
fines, fees, or restitution, we cannot say that the circuit 
court abused its discretion in denying Sarmiento's request for an order of reimbursement without prejudice. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
August 23, 2021 Order Denying Fines and Expungement. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, December 16, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
 Presiding Judge 
Kai Lawrence,  
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
 Associate Judge 
Tracy Murakami,  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
County of Kaua‘ i,  Associate Judge 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5 