NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000001
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
ANDREA ILIMA DECOSTA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JASON ANDREW CARLSON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DIVORCE NO. 10-1-2626)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Andrea Ilima DeCosta (DeCosta), pro
 
se, appeals from the December 2, 2011 "Order Denying Plaintiff's
 
Motion For Reconsideration Filed On November 7, 2011," entered in
 
1
the Family Court of the First Circuit  (family court).
I. BACKGROUND
 
On November 29, 2010, DeCosta filed a complaint for
 
divorce against Defendant-Appellee Jason Andrew Carlson (Carlson)
 and on September 20, 2011, the family court held a hearing on the
 
complaint for divorce. 
The minutes from the hearing indicate the
 
parties had reached a prior agreement about the terms of the
 divorce, and both parties confirmed their agreement and placed
 
the terms on the record.
 
1
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided over the pertinent
proceedings.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 3, 2011, DeCosta's counsel sent a letter
 
advising the family court that DeCosta disputed the court
 
procedure and the terms from the September 20, 2011 hearing, and
 
therefore she was not willing to sign the proposed divorce decree
 
that Carlson's attorney had sent. DeCosta's attorney also
 
informed the court he was withdrawing.
 
On October 7, 2011, Carlson's attorney submitted a 
proposed divorce decree to the family court for processing 
without DeCosta's signature, pursuant to Hawaif i Family Court 
Rules (HFCR) Rule 58.2 On October 24, 2011, the family court 
entered a divorce decree (Decree) dissolving the marriage between 
Carlson and DeCosta, awarding no spousal support to either party, 
and dividing and distributing Carlson and DeCosta's property and 
debts. Paragraph 3 of the Decree states: "This decree is 
effective March 31, 2012." 
On November 2, 2011, DeCosta's counsel sent a letter
 
informing the family court that neither they nor Decosta had
 
received notice of the Decree's entry until that day. In the
 
letter, DeCosta's counsel stated they would be submitting a
 
stipulation to extend the ten-day time period under HFCR Rule
 
59(e) for DeCosta to file a motion for reconsideration
 
3
(Stipulation to Extend). On November 4, 2011,  eleven days after
the Decree's entry, DeCosta filed a pro se post-judgment motion
 
2
 HFCR Rule 58 provides in relevant part:
. . . .
 
(b) Signing of Judgment or Order. Upon a showing in
writing that opposing counsel or a party in a contested case
fails or refuses to approve a judgment or order submitted to
that opposing counsel or party by the other counsel in
accordance with the above, the court shall sign the judgment
or order notwithstanding the absence of approval of the
opposing counsel or party, provided that the submitted
judgment or order conforms with the decision of the court.
 
3
 The family court accepted and date-stamped DeCosta's Motion for
Reconsideration as "received" on November 4, 2011 but did not stamp the motion as
"filed" until November 7, 2011. The date on which a family court receives adocument by mail prevails over any subsequent file-stamped date on which thefamily court eventually files the document. Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawaif i 144, 151, 44
P.3d 1085, 1092 (2002). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3The parties' attorneys submitted the Stipulation to
Extend in the family court on November 9, 2011.  On November 14,
2011, the family court entered an order purporting to approve the
parties' Stipulation to Extend (Order Approving Stipulation to
Extend) and stating: "[DeCosta's] deadline to file a Motion for
Reconsideration, pursuant to [HFCR] Rule 59, of the Divorce
Decree filed on October 24, 2011 shall be extended for 10 days
from and after November 2, 2011 (until November 14, 2011)."
On December 2, 2011, the family court entered a post-
judgment order denying DeCosta's Motion for Reconsideration
(Order Denying Reconsideration).  DeCosta filed a timely notice
of appeal from the Order Denying Reconsideration on December 30,
2011.
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW
The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to
allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments
that could not have been presented during the earlier
adjudicated motion.  Reconsideration is not a device to
relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence
that could and should have been brought during the earlier
proceeding.  We review a trial court's ruling on a motion
for reconsideration under the abuse of discretion standard. 
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant.for relief from the Decree (Motion for Reconsideration),
purportedly pursuant to HFCR Rule 59(e).
Tagupa v. Tagupa, 108 Hawai# i 459, 465, 121 P.3d 924, 930 (App.
2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, ellipsis, and
brackets omitted).
III.  DISCUSSION
A. Decree
DeCosta's opening brief raises several points of error
and arguments requiring review of the underlying Decree and the
family court proceedings leading up to the Decree entry.  Because
this court lacks jurisdiction to review the Decree, we review
only the post-judgment Order Denying Reconsideration.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DeCosta's appeal from the Decree is untimely under 
Hawaifi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4. DeCosta did 
not file her notice of appeal within thirty days of the Decree's 
entry, as required under HRAP Rule 4(a)(1). HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) 
also provides: "If any party files a timely motion . . . to 
reconsider . . . the time for filing the notice of appeal is 
extended until 30 days after entry of an order disposing of the 
motion[.]" However, DeCosta's Motion for Reconsideration was 
untimely under HFCR Rule 59(e) because DeCosta filed the motion 
eleven days after the October 24, 2011 entry of the Decree. See 
HFCR Rule 59(e) ("[A] motion to reconsider, alter or amend a judgment . . . may be filed no later than 10 days after entry of 
the judgment[.]"). 
Although the family court entered a November 14, 2011
 
Order Approving Stipulation to Extend, purportedly granting
 
DeCosta an additional ten days to file a motion under HFCR Rule
 
59, the order violates HFCR Rule 6(b). HFCR Rule 6(b) states the
 
family court "may not extend the time for taking any action under
 
Rules 52(b), 59(b), (d) and (e) and 60(b) of these rules and Rule
 
4(a) of the [HRAP], except to the extent and under the conditions
 
stated in them." (Emphases added.). Thus, DeCosta's Motion for
 
Reconsideration cannot be considered a timely HFCR Rule 59 motion
 
and therefore would not invoke the tolling provision of HRAP Rule
 
4(a)(3). 
Furthermore, although the Hawaif i Supreme Court held in 
Cabral v. State, 127 Hawaif i 175, 277 P.3d 269 (2012) that 
certain circumstances warrant application of a "unique circumstances" doctrine as an equitable exception to the time 
limits for filing an appeal, that doctrine is inapplicable to 
this case. In Cabral, the parties submitted a stipulation to 
obtain an extension of time three days before the plaintiffs' 
deadline to file a notice of appeal, and the circuit court 
"approved and so ordered" the stipulation on the same day. Thus 
the plaintiffs had relied, to their detriment, on the circuit 
court's granting an extension and had reason to believe the 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
original deadline was no longer effective. Id. at 185, 277 P.3d
 
at 279. The supreme court noted that because the circuit court
 
granted the extension before the original deadline's expiration,
 
if the circuit court had denied the extension, the plaintiffs
 
could have, and presumably would have, filed their notice of
 
appeal within the original deadline. Id. at 183-184, 277 P.3d at
 
277-78. In light of the case's specific, "unique circumstances,"
 the supreme court concluded the appellate court had jurisdiction
 
over the plaintiffs' otherwise untimely appeal. Id. at 183, 277
 
P.3d at 277.
 
Cabral is distinguishable from this case, however. 
Here, the family court did not "approve" the Stipulation to Extend until after the expiration of DeCosta's deadline to file a 
timely post-judgment HFCR Rule 59 motion that would toll the time 
period under HRAP Rule 4. The family court entered the Decree on 
October 24, 2011, and the ten-day deadline for filing a timely 
HFCR Rule 59 motion was November 3, 2011. DeCosta's counsel 
wrote to the family court on November 2, 2011 stating their 
intent to stipulate to an extension, but the parties did not 
submit the Stipulation to Extend itself until November 9, 2011. 
The family court did not "approve" the Stipulation to Extend 
until November 14, 2011, eleven days past DeCosta's deadline to 
file a timely HFCR Rule 59 motion. Therefore, when DeCosta filed 
her Motion for Reconsideration on November 4, 2011, she could not 
have relied on the family court's November 14, 2011 Order 
Approving Stipulation to Extend, and she did not have a 
reasonable basis to believe the original deadline (November 3, 
2011) was no longer in effect. See Enos v. Pac. Transfer & 
Warehouse, Inc., 80 Hawaif i 345, 353, 910 P.2d 116, 124 (1996) 
("A party has an independent duty to keep informed and mere 
failure of the clerk to notify the parties that judgment has been 
entered does not provide grounds for excusable neglect or warrant 
an extension of time [to file a notice of appeal].") (Internal 
quotation marks omitted.). Because DeCosta's post-judgment 
Motion for Reconsideration was not timely under HFCR Rule 59 and 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6did not invoke the tolling provision under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3),
this court lacks jurisdiction to review the Decree, and our
review is limited to the Order Denying Reconsideration.  
B. Order Denying Reconsideration
DeCosta contends the family court imposed "procedural
duress" and inhibited her from presenting evidence at the
hearing, and therefore the family court erred in denying her
Motion for Reconsideration of the Decree.  DeCosta also claims
the family court ignored evidence of her contributions to the
marital partnership, failed to equitably distribute the parties'
assets, and entered a Decree containing terms that differed
substantively from the terms discussed at the September 20, 2011
hearing.
Because the record on appeal does not contain any
transcripts of the relevant hearings, this court lacks the means
to assess the merits of DeCosta's contentions.  "The burden is
upon appellant in an appeal to show error by reference to matters
in the record, and he or she has the responsibility of providing
an adequate transcript."  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai #i
225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (internal quotation marks and
brackets omitted); HRAP Rule 10 (b)(1)(A) ("When an appellant
desires to raise any point on appeal that requires consideration
of the oral proceedings before the court appealed from, the
appellant shall file with the appellate clerk, within 10 days
after filing the notice of appeal, a request or requests to
prepare a reporter's transcript of such parts of the proceedings
as the appellant deems necessary that are not already on file."). 
Absent the transcripts, or anything else in the record supporting
DeCosta's contentions, we conclude DeCosta failed to meet her
burden of showing error.
DeCosta also contends certain terms in the Decree
(specifically, the provisions addressing the parties' retirement
funds and the distribution of tax returns) are vague and
ambiguous.  We disagree.  The Decree specifies how, when, by
whom, and in what manner the parties' respective property andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
debts shall be divided. Therefore, the Decree was sufficiently
 
clear and did not require correction.
 
Lastly, DeCosta contends that pursuant to Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 580-45 (2006 Repl.), the family court
 
lacked the authority to enter a divorce decree taking effect more
 
than one month after the date of the decree's entry. HRS § 580­
45 states in full:
 
§580-45 Decree.  If after a full hearing, the court is of
opinion that a divorce ought to be granted from the bonds of
matrimony a decree shall be signed, filed and entered, which
shall take effect from and after such time as may be fixed
by the court in the decree. The court, in its discretion,
may waive a hearing on an uncontested divorce complaint and
admit proof by affidavit. In case of a decree dissolving the
bonds of matrimony, such time so fixed shall not be more
than one month from and after the date of the decree.
 
(Emphasis added.).
 
In Camp v. Camp, 109 Hawaif i 469, 128 P.3d 351 (2006), 
this court examined the legislative history of HRS § 580-45 and 
concluded the legislature "wished to (1) discourage 'hasty' 
divorces by permitting courts to enter decrees that would take 
effect at a later date and (2) limit the discretion of the courts 
in this regard to a one month period 'from and after' the date of 
the entry of the decree." Id. at 480, 128 P.3d at 362. Thus, 
the terms of HRS § 580-45 "indicate that courts have discretion in fixing the effective date of the divorce decree but that this 
discretion is limited to a one month period commencing the date 
of the entry of the decree." Id. 
In this case, the family court entered the Decree on
 
October 24, 2011. However, Paragraph 3 of the Decree states:
 
"Effect. This decree is effective March 31, 2012." Thus, on its
 
face, the Decree expressly fixes its effective date to more than
 
one month "from and after" the date of its entry, and the family
 
court erred in setting the Decree's effective date.
 
However, this error is only procedural and was harmless
 
under the facts of this case. DeCosta has neither claimed nor
 
demonstrated any prejudice from this particular error, and
 
nothing in the record suggests the court's error implicated the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties' substantive rights. Although DeCosta challenges the
 
Decree's terms on several grounds, she does not claim the
 
erroneous effective date had any impact on or connection to the
 
terms she challenges. As discussed above, the family court did
 
not abuse its discretion in denying DeCosta's Motion for
 
Reconsideration in all other respects, and vacating the family
 
court's Order Denying Reconsideration for this error alone raises
 
a greater risk of prejudice to the parties, who have acted as
 
though the Decree has been in effect since March 31, 2012. 
Consequently, we conclude the family court's error does not
 
warrant reversal.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The December 2, 2011 "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion
 
For Reconsideration Filed On November 7, 2011," entered in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, February 21, 2013. 
On the opening brief:
 
Andrea Ilima DeCosta
 
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
8
 