SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000216
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOSHUA VASCONCELLOS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 3DTC-15-042768)
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joshua Vasconcellos (Vasconcellos)
 
appeals from a Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment
 
1
(Judgment),  entered by the District Court of the Third Circuit,
Kona Division (District Court), on February 26, 2016.  The
 
District Court convicted Vasconcellos of one count of Inattention
 
to Driving, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291­12 (Supp. 2015).
2
  
Vasconcellos argues that the District Court wrongly
 
convicted him after (1) failing to provide him with the
 advisement concerning alien status, or "immigration advisement,"
 
1
 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291-12 provides:
 
Whoever operates any vehicle without due care or in a manner
as to cause a collision with, or injury or damage to, as the
case may be, any person, vehicle or other property shall be
fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than thirty
days, or both, and may be subject to a surcharge of up to
$100 which shall be deposited into the trauma system special
fund.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
in violation of HRS § 802E-2 (2014)  ; (2) admitting into evidence
his statements to Officer Pa without a sufficient foundation
 
because Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) failed to 
demonstrate that his statements were voluntary; and (3) wrongly
 admitting into evidence the traffic citation (Citation) issued to
 him by Officer Pa, which was irrelevant and inadmissible hearsay.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Vasconcellos's points of error as follows, and affirm.
1.
 The District Court's error in failing to provide
Vasconcellos with the immigration advisement required by HRS
§ 802E-2 was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Although the State concedes that the court erred by
 
failing to provide Vasconcellos with the immigration advisement 
3
 HRS § 802E-2 provides:
 
Prior to the commencement of trial, entry of a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere, or admission of guilt or
sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a crime under
state law, except offenses designated as infractions under
state law, the court shall administer the following
advisement on the record to the defendant:
 
If you are not a citizen of the United States,
whether or not you have lawful immigration
status, you have the right to receive advice
from your attorney about the specific impact
that this case will have, if any, on your
immigration status. The entry of a guilty or
nolo contendere plea, admission of guilt or
sufficient facts, or conviction, deferred
judgment, or deferred sentence may have the
consequences of your immediate detention,
deportation, exclusion from admission to the
United States, or denial of naturalization
pursuant to the laws of the United States. In
 some cases, detention and deportation from the
United States will be required. Your lawyer
must investigate and advise you about these
issues prior to the commencement of trial, entry
of a guilty plea or nolo contendere [plea], or
admission of guilt or sufficient facts to any
offense punishable as a crime under state law,
other than those offenses designated as
infractions. You are not required to disclose
your immigration or citizenship to the court.
 
Upon request, the court shall allow the defendant additional
time to consider the appropriateness of the plea in light of
the advisement as described in this section. 
(Brackets in original.) 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and agrees that the Judgment must be vacated, "appellate courts 
have an independent duty 'first to ascertain that the confession of error is supported by the record and well-founded in law and second to determine that such error is properly preserved and prejudicial.'" State v. Veikoso, 102 Hawai
'i 219, 221–22, 74 
P.3d 575, 577–78 (2003) (citing to State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 
333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). In other words, the State's concession of error "is not binding upon an appellate court[.]" Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i at 336, 3 P.3d at 502 (quoting Territory v. 
Kogami, 37 Haw. 174, 175 (Haw. Terr. 1945)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The plain language of HRS § 802E-2 obligates the trial 
court to provide the immigration advisement "[p]rior to the commencement of trial, entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or admission of guilt or sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a crime under state law." See § 802E-2. 
See also Rule 11(d) of the Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
("Prior to entry of a plea of guilty or no contest, or admission of guilt or sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a crime under state law, except those offenses designated as infractions, the court shall read the advisement in § 802E-2, Hawai
'i Revised 
Statutes, on the record to the defendant."). Thus, the District Court was required to provide the advisement to Vasconcellos. 
Nevertheless, Vasconcellos fails to show this court
 
where he preserved this error nor has he provided us a complete
 record with the transcripts of all court appearances prior to
 trial. Moreover, the District Court's erroneous failure to
 provide the advisement was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
4
 
because Vasconcellos has not argued that the error may result in
 any adverse immigration consequences to him and, thus, has failed
 to show he suffered any prejudice. See Bartholomew v. State, 
4
 We note that HRS § 802E-3 (2014) -- which provides that when the
trial court fails to give the required immigration advisement set forth in
§ 802E-2, the court must vacate the judgment on motion by the defendant in
cases where the defendant pled guilty or nolo contendere and where the
defendant shows that the conviction may result in certain immigration
consequences for the defendant -- does not apply here where Vasconcellos did
not plead guilty or no contest and has not shown that his conviction may
result in any adverse immigration consequences to him. 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
129 Hawai 'i 427, 301 P.3d 1268, No. CAAP-11-0000622 2013 WL 
2301500 at *2 (App. May 24, 2013) (SDO) (the Second Circuit 
District Court's failure to complete the required immigration colloquy was harmless where Bartholomew claimed to be a U.S. citizen and did not contend that any of the excluded information was relevant to him).
2. The admission of Vasconcellos's statements to
 
Officer Pa was proper.
 
Vasconcellos argues that the District Court erred in
 
admitting his statement to Officer Pa because the State failed to
 show that the statement was voluntarily made. We disagree.
 
The State presented testimony regarding the 
circumstances leading to Vasconcellos's statement: That upon arriving at the scene of an automobile accident, Officer Pa approached Vasconcellos, who was standing outside one of the vehicles, and asked him if he were involved. Upon Vasconcellos's voluntariness objection and voir dire of Officer Pa, the District Court allowed the state to elicit Vasconcellos's statement from Officer Pa. Given the context of these proceedings, it appears that the District Court made an implicit determination that the statement was voluntarily given. State v. Ackerman, 128 Hawai
'i 
312, 288 P.3d 130, No. 29469 2012 WL 5199176 at *2 (App. Oct. 22, 2012) (SDO) (this court held the failure to make an explicit finding of voluntariness was harmless where the record showed statements were made voluntarily). State v. Filoteo, 125 Hawai
'i 
240, 257 P.3d 253, No. 29921 2011 WL 2126149 at *4 (App. May 25, 2011) (SDO) (this court concluded the family court had implicitly found statements to be voluntary). 
On this record, we see no circumstances which suggest 
Vasconcellos's statement was coerced. See State v. Wyatt, 67
 
Haw. 293, 300, 687 P.2d 554, 550 (1984) ("[W]hat transpired here
 may be more aptly described as on-the-scene questioning of brief
 duration conducted prior to arrest in public view. . . . for
 nothing in the record suggests . . . the interrogation was of a
 nature likely to subjugate the defendant to the will of her
 examiner.") We conclude the District Court did not err in
 admitting Vasconcellos's statement into evidence.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. The District Court did not plainly err by admitting
the Citation into evidence. 
a. The Citation was relevant. Officer Pa could not 
positively identify Vasconcellos at trial. Vasconcellos's 
signature on the Citation provided evidence that Vasconcellos received the Citation, making it more probable that Vasconcellos was the person who committed the offense. Rule 401 of the Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE).
b. The Citation was not hearsay.  The State offered
 
the Citation to show that Vasconcellos received the Citation, not
 to prove the truth of any matter asserted therein. See HRE Rule
 
801 (defining "hearsay").
 
In any event, as Vasconcellos testified at trial that
 
he was the driver who "bumped into the van" because he was
 looking at his temperature gauge, any error in admitting the
 Citation into evidence is not plain error but harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and
 
Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered in the District Court of the
 Third Circuit, Kona Division on February 26, 2016, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 10, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
James S. Tabe,

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Charles E. Murray, III

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai 'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
5
 