NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000537
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SHARI H. KOMATA, nka SHARI H. UYENO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JAMES M. KOMATA, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 08-1-0101)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Shari H. Komata, nka Shari H. Uyeno
 
(Mother), appeals from the Decree Granting Absolute Divorce
 
(Decree) entered in the Family Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(family court) on June 13, 2011. The Decree dissolved the
 marriage between Mother and Defendant-Appellee James M. Komata
 
(Father), and, among other things, awarded primary legal and
 
physical custody of their two minor children to Father, subject
 
to Mother's rights of reasonable visitation. 
On appeal, Mother challenges the custody award for the
 
parties' children, contending that the family court abused its
 
discretion when it: (1) precluded Marvin Acklin, PhD (Dr. Acklin)
 
from providing expert testimony; and (2) awarded physical and
 
legal custody to Father after the court cut short Mother's cross­
1
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examination of Custody Evaluator/Guardian ad litem Edith Kawai
 
(GAL), ignored statutory factors, and failed to make necessary
 
findings.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Dr. Acklin's Testimony
 
The family court did not abuse its discretion when it 
precluded Marvin Acklin, PhD from presenting expert testimony at trial. "The Family Court has wide discretion to limit expert 
testimony." Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai' i 149, 176, 202 P.3d 610, 637 
(App. 2009) (citations omitted). "The imposition of a sanction is generally within the discretion of the trial court." Weinberg 
v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawai' i 68, 71, 229 P.3d 1133, 1136 
(2010) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). It is 
also within the court's discretion to set the pre-trial calendar. 
See Hawai' i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 16. 
Mother contends that the family court abused its 
discretion in precluding Dr. Acklin's testimony because the court 
did not make a finding that she acted in bad faith or that Father 
was prejudiced due to the untimely disclosure of Dr. Acklin's 
report. In short, Mother asserts that the factors set forth by 
this court in Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 121 Hawai' i 401, 435, 
220 P.3d 264, 298 (App. 2009) affd. in part and vacated in part 
by Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawai' i 68, 229 P.3d 1133 
(2010) should apply to this case. We do not agree. As expressed 
in the Hawai' i Supreme Court's subsequent opinion in Weinberg, 
the family court in that case struck a number of exhibits and 
witnesses which had the "effect of essentially barring nearly an 
entire body of evidence[.]" 123 Hawai' i at 77-78, 229 P.3d at 
1142-43. The supreme court distinguished those circumstances 
from Glover v. Grace Pacific Corp., 86 Hawai' i 154, 948 P.2d 575 
(App. 1997), in which this court upheld a ruling that precluded one expert from testifying due to his failure to produce a timely 
report, without a finding of bad faith or prejudice. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The instant case is similar to Glover rather than 
Weinberg. Mother was precluded from presenting one expert, whose 
testimony would purportedly challenge the GAL and the GAL's 
report. However, although the GAL's report was issued over seven 
months prior to the experts' report deadline, Dr. Acklin's report 
was untimely and instead the record indicates it was provided 
four days before trial. As noted in Glover, where the expert had 
failed to finalize his opinions before the discovery cut-off, 
"the fair import of the policies underlying the discovery cutoff 
date is that an expert should have arrived at his or her final 
opinions by that date. Otherwise, the party seeking discovery of 
such opinions would be prevented from adequately preparing for 
trial." 86 Hawai' i at 164, 948 P.2d at 585. 
Similar to Glover, the family court in this case had
 
the authority, and did not abuse its discretion, in precluding
 
Dr. Acklin's testimony. Pursuant to HFCR Rule 16, related to
 
pretrial conferences, "[t]he court shall make an order which
 
recites the action taken at the conference . . . and such order
 
when entered controls the subsequent course of the action, unless
 
modified at the trial to prevent manifest injustice." (Emphasis
 
added.)
 
Here, the family court's August 14, 2009
 
Stipulation/Order To Set Trial required that, "[a]ll discovery
 
will be completed by no later than December 1, 2009. After this
 
date, no additional formal discovery will be initiated without
 
court approval or the agreement of the other party." 
Importantly, this order instructed the parties to serve on the
 
other party "all appraisals and reports of expert witnesses with
 
their expert opinions" at least one week before the settlement
 
conference set for January 12, 2010; thus, the due date for
 
expert reports was January 5, 2010. The order further explicitly
 
stated: "Appraisals and other expert reports not provided as
 
required above shall not be admitted, and such experts will not
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be permitted to testify at trial over the objection of the
 
opposing party unless otherwise ordered by the court." (Emphasis
 
added.) 
Mother failed to meet the order's deadline to submit
 
expert reports by January 5, 2010. Even though Mother provided
 
Dr. Acklin's name in her January 5, 2010 witness list, she did
 
not provide his report to Father until February 4, 2010, which
 
was four days before trial commenced. Mother made no effort to
 
request agreement from Father or leave of the court to submit the
 
report late. 
At trial on February 8, 2010, in response to the family
 
court's query as to why the court should permit Dr. Acklin to
 
testify, Mother responded that:
 
our good cause is if this Court looks at Doctor Acklin's
report it talks about the problems with the GAL's report,
which is basically the lack of time logs, the lack of
correspondence, the lack of a client -- the lack of a file,
basically case notes. None of those, none of those were
provided by the GAL.
 
The court confirmed that Mother was offering Dr. Acklin "as a
 
sort of industry expert to impeach [the GAL's], uh, professional
 
approach[.]" Mother then also argued that Dr. Acklin's report
 
was delayed because the GAL had not produced documents Dr. Acklin
 
needed to write his report. 
The family court noted that the GAL report "at the
 
heart of this dispute has been in the parties' hands since May
 
[2009]," and thus Mother's "late-hour problems" in getting
 
information were essentially of her own creation. Mother's
 
discovery request to the GAL was not served until November 3,
 
2009, less than a month before the discovery deadline and two
 
months before expert reports were due. The family court also
 
noted that Mother had failed to raise her concerns at the pre­
trial conference. Finally, the court determined that it was
 
premature to allow for a rebuttal witness to testify before the
 
GAL had testified. The family court thus ruled that it would not
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permit Dr. Acklin to testify at the February 8, 2010 hearing "in
 
contravention of the pre-trial order" and would not admit into
 
evidence any exhibits based on Dr. Acklin's report. 
At the continued trial on March 15, 2010, Mother again
 
requested that Dr. Acklin be sworn in as a rebuttal witness to
 
"testify as to . . . the standards required of a child custody
 
evaluator" and to "the fact that the standards have not in fact
 
been met." The family court again denied Mother's request that
 
Dr. Acklin testify as a rebuttal witness. The court explained
 
that it was not ruling on Dr. Acklin's qualifications as an
 
expert. The court disallowed Dr. Acklin's testimony because it
 
was improper rebuttal testimony and the "requirements imposed by
 
this Court in its earlier rulings with regard to production of
 
records . . . otherwise have not been complied with." 
There was no manifest injustice requiring the family
 
court to modify its pretrial order under HFCR 16. Mother was
 
able to present the children's therapist, Theresia Presbrey, PhD
 
(Dr. Presbrey), as an expert witness. Mother was also able to
 
cross-examine the GAL and made clear her challenge to the GAL's
 
methodology, standards utilized, and qualifications. Under the
 
circumstances of this case, we conclude that the family court did
 
not abuse its discretion when it precluded Dr. Acklin from
 
testifying.
 
II. Award of Custody
 
With regard to the award of custody to Father, Mother
 
contends that the family court abused its discretion when it:
 
(1) cut off Mother's cross-examination of the GAL; and
 
(2) ignored statutory criteria under Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 571-46(b) (Supp 2011) and failed to make necessary
 
findings.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The family court did not abuse its discretion when
A.	 
limiting Mother's cross-examination of the GAL. 
Mother contends that the family court "should have
 
allowed Mother to finish her case," rather than cutting off
 
counsel "in mid-sentence, when she was questioning [the GAL]
 
about the supporting documents." 
The family court had the authority to set a reasonable 
time limit for the trial and control the litigation process, 
including the scope of cross-examination at trial. Doe v. Doe
, 
98 Hawai' i 144, 154-55, 44 P.3d 1085, 1095-96 (2002). 
2
Furthermore, Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611  vests the
court with the discretion to determine the "mode and order" of
 interrogation and the "scope of cross-examination."
 
In 
Doe, the family court limited the evidentiary 
hearing to three hours, which had the effect of precluding mother 
from presenting testimony in support of her claims regarding 
father's abusive behavior. Doe, 98 Hawai' i at 154-56, 44 P.3d at 
1095-97. The Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded that the family 
court had abused its discretion when it denied mother's HFCR 
3
Rule 59  motion for further proceedings, determining that mother
had shown good cause to grant the motion because "[a]
 
determination of family violence bears directly upon the best
 
interests of the child[.]" Id.
 at 156, 44 P.3d at 1097. 
2 HRE 611 provides, in pertinent part:
 
Rule 611. Mode and order of interrogation and presentation
(a) Control by court. The court shall exercise reasonable
control over the mode and order of interrogating witnesses and
presenting evidence so as to (1) make the interrogation and
presentation effective for the ascertainment of the truth, (2)
avoid needless consumption of time, and (3) protect witnesses from
harassment or undue embarrassment.
 
(b) Scope of cross-examination. Cross-examination should be
limited to the subject matter of the direct examination and
matters affecting the credibility of the witness.
3
 HFCR Rule 59 provides the trial court with the discretion to take
additional testimony, among other actions, upon a showing of good cause. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Unlike Doe, in the instant case, Mother failed to show
 
that further proceedings were necessary to determine issues
 
bearing on the best interests of the children. Mother maintained
 
she needed more time, asserting that "[the GAL's qualifications
 
are] the biggest issue, Judge, and we should be allowed to have
 
as long as time [sic] we need to cross-examine this."
 
Mother had cross-examined the GAL as to the factors she
 
used "to determine the best-interest standards[.]" The GAL said
 
she went into the home and observed interactions between the
 
children and the parents; checked to see how the children were
 
doing in school, extracurricular activities, and therapy; and
 
looked at any medical or physical needs. She testified that she
 
looked at each of the conditions, weighed them, and applied the
 
circumstances to what was in the children's best interest. 
Mother's counsel then asked details about the visits described in
 
the GAL's report. 
After the family court informed Mother's counsel that
 
"[y]ou need to finish," counsel asked a few questions about the
 
GAL's response to Mother's "allegations of the possible use of
 
force." Counsel then began a line of questioning about the GAL's
 
curriculum vitae and her qualifications to conduct custody
 
evaluations. Finally, when the court limited Mother to one more
 
question, Mother's counsel asked about the GAL's time log and
 
additional charges. From our review of the record, Mother had
 
ample time to cross-examine the GAL and to challenge the GAL's
 
credentials.
 
We thus conclude that, given the circumstances in this
 
case, the family court did not abuse its discretion in limiting
 
Mother's time in the cross-examination of the GAL.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.	 Mother fails to show that the family court ignored
statutory factors or failed to make necessary findings.
 
Mother contends that the family court abused its
 
discretion by providing insufficient findings of facts and
 
4
failing to enumerate criteria listed under HRS § 571-46(b)  for
determining the best interests of the child. 
In making its
 
custody determination, "the family court is granted broad
 
discretion to weigh the various factors involved, with no single
 
4 HRS § 571-46(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest of
the child under this section, the court shall consider, but
not be limited to, the following:
 
(1)	 Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a child by
a parent;
(2)	 Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a child
by a parent;
(3)	 The overall quality of the parent-child relationship;
(4)	 The history of caregiving or parenting by each parent
prior and subsequent to a marital or other type of
separation;
(5)	 Each parent's cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs,
interests, and schedule; provided that this factor
shall not be considered in any case where the court
has determined that family violence has been committed
by a parent;
(6)	 The physical health needs of the child;
(7)	 The emotional needs of the child;
(8)	 The safety needs of the child;
(9)	 The educational needs of the child;
(10)	 The child's need for relationships with siblings;
(11)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they allow
the child to maintain family connections through
family events and activities; provided that this
factor shall not be considered in any case where the
court has determined that family violence has been
committed by a parent;
(12)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they separate
the child's needs from the parent's needs;
(13)	 Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol abuse
by a parent;
(14)	 The mental health of each parent;
(15)	 The areas and levels of conflict present within the
family; and
(16)	 A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protection from
abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a tactical
advantage in any proceeding involving the custody
determination of a minor.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
factor being given presumptive paramount weight[.]" Fisher v.
 
Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 50, 137 P.3d 355, 364 (2006). 
Here, the family court provided its findings and 
conclusions in its Decision and Order. 
The court stated:
 
IV. Custody and Visitation
 
Based upon the entire record in this case, the court
concludes that the provisions for legal and physical custody
and visitation set forth below are in the best interests of
 the parties' minor children. After careful consideration of
 the testimony of the parties, the children's therapist
Dr. Presbrey, and the written report and testimony of the
guardian ad litem Edith Kawai, the court has reached the
following conclusions which have guided the court's decision
with regard to custody and visitation:
 
A. Both parties are competent parents, albeit with
somewhat differing parenting styles. Notwithstanding their
differing styles, each of them is a good parent on his or
her own terms, and insofar as their individual relationships
with the children are concerned, either of the parties is
capable of being the custodial parent.
 
B. In contrast with their respective relationships
with their children, the parties' relationship with each
other is not at all effective; indeed, the parties'
inability to insulate the children from their parenting
disputes persuades the court that "co-parenting" is not a
workable option for these parties. Nor is joint legal
custody a workable arrangement, for the parties' [sic] are
evidently unable to engage with each other regarding the
children without an unacceptable level of conflict.
 
C. Because the parties cannot effectively manage a
"co-parenting" type of joint custody, one of them must
necessarily be the primary custodian, and the court's
assessment as to which is the more appropriate primary
custodian is influenced primarily by the court's assessment
of which of the parties, as primary custodian, would be most
supportive of the other's relationship with the children.
 
1. Custody
 
Legal and physical custody of the parties' minor
children shall be awarded to [Father], subject to [Mother's]
right to visitation. In addition to the considerations
 noted above, the court notes that the children have
evidently done quite well during the time they have been in
[F]ather's custody, and the court considers that the
children's best interests will be served by continuing them
in their present placement.
At the same time, it is important that the children
continue to enjoy significant visitation with their mother,
and the court is satisfied that [Father] may be expected to
support and encourage the children's relationship with their
mother.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Where "the written decision of the court contains 
findings of fact and conclusions of law," the court need not 
enter separate FOFs/COLs. HFCR Rule 52(a). Furthermore, "[t]he 
trial judge is required to 'only make brief, definite, pertinent 
findings and conclusions upon the contested matters; there is no 
necessity for over-elaboration of detail or particularization of 
facts.'" Doe IV v. Roe IV, 5 Haw. App. 558, 565, 705 P.2d 535, 
542 (1985) (quoting Tugaeff v. Tugaeff, 42 Haw. 455, 467 (1958) (quoting Moore's Federal Practice, 2d Ed. § 52.05[1])). 
"Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its 
examination of the reports concerning a child's care, custody, 
and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if supported by 
the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on appeal." In 
re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (citation, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
The family court acted within its discretion in
 
reaching its decision on the issue of custody and thus did not
 
abuse its discretion when it awarded physical and legal custody
 
to Father. 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Decree Granting Absolute
 
Divorce entered in the Family Court of the Third Circuit on
 
June 13, 2011 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser 
Joy A. San Buenaventurafor Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian J. De Lima William B. Heflin (Crudele & De Lima)for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 