NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000735
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF WAIKIKI SKYLINER,
by and through its Board of Directors, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
FRANK EUGENE WARD, JR.; LINDA WILKS WARD; LASALLE BANK, NA.,
now known as BANK OF AMERICA, NA, as Trustee for
Merrill Lynch Mortgage Investors Trust Mortgage Loan
Asset-Backed Certificates, Series 2006-OPT1
OPTION ONE MORTGAGE CORPORATION, a California corporation,
now known as SAND CANYON CORPORATION, a California corporation,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-50;
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50; Defendants,
and
COURTNEY BROWN, Purchaser-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-2107)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
In this judicial foreclosure action, the question on
appeal is whether Purchaser-Appellant Courtney Brown ( Brown) is
obligated to pay certain maintenance fees and charges assessed by
Plaintiff-Appellee Association of Apartment Owners of Waikiki
Skyliner ( Association ).  This case involves foreclosure on the
leasehold interest for a unit located in the Waikiki Skyliner due
to the prior owners' failure to pay common element assessments. 
After foreclosure was granted, Brown was the high bidder at theNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
foreclosure auction, but title to the unit was ultimately
transferred via a quitclaim assignment of lease to Brown's
nominee, Ala Wai Resources LLC (AWR ).  AWR is not a party to this
appeal, and thus our decision in this appeal affects only Brown
and not AWR.  
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( circuit court)
ruled that Brown and AWR were jointly and severally liable to pay
the Association $13,874.70 for unpaid monthly maintenance fees
and other specified charges for the period from May 6, 2013
through March 5, 2015, and $2,698.82 for costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorneys' fees as set forth in its
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners of Waikiki Skyliner's
Motion for Order Directing Purchaser Ala Wai Resources, LLC to
Pay Delinquent Maintenance Fees or in the Alternative the Entry
of Judgment Against Ala Wai Resources LLC" ( Order Directing
Fees), filed on September 10, 2015.  On the same date, the
circuit court also entered a "Judgment on Order Granting
Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners of Waikiki Skyliner's
Motion for Order Directing Purchaser Ala Wai Resources, LLC to
Pay Delinquent Maintenance Fees or in the Alternative the Entry
of Judgment Against Ala Wai Resources LLC" ( Judgment).  Brown
appeals from the Order Directing Fees and the Judgment.1
On appeal, Brown contends that the circuit court erred
in its application of Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 514B-146 to
this case, when it concluded that Brown was statutorily barred
from disputing the amounts assessed by the Association, and by
deeming Brown to have acquired title to the unit and ordering
Brown to pay specified maintenance fees and charges.
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the Order
Directing Fees and the Judgment to the extent they pertain to
Brown.
1  The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.  Background
The circuit court's findings of fact in the Order
Directing Fees are not challenged on appeal and thus are binding
on this court.  See Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water
Supply, 97 Hawai#i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002).  Moreover,
the proceedings below and relevant facts are not in dispute.
On October 4, 2010, the Association initiated this
foreclosure action against, inter alia, Frank E. Ward Jr. and
Linda W. Ward (collectively the Wards), the owners of the
leasehold interest in the unit  located at the condominium project
Waikiki Skyliner.  The Association sought to foreclose on a lien
for unpaid common assessments.  On February 17, 2012, the circuit
court entered summary judgment against all defendants and in
favor of the Association.   A public auction on the leasehold
interest in the unit followed. 
On January 23, 2013, a public auction was conducted, at
which the leasehold interest of the unit was sold to Brown, or
his nominee, for $10,001.00, subject to the circuit court's
confirmation of the sale.  On March 7, 2013, the circuit court
orally granted the Association's motion for confirmation of sale,
and a corresponding order confirming sale was filed on July 24,
2013.  On November 26, 2013, an amended order confirming sale was
filed by the circuit court at the request of Brown's escrow
company in order to more accurately reflect the distribution of
the sale proceeds.  On March 31, 2014, a second amended order
confirming sale was filed by the circuit court to reflect that
the fee-simple interest in the unit had been conveyed to another
entity. 
On June 10, 2014, the escrow company selected by Brown
filed a Commissioner's Quitclaim Assignment of Lease in the Land
Court, whereby the sale of the leasehold interest in the unit was
closed to AWR as Brown's nominee.  The circuit court noted in its
Order Directing Fees that Brown did not disclose any relationship
he had with AWR and did not present any evidence that he had
observed any corporate formalities with respect to the unit.  
The circuit court found that neither Brown nor AWR had paid any
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
amounts due to the Association other than the original auction
price since the closing of the sale.
On March 18, 2015, the Association filed "Plaintiff's
Motion for Order Directing Purchaser [AWR] to Pay Delinquent
Maintenance Fees or in the Alternative the Entry of Judgment
Against [AWR]" ( Motion to Direct Fees ).  In its Motion to Direct
Fees, the Association alleged that Brown's nominee, AWR, had
failed to pay for maintenance fees and charges assessed since May
6, 2013, the date the Association contends -- under HRS 
§ 514B-146(b) -- that Brown or his nominee was deemed to have
acquired title in the unit and became liable to pay for the
unit's share of common expenses and assessments.  2
On September 10, 2015, the circuit court entered its
Order Directing Fees in favor of the Association.  In its order,
the circuit court concluded, inter alia, that: (1)  Brown and AWR
were barred from disputing the amounts assessed by the
Association pursuant to HRS § 514B-146(c) because neither Brown
nor AWR had paid any assessments for monthly common expenses
assessed by the Association since acquiring the leasehold
interest in the unit; (2)  Brown and AWR were further barred from
disputing the amounts assessed by the Association because neither
Brown nor AWR had followed the procedure for disputing the amount
set forth in HRS § 514B-146(d); and (3) pursuant to HRS
§ 514B-146(b), Brown and AWR "are deemed to acquire title and are
required to pay the share of common expenses and assessments for
[the unit] beginning on May 6, 2013, which is sixty (60) days
after the hearing at which [the circuit court] granted the Motion
to Confirm the Sale to Brown and/or his nominee, AWR."  (Emphasis
added).  See HRS § 514B-146(b)(2).  The circuit court thus
concluded that Brown and AWR were jointly and severally liable to
the Association in the amount of $13,874.70 for the unpaid
monthly assessments for the period from May 6, 2013 through March
2  The Association sought "an Order determining that [AWR] is indebted
to [the Association] for the sum of $13,874.70 for unpaid maintenance and
other fees through March 5, 2015, plus reasonable attorneys' fees and costs as
approved by [the circuit court], and directing payment of said sums[.]"
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5, 2015, and $2,698.82 for costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees for collecting the delinquent
assessments. 
II.  Discussion
A.  HRS § 514B-146(b)
Brown argues that HRS § 514B-146(b) is inapplicable to
this case because it applies to circumstances where title is
obtained due to foreclosure of a mortgage, and not where
foreclosure is based on a lien for unpaid common assessments, as
in this case.  For the reasons discussed below, we agree and
conclude that HRS § 514B-146(b), in effect at the time of the
public auction on January 23, 2013, did not apply to this case
and thus the circuit court erred in applying that statute to
determine when Brown "acquired title" to the unit and became
obligated to pay the unit's share of common expenses and
assessments.
For purposes of statutory interpretation, we follow
well-established principles:
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language  is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when there
is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or
uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity
exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous statute, the
meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by examining
the context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their true
meaning.
Jaylo v. Jaylo, 125 Hawai#i 369, 373, 262 P.3d 245, 249 (2011)
(citations omitted).  We further note that "when the language is
plain and unmistakable the court is bound by the plain, clear and
unambiguous language of the statute."  State v. Sylva, 61 Haw.
385, 387-88, 605 P.2d 496, 498 (1980) (citations omitted).  
At the time Brown was the high bidder for the unit at
the January 23, 2013 foreclosure auction,  HRS § 514B-146(b)
stated:3
3  We note there have since been various amendments to HRS § 514B-146.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
§514B-146  Association fiscal matters; lien for assessments.
 . . . . 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (g), when the
mortgagee of a mortgage of record or other purchaser of a
unit obtains title to the unit as a result of foreclosure of
the mortgage , the acquirer of title and the acquirer's
successors and assigns shall not be liable for the share of
the common expenses or assessments by the association
chargeable to the unit that became due prior to the
acquisition of title to the unit by the acquirer. The
unpaid share of common expenses or assessments shall be
deemed to be common expenses collectible from all of the
unit owners, including the acquirer and the acquirer's
successors and assigns.  The mortgagee of record or other
purchaser of the unit shall be deemed to acquire title and
shall be required to pay the unit's share of common expenses
and assessments beginning:
(1)Thirty-six days after the order confirming the sale to
the purchaser has been filed with the court;
(2)Sixty days after the hearing at which the court grants
the motion to confirm the sale to the purchaser;
(3)Thirty days after the public sale in a nonjudicial
power of sale foreclosure conducted pursuant to
chapter 667; or
(4)Upon the recording of the instrument of conveyance;
whichever occurs first; provided that the mortgagee of
record or other purchaser of the unit shall not be·deemed to
acquire title under paragraph (1), (2), or (3), if transfer
of title is delayed past the thirty-six days specified in
paragraph (1), the sixty days specified in paragraph (2), or
the thirty days specified in paragraph (3), when a person
who appears at the hearing on the motion or a party to the
foreclosure action requests reconsideration of the motion or
order to confirm sale, objects to the form of the proposed
order to confirm sale, appeals the decision of the court to
grant the motion to confirm sale, or the debtor or mortgagor
declares bankruptcy or is involuntarily placed into
bankruptcy. In any such case, the mortgagee of record or
other purchaser of the unit shall be deemed to acquire title
upon recordation of the instrument of conveyance. 
HRS § 514B-146(b) (Supp. 2012) (emphases added).4
4  HRS § 514B-146(b) starts with the phrase: "Except as provided in
subsection (g)[.]"  At the time of the foreclosure auction in this case,
subsection (g) provided:
(g)  Subject to this subsection, and subsections (h)
and (i), the board may specially assess the amount of the
unpaid regular monthly common assessments for common
expenses against a person who, in a judicial or nonjudicial
power of sale foreclosure, purchases a delinquent unit;
provided that:
(1)A purchaser who holds a mortgage on a delinquent
unit that was recorded prior to the filing of a
notice of lien by the association and who
acquires the delinquent unit through a judicial
or nonjudicial foreclosure proceeding, including
purchasing the delinquent unit at a foreclosure
auction, shall not be obligated to make, nor be
liable for, payment of the special assessment as
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
provided for under this subsection; and
(2)A person who subsequently purchases the
delinquent unit from the mortgagee referred to
in paragraph (1) shall be obligated to make, and
shall be liable for, payment of the special
assessment provided for under this subsection;
and provided further that the mortgagee or
subsequent purchaser may require the association
to provide at no charge a notice of the
association's intent to claim lien against the
delinquent unit for the amount of the special
assessment, prior to the subsequent purchaser's
acquisition of title to the delinquent unit. 
The notice shall state the amount of the special
assessment, how that amount was calculated, and
the legal description of the unit.
HRS § 514B-146(g) (2006) (emphasis added).  The following year, effective June
25, 2013, subsection (g) was amended as follows:
(g)  Subject to this subsection, and subsections (h) and
(i), the board may specially assess the amount of the unpaid
regular monthly common assessments for common expenses against
a [person] mortgagee who, in a judicial or nonjudicial power
of sale foreclosure, purchases a delinquent unit; provided
that[:
(1) A purchaser who holds a mortgage on a delinquent
unit that was recorded prior to the filing of a
notice of lien by the association and who
acquires the delinquent unit through a judicial
or nonjudicial foreclosure proceeding, including
purchasing the delinquent unit at a foreclosure
auction, shall not be obligated to make, nor be
liable for, payment of the special assessment as
provided for under this subsection; and
(2) A person who subsequently purchases the
delinquent unit from the mortgagee referred to in
paragraph (1) shall be obligated to make, and
shall be liable for, payment of the special
assessment provided for under this subsection;
and provided further that] the mortgagee or
[subsequent] other purchaser may require the
association to provide at no charge a notice of
the association's intent to claim lien against
the delinquent unit for the amount of the special
assessment, prior to the subsequent purchaser's
acquisition of title to the delinquent unit. The
notice shall state the amount of the special
assessment, how that amount was calculated, and
the legal description of the unit.
2013 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 196, § 1 at 629.
The applicable version of subsection (g), as well as the subsequent
amendments which became effective in June 2013, are consistent with our plain
reading of subsection (b), that subsection (b) applies to a foreclosure of a
mortgage.  We may consider subsequent legislative amendments to confirm our
interpretation of an earlier provision.  See Keliipuleole v. Wilson, 85
Hawai#i 217, 225, 941 P.2d 300, 308 (1997).
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The plain and unambiguous language of the statute
supports Brown's contention that subsection (b) was not
applicable to the foreclosure in this case.  The first sentence
of subsection (b) –- specifically the wording "when the mortgagee
of a mortgage of record or other purchaser of a unit obtains
title to the unit as a result of foreclosure of the mortgage" --
limits application of subsection (b) to those who acquire title
to a unit "as a result of foreclosure of [a] mortgage[.]"  We
must give effect to all parts of a statute and this language is
clear.  See Coon v. City and Cty. of Honolulu, 98 Hawai#i 233,
259, 47 P.3d 348, 374 (2002) ("It is a cardinal rule of statutory
construction that courts are bound, if rational and practicable,
to give effect to all parts of a statute, and that no clause,
sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, void, or
insignificant if a construction can be legitimately found which
will give force to and preserve all words of the statute."
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted)).  Moreover,
there is nothing in the rest of subsection (b) to indicate that
the remaining sentences should otherwise apply to other types of
foreclosures.
We rely on the plain language of HRS § 514B-146(b), but
also note that the legislative history for this provision does
not provide clear guidance on the question at hand.   The
legislative history for HRS § 514B-146(b) is extensive, and there
have been multiple predecessor versions of the provision
contained in HRS § 514A-90, HRS § 514-90, HRS § 514-24 and
Revised Laws of Hawaii (RLH ) § 170A-22.  The various amendments
to the provision over the years do not reveal a legislative
intent inconsistent with our plain reading of the applicable
version of the statute.  See 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 182, § 10
at 656; 2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164, § 2 at 786; 2003 Haw. Sess.5
5  "Even when the meaning of a law is apparent on its face, legislative
history may be used to confirm the court’s interpretation of a statute’s plain
language."  Priceline.com, Inc. v. Dir. of Taxation, 144 Hawai#i 72, 88, 436
P.3d 1155, 1171 (2019) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets
omitted).
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Laws Act 53, § 1 at 81-82 ; 2000 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 39, § 2 at
70-72; 1999 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 236, § 4 at 727-28 ; 1991 Haw.
Sess. Laws Act 282, § 1 at 676 ; 1977 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 98, § 2
at 179-80.6
Based on a plain reading of subsection (b), it is
inapplicable to Brown because in this foreclosure action the
Association foreclosed on its lien arising from unpaid common
element assessments by the Wards.  This case does not involve a
foreclosure of a mortgage as subsection (b) expressly
contemplates.
The circuit court erred in concluding, pursuant to HRS
§ 514B-146(b), that Brown was "deemed to acquire title" and was
"required to pay the share of common expenses and assessments for
[the unit] beginning on May 6, 2013[.]"
B.  HRS § 514B-146(c) and (d) 
The Association contends that regardless whether HRS
§ 514B-146(b) applies, the circuit court correctly concluded that
Brown was statutorily barred from disputing the amounts claimed
by the Association because under HRS § 514B-146(c) and (d)
(2006), Brown failed to pay any assessments.  We disagree.
6  Committee reports related to amendments over the years sometimes have
reference to foreclosures involving mortgagees, but sometimes do not provide
any specific reference to the type of foreclosure involved.  See S. Stand.
Comm. Rep. No. 2416, in 2000 Senate Journal, at 997-98; H. Stand. Comm. Rep.
No. 1277-00, in 2000 House Journal, at 1494-95; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1738,
in 1999 House Journal, at 1706-07; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 388, in 1999
Senate Journal, at 1097-98; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 845, in 1999 Senate
Journal, at 1297-98.
One committee report in 2003 states that a bill, S.B. No. 373, regarding
a predecessor statute, HRS § 514A-90(b), addressed when title was acquired
"pursuant to foreclosure of a lien by the association of apartment owners" and
stated that "[c]urrent law does not cover the situation of a nonjudicial power
of sale by an association of apartment owners for unpaid assessments of common
expenses, which is addressed by this measure."  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 609,
in 2003 Senate Journal, at 1284-85 (emphasis added).  However, committee
reports later in the 2003 legislative session do not indicate that amended
versions of S.B. 373 involved foreclosure of a lien, but rather appear to
indicate the amendments address nonjudicial foreclosure.  See H. Stand. Comm.
Rep. No. 972, in 2003 House Journal, at 1472-73; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
1501, in 2003 House Journal, at 1652.  In all versions of S.B. No. 373 in
2003, the first sentence of HRS § 514A-90(b) remained: "Except as provided in
subsection (g), when the mortgagee of a mortgage of record or other purchaser
of an apartment obtains title to the apartment as a result of foreclosure of
the mortgage , . . ." (Emphasis added).
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The relevant versions of HRS § 514B-146(c) & (d),
applicable at the time of the foreclosure auction, provided:
[§514B-146] Association fiscal matters; lien for
assessments.
. . . 
(c) No unit owner shall withhold any assessment claimed
by the association.  A unit owner who disputes the amount of
an assessment may request a written statement clearly
indicating:
(1) The amount of common expenses included in the
assessment, including the due date of each amount
claimed;
(2) The amount of any penalty, late fee, lien filing
fee, and any other charge included in the
assessment;
(3) The amount of attorneys' fees and costs, if any,
included in the assessment;
(4) That under Hawaii law, a unit owner has no right
to withhold assessments for any reason;
(5) That a unit owner has a right to demand mediation
or arbitration to resolve disputes about the
amount or validity of an association's
assessment, provided the unit owner immediately
pays the assessment in full and keeps assessments
current; and
(6) That payment in full of the assessment does not
prevent the owner from contesting the assessment
or receiving a refund of amounts not owed.
Nothing in this section shall limit the rights of an owner to
the protection of all fair debt collection procedures mandated
under federal and state law.
(d) A unit owner who pays an association the full amount
claimed by the association may file in small claims court or
require the association to mediate to resolve any disputes
concerning the amount or validity of the association's claim. 
If the unit owner and the association are unable to resolve
the dispute through mediation, either party may file for
arbitration under section 514B-162; provided that a unit owner
may only file for arbitration if all amounts claimed by the
association are paid in full on or before the date of filing. 
If the unit owner fails to keep all association assessments
current during the arbitration, the association may ask the
arbitrator to temporarily suspend the arbitration proceedings. 
If the unit owner pays all association assessments within
thirty days of the date of suspension, the unit owner may ask
the arbitrator to recommence the arbitration proceedings.  If
the owner fails to pay all association assessments by the end
of the thirty-day period, the association may ask the
arbitrator to dismiss the arbitration proceedings.  The unit
owner shall be entitled to a refund of any amounts paid to the
association which are not owed.
HRS § 514B-146(c), (d) (2006) (emphases added).
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Brown is not precluded from disputing the Association's
assessments because HRS § 514B-146(c) and (d) apply to a "unit
owner", and Brown was never a unit owner.
HRS § 514B-3 (2018) defines a "unit owner" as:
the person owning, or the persons owning jointly or in
common, a unit and its appurtenant common interest; provided
that to such extent and for such purposes as provided by
recorded lease, including the exercise of voting rights, a
lessee of a unit shall be deemed to be the unit owner.
First, we have already determined that HRS § 514B-
146(b) does not apply to the foreclosure in this case.  Hence,
Brown cannot be "deemed to acquire title" under the provisions of
that statute.
Second, the undisputed findings by the circuit court in
the Order Directing Fees establish that, at the foreclosure
auction, the leasehold interest in the unit was "sold to Brown,
or his nominee, for $10,001.00, subject to Court confirmation[.]" 
The circuit court further found that, after proceedings related
to court confirmation, "Premier Escrow closed the sale of [the
unit] to AWR as Brown's nominee[.]" (Emphasis added).  The
circuit court's undisputed findings and the record establish that
AWR became the owner of the leasehold interest in the unit, not
Brown.
We thus hold that the circuit court erred in concluding
that Brown was barred under HRS § 514B-146(c) and (d) from
disputing the amounts assessed by the Association.7
Based on the foregoing, therefore, the circuit court
erred in concluding that Brown was jointly and severally liable
to the Association for all monthly common assessments that had
accrued during the period from May 6, 2013 through March 5, 2015,
and for the Association's costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.    8
7 We need not address whether other aspects of HRS § 514B-146(c) and (d)
are applicable to the circumstances in this case.
8  As previously noted, our decision in this appeal does not affect the
Order Directing Fees and the Judgment as they pertain to AWR.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.  Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, to the extent that they pertain
to Brown, we vacate the following entered by the Circuit Court of
the First Circuit:
(1) the "Judgment on Order Granting Plaintiff
Association of Apartment Owners of Waikiki Skyliner's Motion for
Order Directing Purchaser Ala Wai Resources, LLC to Pay
Delinquent Maintenance Fees or in the Alternative the Entry of
Judgment Against Ala Wai Resources LLC", filed on September 10,
2015; and
(2) the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Order Granting Plaintiff Association of Apartment Owners of
Waikiki Skyliner's Motion for Order Directing Purchaser Ala Wai
Resources, LLC to Pay Delinquent Maintenance Fees or in the
Alternative the Entry of Judgment Against Ala Wai Resources LLC",
filed on September 10, 2015.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 27, 2019. 
On the briefs:
Brian S. Kim, 
Andrew T. Park, 
for Purchaser-Appellant.
Christopher Shea Goodwin, 
Robert S. Alcorn, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
12