 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000211 27-JAN-2025 07:53 AM Dkt. 125 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000211  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
JAMES "KIMO" MCCLELLAN, Plaintiff -Appellee,
  
v.  
TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP dba KAMEHAMEHA 
SCHOOLS, JENNIFER NOELANI GOODYEAR- KA‘ŌPUA, in her official 
capacity as Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop dba 
Kamehameha Schools, ROBERT NOBRIGA, in his official capacity as 
Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop dba Kamehameha 
Schools,  MICHELLE KA ‘UHANE, in her  official capacity as Trustee 
of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop dba Kamehameha Schools, 
ELLIOT MILLS, in his official capacity as Trustee of the Estate 
of Bernice Pauahi Bishop dba Kamehameha Schools, and CRYSTAL 
ROSE, in her official capacity as Trustee of the Estate of 
Bernice Pauahi Bishop dba Kamehameha Schools,   
Defendants/Cross-claimants/Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellants,  
and  
ST. FRANCIS MEDICAL CENTER f.k.a. ST. FRANCIS HOSPITAL;  
ESTATE OF ROBERT MCCORMICK BROWNE, Deceased,  
Defendants/Cross-claim Defendants-Appellees,  
and  
ST. FRANCIS HEALTHCARE SYSTEM OF HAWAII,  
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,  
and   1
1 Pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 201 and Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1), we take judicial notice that Jennifer 
Noelani Goodyear -Ka‘ōpua and Michelle Ka‘uhane are current Trustees of the 
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop and are automatically substituted as 
Defendants/Cross -claimants/ Third-Party Plaintiffs -Appellants in place of 
Micah Kane and Lance Wilhelm.   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
   
   
    
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
JOHN DOES 1 -10, Defendants; JOHN DOES 1 -10, DOE CORPORATIONS 
1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1 -10, and DOE NON -PROFIT ENTITIES 1 -10, 
Cross-claim Defendants and Third -Party Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT  COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1CCV-20-0001095)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
This appeal arises out of a settlement between 
Defendant/Cross -claim Defendant -Appellee S t. Francis Medical 
Center, Third-Party Defendant -Appellee St. Francis Healthcare 
System of Hawaii,2 and Plaintiff -Appellee James "Kimo" McClellan 
(Plaintiff ). Defendants/Cross -claimants/Third -Party Plaintiffs -
Appellants Trustees of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop dba 
Kamehameha Schools ( Kamehameha Schools ) appeal from the Order 
Granting St. Francis Medical Center's Petition for Determination 
of Good Faith Settlement and Joinder s Thereto (Order), filed on 
March 15, 2021, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(circuit court).3 
I. BACKGROUND 
Plaintiff identified Dr. Robert McCormick Browne ( Dr. 
Browne), formerly employed as Chief of Psychiatry at St. Franci s 
2 St. Francis Medical Center and S t. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii are separate entities, and are represented by separate counsel in this 
litigation. They are referenced individually as St. Francis Medical Center 
and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii , and collectively as St. Francis , 
in this summary disposition order. 
3 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided . 
2   
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
  
 
    
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Medical Center , as having sexually abused him on a near weekly 
basis from the summer of 1970 to June of 1971 , during the time 
he was a student at Kamehameha Schools . In August 2020, 
Plaintiff filed his Complaint against Kamehameha Schools , St. 
Francis Medical Center , and the Estate of Dr. Browne4 pursuant to 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-1.8 (2016 & Supp. 2018), 
which permits certain actions "for recovery of damages based on 
physical, psychological, or other injury or condition suffered 
by a minor arising from the sexual abuse of the minor by any 
person" that would otherwise be time -barred. 
Count I of Plaintiff 's Complaint alleged claims of 
negligence and gross negligence against all defendants ; Count II 
alleged claims of fraud and fraudulent concealment against 
Kamehameha Schools . 
On September 8, 2020, Kamehameha Schools filed cross-
claims against St. Francis Medical Center and the Estate of Dr. 
Browne, and a third -party complaint against St. Francis 
Healthcare System of Hawaii . St. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii answered Kamehameha Schools' third-party complaint on 
September 30, 2020 , and St. Francis Medical Center answered 
Kamehameha Schools' cross-claims on October 1, 2020. 
4 Dr. Browne is deceased. His Estate is a nominal Defendant/Cross -
claim Defendant -Appellee in this appeal. 
3   
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff , Kamehameha Schools and St. Francis entered 
into formal mediation with mediator Keith Hunter in May 2020. 
Prior to the mediation, Plaintiff transmitted a demand to 
Kamehameha Schools and St. Francis for the sum of $6.5 million 
dollars in general damages . According to the declaration of 
Plaintiff's counsel, " during the mediation, it became clear that 
Kamehameha Schools was not going to make any offer in the 7 -
figure range," and negotiations soon terminated with Kamehameha 
Schools. Plaintiff and St. Francis continued to negotiate, and 
agreed to settle all claims against St. Francis for an agreed-
upon monetary payment. 
The terms of the settlement are memorialized in the 
Confidential Release, Indemnity , and Settlement Agreement 
(Settlement ). The Settlement set forth the amount of monetary 
consideration to be paid by St. Francis Medical Center and St. 
Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii , and provided that the 
agreed-upon monetary payment constituted consideration for the 
release of Plaintiff 's past, present, and future claims against 
St. Francis arising out of this litigation. 
In October 2020, St. Francis Medical Center filed a 
Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement ( Petition ). 
Plaintiff and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii filed 
joinders to the Petition. Kamehameha Schools filed its 
Memorandum in Opposition to Defendant St. Francis Medical 
4   
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Center's Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement on 
October 27, 2020. 
A hearing on  the Petition was calendared for  
November  4,  2020, at which time the circuit court  ordered 
Plaintiff and Kamehameha Schools to go back into  mediation  and 
continued  the hearing on  the Petition.   The renewed mediation 
between Plaintiff and Kamehameha Schools proved unsuccessful, 
and  another hearing on the Petition was held on February 10, 
2021. At the February 2021 hearing, the circuit court granted 
the Petition, but once again ordered Plaintiff and Kamehameha 
Schools to engage in  one last attempt at mediation. On 
March  15, 2021, the circuit court  filed its Order granting the 
Petition.  
The circuit court's Order provided, in pertinent part, 
1. The Court specifically determines that the 
settlement agreement reached by and between Plaintiff James 
"Kimo" McClellan, and Defendants St. Francis Medical Center 
and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii, was made in 
good faith pursuant to [HRS] Section 663 -15.5 [(2016)] . 
2. As such, St. Francis Medical Center and St. 
Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii are hereby discharged 
from any and all liability for any contribution to any 
other party, joint tortfeasor and/or co -obligor pursuant to 
HRS Section 663 -15.5 (a)(3); all cross -claims and third -
party claims now pending against St. Francis Medical Center 
and St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii, except those 
based on a written indemnity agreement, are hereby 
dismissed pursuant to HRS Section 663 -15.5 (d)(2); and 
pursuant to HRS Section 663 -15.5 (d)(1) this Order bars any 
other joint tortfeasor or co -obligor from any further 
claims against Defendants St. Francis Medical Center and 
St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii in connection with 
this litigation, except those based up on a written 
indemnity agreement. 
(Emphasis added .) 
5   
 
 
  
  
      
           
          
            NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kamehameha Schools appeal ed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Kamehameha Schools raises two  points of error on 
appeal, contending that the circuit  court erred  by: (1) 
determining the Settlement was a good faith settlement; and (2) 
concluding that a good faith settlement bars all of Kamehameha 
Schools'  cross-claims and third-party claims under HRS § 663-
15.5.    
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve  
Kamehameha Schools' contentions  as follows:  
(1) Kamehameha Schools contends that the circuit 
court's finding of a good faith settlement is contrary to each 
of the factors specifically enumerated in Troyer v. Adams, 102 
Hawaiʻi 399, 427, 77 P.3d 83, 111 (2003). 
"[T]he determination of whether a settlement is in 
good faith [is left] to the sound discretion of the trial court in light of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the settlement. . . .  On appeal, the trial court's determination 
will be reviewed for abuse of discretion." Brooks  v.  Dana  Nance  
&  Co., 113 
Hawaiʻi 406, 412, 153 P.3d 1091, 1097 (2007) (citation 
omitted).  "An appellate court should consider the decision in  
6   
 
 
             
     
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
light of all of the relevant circumstances extant at the time of 
settlement ." Id. (cleaned up). 
In assessing the totality of the circumstances, 
the trial court may consider the following factors to the 
extent that they are known at the time of settlement:  
(1) the type of case and difficulty of proof at trial 
.  .  .  ; (2) the realistic approximation of total damages 
that the plaintiff seeks; (3) the strength of the plaintiff's claim and the realistic likelihood of his or 
her success at trial; (4) the predicted expense of litigation; (5) the relative degree of fault of  the 
settling tortfeasors; (6) the amount of consideration paid 
to settle the claims; (7) the insurance policy limits and 
solvency of the joint tortfeasors; (8) the relationship 
among the parties and whether it is conducive to collusion 
or wrongful conduct; and (9) any other evidence that the 
settlement is aimed at injuring the interests of a non -
settling tortfeasor or motivated by other wrongful  purpose.  
Id.  at  413, 153 P.3d at  1098 (quoting Troyer, 102 Hawaiʻi at 427, 
77 P.3d at 111). However, "[t]he foregoing list is not 
exclusive, and the court may  consider any other factor that is 
relevant to whether a settlement has been given in good faith." 
Id.  (citation omitted).  
In approving the Petition, the circuit court explained 
its reasoning as follows , 
[I]n this case, I'm not going to second- guess 
plaintiff's counsel and his client's reason for electing to 
settle. Every plaintiff has unique circumstances.  . . .  I 
am aware of the circumstances of the plaintiff in this 
particular case. And the Court's not going to second -guess 
how the plaintiff intends to proceed in the prosecution of 
the case, the relative difficulties against -- going 
against the various parties  involved. The amount is 
substantial. It's not like St. Francis is contributing a 
mere $20,000 policy limit liability contribution.  
So accordingly, the Court finds that this settlement, 
having gone through mediation with a mediator  that the 
Court finds very skilled and reputable and coming to this 
point, was all done in good faith. So the [Petition]  will 
be granted.  
7   
 
 
  
   
 
   
  
 
   
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record reflects that the circuit court took into 
consideration the totality of the circumstances underlying the 
Settlement, including, inter alia , consideration of the monetary 
value of the Settlement , Plaintiff's "unique circumstances, "5 and 
the potential liability of St. Francis . 
The record also reflects  that Plaintiff and St. 
Francis, through the assistance of a neutral mediator, entered 
into the Settlement in an effort to avoid additional litigation, 
such that Plaintiff could achieve resolution of his claims 
against St. Francis, and St. Francis could "buy their peace."  
See  Troyer, 102 Hawaiʻi at 427, 77 P.3d at 111; see also  Island 
Helicopters-Kauai, Inc. v. Tesoro Haw. Corp., No. 30736, 2012 WL 
503799, at *4 (Haw. App. Feb. 13, 2012) (mem.  op.).     
Thus,  the  circuit  court  did  not  abuse  its  discretion  
by  determining,  in  its  consideration  of  the  Troyer  factors  "to  
the  extent  that  they  [were]  known  at  the  time  of  settlement"  and  
the  totality  of  the  circumstances,  that  the  Settlement  between  
5 The unique circumstance s in this case to which the circuit court 
refers are the medical and financial difficulties Plaintiff faced at the time 
of settlement. Plaintiff represented that he was suffering from "medical 
issues which were potentially life -threatening," which, prior to settling 
with St. Francis, had "required Plaintiff's retirement[.]" Moreover, it 
appears that Plaintiff's "pension [was] not enough to cover all of his living 
expenses going forward" and, therefore, Plaintiff desired this partial 
settlement because "Plaintiff needed money to pay his bills until he could 
obtain full recover y in this case," and " it made more sense to take a lesser 
settlement amount from [St. Francis] , which is a less desirable defendant 
than Kamehameha [Schools] given [St. Francis's] far less evidence of notice 
coupled with its far less ability to pay. " Plaintiff explained that "[his] 
situation is unique, [and] motivated by the economic needs of the Plaintiff 
in the short term." 
8   
 
 
  
  
       
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff  and  St.  Francis  was  entered  into  in  good  faith.   See  
Troyer,  102  Hawaiʻi  at  427,  77  P.3d  at  111.    
(2) Kamehameha Schools further contends that the 
circuit court erred in concluding that the Settlement bars all 
of Kamehameha Schools' cross-claims  and third-party claims  
under HRS § 663-15.5. We review the circuit court's conclusions of law de novo, under the right/wrong standard.  State v. 
Hoshijo ex rel. White, 102 7
Hawaiʻi 307, 316, 76 P.3d 550, 559 
(2003).  6
HRS § 663-15.5, entitled "Release; joint tortfeasors; 
co-obligors; good faith settlement" provides, in pertinent part,  
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement 
was made in good faith shall: 
(1) Bar any other joint tortfeasor . . . from any 
further claims against the settling tortfeasor 
. . . except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement; and 
(2) Result in a dismissal of all cross -claims filed 
against the settling joint tortfeasor . . . 
except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement. 
6 Kamehameha Schools ' cross-claim asserts claims against St. 
Francis Medical Center for: breach of contract, negligence, indemnification, 
contribution and/or equitable subrogation, a claim for attorneys’ fees 
pursuant to Uyemura v. Wick , 57 Haw. 102, 551 P.2d 171 (1976) , intentional 
fraudulent transfer, constructive fraudulent transfer, and piercing the 
corporate veil. On appeal, Kamehameha Schools argues that the following 
claims against St. Francis Medical Center were erroneously dismissed: breach 
of contract, negligence, indemnity, contribution and/or equitable 
subrogation, and the Uyemura v. Wick claim. 
7 The third -party complaint asserts claims against St. Francis 
Healthcare System of Hawaii for: intentional fraudulent transfer, 
constructive fraudulent transfer, and piercing the corporate veil. 
9   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Contrary to Kamehameha Schools' contention, the 
circuit court did not authorize the blanket dismissal of all 
claims  –  including those grounded on independent duties owed to 
Kamehameha Schools - against St. Francis. Rather, the circuit court ruled that it was dismissing Kamehameha Schools' cross-
claims and third-party claims against St. Francis  "now pending,"  
and barring any further claims against St. Francis that are "in 
connection with this litigation, except those based upon a 
written indemnity agreement." The circuit court's Order  
explained,  
2. . . . St. Francis Medical Center and St. Francis 
Healthcare System of Hawaii are hereby discharged from any 
and all liability for any contribution to any other party, 
joint tortfeasor and/or co -obligor pursuant to HRS Section 
663-15.5 (a)(3); all cross -claims and third -party claims 
now pending against St. Francis Medical Center and St. 
Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii , except those based on 
a written indemnity agreement, are hereby dismissed 
pursuant to HRS Section 663 -15.5 (d)(2); and pursuant to 
HRS Section 663-15.5 (d)(1) this Order bars any other joint 
tortfeasor or co -obligor from any further claims against 
Defendants St. Francis Medical Center and St. Francis 
Healthcare System of Hawaii in connection with this 
litigation, except those based upon a written indemnity 
agreement. 
(Emphasis added.) 
As this court recently recognized in Abad v. Griffith , 
Reading all parts of HRS § 663 -15.5 together, we conclude 
the trial court's approval of a good faith settlement under 
HRS § 663 -15.5(d)(2) requires dismissal of only those 
crossclaims against a settling joint tortfeasor raised in 
the capacity of a joint to rtfeasor, i.e., those seeking 
contribution or indemnity (directly or indirectly) for the 
injury (to the complainant) that is the subject of the good 
faith settlement. 
. . . [W]e examine, for this limited purpose, the nature of 
the [appellants'] claims against the [settling join t 
10   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
     
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tortfeasors], i.e., to consider whether they seek 
contribution or indemnity for the original injury to 
[appellees], as opposed to relief for alleged direct 
injuries to the [appellants]. 
Abad v. Griffith , Nos. CAAP -21-0000120, CAAP -23-0000015, 2024 WL 
5088457, at *5 (Haw. App. Dec. 12, 2024) (SDO). 
In Abad, this court examined the nature of the 
appellants' claims, including the nature of the relief 
requested, and concluded that the appellants made "separate , 
unqualified requests for attorneys' fees and costs that are not 
tied to the [appellants'] liability to the [appellees ]." Id. 
Here, Kamehameha Schools' cross -claims and third -party claims, 
including its breach of contract and Uyemura v. Wick claims, 
arise out of the "original injury" to Plaintiff caused by Dr. 
Browne's abuse and are "directly or indirectly" in the nature of 
contribution and indemnity claims. 
Thus, the circuit court's dismissal of Kamehameha 
Schools' cross-claims and third-party complaint, and its 
"discharg[ing] [St. Francis] from any and all liability for any 
contribution to any other party, joint tortfeasor and/or co-
obligor, "  is consistent with the underlying purpose of HRS §  663-
15.5 of protecting settling tortfeasors from  contribution claims 
brought by  nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasors.  
11   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court's Order 
is affirmed . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, January 2 7, 2025. 
Paul Alston,  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
for Defendants/Cross- Presiding Judge  
claimants/Third-Party  
Plaintiffs-Appellants.  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
 Associate Judge  
Randall L.K.M. Rosenberg,   
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
 Associate Judge 
Jodie D. Roeca,  
for Defendant/Cross-claim 
Defendant-Appellee.  
 Jordon  J. Kimura,  
for Third-Party Defendant-Appellee.  
12 