 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000679 13-MAR-2024 08:14 AM Dkt. 87 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000679  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.  
BYRON DEREGO, Defendant-Appellant   
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 2CPC-19-0000517)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Byron DeRego ( DeRego) appeals from 
the Order Denying Defendant's Motion for a New Trial, entered on 
October 11, 2022, and the Judgment, Conviction and Sentence 
(Judgment ) entered on October 14, 2022, by the Circuit Court of 
the Second Circuit ( circuit court ).1 On August 12, 2019, DeRego 
was indicted on one count of Sexual Assault in the First Degree2 
1 The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided. 
2 The indictment stated, in relevant part, 
That on or about the 31st day of March, 2019, in the County 
of Maui, State of Hawaii, BYRON DeREGO did knowingly engage 
in sexual penetration with another person who is less than 
(continued . . .)   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) 
(2014).3 DeRego pleaded not guilty, and the matter proceeded to 
a jury trial. The jury found DeRego guilty as charged. DeRego 
was sentenced to a term of twenty years imprisonment. 
DeRego raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that (1) "[t]he conviction should be reversed for 
prosecutorial misconduct"; and (2) "[t]rial counsels were 
constitutionally ineffective[.]" 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve DeRego's points of error as follows: 
(1) We conclude that the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
(DPA) did not commit prosecutorial misconduct. "The term 
prosecutorial misconduct is a legal term of art that refers to 
any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however harmless 
or unintentional." State v. Conroy , 148 Hawai‛i 194, 201, 
468 P.3d 208, 215 (2020) (cleaned up). We review contentions of 
prosecutorial misconduct under the harmless beyond a reasonable 
2(. . .continued) 
fourteen (14) years old, by inserting his penis into her 
vagina, thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault in 
the First Degree in violation of Section 707 -730(1)(b) of 
the Hawaii Revised Statutes.   
HRS § 707 -730(1)(b) (2014) provides, in pertinent part, "A person 
commits the offense of sexual assault in the first degree if. . . (b) The 
person k nowingly engages in sexual penetration with a nother person who is 
less than fourteen years old[.]" 
2 3   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
doubt standard. See State v. Mainaaupo , 117 Hawai‛i 235, 247, 
178 P.3d 1, 13 (2008). 
DeRego's contention that the DPA violated the circuit 
court's order granting DeRego's Motion in Limine No. 23, which 
instructed that "any reference by Dr. Kepler as to why the 
Forensic Examination of complainant was not completed and/or any 
explanations by Dr. Kepler as to complainant's emotions during 
the examination be excluded," lacks merit. The record reflects 
the DPA's examination of Dr. Kepler as follows, 
Q [by DPA] . And as part of your exam of the child, 
you do a genital exam of this child? 
A [by Dr. Kepler] . Yes. 
Q. And did you examine her hymen? 
A. I --I began to examine the hymen but she 
resisted and cried. 
[TRIAL COUNSEL] : Your Honor, could we 
approach? 
THE COURT: Yes. 
(The following was heard at the bench.) 
[TRIAL COUNSEL] : I believe prior to trial it 
was agreed upon on at the motion in limines about the 
crying and –-and so –-
[DPA]: That's correct. Yeah, and I told him 
he –-I told him out there he shouldn't mention that. So 
I –-
[TRIAL COUNSEL] : Your Honor, we want to confer 
quietly with our client as to whether we need to make a 
motion for mistrial if we could have five minutes. . . . 
 . . . . 
(The following was heard at the bench.) 
[TRIAL COUNSEL ]: Your Honor, during the break 
we conferred with Mr. DeRego. The defense will not be 
requesting a motion for mistrial. We will ask that the 
3   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
last answer be stricken and have the jury instructed to 
disregard the last answer. Thank you. 
(The following was heard in open court.) 
THE COURT: The Court will note that the Court 
is striking the last statement by the witness and the jury 
is instructed to disregard that statement and we can 
continue with the testimony. 
As the transcript reflects, Dr. Kepler provided the 
unsolicited commentary regarding the complaining witness's 
emotional response, and the circuit court, at the request of 
DeRego's counsel, struck Dr. Kepler's response and ordered the 
jury to disregard the response.4 
Moreover, DeRego's contention that the DPA violated 
the circuit court's order granting DeRego's Motion in Limine 
No. 25, excluding evidence regarding DeRego's extradition to 
Hawai‛i from Nevada, also lacks merit.  The record reflects that 
the circuit court ordered, with regard to Motion in Limine No. 
25, "as far as [DeRego] being extradited out of state, then I 
will grant the motion as to that information." The DPA's cross -
examinat ion question to DeRego, regarding whether DeRego had a 
surgical procedure performed in Nevada, was not on the subject 
of DeRego's extradition. And the DPA's question to another 
witness, as to whether DeRego "drive[s] around in the same 
4 To the extent that Dr. Kepler's testimony constituted an improper 
remark by a witness, we conclude that the statement --which was immediately 
stricken from the record, at the request of DeRego's counsel, with an 
instruction to the jury to disregard the remark --was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. See State v. Samuel , 74 Haw. 141, 149, 838 P.2d 1374, 1378 
(1992) ("In determining whether improper remarks made by a witness 
constitutes reversible error, the same analysis used for prosecutorial 
misconduct is applicable."). 
4   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bronco [vehicle][,]" did not solicit the witness' s subsequent 
reference to DeRego's extradition --i.e., "[w]hen the police 
got him from the mainland[.]5 We thus conclude that the DPA's 
questions were not in violation of the circuit court's in limine 
rulings. 
(2) With respect to DeRego's contention that he 
received ineffective assistance of counsel at trial, we conclude 
that the record is not sufficiently developed for this court to 
address DeRego's claim that his trial counsel permitted the DPA 
to "run[] roughshod[,]" and failed to move for a mistrial. 
State v. Silva , 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592 (1993) 
("[N]ot every trial record is sufficiently developed to 
determine whether there has been ineffective assistance of 
counsel; indeed, a defendant is often only able to allege facts 
that, if proved, would entitle him or her to relief."). 
We thus affirm the Judgment without prejudice to 
DeRego's filing of a petition for post-conviction relief, 
pursuant to Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure  Rule 40, to allow 
for the development of a factual record as to those contentions 
of ineffective assistance  of counsel. Silva, 75  Haw. at 439, 
864 P.2d at 592-93 ("[W]here the record on appeal is 
5 To the extent that this unelicited response constituted an 
improper remark by the witness, we conclude that the statement, which was 
immediately stricken from the record by the circuit court with an instruction 
to the jury to disregard the witness' s statement, was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. Samuel, 74 Haw. at 149, 838 P.2d at 1378. 
5   
 
  
    
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient to demonstrate ineffective assistance of counsel, 
but where: (1) the defendant alleges facts that if proven would 
entitle him or her to relief, and (2) the claim is not patently 
frivolous and without trace of support in the record, the 
appellate court may affirm defendant's conviction without 
prejudice to a subsequent Rule 40 petition on the ineffective 
assistance of counsel claim."). 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, March 13, 2024. 
6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Gerald T. Johnson, Presiding Judge 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Richard B. Rost, Associate Judge 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
County of Maui, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 