 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000055
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CRYSTAL LEANN SOTO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2P110-01396)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Crystal Leann Soto (Crystal)
 
appeals from Judgment entered on January 3, 2011, in the District
 
Court of the Second Circuit (District Court).1 Crystal was
 
charged with harassment, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1)(a) and/or (1)(f) (Supp. 2010).
2 After a
 
1
 The Honorable Richard A. Priest presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 711-1106 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that person:
 
(a)	 Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches another person
in an offensive manner or subjects the other person to
offensive physical contact;
 
. . . .
 
(f)	 Makes a communication using offensively coarse language that
would cause the recipient to reasonably believe that the
actor intends to cause bodily injury to the recipient or
another or damage to the property of the recipient or
another.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bench trial, the District Court found Crystal guilty as charged. 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate Crystal's conviction
 and remand the case for a new trial.
 
I.
 
At the time of the events at issue, the complainant,
 
Chasare Soto (Chasare), was apparently the girlfriend of Nicholas
 
3
Soto (Nicholas);  Crystal was Nicholas's ex-wife; and Chris
Orozco (Chris) was Crystal's boyfriend. 
Nicholas and Crystal had
 
been in a "custody battle" over their two children. The
 harassment charge arose out of an incident in which Nicholas and
 Chasare went to Crystal's residence to pick-up the children for a
 visitation. Nicholas got into a dispute with Crystal over
 whether Nicholas would be allowed to take the children, in which
 both Chris and Chasare also became involved.
 
During the confrontation between Crystal and Chasare,
 
both were holding infants. 
Chasare testified that Crystal
 
grabbed Chasare's neck and told her to "get the fuck out." 
According to Chasare, she felt threatened, but also was mad,
 wanted to fight Crystal, and told Crystal that if Crystal had not
 been holding an infant, "I'd fuck you up, bitch." 
Crystal testified that Chasare ran up the stairs,
 
yelling at Crystal. According to Crystal, as Chasare came
 running toward her, Crystal put up her left hand and made contact
 with Chasare's chest to stop Chasare. Crystal did not invite
 Chasare to enter the house, felt threatened, and believed Chasare
 wanted to hit Crystal. Crystal did not grab Chasare's neck and
 felt that it was necessary to put up her hand and make contact
 with Chasare to defend herself. 
In rendering its verdict, the District Court stated,
 
"The defense that is raised to the touching is that of self-
defense. The defendant has the burden to establish that and has
 
failed to do that." (Emphasis added).
 
3
 The complaint identifies the complainant as "Chasare Belles," and
Chasare testified at trial that she had just gotten married to Nicholas.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
On appeal, Crystal argues, as her sole point of error,
 
that her conviction should be reversed because there was
 
insufficient evidence to negate her defense of self-defense or
 the defense of others. We reject this argument, but conclude
 that the District Court plainly erred in placing the burden of
 proving self-defense on Crystal. 
Under the Hawaii Penal Code, the justification defense 
of self-defense or the use of force in self-protection is not an affirmative defense. State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai' i 429, 431, 886 
P.2d 766, 768 (App. 1994). Thus, once a defendant puts forth credible evidence to support the defense, it becomes the prosecution's burden to disprove the defense beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. 
Here, it was clear that Crystal had put forward
 
sufficient evidence to raise a claim of self-defense. We
 conclude that the District Court's statement that "[t]he
 defendant has the burden to establish [self-defense]"
 demonstrates that the District Court misapplied the burden of
 proof on this critical issue. Instead of requiring the
 prosecution to disprove the claim of self-defense beyond a
 reasonable doubt, the District Court erroneously believed that
 Crystal had the ultimate burden of proving self-defense.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) concedes 
that the District Court erroneously stated the burden of proof on self-defense. Nevertheless, it argues that we should affirm Crystal's conviction in light of the reasons given by the District Court for concluding that Crystal had failed to prove self-defense. We disagree. 
The correct allocation of the burden of proof on the
 
issue of self-defense was essential to the District Court's
 proper evaluation of the evidence in this case. We are not
 persuaded that the District Court's reasons for concluding that
 Crystal had failed to prove self-defense demonstrates that it
 would have concluded that the State had disproved the defense
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
beyond a reasonable doubt. See Raines v. State, 79 Hawai' i 219, 
226, 900 P.2d 1286, 1293 (1995) (holding that the failure to 
provide burden of proof instruction on non-affirmative mitigating defense of extreme emotional disturbance manslaughter constituted plain error); State v. Mitchell, 88 Hawai' i 216, 228, 965 P.2d 
149, 161 (App. 1998) (remanding case for a new trial where instruction improperly shifting the burden of proof from the prosecution to the defendant on a material element of the offense). Therefore, Crystal's conviction cannot stand. 
In deciding Crystal's claim that the evidence was 
insufficient to support her conviction, we must view the evidence in the strongest light for the prosecution. State v. Richie, 88 
Hawai'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). When viewed in that 
light, we conclude that the State presented substantial evidence to negate Crystal's claim of self-defense. Accordingly, a retrial is not precluded by the protection against double jeopardy. See State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai' i 43, 57, 237 P.3d 
1109, 1123 (2010). 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the January 3, 2011,
 
Judgment of the District Court, and we remand the case for a new
 trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 24, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant 
Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 