NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000936 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
CHRISTOPHER PARK, Petitioner-Appellant,
v. 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS,
S
TATE OF HAWAI# I, Respondent-Appellee, 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
H
ONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DAA-18-00016)
(ADLRO CASE NO. 18-03461) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Christopher Park (Park
) appeals 
from the "Decision and Order Affirming Administrative Order and 
Dismissing Appeal" (Decision and Order) filed by the District 
Court of the First Circuit (District Court)1 on November 9, 2018. 
Park asserts that the District Court erred in affirming the 
administrative revocation of his driver's license by Respondent-Appellee Administrative Director of the Courts (Director) because 
the Director's written hearing decision was not timely rendered. 
We disagree with Park that the Director's hearing 
decision was untimely, and therefore, we affirm the Decision and 
Order. 
I. Background 
On August 15, 2018, Park was arrested for the offense 
of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant 
(OVUII) after he had been stopped while operating a moped.  On 
1  The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that date, Park was issued a Notice of Administrative Revocation 
(Revocation Notice).  As part of the administrative process for 
the revocation of Park's license, it is undisputed that an 
administrative hearing was held and concluded on Monday, October 1, 2018.  Thereafter, the Hearing Officer issued a Notice of Administrative Hearing Decision (Notice of Hearing Decision) and 
the Administrative Driver's License Revocation Hearing Decision 
(Hearing Decision), which upheld the revocation of Park's license 
as set forth in a prior Notice of Administrative Review Decision 
(Review Decision).  Both the Hearing Decision and the Notice of 
Hearing Decision were dated and mailed on October 9, 2018. 
Park appealed to the District Court, which affirmed the 
administrative revocation of Park's license. 
II. Discussion 
Park contends that, based on the applicable statutes, 
the rendering of the written Hearing Decision was untimely, even 
though it was timely mailed to him.  This case turns on the interpretation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 291E-38(i) and 
291E-46.  HRS § 291E-38(i) provides, in relevant part: "The 
director's decision shall be rendered in writing and mailed to the respondent, or to the parent or guardian of the respondent if the respondent is under the age of eighteen, no later than five days after the hearing is concluded."  (Emphasis added). 
HRS § 291E-46, which governs the computation of time 
for HRS Chapter 291E, Part III (including HRS § 291E-38(i)), provides: 
The time in which any act provided in this part is to be
done is computed by excluding the first day and includingthe last, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, orstate holiday, and then it also is excluded; provided thatif the last day for the mailing  of decisions under sections 
291E-37(a) and 291E-38(i)  is a federal holiday, it also is 
excluded. 
(Emphasis added). 
As noted, Park's hearing was held and concluded on 
October 1, 2018.  Excluding Saturday and Sunday, the fifth day 
after Park's hearing was concluded fell on October 8, 2018, Columbus Day, which is a federal holiday, but not a state 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
holiday.2  The Director both rendered in writing and mailed the 
hearing decision to Park on October 9, 2018. 
Park does not dispute that the Director mailed the 
hearing decision on time.  However, he contends the Director was 
one day late in rendering the written decision.  Park argues that: (1) HRS § 291E-38(i) imposes a deadline on both the acts of rendering in writing and mailing the hearing decision; (2) because October 8, 2018 was not a state holiday, HRS § 291E-46 did not exclude that day in computing the Director's deadline for rendering Park's hearing decision in writing; (3) therefore, the Director was one day late and violated HRS § 291E-38(i) when the Director rendered Park's hearing decision in writing on October 9, 2018. 
Park's appeal appears to raise two questions regarding 
the interpretation of HRS §§ 291E-38(i) and 291E-46: (1) whether HRS § 291E-38(i) imposes a deadline on both the acts of rendering in writing and mailing the decision; and (2) if so, does HRS    § 291E-46 exclude the last day for rendering the decision in writing under HRS § 291E-38(i) if that last day falls on Columbus Day.  We conclude we need only answer the first question to resolve this appeal. 
We review questions of statutory interpretation de 
novo.  Farmer v. Admin. Dir. of Court
, 94 Hawai# i 232, 236, 11 
P.3d 457, 461 (2000). 
Moreover, where the language of the statute is plain and
unambiguous, our only duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. When construing a statute, our foremostobligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intentionof the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily fromthe language contained in the statute itself. And we mustread statutory language in the context of the entire statuteand construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose. 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in astatute, an ambiguity exists. Put differently, a statute is 
2  Currently, Columbus Day is the only federal holiday that is not also
a state holiday in Hawai #i.  
See 5 U.S.C. § 6103(a) (listing federal
holidays); HRS § 8-1 (listing state holidays).  Therefore, except for ColumbusDay, the last day for any act with a deadline falling on a federal holidaywould already be excluded by the provision in HRS § 291E-46 excluding the lastday that falls on a state holiday.  In other words, the only time that the "provided" clause ( proviso ) in HRS § 291E-46 would be implicated is in a case
like Park's, where the last day falls on Columbus Day.      
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ambiguous if it is capable of being understood by reasonably
well-informed people in two or more different senses. 
In construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context, withwhich the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences may becompared, in order to ascertain their true meaning.Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids indetermining the legislative intent. One avenue is the use oflegislative history as an interpretive tool. 
Id. at 236-37, 11 P.3d at 461-62 (citation omitted).  Further, 
It is a canon of construction that statutes that are in pari 
materia  may be construed together, so that inconsistencies
in one statute may be resolved by looking at another statuteon the same subject.  Thus, laws in pari materia, or uponthe same subject matter, shall be construed with referenceto each other. What is clear in one statute may be calledupon in aid to explain what is doubtful in another. 
State v. Kamanao , 118 Hawai# i 210, 218, 188 P.3d 724, 732 (2008) 
(citations, quotation marks, brackets omitted). 
As to the first question, under a plain reading of the 
language in HRS § 291E-38(i), it is possible to reasonably read 
it as applying the five-day deadline to 
both the acts of 
rendering in writing and mailing the decision, or only to the act of mailing the decision.  In this respect, HRS § 291E-38(i) is ambiguous. 
It is clear from the composition of HRS § 291E-38(i) 
that the five-day deadline applies to the act of mailing the decision.  Therefore, the ultimate question becomes whether the five-day deadline also was intended to apply to the act of rendering the decision in writing for purposes of this case.  We conclude the five-day deadline is intended to apply to the mailing of the written decision, which means the decision must be written by the mailing deadline, and that the written decision in this case having been dated and mailed on October 9, 2018 was consistent with HRS §§ 291E-38(i) and 291E-46. 
Considering the context of HRS §§ 291E-38(i) and 291E-
46 in pari materia with other relevant provisions dealing with the administrative revocation process provides helpful guidance. In particular, the structure of the administrative process provides that respondents must take certain actions to challenge the revocation of their license within certain time frames of decisions being mailed, not the date of the written decisions. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 291E-37 addresses the initial administrative review of the 
issuance of a notice of administrative revocation and requires a "written review decision" to be mailed "to the respondent, or to the parent or guardian of the respondent if the respondent is under the age of eighteen" within different specified time periods, depending on whether the case involves an alcohol related offense or a drug related offense.  See HRS § 291E-37(a). In turn, HRS § 291E-38(a) provides in relevant part: "If the director administratively revokes the respondent's license and privilege to operate a vehicle after the administrative review, the respondent may request an administrative hearing to review the decision within six days of the date the administrative review decision is mailed."  (Emphasis added).  Then, once an 
administrative hearing is held and the written decision is 
rendered and mailed, the structure of the process is that the respondent can seek judicial review by filing a petition in a district court within thirty days of the mailing of the hearing decision.  Specifically, HRS § 291E-40 provides in pertinent part: 
If the director sustains the administrative revocation after 
an administrative hearing, the respondent, or parent orguardian of a respondent under the age of eighteen, may filea petition for judicial review within thirty days after theadministrative hearing decision is mailed . The petition
shall be filed with the clerk of the district court in the district in which the incident occurred and shall be accompanied by the required filing fee for civil actions. 
(Emphasis added). 
Given the manner in which the administrative revocation 
process is structured and the Legislature's clear intent that 
action by the respondent be triggered by the mailing of the administrative decisions, we conclude that the five-day deadline in HRS § 291E-38(i) applies to the mailing of the written decision, not the date by which the written decision needs to be rendered.  Therefore, in this case, the five-day deadline for mailing the written Hearing Decision, under HRS § 291E-38(i), was extended pursuant to HRS § 291E-46 due to the federal Columbus Day holiday, and there was no violation of either provision in this case. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Conclusion 
For these reasons, we affirm the District Court's 
Decision and Order. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 22, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Tae W. Kim, 
for Petitioner-Appellant. 
Dawn E. Takeuchi-Apuna, 
Deputy Attorney General, for Respondent-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
6 