      
  
        
          
        
           
     NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  P ACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000705 23-DEC-2025 07:57 AM Dkt. 42 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000705 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE   COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
TIHANI
  ARBOGAST,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  THE  SECOND  CIRCUIT 
WAILUKU  DIVISION 
(CASE  NO.  2DTA-23-00334) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge,
 Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant  Tihani  Arbogast  (Arbogast )   appeals 
from  the  November  17,  2023  Judgment  and  Notice  of  Entry  of 
Judgment  (Judgment ),  entered  by  the  Wailuku  Division  of  the 
District  Court  of  the  Second  Circuit  (District  Court).   Arbogast 
also  challenges  the  District  Court's  November  17,  2023  Findings 
of  Fact;  Conclusions  of  Law;  Decision  and  Order  Denying  Defendant 
[Arbogast's]  Motion  to  Suppress  Evidence  [(Motion  to  Suppress )] 
Filed  October   20,  2023  (FOFs/COLs ),  entered  in  favor  of 
Plaintiff-Appellee  State  of  1
Hawai i  (State). 
Arbogast raises a single
 point of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court's COLs 18, 19, 21, and 
1 The Honorable Christopher M. Dunn entered the Judgment; the 
Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided over the hearing on the Motion to 
Suppress and entered the FOFs/COLs.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
       
          
        
          
       
          
         
     
        
         
        
      
         
         
         
         
            
        
          
         
         
          
         
          
          footnote 2 are plainly erroneous as a matter of law, and that 
field sobriety tests (FSTs) constitute warrantless searches and 
seizures under Haw. Const. art. I, § 7 and are presumed 
unreasonable unless they fall within a well-defined exception to 
the warrant requirement. Arbogast also argues that the Motion to 
Suppress sufficiently raised and adequately provided notice to 
both the prosecution and the District Court that one of the 
grounds for her motion was that the prosecution failed to 
establish probable cause to arrest Arbogast. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve 
Arbogast's point of error as follows: 
On May 18, 2023, the State filed its Complaint and 
charged Arbogast with the offense of Operating a Vehicle Under 
the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes § 291E-61 (a)(1) and/or 291E-61 (a)(3) (2021). 
It is undisputed that on May 7, 2023, at around 1:30 a.m., Maui 
Police Department Officer Rahul Mehra (Officer Mehra) observed a 
certain SUV (SUV) traveling in front of him, that Officer Mehra 
observed the SUV travel over the white fog line for 
"approximately one second," then later observed the SUV drift to 
the left and over the double solid yellow line, then finally 
observed the SUV drift right again with the passenger tires 
traveling over the white fog line again. Officer Mehra then 
effectuated a traffic stop. Arbogast was the operator of the 
2
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
          
          
        
      
          
          
           
      
       
          
         
             
          
          
          
          
       
         
       
     
         
           
         
    
        
           SUV; a female passenger was in the front seat. As Officer Mehra 
informed Arbogast of the reason for the stop, he detected the 
odor of liquor coming from within the subject vehicle and the 
female passenger admitted that she had been drinking; Officer 
Mehra, after obtaining Arbogast's driver's license, registration, 
and insurance, detected an odor of liquor on Arbogast and that 
she had red, watery eyes. Arbogast denied having anything to 
drink. Officer Mehra then directed Arbogast to step out of the 
subject vehicle to participate in the FST. 
Arbogast originally pleaded not guilty, and filed the 
Motion to Suppress. The thrust of Arbogast's Motion to Suppress 
was that FSTs constitute both a warrantless search and/or seizure 
within the meaning of Haw. Const. art. I, §§ 6 and 7, and thus 
that for such warrantless searches and/or seizures to be valid, a 
defendant would need to consent to such FSTs; thus, consent by 
the defendant in the context of an FST constitutes a voluntary 
waiver whereas the absence of consent does not. In the 
introductory paragraph of the motion, Arbogast included that 
"[t]his motion is made on the grounds that [Arbogast's] seizure 
and subsequent arrest were unlawful, having lacked reasonable 
suspicion, probable cause or lawful consent[.]" 
On October 27, 2023, the District Court held a hearing 
on the Motion to Suppress. Officer Mehra was the only testifying 
witness. No testimony was elicited by either party regarding 
probable cause for Arbogast's arrest. 
On November 17, 2023, the District Court issued its 
FOFs/COLs in favor of the State, and in a footnote stated that: 
3
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
     
       
      
        
         
      
        
       
       
          
      
        
  
       
      
  
       
       
           
         
     At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  on  the  Motion, 
counsel  for  Defendant  also  argued  that  the  State  failed  to 
set  forth  sufficient  facts  to  establish  probable  cause  for 
the  OVUII  arrest.   This  argument  is  unavailing.   Aside  from 
simply  stating  so  in  a  single  sentence  in  the  introductory 
paragraph  of  the  Motion,  it  is  clear  from  the  body  of  the 
Motion  that  lack  of  probable  cause  was  not  a  ground  for  the 
Motion.   Accordingly,  the  Court  respectfully  declines  to 
address  this  issue. 
On  the  same  day,  Arbogast  entered  a  conditional  guilty  plea 
reserving  the  right  to  appeal  from  the  judgment  to  seek  review  of 
the  Motion  to  Suppress. 
The challenged COLs are as follows: 
18. Standardized field sobriety tests do not infringe upon 
a defendant's constitutional right, under the Fourth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, 
Section 7 of the Hawai i State Constitution,  to be secure 
from unreasonable searches, seizures, and invasions of 
privacy. These tests involve nothing more than an 
exhibition of physical characteristics of coordination. The 
tests seek neither communications nor testimony from a 
defendant. The tests, even if compelled , do not run afoul 
of the constitutional prohibition against compulsory self-
incrimination. State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 301-03 (1984) 
(emphasis added). 
19. Defendant's consent to the SFSTs was not required. 
   . . . . 
21. Even assuming, arguendo , consent was required, based 
on the court's review of the totality of the circumstances, 
Defendant freely and voluntarily consented to participate in 
the SFSTs, and there was also no evidence of any force or 
compulsion on the part of Officer Mehra for Defendant to 
consent to participate in the SFSTs. 
"A trial  court's  conclusions  of law  are reviewed  de
novo  under  the  right/wrong  standard."   State  v.  Kalua,  144 
Hawai i  7,  10,   434  P.3d  1202,  1205  (2019)  (quoting  State  v. 
Adler,  108  Hawai i  169,  174,  118  P.3d  652,  657  (2005)).          
It  is  well  settled  that  an  FST  does  not  infringe  upon  a 
defendant's  constitutional  rights,  under  the  Fourth  Amendment  to 
the  United  States  Constitution  and  article  I,  section  7  of  the 
Hawai i  State  Constitution,  to  be  secure  from  unreasonable  
4
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
           
           
           
          
   
       
         
           
         
           
          
        
         
           
          
           
            
         
          
         
         
        
           
        searches, seizures and invasions of privacy, even if compelled. 
State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 303-06, 687 P.2d 544, 551-53 (1984); 
see also State v. Uchima, 147 Hawai i 64, 84–85, 464 P.3d 852  
872–73 (2020). COLs 18, 19, and 21 correctly reflect the well-
settled law on this issue. Thus, Arbogast's arguments to the 
contrary are without merit. 
Arbogast further argues that the Motion to Suppress 
should have been granted because the State did not establish 
probable cause for her arrest during the hearing on the Motion to 
Suppress. The District Court correctly noted that Arbogast had 
not argued that the State failed to set forth sufficient facts to 
establish probable cause for the OVUII arrest in the Motion to 
Suppress, except for a passing reference in the introductory 
paragraph of the motion, and that Arbogast merely repeated this 
bare assertion at the conclusion of the hearing on the motion. 
Hawai i Rules of  Penal Procedure Rule 47 requires that a motion 
made in writing or orally shall state the grounds upon which it 
is made. Arbogast did not state, in her Motion to Suppress, the 
grounds on which the State allegedly failed to establish probable 
cause and instead argued at length about the FST issues discussed 
supra. Moreover, Arbogast offers no support for the proposition 
that evidence of Arbogast's performance on an FST must be 
suppressed because probable cause to arrest Arbogast for OVUII 
had not been established prior to the administration of the FST. 
Accordingly, we conclude that this argument is without merit. 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For  these  reasons,  the  District  Court's  November  17, 
2023  Judgment  is  affirmed. 
DATED:   Honolulu,   Hawai i,  December   23,  2025. 
On  the  briefs: 
Hayden  Aluli, 
for  Defendant-Appellant. 
Renee  Ishikawa  Delizo, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
County  of  Maui, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/  Katherine   G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Kimberly  T.  Guidry 
Associate  Judge 
6 