NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000396
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DEIRDRE ICHIMURA, also known as
DEIRDRE A. ICHIMURA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1497)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Deirdre Ichimura, also known as
 
Deirdre A. Ichimura (Ichimura), appeals from the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit's (Circuit Court)  March 14, 2013 judgment of
conviction and sentence for violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes

 
(HRS) § 707-712.6 (2014), Assault Against a Law Enforcement
 
Officer in the Second Degree.
 
On appeal, Ichimura maintains that the Circuit Court

 
erred in permitting testimony by a Honolulu Police Department
 officer present at the scene of the incident that (1) Ichimura
 appeared to be under the influence of drugs rather than suffering
 from a mental illness and (2) the judge issuing a bench warrant
 for Ichimura's arrest would have been aware if Ichimura suffered
 from a mental illness.
 
1
 The Honorable Judge Patrick W. Border presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Ichimura's points on appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in admitting Officer
 
Denny Santiago's (Officer Santiago) testimony that it appeared to
 him that Ichimura was more likely on drugs than suffering from a
 mental illness. The admission of lay opinion testimony under
 
2
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 701  is reviewed for an abuse
of discretion. State v. Toyomura
, 80 Hawai 'i 8, 23-24, 904 P.2d 
893, 908-09 (1995). Admissible lay opinion testimony must be within the witness's personal knowledge, be rationally based on the perception of the witness, and be helpful to the trier of fact. Toyomura, 80 Hawai
'i at 25, 904 P.2d at 910. 
Officer Santiago testified, without objection, that
 
based on Ichimura's behavior, it appeared to him that Ichimura
 was "high on something[.]" Officer Santiago also testified that
 he had been exposed to training on behaviors that persons with
 mental health issues might present, observed Ichimura's behavior
 at the time of the incident, which included being "on a rant,"
 "very fidgety, she wouldn't stay still, real eccentric hand
 gestures, wide-eyed, very loud-spoken," and that his approach to
 persons who were under the influence of drugs or were mentally
 ill might be different than with other individuals. Officer
 Santiago opined that "[i]t appeared to be that she was more on
 drugs than having a mental illness" but also conceded that he did
 not know whether Ichimura was on drugs or not.
 
2
 HRE Rule 701, Opinion testimony by lay witnesses provides, 
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness'
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited
to those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationally
based on the perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to a
clear understanding of the witness' testimony or the
determination of a fact in issue. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court ruled that this testimony was not
 
"for the truth" but was relevant to what Officer Santiago's
 
perception and reaction to the situation was. Under these
 circumstances, Ichimura has failed to demonstrate an abuse of
 discretion in admitting this testimony.
3
 
2. Assuming, without deciding, that the Circuit Court
 
should have stricken Officer Santiago's remark that he assumed
 the judge issuing the arrest warrant would have been made aware
 if Ichimura had a mental illness, any error was harmless. 
Ichimura did not assert a lack of penal responsibility as a
 defense, but rather, her defense was that she did not assault any
 of the officers. In addition, Officer Santiago's remark was made
 in the context of describing his actions – whether he would "have
 done anything differently if [he] had known that [Ichimura] has a
 mental illness." To the extent that the remark contradicted
 Ichimura's position that she indeed suffered from a mental
 illness the impact was minimal at best. Officer Santiago's
 comment was incomplete as he was stopped before explaining what
 his assumption was based on, was explicitly a matter of the
 officer's conjecture, and added nothing of substance to whether
 Ichimura's behavior during the incident in question was due to
 drugs or mental illness. Ichimura's mother testified at trial
 that Ichimura had an unspecified "handicap" for which she was
 seeing a psychiatrist and was taking medication on the day in
 question. Both Officers Nutter and Santiago testified that their
 behavior did not turn on the possible cause or catalyst for
 
3
 We note that, at the time Officer Santiago gave this testimony,
Officer Christopher Nutter (Officer Nutter), the first officer at the scene
and who had participated in Ichimura's arrest, had already testified, without
objection, that he had received training at the police Academy about dealing
with persons with mental illnesses, that he had experience in the field with
persons having mental illnesses, and Ichimura was "acting like she was on
drugs." Thus, Officer Santiago's testimony was cumulative of Officer Nutter's
testimony.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ichimura's behavior. On this record, we conclude the error, if
 
any, was harmless.
 
Based on the foregoing, the March 14, 2013 Judgment
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 6, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
William H. Jameson, Jr.

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 James M. Anderson,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
4
 