____________________ FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-17-0000324 20-DEC-2023 08:01 AM Dkt. 201 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
NO. CAAP-17-0000324 
FAUSTINO DASALLA DOMINGO and ELTON LANE NAMAHOE, SR.,
P
laintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellees,
v. 
JAMES B. NUTTER & COMPANY,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and 
ROBERT M. EHRHORN, JR.; CLAY CHAPMAN IWAMURA PULICE & NERVELL,
Attorneys at Law, a Law Corporation,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10 and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants 
NO. CAAP-17-0000859 
FAUSTINO DASALLA DOMINGO and ELTON LANE NAMAHOE, SR.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v. 
JAMES B. NUTTER & COMPANY,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
and 
ROBERT M. EHRHORN, JR.; CLAY CHAPMAN IWAMURA PULICE & NERVELL,
Attorneys at Law, a Law Corporation,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10 and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NOS. CAAP-17-0000324 and CAAP-17-0000859 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-0249) 
DECEMBER 20, 2023 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
This consolidated appeal concerns wrongful-foreclosure
-
related claims brought in Civil No. 16-1-0249 by Plaintiffs-
Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Appellants Faustino Dasalla Domingo (Domingo) and Elton Lane Namahoe, Sr. (Namahoe) (collectively, 
Plaintiffs) against Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee/Appellee James B. Nutter & Company (Nutter), as well as related claims brought against Nutter's attorneys. 
In CAAP-17-0000324, Nutter appealed from the March 6, 
2017 Order Denying [Nutter's] Motion for Judgment on the 
Pleadings as to Plaintiffs' Complaint filed July 5, 2016 (Order 
Denying Nutter MJOP), entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Nutter later moved to dismiss its 
appeal from the Order Denying Nutter MJOP. On January 25, 2019, 
this court entered an order granting Nutter's motion and dismissing its appeal with prejudice. 
In CAAP-17-0000324, Defendants-Appellees/Cross-
Appellants/Appellees Robert M. Ehrhorn, Jr. (Ehrhorn) and Clay 
Chapman Iwamura Pulice & Nervell Attorneys at Law, a Law 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Corporation, (Clay Chapman) (collectively, Attorney Defendants) 
cross-appeal from: (1) the Order Denying Nutter MJOP; (2) the 
March 6, 2017 Order Denying [Attorney Defendants'] Substantive Joinder to [the Nutter MJOP]; and (3) the March 6, 2017 Order Denying [Attorney Defendants'] MJOP (Order Denying Attorney 
Defendants' MJOP). 
In CAAP-17-0000859, Plaintiffs appeal from the November 
15, 2017 Final Judgment on Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for 
HRCP 54(b) Certification of (1) Decision and Order on [Attorney Defendants'] Motion to Dismiss Plaintiffs' Complaint with Prejudice, . . . and (2) Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Number One Against [Nutter and Attorney Defendants] (HRCP Rule 54(b) 
Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court. Plaintiffs also challenge (or appeal from) the following three orders: the 
December 15, 2016 Decision and Order on [Attorney Defendants'] Motion to Dismiss Plaintiffs' Complaint with Prejudice (Partial 
Dismissal Order); the March 6, 2017 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment 
Number One Against [Nutter] and [Attorney Defendants] (Order 
Granting/Denying MPSJ); and the October 19, 2017 Order Granting [Plaintiffs'] Motion for HRCP 54(b) Certification of (1) the 
[Partial Dismissal Order]; and (2) the [(Order Granting/Denying MPSJ] (Order Granting HRCP Rule 54(b) Certification). 
In CAAP-17-0000859, Attorney Defendants cross-appeal 
from the HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment. Attorney Defendants challenge: (1) the Partial Dismissal Order; (2) the Order 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Granting/Denying MPSJ; and (3) the Order Granting HRCP 54(b) 
Certification. 
Notably, on March 31, 2023, the Hawai# i Supreme Court 
issued an opinion in a closely-related case, James B. Nutter & Co. v. Namahoe, 153 Hawai# i 149, 528 P.3d 222 (2023) (generally 
referred to as the Namahoe Appeal).
2 Of significance here, the 
supreme court held that Namahoe was entitled to relief from the foreclosure judgment against him on two grounds, including that Nutter and its attorneys, Attorney Defendants herein, committed fraud on the court in the foreclosure action against Namahoe's home. Id. at 153, 528 P.3d at 226. 
Here, in sum, we hold that: (1) the Circuit Court did 
not err in concluding that Plaintiffs' action against Attorney Defendants was not a strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP) filed in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 634F (2016) (repealed 2022); (2) this court has appellate jurisdiction to review the Partial Dismissal 
Order, but not the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in part in granting the Partial Dismissal Order. In doing so, we further hold that: (1) the litigation privilege is not an absolute bar against an action by a borrower against a foreclosing lender's attorney arising out of the attorney's fraud on the court in a prior foreclosure action; (2) a private cause of action against an attorney for committing a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually 
2 We take judicial notice of the court records in the Namahoe
Appeal, in accordance with Hawai #i Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 201 (1993), as
well as rely on the court's opinion. 
4  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and 
misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation, with respect to a foreclosure on a reverse mortgage, is hereby recognized; (3) a wrongful foreclosure claim per se is not cognizable against a 
lender's attorney, even though certain wrongful-foreclosure-related claims may lie against the attorney for the attorney's own wrongful conduct in limited circumstances; (4) the litigation privilege bars Plaintiffs' claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED) in this case, but does not in every 
circumstance shield attorneys from defending a claim that they 
intentionally acted to defraud elderly borrowers out of their homes; (5) although we recognize Plaintiffs' cause of action against Attorney Defendants for committing a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation under the circumstances of this case, the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing Plaintiffs' additional fraud claims without prejudice; and (6) although Domingo and Namahoe are consumers based on their reverse mortgages with Nutter, and thus are consumers vis à vis Attorney Defendants, we decline to recognize a claim against Attorney Defendants pursuant to HRS chapters 480 and 481A here. I. RELEVANT BACKGROUND 
On July 5, 2016, Domingo and Namahoe filed a complaint 
against Nutter and Attorney Defendants asserting the following thirteen counts (the Complaint): (I) & (II) legal malpractice 
and gross legal malpractice (against Attorney Defendants only); 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(III) breach of fiduciary duty; (IV) wrongful foreclosure; (V) 
intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED); (VI) unfair 
and deceptive trade practices (Chapters 480 and 481A Claims or UDAP Claims); (VII) abuse of process; (VIII) fraud (which the Circuit Court construed as including fraud on the court); (IX) 
fraud in the inducement (against Nutter only); (X) elder abuse; (XI) a prayer for injunctive relief (against Nutter only); (XII) slander of title; and (XIII) punitive damages. 
The Complaint states factual allegations relating to 
two separate underlying foreclosure actions undertaken by Nutter, through then-counsel Attorney Defendants, against Domingo and Namahoe, respectively. 
A. The Allegations Regarding the Domingo Foreclosure With respect to Domingo, the Complaint alleges that on 
December 11, 2007, Domingo executed an Adjustable Rate Note (Domingo Note), Home Equity Conversion Loan Agreement (Domingo 
Loan Agreement), with an attached Repair Rider to Loan Agreement (Domingo Repair Rider), and an Adjustable Rate Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (Domingo Reverse Mortgage), which was assigned to Nutter on the same day. The Domingo Repair Rider 
contained a provision requiring Nutter to set aside $24,000 from the initial principal limit to be used for certain required repairs.
3 The Complaint alleges that on November 3, 2009, nearly 
3 The Domingo Repair Rider provided, in relevant part: I. Lender's Promises A. The Lender [Nutter] shall set aside $24,000.00
from the initial Principal Limit under the LoanAgreement to be used for the purpose of bringing
(continued...) 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
two years after Domingo executed the Domingo Reverse Mortgage, 
Nutter first communicated by letter to Domingo regarding the repairs identified in the Domingo Repair Rider, asking to be advised of the progress to date and to complete the required repairs as soon as possible, if not already completed. Domingo advised Nutter via letter on or about December 7, 2009, that he had completed and paid for the required repairs and requested the $24,000 set aside to complete additional upgrades in progress. 
The Domingo Loan Agreement provided that if the 
mortgagor failed to make the repairs, the reverse mortgage lender could access the property to make the repairs utilizing the funds withheld to make the repairs, and that foreclosure was not permitted under the "standard reverse mortgage" unless "the Loan Agreement was recorded contemporaneously with the Reverse Mortgage." The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations and best practices "prohibited 
foreclosure as a remedy for failure to timely repair, especially 
where funds were withheld from loan proceeds for repairs." Nevertheless, on April 19, 2012, through Attorney Defendants, Nutter filed a foreclosure complaint against Domingo, based solely on Domingo's alleged failure to timely make the repairs required per the Domingo Loan Agreement and Domingo Repair Rider. 
(...continued) 
the Property up to the property standards
required by the [HUD] Secretary by repairing: 
Peeling/Scraping Paint, Roof Repair/Replacement,
General Cleanup, Replace Stove/Hood, ToiletInspection/Repair, Cabinet Repair, Hot WaterHeater Insp[ection]/Repair. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nutter filed a motion for summary judgment, which 
Domingo opposed, arguing that Nutter did not have a legal right 
to foreclosure under these circumstances. Specifically, Domingo argued that foreclosure was not a remedy for failure to timely repair where, as was the case here, the loan agreement (containing the repair rider) was not simultaneously recorded with the reverse mortgage; where Nutter held reserves to pay for said repairs; where the repairs were so "manini", i.e. inconsequential, as to not constitute a substantial breach of contract; and where HUD regulations prohibited foreclosure as a remedy. Nutter's motion for summary judgment was denied. 
The Complaint further alleges that Domingo, through 
counsel William J. Rosdil (Rosdil),
4 contacted Nutter and 
Attorney Defendants to request that they stipulate to a HUD-approved inspection of Domingo's property to determine if all of the required repairs had been completed. Neither Nutter nor Attorney Defendants agreed to the inspection. Nevertheless, Rosdil "contacted a HUD approved inspector who made the inspection and approved not only the repairs but the overall condition of the [Domingo] residence." Upon notification of the inspection, Attorney Defendants "conceded [that] Domingo was due the $24,000 refund [set aside in the Repair Rider] and not in default." However, Nutter allegedly "refused to acknowledge [that] Domingo had satisfactorily completed the repairs per HUD inspection and was not now or ever in default[.]" 
4 Domingo was self-represented until December 29, 2013. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 7, 2014, Domingo moved for summary judgment 
on Nutter's foreclosure complaint, for an award of $24,000, and 
for attorney's fees and costs, arguing, inter alia, that he completed the required repairs, and that, even if he had not, failure to do so would not, as a matter of law, give Nutter a legal right to accelerate the Domingo Note and seek foreclosure. 
On November 14, 2014, the Circuit Court granted summary 
judgment in favor of Domingo, dismissing Nutter's foreclosure complaint with prejudice and ordering Nutter to pay Domingo the $24,000 set aside, as well as attorney's fees. The court concluded that Nutter was unable to show default under the terms of the Domingo Loan Agreement and that there was no genuine issue of material fact precluding summary judgment in favor of Domingo. Judgment was entered on January 15, 2015.
5 
The Complaint further alleges that despite the 
foregoing judgment being entered in favor of Domingo, Nutter and/or Attorney Defendants notified Domingo by mail on or about February 26, 2015, that he remained in default for non-payment of $6,674 and threatened Domingo with foreclosure if Domingo did not sign a Repayment Plan Agreement for monthly repayments of $278.08.
6 Plaintiffs allege that this default notice did not 
disclose that Nutter's claims had been dismissed with prejudice 
5 A second judgment was entered on February 4, 2015, concerning the
Circuit Court's award of attorney's fees and costs. 
6 Plaintiffs allege that Nutter was directed by Rosdil on two
separate occasions to "communicate with Domingo through Rosdil only, and to
send Domingo's $24,000.00 [judgment award] through Rosdil[.]" Nevertheless,the Complaint states that on or about February 24, 2015, Nutter and/orAttorney Defendants mailed the $24,000 check to Domingo directly withoutadvising Rosdil. 
9  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and that Domingo did not "appreciate the same." Domingo signed 
the Repayment Plan Agreement "under duress, fear and serious emotional distress caused by the continued threat of foreclosure and years of litigation."
7 
Thereafter,8 the Circuit Court entered an August 10, 
2015 Amended Judgment Superceding Judgments (Amended Judgment), 
which made clear that all claims for foreclosure in Nutter's 
complaint were dismissed with prejudice and expressly directed judgment in favor of Domingo for the $24,000 repair set aside and $39,179.24 in attorney's fees and costs.
9 On September 4, 2015, 
Nutter appealed the Amended Judgment in CAAP-15-0000659. Domingo cross-appealed, arguing that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in refusing to impose sanctions on Nutter. 
Upon review, we concluded that Nutter did not provide 
any evidence showing that Domingo failed to comply with the terms of the Domingo Repair Rider.  We also upheld the Circuit Court's 
conclusion that the entry of final judgment on Nutter's complaint 
before Domingo's Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 11 
motion was filed precluded the Circuit Court from entering 
7 Upon notifying Rosdil of the letter, Domingo abrogated the payment
contract. 
8 On April 24, 2015, Domingo filed an HRCP Rule 11 motion for
sanctions against Nutter and Attorney Defendants based on the filing and
prosecution of the foreclosure complaint. The court denied the motion on procedural grounds, finding that the summary judgment entered in favor ofDomingo and against Nutter resolved the challenged conduct. Domingo thenfiled a motion to correct/reconsider the order denying the HRCP Rule 11motion, which the court also denied. 
9 On May 1, 2015, Nutter moved for correction and/or reconsideration
per HRCP Rules 54, 58, 60(a), and 60(b) of the judgments granting Domingo'smotion for summary judgment and for attorney's fees and costs. Although themotion was granted in part and denied in part, the August 10, 2015 AmendedJudgment is essentially identical in substance to the earlier judgments infavor of Domingo. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sanctions against Nutter. We therefore affirmed the trial 
court's rulings. 
Finally, Plaintiffs alleged that Nutter continues to 
threaten Domingo with foreclosure, and that Nutter's conduct is intended to cause Domingo anxiety and worry and to hasten his demise, and that Nutter has been successful. Domingo has been hospitalized about four times since Nutter's first post-judgment threat to foreclose again and/or render Domingo in default. The Complaint states that on June 14, 2016, through different counsel, Nutter again filed for foreclosure against Domingo, and "[t]he pleading and affirmation of counsel are intentionally vague and ambiguous but certainly frivolous, fraudulent, elder abuse, and wrongful foreclosure." 
B. The Allegations Regarding the Namahoe Foreclosure The allegations regarding Nutter's foreclosure action 
against Namahoe mirror in many respects those regarding Nutter's foreclosure against Domingo, the main differences being that Namahoe's alleged repair failure was for only $500 worth of repairs, and Namahoe failed to defend himself in the case. Namahoe lost his home. 
On October 19, 2009, Namahoe executed a promissory note 
in favor of Nutter and its successors and assigns (Namahoe Note), 
along with a Home Equity Conversion Loan Agreement (Namahoe Loan Agreement) and an attached Repair Rider to Loan Agreement 
11  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Namahoe Repair Rider).10 The exhibits to the Namahoe Note 
indicated that the "principal limit" was $67,536.00, with Namahoe 
receiving an "advance" of $52,462.48, with a $750.00 "line of credit" designated for repairs, and the balance of the $67,536.00 going to closing costs and servicing fee set asides. The Namahoe Note was secured by a Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (Namahoe 
Reverse Mortgage). 
On March 6, 2012, Nutter filed a foreclosure complaint 
and summons against Namahoe, also naming HUD.
11 The complaint 
alleged that Namahoe "defaulted in the observance and performance 
of the terms, covenants and conditions by failing to repair the property as required by the [Namahoe Repair Rider] in a timely manner." The complaint further alleged that Namahoe was given written notice that failure to timely repair per the Namahoe Repair Rider "required immediate payment in full of all outstanding principal and accrued interest due on the loan," and that Namahoe failed to so pay. 
On May 20, 2013, Nutter filed a Motion for Summary 
Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on 
10 The Namahoe Repair Rider provided, inter alia : 
I. Lender's Promises 
A. The Lender shall set aside $750.00 from the initial Principal Limit under the Loan Agreementto be used for the purpose of bringing theProperty up to the property standards requiredby the Secretary by repairing:The hall and carport ceiling shows evidence ofwater stains due to roof leak. The Front stair rail showed evidence of water rot. All to be repaired. 
11 On June 28, 2012, HUD filed a disclaimer of interest in the
Property. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complaint Filed March 6, 2012.12 The memorandum in support of 
the motion stated, inter alia: 
[Namahoe] defaulted in the observance and performance
of the terms, covenants and conditions by failing to repair
the property, as required by the [Namahoe Repair Rider], ina timely manner. A true and correct copy of the approval by[HUD] for immediate payment in full of all outstandingprincipal and accrued interest as required by paragraph7(b)(iii) of the Note is attached hereto. . . . Written notice was given to [Namahoe] that because of the failure torepair the property as required by the [Namahoe RepairRider] in a timely manner [Nutter] required immediatepayment in full of all outstanding principal and accruedinterest due on the loan. A true and correct copy of thisnotice with all personal and confidential informationredacted is attached hereto. . . . However, despite saidnotice the default was not cured and the loan has not been paid off. Consequently, [Nutter] exercised its option underthe terms and covenants of the Note and Mortgage to declarethe entire unpaid principal balance of the loan, togetherwith interest immediately due and payable[.]
13 
On June 25, 2013, a one-minute hearing was held on 
Nutter's motion for summary judgment, with Nutter's attorney 
appearing by telephone and no other appearances noted; the motion was granted. On July 2, 2013, the Circuit Court entered the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting [Nutter's] Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed March 6, 2012 (Order 
12 According to the attached certificate of service, the motion for
summary judgment and the notice of hearing were mailed to Namahoe at the
subject property. Based on an August 28, 2012 filing by Nutter, it does notappear that the U.S. Postal Service delivers mail to the physical location ofthe subject property. The notice of hearing stated that a hearing would beheld at 8:30 a.m. in the Circuit Court's courtroom at 777 Kilauea Avenue, inHilo; no hearing date was included in the Notice of Hearing, although a datewas written on the first page of the Motion for Summary Judgment. A November 16, 2011 Notice of Intent to Foreclose and an April 6, 2012 debt collectionnotice, both attached in support of the motion, indicated that they weremailed to Namahoe's post office box in Hilo, rather than the subjectproperty's physical address. 
13 With the motion for summary judgment, Ehrhorn submitted an
affirmation pursuant to HRS § 667-17 (2016) (repealed 2017) stating that he
was "fully aware" of the underlying action and that based, inter alia , "upon
[his] own inspection and other reasonable inquiry" to the best of his
knowledge, information, and belief, the motion contained no false statementsof fact or law, that he understood his continuing obligation to amend theaffirmation in light of newly discovered material facts, and that theallegations in the motion were warranted by existing law and have evidentiarysupport. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Granting Summary Judgment), as well as a Judgment on the Order 
Granting Summary Judgment (Foreclosure Judgment). 
On July 24, 2013, Foreclosure Commissioner Michael W. 
Moore (Moore) filed a Motion for Leave to Waive Open Houses. The attached Declaration states: 
2. On July 18, 2013, I visited the subject property
in Hawaiian Acres. . . . I knocked on the front door, but
there was no response. . . . It appeared that someone wasresiding in the house. 
3. . . . I found Defendant Namahoe's telephone number
in the phone book and called. Mr. Namahoe answered. He 
seemed unaware there was a foreclosure proceeding againsthim. He said he is 70 years old, has no car, so he can'tcheck his post office box in Hilo where he receives hismail. He told me no one can take his house because he owns it. I explained to him it was my responsibility to sell hisproperty at public auction. 
4. He became quite upset. He said he has nowhere 
else to live, no family or friends he can stay with. He said his income is only $700 a month, and he can barelyafford to buy food. He told me that he would shoot the next person to come to his house so he could go to jail and getfed. 
5. Based on these circumstances, I believe Mr.
Namahoe will not cooperate in conducting open houses of theproperty, and that any person who attempts to enter his homewould risk injury, possibly serious injury. 
(Emphasis added). 
Also on July 24, 2013, Moore mailed a Notice of Hearing 
to Namahoe's Hilo post office box. The Circuit Court's October 
2, 2013 Order Granting Commissioner's Motion for Leave to Waive Open Houses states that the motion "came on for hearing before this Court on August 29, 2013, with the Commissioner present and [Nutter] having filed a statement of no opposition . . . and no other parties appearing." 
The Commissioner's Report on Sale of Property indicates 
that the property was sold at public auction on November 13, 2013, with the highest bid being presented by Nutter. The 
14  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attached certificate of service, dated November 25, 2013, 
contains the following addendum: 
NOTE: We do not have a current mailing address for
[Namahoe]. His last known mailing address was P.O. Box
4686, HILO HI 96721. By return mail notice dated 10/4/13,
the U.S. Postal Service advised that Mr. Namahoe's postoffice box has been closed and they are unable to forwardhis mail. 
On February 11, 2014, the Circuit Court entered an 
Order Approving Report of Commissioner, Confirming Commissioner's 
Sale of Property at Public Auction, Directing Distribution of Proceeds and for a Writ of Ejectment, along with a corresponding Judgment, Writ of Ejectment, and Notice of Entry (Confirmation 
Judgment). A Return of Service as to Writ of Ejectment was filed on June 23, 2014, indicating personal service on Namahoe. 
Approximately two and a half years later, on January 3, 
2017, Namahoe filed an HRCP Rule 60(b) Motion for Relief from 
[Foreclosure Judgment] (Rule 60(b) Motion). The motion 
challenged the substantive basis for the foreclosure, averring 
that Nutter was not entitled to pursue a reverse mortgage foreclosure based upon failure to timely repair, and further, that Namahoe made the repairs set forth in the Namahoe Repair Rider but that, although he recalled two separate inspections of the Property by Nutter's agents, neither inspector checked the repairs to the roof and neither indicated there was any problem with the repairs. 
The Rule 60(b) Motion and Namahoe's attached 
Declaration also challenged whether Namahoe had notice of the foreclosure proceedings, stating, inter alia: 
7. I do not remember the sheriff, [Estacion]
handing me the foreclosure Complaint on November 9, 2012. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Not [sic] do I recall signing any paper that I received the
Complaint. I would not have understood it anyway. 
8. My first memory about the foreclosure was a
telephone call from an attorney who said he wanted toinspect my house and property because it was his job to sellmy house at a foreclosure action. I was shocked! I did not know of any foreclosure. How come no one wrote me,telephoned me, or came to the house. I was always therebecause I had no car, very little money and only a fewneighbors and relatives. I had to hitch rides from my housein remote Hawaiian Acres to shop for food and collect mymail at my post office box in Hilo. I was angry and upsetand never heard again from the attorney. 
In the Rule 60(b) Motion, Namahoe further argued that 
Nutter committed fraud and fraud upon the court in pursuing the 
improper foreclosure, and requested the court take judicial notice of the records and files in the separate allegedly improper foreclosure proceedings brought by Nutter against Domingo, as well as the records and files in Civil No. 16-1-0249, the Circuit Court case underlying the instant appeal. 
Nutter opposed the Rule 60(b) Motion, arguing that: 
(1) it was untimely and Namahoe failed to establish a meritorious claim or defense; (2) Namahoe's fraud allegations were unsupported; (3) the Foreclosure Judgment was not void; (4) Namahoe waived all claims against Nutter related to the foreclosure in exchange for $5,000; and (5) the Property had already been sold to a third party. Namahoe filed a reply to Nutter's opposition, contesting Nutter's first four arguments. 
A hearing on the Rule 60(b) Motion was held on February 
28, 2017, wherein the Circuit Court orally denied the motion. The Circuit Court explained its ruling: 
[T]he Court will deny the motion to the extent that
the motion proceeds under Rule 60(b)(3), [because] the
motion is untimely. More than one year passed between the 
16  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
time the Judgment was filed on July 2nd, 2013, and the
filing of the [Rule 60(b) Motion].
To the extent that proceeding under Rule 60(b)(4), the
motion is denied. If we're talking about the notice issue,Mr. Namahoe did not answer and provide a mailing address.And if you look at the note and mortgage, all notices wereto be given by mail to that 16-2218 Opeapea Road inKurtistown unless Mr. Namahoe designated otherwise. And there's no indication that he designated another address tothe lender. 
Regarding the fraud on the court type theories I'm
going to think that that's more properly addressed in Civilnumber 16-1-249. I see that case as being that independentaction that's mentioned under Rule 60(b). And my impressionis that independent action is not really a 60(b) typemotion. 
There's still a fraud on the court type claim for
relief by Mr. Namahoe against Clay Chapman. And Mr. Namahoe would have at least the opportunity to attempt to amend thepleadings in that case to state, let's say, clear claims forrelief against Nutter. So that's what the Court's belief is. 
Namahoe's attorney asked if the court's ruling was with 
prejudice, and the court replied: 
On the (b)(3), (b)(4), I think so.But the [fraud on the] court stuff 
[14] is still out 
there; right, in your other action. Cause you still have --I think Mr. Namahoe still has a claim for relief againstNutter -- not Nutter -- Clay Chapman. And then you have theopportunity to amend. I'm thinking that you already havethat action already, you know, so it's not as if you neededthis action to address the [fraud on the] court issue[.] 
On April 5, 2017, the Circuit Court entered the Order 
Denying Rule 60(b) Motion. 
On April 13, 2017, Namahoe filed an HRCP Rule 59(a) & 
(e) Motion for Amendment/Additional Evidence/Reconsideration of 
[Order Denying Rule 60(b) Motion]. Nutter opposed the motion. On June 9, 2017, the Circuit Court entered an order denying reconsideration.
 Namahoe timely filed a Notice of Appeal to this court 
(the ICA). We affirmed. Namahoe filed a petition for writ of 
certiorari to the supreme court, which was accepted and which 
14 The transcript reads "form of court stuff," but in context, it is
clear that the Circuit Court was referring to Namahoe's assertion that there
had been a fraud on the court. 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resulted in the Namahoe Appeal, which is discussed at length 
herein. In short, the supreme court affirmed the ICA's decision with respect to Namahoe's requests for relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) and (4), but held that Namahoe was entitled to relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6). Namahoe
, 153 Hawai#i 149, 528 P.3d 
222. 
C. Other Relevant Proceedings Below 
1. Attorney Defendants' Motion to Dismiss 
On July 27, 2016, Attorney Defendants filed a Motion to 
Dismiss Plaintiffs' Complaint with Prejudice (Motion to Dismiss
), 
arguing that: (1) they owe no duty of care or fiduciary duty to Plaintiffs that could give rise to liability for legal malpractice or breach of fiduciary duty; (2) the litigation privilege provides them with immunity for legal malpractice, breach of fiduciary duty, wrongful foreclosure, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and elder abuse; (3) Plaintiffs failed to allege a claim for abuse of process because the Complaint did not allege "willful acts" distinct from the use of process; (4) Plaintiffs failed to allege a claim for fraud because the Complaint failed to allege detrimental reliance or, in the case of Domingo, substantial pecuniary damage; (5) Plaintiffs failed to allege a claim for violation of HRS Chapter 481A because the Complaint did not allege conduct that would likely lead to confusion or misunderstanding; and (6) Plaintiffs lacked the consumer standing required to bring a claim under HRS Chapter 480. 
18  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attorney Defendants further argued that because the 
claims against Ehrhorn fail to state a claim for relief, any and 
all allegations of respondeat superior liability against Clay 
Chapman must be dismissed with prejudice, and, similarly, that Plaintiffs had no cause of action on which to premise a request for punitive damages. 
Plaintiffs raised numerous arguments in opposition to 
the Motion to Dismiss, and Attorney Defendants filed a reply memorandum. 
Following a September 29, 2016 hearing, on December 15, 
2016, the Circuit Court entered the Partial Dismissal Order. The Partial Dismissal Order dismissed Counts I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII (only in part), X, and XIII of the Complaint without prejudice, as well as dismissed Count XII of the Complaint with prejudice.
15 The Partial Dismissal Order is discussed further in 
Section IV.B.2. and IV.C. below. 
2. Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment 
On August 24, 2016, Plaintiffs filed a Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment Number One Against [Nutter and Attorney Defendants] (MPSJ), seeking a determination that, as a matter of 
law, Nutter did not have the right to foreclosure on either 
Domingo or Namahoe for failure to timely make the required repairs. Plaintiffs argued that Nutter was prevented from seeking foreclosure by the terms of the loan documents, the HUD mortgage loan servicing handbook, and Nutter's own reverse mortgage manual. 
15 Counts IX and XI state claims against Nutter only. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nutter and Attorney Defendants filed oppositions to the 
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment. On March 6, 2017, the court 
entered the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ, granting the MPSJ as to Domingo and denying it as to Namahoe. For the reasons set forth in Section IV.B.1. below, we conclude that we lack appellate jurisdiction to review the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ. 
D. Attorney Defendants' Anti-SLAPP Motion On November 23, 2016, Attorney Defendants filed a 
motion for judgment on the pleadings "on the basis that [Plaintiffs'] claims against the Attorney Defendants represent an impermissible strategic lawsuit against public participation." Plaintiffs filed a memorandum in opposition, Attorney Defendants filed a reply memorandum, and the Circuit Court held a hearing on January 26, 2017. The Circuit Court concluded that Plaintiffs' sole surviving claim against Attorney Defendants for fraud on the court had substantial and sufficient justification to warrant denial of the motion for judgment on the pleadings. On March 6, 2017, the Circuit Court entered an Order Denying Attorney Defendants' MJOP, and the court later denied Attorney Defendants' renewed anti-SLAPP motion for judgment on the pleadings. 
These appeals were timely filed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
In CAAP-17-0000324, Nutter raised three points of 
error, all of which contended, in one manner or other, that the Circuit Court erred in failing to conclude that this action constitutes a SLAPP filed in violation of HRS Chapter 634F (2016) 
20  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(repealed 2022).16 As noted above, Nutter's appeal has been 
dismissed with prejudice. 
In CAAP-17-0000324, Attorney Defendants raise three 
points of error, contending that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) 
denying their substantive joinder to Nutter's MJOP; (2) denying Attorney Defendants' MJOP, pursuant to HRS Chapter 634F; and (3) ruling that Attorney Defendants were not afforded protection by the anti-SLAPP statute, based on (a) the attorney affirmations filed by them during their representation of Nutter in the foreclosure actions against Namahoe and Domingo, and (b) the fraud on the court claim by Namahoe, which was not dismissed in the Partial Dismissal Order. 
In CAAP-17-0000859, Attorney Defendants raise three 
points of error,  contending that the Circuit Court erred in: 
(1) entering the Order Granting HRCP 54(b) Certification, as the orders subject to certification did not resolve any claims; (2) entering the Partial Dismissal Order inasmuch as it denied Attorney Defendants' motion to dismiss Namahoe's claim for relief based on fraud on the court; and (3) entering the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ to the extent that it granted any relief in favor of Namahoe. 17
In 
CAAP-17-0000859, Plaintiffs raise two points of 
error, contending that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) granting in part Attorney Defendants' Motion to Dismiss, which was filed 
16 Act 96 of 2022 repealed HRS chapter 634F and instead adopted HRS
chapter 634G, the Hawaii Public Expression Protection Act. 
17 Although Attorney Defendants cross-appealed in CAAP-17-0000859 , we
address their contentions first here because they argue that this court lacks
appellate jurisdiction. 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6); and (2) denying in part 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, given that Nutter had no right to foreclose against their homes. III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A ruling on a motion for judgment on the pleadings 
pursuant to HRS § 634F, regarding SLAPP cases, is reviewed de novo. Perry v. Perez-Wendt, 129 Hawai# i 95, 98, 294 P.3d 1081, 
1084 (App. 2013). Pursuant to the anti-SLAPP statute, when a motion to dispose of a purported SLAPP claim is filed, the burden of proof and persuasion rests with the non-moving party. 
HRS 
§ 634F–2(4)(B) (Supp. 2012); see also Perry, 129 Hawai# i at 100, 
294 P.3d 1086. 
Statutory interpretation and the existence of 
jurisdiction are questions of law that are reviewed under the right/wrong standard. Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. v. Greenspon, 
143 Hawai# i 237, 243, 428 P.3d 749, 755 (2018). 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo
. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 
117 Hawai# i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to
state a claim unless it appears beyond a doubt that the
plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or herclaim that would entitle him or her to relief. This court must, therefore, view a plaintiff's complaint in a lightmost favorable to him or her in order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could warrant relief underany alternate theory. Consequently, in reviewing thecircuit court's order dismissing the plaintiffs' complaintin this case, our consideration is strictly limited to theallegations of the complaint, and we must deem thoseallegations to be true. 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel , 113 
Hawai#i 251, 266, 151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
22 IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Attorney Defendants' Anti-SLAPP Arguments FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attorney Defendants argue that Plaintiffs' Complaint 
should have been dismissed as an impermissible SLAPP, filed in 
violation of HRS Chapter 634F. We conclude that Plaintiffs carried their burden of showing that their Complaint is not a SLAPP. Namahoe and Domingo are elderly individuals who allegedly suffered injury and/or loss in conjunction with the wrongful foreclosures of the reverse mortgages on their homes. Plaintiffs' action to seek redress was not filed in violation of HRS Chapter 634F. The Circuit Court did not err in rejecting Attorney Defendants' arguments that this case should be dismissed as a SLAPP.
18 
HRS Chapter 634F sought to, inter alia, "[p]rotect and 
encourage citizen participation in government to the maximum extent permitted by law" and "[c]reate a more equitable balance between the rights of persons to file lawsuits and to trial by jury, and the rights of persons to petition, speak out, associate, and otherwise participate in their governments" by prohibiting strategic lawsuits against such public participation. See 2002 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 187, § 1 at 822 (setting forth purposes of HRS Chapter 634F). HRS § 634F-1 (2016) provided that SLAPP "refers to a lawsuit that lacks substantial justification or is interposed for delay or harassment and that is solely based on the party's public participation before a governmental body." 
18 Our affirmation of the Circuit Court's SLAPP rulings is not a
decision on the merits of Plaintiffs' claims against Attorney Defendants. 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added). Attorney Defendants argue that the claims 
against them lack substantial justification, are based solely on their participation before a government body, and therefore, should have been dismissed under the anti-SLAPP statute. 
Attorney Defendants generally contend, inter alia, 
that: every one of Plaintiffs' claims against them arise out of Nutter's foreclosures on both Namahoe's and Domingo's reverse mortgages; Nutter had a right to initiate the foreclosure actions and participate in those actions by way of giving written and/or oral testimony; and Attorney Defendants' actions in the foreclosures against Namahoe and Domingo constitute precisely the type of conduct that Hawaii's anti-SLAPP Law is designed to protect. Given the allegations in Plaintiffs' Complaint, this is an incorrect interpretation of Hawaii's anti-SLAPP law, especially in light of the supreme court's opinion in the Namahoe Appeal, as set forth below. 
Attorney Defendants more specifically argue that 
Plaintiffs do not assert a valid claim against them because Namahoe's claim for fraud on the court is not a cause of action upon which damages may be awarded to an individual. However, as Plaintiffs note, this argument was not raised in their anti-SLAPP arguments to the Circuit Court, and therefore it is waived. See 
Hawaii Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4); see also, e.g., Kemp v. CSEA
, 111 Hawai#i 367, 391, 141 P.3d 1014, 1038 
(2006). 
Attorney Defendants next argue that Plaintiffs' fraud 
on the court claim lacks substantial justification because the 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged conduct is not a sufficiently egregious or widespread 
fraud upon the judicial process to constitute a fraud on the court. In the Namahoe Appeal, in the supreme court's discussion of what constitutes fraud on the court in the context of an HRCP Rule 60(b) motion, the court explained: 
Attorneys representing foreclosing lenders must verify
and affirm to the court the accuracy of documents proffered
by the lender/client in order to prevent unwarrantedforeclosures. HRS § 667-17. Attorney affirmations inforeclosure proceedings are a statutory means of protectinghomeowners from wrongful foreclosure, as they prevent thecourts from advancing fraud by lenders in foreclosureactions. Id. According to the statutory mandate, attorneysshall file an affirmation with the court "that the attorneyhas verified the accuracy of the documents submitted, underpenalty of perjury and subject to applicable rules ofprofessional conduct." Id. The purpose of the statute "isto prevent unwarranted foreclosure actions on residentialproperty by requiring an attorney who files a judicialforeclosure . . . to also submit a signed affidavit to thecourt . . . stating that the attorney has verified theaccuracy of the document submitted." H. Stand Comm. Rep.No. 697-14, in 2014 House Journal, at 1127. The statute specifically notes that: 
During and after August 2010, numerous and
widespread insufficiencies in foreclosure filings invarious courts around the nation were reported bymajor mortgage lenders and other authorities,including failure to review documents and files toestablish standing and other foreclosure requisites;filing of notarized affidavits that falsely attest tosuch review and to other critical facts in the foreclosure process; and "robosignature" of documents. 
HRS § 667-17. 
Failure to submit adequate documentation, including
the attorney affirmation, has been determined to be anadequate basis for denial of a motion for summary judgment.Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Fong, 149 
Hawai #i 249, 252,
255—56, 488 P.3d 1228, 1231, 1234—35 (2021). It is reasonably inferred that to require attorney affirmations isto also require them to be accurate and complete. Anythingless would render the statutory requirement meaningless.See In re City & Cnty. of Honolulu Corp. Counsel, 54 Haw.356, 373, 507 P.2d 169, 178 (1973) ("It is a cardinal ruleof statutory construction that a statute ought upon thewhole be so construed that, if it can be prevented, no
clause, sentence or word shall be superfluous, void, or
insignificant."); Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Haw.v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai #i 217, 230, 953 P.2d 1315, 1328 (1998)
(courts can consider "[t]he reason and spirit of the law,and the cause which induced the legislature to enact it. . . to discover its true meaning.") (bracket and ellipsispoints in original). Because attorney affirmations are
representations to the court, an inaccurate, incomplete, orotherwise misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation may constitute 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a misrepresentation to the court. Accordingly, an
inadequate attorney affirmation may rise to the level offraud on the court.  In these instances, relief from the
Decree of Foreclosure is justified.
24 
24 The circuit court in the Domingo and Namahoeforeclosure action in Domingo v. James B. Nutter &Co., Civil No. 16-1-0249, CAAP-17-0000324, highlightedthe importance of the attorney affirmation: 
If the representations contained in the
affirmation required under HRS § 667-17 are notdirected to the mortgagor, then to whom are theydirected? Quite clearly they are directed tothe Court presiding over the foreclosure case.The Court implicitly relies upon the attorneyaffirmation. The attorney affirmation "helpsensure that Hawai #i's courts are not used as 
instruments of fraud in foreclosure actions." Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 62-12, in 2013 HouseJournal, 27th Leg., Reg. Sess. at 1632 (Haw.2013).
Since the attorney affirmation contains
representations to the Court, if the attorneyaffirmation contains misrepresentations they aremisrepresentations to the Court. Sanctions and remedies may be available as a result of thesemisrepresentations to the Court. 
Here, the attorney affirmation submitted in support of
the foreclosure of Namahoe's home was inaccurate and incomplete in several respects. [Nutter] appears to haveinitiated foreclosure despite having knowledge that itfailed to comply with the Repair Rider — the violation ofwhich triggered the foreclosure. According to the RepairRider attached to [Nutter's] complaint, the burden was on[Nutter] to certify "that the repairs which are funded underthis Repair Rider will be completed in a manner to meet HUDproperty standards required by the Secretary as determinedby a HUD-approved inspector." However, the record is devoidof any admissible evidence of Namahoe's alleged failure tocarry out the repairs. 
As the ICA stated in its Memorandum 
Opinion, "there is no declaration or other evidence in therecord of the particular repairs Namahoe allegedly failed tocomplete." No. CAAP-17-0000496, 2022 WL 899896 at *11 n.10(App. March 28, 2022) (emphasis added). Furthermore,nowhere in the record does [Nutter] confirm that Namahoe'sproperty had been inspected by a HUD-certified inspector.
25  
Pursuant to the Repair Rider, [Nutter] had the independentduty to ensure that a HUD-approved inspector had inspectedNamahoe's property prior to initiating foreclosureproceedings. 
25 Based on the current record, it is unknown whether anyinspectors were sent to survey the state of repairs onNamahoe's property. Namahoe attests that two individuals inspected his property, but that noneindicated any problems with Namahoe's repairs. 
By submitting an attorney affirmation in support of
foreclosure against Namahoe, without first verifying that
there was an adequate factual and legal basis forforeclosure pursuant HRS § 667-17, the attorney affirmationfalsely affirmed the sufficiency of the basis for the 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreclosure. This failure by [Nutter] and its attorneys
supports a finding of fraud on the court. 
James B. Nutter & Co. , 153 Hawai#i at 167-68, 528 P.3d at 240-41 
(emphasis added). 
The supreme court clearly rejected the argument that 
the alleged conduct of Attorney Defendants in the foreclosure 
action against Namahoe does not constitute a fraud on the court. The supreme court's ruling shows that Plaintiffs' claim for fraud in this case does not "lack[] substantial justification." See 
HRS § 634F-1 (definition of SLAPP). 
Further, the Complaint and 
the supreme court's opinion show that Plaintiffs' claims do not just flow from the filing of the false attorney affirmation and other pleadings in the foreclosure case, but the failure to verify – outside the participation in the court proceedings – that there was an adequate factual and legal basis for foreclosure. Indeed, Plaintiffs' allegations assert that Attorney Defendants conducted due diligence and similar responsibilities "prior to, during and subsequent to the foreclosures." Thus, the allegations in Plaintiffs' Complaint are based in part on the conduct of Attorney Defendants outside of their appearances before the court and are not "solely based on [Attorney Defendants'] public participation before a governmental body." Id.Therefore, Defendant Attorneys are not 
entitled to SLAPP relief based on that argument. 
Domingo's claims against Nutter are similarly based on 
allegations of wrongful foreclosure and further claims arising, in the first instance, out of a factually and legally deficient foreclosure on the reverse mortgage on Domingo's home based on 
27  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
repairs that Domingo supposedly failed to complete. Domingo, 
like Namahoe, argued that, as a matter of law, Nutter did not have a legal right to foreclosure under the circumstances. 
Domingo moved for summary judgment on Nutter's 
foreclosure complaint in Civil No. 12-1-0226, arguing, inter alia, that he completed the required repairs, and that even if he had not, failure to complete the repairs would not, as a matter of law, give Nutter the legal right to accelerate the subject note and seek foreclosure. The Circuit Court granted Domingo's summary judgment motion and entered judgment in favor of Domingo, inter alia, dismissing the foreclosure complaint with prejudice. 
The Complaint herein further alleges, inter alia, that 
despite the foregoing order and judgment thereon, Nutter and/or Attorney Defendants notified Domingo by mail on or about February 26, 2015, that he remained in default for non-payment of $6,674 and threatened Domingo with another foreclosure, if Domingo did not sign a Repayment Plan Agreement for monthly repayments and make monthly payments of $278.08. Plaintiffs allege that this default notice did not disclose that Nutter's claims had been dismissed with prejudice and that Domingo did not "appreciate the same." Domingo signed the Repayment Plan Agreement "under duress, fear and serious emotional distress caused by the continued threat of foreclosure and years of litigation."
19 
Thereafter, the Circuit Court entered the August 10, 
2015 Amended Judgment, superceding the previous judgments, which 
19 Upon notifying his counsel of the letter, Domingo abrogated the
repayment contract. 
28 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
made clear that all claims for foreclosure were dismissed with 
prejudice and expressly directed judgment in favor of Domingo for the $24,000 repair set aside and $39,179.24 in attorney's fees and costs.
20 The Circuit Court's rulings in favor of Domingo in 
the foreclosure action against him were affirmed on appeal in CAAP-15-0000659. 
Although ultimately Domingo did not end up losing his 
home to foreclosure, it appears that by submitting an egregiously inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading, attorney affirmation in support of the foreclosure action against Domingo, without first verifying that there was an adequate factual and legal basis for foreclosure pursuant to HRS § 667-17, Attorney Defendants fraudulently affirmed the sufficiency of the basis for the foreclosure. This egregious failure to comply with HRS § 667-17, facilitated an unwarranted foreclosure action against Domingo. Thus, Plaintiffs' Complaint does not "lack[] substantial justification," and it is not "solely based on [Attorney Defendants'] public participation before a governmental body." See HRS § 634F-1. We conclude that Defendant Attorneys 
are not entitled to SLAPP relief based on Domingo's action to seek redress. 
Attorney Defendants next argue that Plaintiffs' 
Complaint against them lacks substantial justification because Namahoe's claims are barred by res judicata and collateral estoppel in light of the judgment on the merits in favor of 
20 This judgment was later modified, but the substance of it was
undisturbed. 
29 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nutter and against Namahoe in the foreclosure action (Civil No. 
12-1-0113). However, the supreme court vacated the Foreclosure Decree insofar as it would preclude Namahoe from asserting a wrongful foreclosure claim against Nutter. James B. Nutter & 
Co.
, 153 Hawai#i at 153, 166-69, 528 P.3d at 226, 239-42. We 
conclude that the vacated judgment is not a bar to claims against Defendant Attorneys, and therefore, we reject the argument that Plaintiffs' Complaint against them lacks substantial justification because Namahoe's claims are barred by res judicata and collateral estoppel. 
Finally, Attorney Defendants argue that the supreme 
court's decision in 
Hungate v. Law Office of David B. Rosen, 139 
Hawai#i 394, 391 P.3d 1 (2017),21 bars all direct claims against a 
mortgagee's attorney for wrongful foreclosure, and as a result, Plaintiffs' Complaint lacks substantial justification under HRS chapter 634F. We conclude that Hungate is distinguishable, and this argument is without merit. 
Attorney Defendants specifically argue that Hungate 
bars all HRS § 480-2 claims against the lender's attorney in the context of foreclosure cases. However, the supreme court's decision was based on the specific allegations against the mortgagee's attorney in that case (Rosen), and set forth examples 
of circumstances beyond that decision. The supreme court stated, 
inter alia: 
In contrast [to the role of a real estate broker], the
role of an attorney involves representing a client's
interests against those of an opposing party within an 
21 Hungate was abrogated on other grounds by State ex rel. Shikada v.
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., 152 Hawai #i 418, 526 P.3d 395 (2023). 
30 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adversary system. Attorneys bear a duty to zealously
represent clients " within the bounds of the law ." Giuliani 
v. Chuck, 1 Haw. App. 379, 384, 620 P.2d 733, 737 (1980);see also Hawai #i Rules of Professional Conduct, "Preamble,"
¶ 2; ¶ 8; ¶ 9.
22 In other settings, we have declined to
recognize a duty in favor of a plaintiff adversely affectedby an attorney's performance of legal services on behalf ofthe opposing party. In Boning, we noted that "creation of aduty in favor of an adversary of the attorney's client wouldcreate an unacceptable conflict of interest. Not only wouldthe adversary's interests interfere with the client'sinterests, the attorney's justifiable concern with being
sued for negligence would detrimentally interfere with the
attorney-client relationship." Boning, 114 Hawai #i at 220,
159 P.3d at 832. 
22 Our desire to avoid creating unacceptable conflicts ofinterest in this context, to protect attorney-clientcounsel and advice from the intrusion of competingconcerns, and to allow adequate room for zealousadvocacy, does not encompass, for example , allowing
attorneys to conduct patently illegal activities onbehalf of clients. 
Permitting a party to sue his or her opponent's
attorney for UDAP under HRS § 480-2 in foreclosure actionspresents a similar issue in that an attorney's concern withbeing sued by a party opponent could compromise his or herrepresentation of the client. 
In a UDAP action, an attorney
would be especially vulnerable to suit because, for example,under HRS § 480-2 "actual deception need not be shown; thecapacity to deceive is sufficient." Keka, 94 Hawai #i at 
228, 11 P.3d at 16 (emphasis added) (citations omitted).Accordingly, a plaintiff would need only to allege thatopposing counsel has breached the statutory duty under HRS§ 480-2 "not to engage in unfair or deceptive acts orpractices in the conduct of any trade or commerce . . . in away that caused private damages[ ] in order to state a claimunder" HRS chapter 480. Compton, 761 F.3d at 1056. Given 
that UDAP lacks a more rigorous or precise state of mindrequirement, "even a carefully rendered opinion could, ifincorrect, have the capacity to deceive." Short v. 
Demopolis, 103 Wash.2d 52, 691 P.2d 163, 172 (1984)(Pearson, J., concurring). The attorney would therefore"have to insure the correctness of his [or her] opinions andstrategies," rendering it "virtually impossible for anattorney to effectively perform the traditional role oflegal counselor." Id.Similar to the negligence issue in
Boning, in foreclosure actions an attorney's justifiableconcern with being sued by the opposing party for UDAP couldcompromise the attorney's ability to zealously represent hisor her client. Consequently, based on the allegationsagainst Rosen, we decline to recognize a UDAP claim againsthim by Hungate under HRS § 480-2 in the instant foreclosureaction.
23 
31 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
23 We do not now decide whether the 2012 amendments to 
the foreclosure statute create potential UDAPliability under some circumstances for attorneysconducting nonjudicial foreclosures.  See HRS § 667-60
(2016) (imposing UDAP liability on "any foreclosingmortgagee" for violating a series of provisionsgoverning nonjudicial foreclosure); HRS § 667-1 (2016)(defining "mortgagee" to include "the currentmortgagee's or lender's duly authorized agent"). 
Accordingly, the circuit court properly dismissed
Hungate's complaint alleging Rosen violated HRS § 480-2 by
engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices. 
Hungate, 139 Hawai#i at 413, 391 P.3d at 20. 
In short, Hungate expressly leaves open potential for 
HRS § 480-2 claims against an attorney, 
for example, if the 
attorney conducts patently illegal activities on behalf of a 
client; and the supreme court declined to decide whether the amendments to the nonjudicial foreclosure statute at issue in Hungate create potential HRS chapter 480 liability for attorneys under some circumstances. 
Our conclusion that Hungate does not support Attorney 
Defendants' SLAPP argument is further informed by the supreme court's discussion and rationale for concluding that the former HRS §§ 667-5 and 667-7 did not create a private cause of action against a foreclosing mortgagee's attorney. See Hungate, 139 Hawai#i at 405-08, 391 P.3d at 12-15. The supreme court 
reiterated the factors it considered in determining whether statutory duties give rise to a private cause of action: 
In determining whether a private cause of action
should be recognized based on statutory requirements, we
consider the following factors: (1) whether the plaintiffis one of the class for whose especial benefit the statutewas enacted; (2) whether there is any indication oflegislative intent, explicit or implicit, either to createsuch a remedy or to deny one; and (3) whether a privatecause of action would be consistent with the underlyingpurposes of the legislative scheme to imply such a remedyfor the plaintiff. 
32 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 406, 391 P.3d at 13 (citation and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
Finally, we note that in the Namahoe Appeal, the 
supreme court discussed, at some length, the vulnerability of seniors who have taken out reverse mortgages, the legislative intent to combat predatory lending and foreclosure practices, and the expansive legislative and regulatory framework intended to prevent abuse of borrowers like Namahoe and Domingo. James B. 
Nutter & Co., 153 Hawai# i at 163-64, 528 P.3d at 236-37. 
Accordingly, we reject Attorney Defendants' arguments 
that the Complaint lacks substantial justification under Hawai# i 
law or that the Complaint is solely based on Attorney Defendants' participation before a governmental body. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in rejecting Attorney Defendants' arguments that the Complaint should have been dismissed under the anti-SLAPP statute. 
B. The Issues Raised in CAAP-17-0000859 
1. Appellate Jurisdiction 
As a threshold matter, Attorney Defendants argue that 
this court lacks appellate jurisdiction in CAAP-17-0000859 because the Circuit Court erred in entering the Order Granting HRCP Rule 54(b) Certification and the HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment. Attorney Defendants submit that neither the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ nor the Partial Dismissal Order were eligible for HRCP Rule 54(b) certification. 
HRS § 641-1 (2016) sets forth the jurisdiction of this 
court in civil matters and provides in relevant part: 
33 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 641-1 Appeals as of right or interlocutory, civil
matters.  (a) Appeals shall be allowed in civil matters from
all final judgments, orders, or decrees of circuit and
district courts and the land court to the intermediate appellate court, subject to chapter 602.
[22] 
HRCP Rule 54(b) provides in pertinent part: 
Judgment upon multiple claims or involving multiple
parties.  When more than one claim for relief is presented
in an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim, cross-claim,or third-party claim, or when multiple parties are involved,the court may direct the entry of a final judgment as to oneor more but fewer than all of the claims or parties onlyupon an express determination that there is no just reasonfor delay and upon an express direction for the entry ofjudgment. 
In addition, HRCP Rule 58 requires that "[e]very 
judgment shall be set forth on a separate document." 
On August 2, 2018, this court entered an order raising 
the issue of appellate jurisdiction, and temporarily remanding 
the case to the Circuit Court (Temporary Remand Order).  In the 
Temporary Remand Order, the court stated, inter alia: 
Although Domingo and Namahoe asserted thirteen
separate counts against multiple parties in their July 5,
2016 complaint, the [HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment] purports toenter judgment by merely incorporating the following twointerlocutory orders by reference: 
(1) [Partial Dismissal Order], and 
(2) [Order Granting/Denying MPSJ]. 
The [HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment] does not specifically
identify the parties in favor of whom and against whom theCircuit Court intends to enter judgment. 
The [HRCP Rule
54(b) Judgment] also does not specifically identify theclaim or claims on which the Circuit Court intends to enter judgment. In other words, we cannot determine exactly howthe Circuit Court is entering judgment by reading the faceof the [HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment]. Therefore, the [HRCPRule 54(b) Judgment] does not satisfy the specificity 
22 HRS § 602-57 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 602-57 Jurisdiction.  Notwithstanding any other law
to the contrary, the intermediate appellate court shall havejurisdiction . . . . 
(1) To hear and determine appeals fromany court or agency when appeals areallowed by law[.] 
34 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirements for an appealable final judgment under
HRS § 641-1(a), HRCP Rule 58, and the holding in Jenkins. 
The Supreme Court of Hawai #i now 
hold[s] that when a party to a circuit court civilcase timely appeals a purportedly appealable finaljudgment later determined not to meet Jenkinsrequirements, rather than dismiss the appeal, the ICAmust temporarily remand the case to the circuit court"in aid of its jurisdiction" pursuant to HRS §602-57(3) (2016) for entry of an appealable finaljudgment with a direction to the circuit court tosupplement the record on appeal with the finaljudgment. 
State v. Joshua
, 141 Hawai #i 91, 93, 405 P.3d 527, 529 (2017)
(footnote omitted). Under the circumstances of the instant case,a temporary remand is necessary under the holding in 
Joshua for
the entry of a judgment that comports with the specificityrequirements in Jenkins. 
Therefore, pursuant to HRS § 602-57(3) (2016) and the
holding in Joshua, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED AND DECREED asfollows: 
1. . . . CAAP-17-0000859 is temporarily remanded to
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit in Civil No. 16-1-0249 where, within twenty (20) days after entry of thistemporary remand order, the Circuit Court shall 
(a) enter a new judgment that amends the [HRCPRule 54(b) Judgment] by specificallyidentifying the appropriate parties infavor of whom and against whom the CircuitCourt intends to enter judgment, and byspecifically identifying the claim orclaims on which the Circuit Court intends to enter judgment, or 
(b) enter a written explanation as to why it is notpossible or appropriate for the Circuit Court todo so. 
After further submittals from the parties, on September 
4, 2018, the Circuit Court entered: (1) the Final Judgment 
Entered Pursuant to the [Partial Dismissal Order] (2018 
Judgment); and (2) an Explanation as to Why Judgment Is Not Being Entered as to the [Order Granting/Denying MPSJ] (2018 Explanation). 
In the 2018 Explanation, the Circuit Court concluded 
that the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ did not dispose of any claim 
for relief, and therefore, judgment was not being entered 
35 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thereon. In the absence of a compliant judgment, we lack 
appellate jurisdiction to review the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ. See generally Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai#i 115, 869 P.2d 1334 (1994). 
In the 2018 Judgment, as directed by this court, the 
Circuit Court specifies the parties in favor of and against whom judgment is entered and the claims on which judgment is entered pursuant to the Partial Dismissal Order. Although the 2018 Judgment does not resolve all claims as to all parties, it includes the certification language required under HRCP Rule 54(b) that "there is no just reason for delay." Accordingly, we conclude that we have appellate jurisdiction to review the Partial Dismissal Order. 
2. Attorney Defendants' Arguments on the Partial
Dismissal Order 
a. Litigation Privilege 
Attorney Defendants argue that Namahoe's claims against 
them are barred as a matter of law pursuant to the litigation privilege and the supreme court's decision in Hungate. The gravamen of Attorney Defendants' argument is that the litigation privilege operates as an absolute bar against a borrower seeking to sue opposing counsel for counsel's conduct within the scope of representation in a prior foreclosure. They argue, inter alia, "Hungate emphatically quashed the last ambiguity that existed for the litigation privilege regarding foreclosure cases" and "the Hawai#i Supreme Court has completely shut the door on the ability 
of a borrower to sue opposing counsel in a foreclosure action." 
36 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under Hawai# i law, the litigation privilege is robust, 
and for good reason, but it is not an absolute bar against an 
action by a borrower against a foreclosing lender's attorney(s). The reasons for this robust privilege, as discussed in the Hungate passages quoted above, include the attorney's duty to zealously represent his or her client, the lack of a common law duty in favor of an adversary's interest, the strong policy considerations against creating a conflict of interest, the protection of attorney-client counsel and advice from competing concerns, and the vulnerability of an attorney to such suits. See Hungate, 139 Hawai# i at 413, 391 P.3d at 20; Matsuura v. E.I. 
du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai# i 149, 155-61, 73 P.3d 687, 
693-99 (2003) (explaining the policy rationale underlying the litigation privilege);
23 Isobe v. Sakatani, 127 Hawai# i 368, 279 
P.3d 33 (App. 2012) (applying the attorney's absolute privilege for defamation in judicial proceeding to slander of title claims, 
23 In Matsuura, the supreme court explained: [T]he interrelated policies associated with the litigation
privilege include: (1) promoting the candid, objective, andundistorted disclosure of evidence; (2) placing the burdenof testing the evidence upon the litigants during trial; (3)avoiding the chilling effect resulting from the threat ofsubsequent litigation; (4) reinforcing the finality ofjudgments; (5) limiting collateral attacks upon judgments;(6) promoting zealous advocacy; (7) discouraging abusivelitigation practices; and (8) encouraging settlement.Therefore, in order to determine whether the litigationprivilege should bar a subsequent collateral proceeding forcivil damages based on litigation misconduct, includingfraud, we must first address the policies associated withthe privilege. 
102 Hawai #i at 155, 73 P.3d at 693. 
After examining each of these policy considerations in the context
of the case, the supreme court concluded that, under Hawai #i law, a party was
not immunized by the litigation privilege against liability for damages basedon fraud engaged in during prior litigation proceedings. Id. at 162, 73 P.3d
at 700. Attorney liability was not at issue. 
37 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
citing policy reasons); Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawai# i 202, 218-
19, 159 P.3d 814, 830-31 (2007) (discussing policy reasons 
supporting bar to suit against adversary's attorney for negligence and that attorney owed no actionable duty to the opposing party). 
That said, none of these cases hold that the litigation 
privilege provides an absolute bar to claims against the opposing party's attorney for the attorney's actions in judicial foreclosure proceedings. Indeed, as highlighted above, in Hungate the supreme court recognized that attorneys' zealous representation of their clients must be conducted within the bounds of the law, zealous advocacy does not include illegal activities on behalf of clients, and the supreme court would not rule out potential UDAP liability for attorneys in all circumstances other than those at issue in Hungate. 139 Hawai# i 
at 412-13, 391 P.3d at 19-20. In Matsuura, the supreme court stated that the scope of any privilege is based on policy considerations. 102 Hawai# i at 155, 73 P.3d at 693. In Kahala 
Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, the supreme court reiterated the conclusion in Matsuura that "'a party is not immune from liability for civil damages based upon that party's fraud engaged in during prior litigation proceedings .'" 113 Hawai#i 251, 269, 151 P.3d 732, 750 (2007) (quoting Matsuura, 102 
Hawai#i at 162, 73 P.3d at 700). 
In this light, we consider whether the litigation 
privilege operates as a bar against claims against Attorney Defendants for their fraud on the court in conjunction with the 
38 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judicial foreclosure proceedings at issue here. As directed in 
Matsuura, 102 Hawai# i at 155, 73 P.3d at 693, we consider the 
policies associated with the privilege in such circumstances: 
Promoting the candid, objective, and undistorted 
disclosure of evidence: As discussed in Matsuura, the litigation privilege is based, in part, on an assumption that exposing a declarant or witness to liability may result in distorted evidence. Id.Here, however, (like the defendants in Matsuura), 
Attorney Defendants' conduct was fraudulent and extreme. Attorney Defendants provided the Circuit Court with an inadequate and materially misleading HRS § 667-17 attorney affirmation, which was so egregious that the supreme court in the Namahoe Appeal concluded that it constituted a fraud on the court. James 
B. Nutter & Co., 153 Hawai# i at 167, 528 P.3d at 240. The 
supreme court further held that Namahoe had demonstrated extraordinary circumstances warranting relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) in that case. Id. at 170, 528 P.3d at 243. This 
conduct is directly contrary to the policy of promoting the candid, objective, and undistorted disclosure of evidence. Accordingly, this policy does not favor limiting liability in a subsequent proceeding based on commission of a fraud on the court in a prior proceeding. See Matsuura, 102 Hawai# i at 156, 73 P.3d 
at 694. 
Placing the burden of testing the evidence upon the 
litigants during trial: The litigation privilege promotes diligent and timely investigation and testing of the evidence by the parties, and relatedly, it helps secure the finality of 
39 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgments. Id.An attorney's egregious, false, and materially 
misleading failure to carry out their statutory obligations under 
HRS § 667-17 frustrates the purpose of the affirmation, but here Namahoe did not diligently and timely test this evidence. Therefore, this policy consideration slightly weighs in favor of limiting liability in subsequent proceedings. 
Avoiding the chilling effect resulting from the threat 
of subsequent litigation: There is a strong policy in Hawai$ i 
against opening the door to subsequent litigation every time someone loses a lawsuit, in large part because it can deter access to justice. Id. at 157, 73 P.3d at 695. In most 
instances, that policy favors limiting liability in subsequent proceedings. Id.Here, however, assuming that justiciable 
claims can ever be brought against an opposing party's attorney for the attorney's commission of a fraud on the court in a prior proceeding, the only avenue for access to justice would be via subsequent litigation.
24 Thus, under the circumstances here, 
this policy does not weigh against allowing the subsequent suit. 
Reinforcing the finality of judgments: As discussed in 
Matsuura, and as demonstrated in the Namahoe Appeal, Hawai# i 
courts favor reaching a judgment on the merits over preserving the finality of a judgment procured by fraud, including fraud on the court. Matsuura, 102 Hawai$ i at 157-58, 73 P.3d at 695-96; 
James B. Nutter & Co., 153 Hawai# i at 166-68, 528 P.3d at 239-41. 
This policy favors permitting relief in a subsequent proceeding 
24 Any chilling effect of potential subsequent litigation should
operate as a deterrent to the commission of fraud on the court in the first
instance. 
40 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in limited circumstances. Here, permitting suit against the 
Attorney Defendants for their fraud on the court in the prior foreclosure proceedings does not directly impact the finality of the prior foreclosure proceedings. We conclude that when there is an allegation of fraud on the court in prior proceedings, the policy of reinforcing the finality of judgments does not favor limiting liability in a subsequent proceeding. See Matsuura, 102 
Hawai$i at 158, 73 P.3d at 696. 
Limiting collateral attacks upon judgments: A 
collateral attack upon a judgment rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction is strongly disfavored and is permitted only in very limited circumstances, which can include a fraud upon the court. See id. at 158-59, 73 P.3d at 696-97. Here, 
however, a suit against the Attorney Defendants for their fraud on the court in the prior proceedings is not an attack on a judgment entered in favor of their client, and this policy is not implicated. 
Promoting zealous advocacy: Clearly, permitting 
subsequent suit against a party's attorney could impede this important interest. However, as the supreme court explained in Matsuura: 
Litigation misconduct that amounts to a fraud on the court
directly conflicts with the pursuit of justice and neverresults from a reasonable advocate's best judgment. Thus,the policy of promoting zealous advocacy is counterbalancedby the need to adequately punish and discourage suchmisconduct. Consequently, the policy of promoting zealousadvocacy does not favor limiting liability in subsequentcollateral proceedings for fraud. 
Id. at 159, 73 P.3d at 697. 
41 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that this rationale is fully applicable 
here to the subsequent proceedings based upon fraud on the court 
in the prior proceedings. 
Discouraging abusive litigation practices: As 
discussed in Matsuura, remedies such as criminal contempt, attorney discipline, and criminal prosecution might act as deterrents to litigation misconduct, but they provide limited means to compensate the victims of such misconduct, and "the existence of these remedies does not oblige us to limit victims of fraud solely to these established remedies, given the nature and effect of fraud." Id. at 160, 73 P.3d at 698. Again, we 
conclude that this rationale is fully applicable to subsequent proceedings based on fraud on the court in the prior proceedings.
25 
The attorney's litigation privilege: Although not at 
issue in Matsuura, here, the important policy considerations favoring the protection of attorneys from claims against them for their actions in prior judicial proceedings must be carefully weighed. We will not recount each of these policy considerations again, but in the vast majority of circumstances, they should and do act as a bar against suit by an opposing party in prior litigation. However, here, the supreme court has determined that there was a fraud on the court committed by Attorney Defendants through the submission of a legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially misleading affirmation that 
25 The policy of encouraging settlement, which is discussed in
Matsuura, 102 Hawai $i at 161, 73 P.3d at 699, is not implicated here. 
42 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is mandated by Hawai$ i statute in order to prevent unwarranted 
foreclosures. None of the important and substantial policy 
reasons for shielding an attorney from suit, in the vast majority of circumstances, warrant applying the litigation privilege to bar the victims of such misconduct from seeking a remedy. 
Weighing all of the policies underlying the litigation 
privilege, specifically including the litigation privilege for attorneys, and in light of the supreme court's determination in Matsuura that a party is not immune from liability for damages based upon that party's fraud engaged in during prior proceedings, we hold that an attorney is not immune from liability or civil damages based upon the attorney's own fraud upon the court in prior litigation proceedings. 
b. Damages Based on Attorney Defendants' Fraud
on the Court 
Attorney Defendants argue that, as a matter of law, 
fraud on the court is a ground upon which a court may set aside a judgment, but it is not a cause of action for which damages can be awarded. We consider that argument in the context of the fraud on the court at issue here, i.e., Attorney Defendants' legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially misleading affirmation, which falsely affirmed the sufficiency of the basis of Nutter's foreclosure on the reverse mortgage on Namahoe's home, based on an alleged failure to make a $500 repair, which led to Namahoe being evicted and homeless. 
43  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the Namahoe Appeal, the supreme court explained the 
legal framework that has been put in place to protect borrowers 
like Namahoe and Domingo. It is relevant here, and worth repeating: 
Reverse mortgages are distinct from conventional mortgages
both in their function and purpose. Reverse mortgages, ofwhich home equity conversion mortgages (HECMs) make up asignificant portion,
16 are loans that allow senior 
homeowners to withdraw a portion of their home's equity inthe form of cash. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,
Reverse Mortgages: Report to Congress 5—6 (June 2012).This provides seniors with capital to pay for livingexpenses and other costs, with the loan only reachingmaturity when the borrower dies, sells the home or movesout, or fails to maintain the property or pay necessary feesand taxes. Id. at 5—6, 22; see also HRS § 506-10 (2008)
(listing the events that make a reverse mortgage loan due).This transaction for cash at the expense of ownership ofone's home — the largest and most significant asset mostAmericans possess — has significant ramifications for seniorcitizens, their families, and the communities in which theylive. Protecting Seniors: A Review of the FHA's Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (HECM) Program: Hearing Beforethe Subcomm. on Housing, Community Development, andInsurance of the H. Comm. on Financial Services, 116th Cong.2 (2019) (statement of Rep. Wm. Lacy Clay, Chairman, H.Subcomm. on Hous., Cmty. Dev., and Ins.) ("The racial wealthgap is exacerbated as countless families[, largely racialminorities,] are deprived of the chance to pass on theirhomes and other property to their children and other heirs,leading to . . . gutted city blocks, and less overallwealth.") 
16 The mortgage at issue in this case is specifically ahome equity conversion mortgage. HECMs are onlyavailable for seniors above 62 years of age who own aproperty and occupy it as their principal residence.For consistency with the briefs, circuit courtdocuments, and ICA Memorandum Opinion, this court usesthe broader term "reverse mortgage." 
Seniors face a significant risk of abuse by lenders,
and the consequences of reverse mortgages can be unclear atthe time of signing, but disastrous for mortgagors. See Reverse Mortgages: Polishing Not Tarnishing the GoldenYears: Hearing Before the Senate Special Comm. on Aging,110th Cong. 1 (2007) (statement of Senator Herb Kohl,Chairman, Special Comm. on Aging) ("[Reverse mortgage][a]gents are targeting seniors aggressively in ways that
this Committee has seen before: through direct mail,
celebrity endorsements, and free lunch seminars. Marketers often gloss over the risks of a reverse mortgage, but theyconvey the pay-off quite clearly."); Sarah B. Mancini &Odette Williamson, Reversing Course: Stemming the Tide ofReverse Mortgage Foreclosures Through Effective Servicingand Loss Mitigation, 26 Elder L.J. 85, 86—87, 119—20 (2018)("[o]lder adults who have taken out reverse mortgages areparticularly resource-constrained. They tend to take outthese loans as a last resort, motivated by a lack of 
44 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient income to cover rising medical costs and other
essential expenses."). Namahoe appears to have beentargeted in a similar manner; according to his declaration:"some folks came to my door and told me I could obtain aloan and not pay back anything while I lived and resided atthe property. I believed them and I obtained what I understand was a reverse mortgage. . . . I spent the moneyover the years paying bills and buying food." 
Due to the significant risks of abuse by lenders and
inadequate understanding of reverse mortgage agreements bymany senior citizens, reverse mortgages and foreclosures aresubject to stringent rules and regulations promulgated byboth federal and state authorities. Lenders offering loansbacked by HUD, of which reverse mortgages and HECMs are onetype, are required to make reasonable efforts to conductface-to-face interviews with delinquent mortgagors, 24C.F.R. § 203.604 (2009), conduct loss mitigation efforts tocure defaults, 24 C.F.R. §§ 203.605 (2009) and 203.501
(2009), conduct pre-foreclosure review, 24 C.F.R. § 203.606
(2009), and facilitate reinstatement of the mortgage, 24C.F.R. § 203.608 (2009). Failure to comply with theseregulations may result in civil penalties or the withdrawalof a mortgagee's HUD approval. 24 C.F.R. § 203.500 (2009). 
Our state legislature has also acted to combat
predatory lending in the context of reverse mortgages.Lenders are required to refer borrowers to HUD-approvedcounselors, and must be presented with a signedcertification confirming that the borrower has receivedcounseling prior to accepting an application for a reversemortgage loan. HRS § 506-10. 
Further, in the aftermath of economic crash and
foreclosure crisis in the early-2010s, the legislaturepassed HRS § 667-17. The language of the attorneyaffirmation even refers to the conditions that gave rise tothe statute: 
During and after August 2010, numerous and widespreadinsufficiencies in foreclosure filings in variouscourts around the nation were reported . . .,including failure to review documents and files toestablish standing and other foreclosure requisites;filing of notarized affidavits that falsely attest tosuch review and to other critical facts in the foreclosure process; and "robosignature" of documents. 
HRS § 667-17. 
Importantly for [the Namahoe Appeal,] [ as well as this 
appeal now before the ICA ], HRS § 667-17 requires attorneys
filing on behalf of mortgagees seeking foreclosure to signand submit an affirmation that the attorney has verified theaccuracy of filed documents, and confirm that the lender hasan adequate factual and legal basis for pursuingforeclosure.
17 As officers of the court, attorneys for
mortgagees seeking foreclosure must affirm not only theaccuracy of the factual allegations underlying foreclosure,but also the legal sufficiency of foreclosure claims.
18 Id. 
Attorneys are also under a "continuing obligation to amend"the affirmation in the event of newly discovered materialfacts after filing. Id. 
45  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
17 HRS § 667-17 states, "[a]ny attorney who files on
behalf of a mortgagee seeking to foreclose on aresidential property under this part shall sign andsubmit an affirmation that the attorney has verifiedthe accuracy of the documents submitted, under penaltyof perjury and subject to applicable rules ofprofessional conduct." HRS § 667-17. 
18 One of the form affirmations in § 667-17 states: 
Based upon my communication with [theforeclosing entity], as well as upon my owninspection and other reasonable inquiry underthe circumstances, I affirm that, to the best ofmy knowledge, information, and belief, theSummons, Complaint, and other papers filed orsubmitted to the Court in this matter contain no false statements of fact or law and that plaintiff has legal standing to bring thisforeclosure action. 
It is within this expansive legislative and regulatory
framework that [Nutter] and its attorneys at Clay Chapmanpursued foreclosure on Namahoe's only home — all on thebasis of a $500.00 repair obligation. 
James B. Nutter & Co., 153 Hawai# i at 163-64, 528 P.3d at 236-37 
(emphasis omitted). 
This framework is critical here because the supreme 
court has also held: 
In determining whether a private cause of action
should be recognized based on statutory requirements, weconsider the following factors: (1) whether the plaintiffis "one of the class for whose especial benefit the statutewas enacted"; (2) whether there is "any indication oflegislative intent, explicit or implicit, either to createsuch a remedy or to deny one"; and (3) whether a privatecause of action would be "consistent with the underlyingpurposes of the legislative scheme to imply such a remedy
for the plaintiff." 
Whitey's Boat Cruises, Inc. v. Napali-Kauai Boat Charters, Inc., 
110 Hawai# i 302, 312, 132 P.3d 1213, 1223 (2006). 
In Hungate, the supreme court considered these factors 
in determining whether certain former provisions of the nonjudicial foreclosure statute, including the former HRS § 667-5, created a private cause of action against a mortgagee's attorney. 139 Hawai# i at 406-07, 391 P.3d at 13-14. Hungate, as 
a party in breach of a mortgage contract, fell within the class 
46   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for whom the statute was enacted. Id. at 406, 391 P.3d at 13. 
As to the second factor, the statute was silent as to whether the 
legislature intended to create a private cause of action. Id.
Turning to whether a private right of action would be consistent with the underlying purpose, the supreme court emphasized: 
[A] close reading of the legislative history of the
2008 amendment shows it was enacted to set additional 
burdens on the mortgagee to protect the mortgagor; thestatute was not amended to regulate attorneys representingmortgagees. The amendment's structure or scheme attempted"to streamline and ensure transparency in the non-judicialforeclosure process by requiring a foreclosure mortgagee toprovide pertinent information regarding the property to'interested parties." 
Id. at 407, 391 P.3d at 14 (citation omitted). 
Although the legislature tapped Hawaii-based attorneys 
to provide useful information that could be obtained locally, the 
supreme court reiterated that "the underlying structure and intent of the amendment was to enable interested parties to request and receive information in a timely manner from mortgagees, and not to regulate attorneys' conduct." Id.In 
addition, the Hungate court considered whether additional remedies were unnecessary to protect the interests of the borrower in light of the available remedies against the lender, i.e., a claim for wrongful foreclosure. Id.Based on these 
factors, the supreme court concluded that recognizing a cause of action against a lender's attorney based on the former HRS § 667-5 was not warranted. 
We turn to HRS § 667-17 (Supp. 2012) (repealed 2017), 
and the broader statutory framework enacted to combat predatory lending and foreclosure practices related to reverse mortgages. Vulnerable, elderly borrowers such as Namahoe and Domingo are 
47 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
certainly among the class of persons for whose special benefit 
the statute was enacted. See James B. Nutter & Co., 153 Hawai# i 
at 163-64, 528 P.3d at 236-37. Thus, the first Whitey's Boat factor is met. 
The second factor looks for any indication of 
legislative intent, explicit or implicit, to create or deny a remedy against the attorney responsible for communicating with a lender's representative, conducting reasonable inquiry, verifying the accuracy of documents, and submitting an affirmation with the court. Unlike the statute examined in Hungate, HRS § 667-17 was plainly and specifically enacted to put additional burdens on the foreclosing attorney, not his or her mortgagee client.
26 The 
26 HRS § 667-17 provided, in pertinent part: 
§ 667-17 Attorney affirmation in judicial
foreclosure.  Any attorney who files on behalf of a
mortgagee seeking to foreclose on a residential property
under this part shall sign and submit an affirmation thatthe attorney has verified the accuracy of the documentssubmitted, under penalty of perjury and subject toapplicable rules of professional conduct. The affirmation shall be filed with the court at the time that the action is commenced and shall be in substantially the following form: 
. . . . 
Note: 
During and after August 2010, numerous
and widespread insufficiencies in foreclosurefilings in various courts around the nation werereported by major mortgage lenders and otherauthorities, including failure to reviewdocuments and files to establish standing andother foreclosure requisites; filing ofnotarized affidavits that falsely attest to suchreview and to other critical facts in the foreclosure process; and "robosignature" ofdocuments. 
[____________], Esq., pursuant to Hawaii Revised
Statutes § 667-17 and under the penalties of perjury,
affirms as follows: 1. I am an attorney at law duly licensed to practice inthe State of Hawaii and am affiliated with the Law Firm of __________________, the attorneys of recordfor Plaintiff in the above-captioned mortgageforeclosure action. As such, I am fully aware of the
(continued...) 
48 _____________________ _____________________ 
_____________________ _____________________ _____________________ _____________________ 
__________________________FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantially-required form included a recitation regarding 
widespread insufficiencies in foreclosure filings and specifically called out false attestations regarding the review of documents and critical facts. The statute does not explicitly create or deny a remedy for failure to comply with its mandate, and the legislative history states that the purpose of the legislation is "to prevent unwarranted foreclosure." H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 697-14, in 2014 House Journal, at 1127. Thus, this is a neutral factor. 
26(...continued)
underlying action, as well as the proceedings had
herein. 
2. On [date], I communicated with the followingrepresentative or representatives of Plaintiff, whoinformed me that he/she/they (a) personally reviewedplaintiff's documents and records relating to thiscase for factual accuracy; and (b) confirmed thefactual accuracy of the allegations set forth in theComplaint and any supporting affidavits oraffirmations filed with the Court, as well as theaccuracy of the notarizations contained in thesupporting documents filed therewith. 
Name Title 
3. Based upon my communication with [persons specified in
item 2], as well as upon my own inspection and otherreasonable inquiry under the circumstances, I affirmthat, to the best of my knowledge, information, andbelief, the Summons, Complaint, and other papers filedor submitted to the Court in this matter contain no false statements of fact or law and that plaintiff haslegal standing to bring this foreclosure action. I understand my continuing obligation to amend thisAffirmation in light of newly discovered materialfacts following its filing. 
4. I am aware of my obligations under Hawaii Rules ofProfessional Conduct. 
DATED: 
N.B.: Counsel may augment this affirmation to provide
explanatory details, and may file supplemental affirmationsor affidavits for the same purpose. 
(Bold emphasis added). 
49 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The third factor to be examined is whether a private 
cause of action would be consistent with the underlying purposes 
of the legislative scheme. Under the language of the statute and the legislative scheme here, it is palpably clear that the legislature did not view additional duties and remedies directed solely at foreclosing mortgagees as sufficient to stem the tide of wrongful foreclosures. HRS § 667-17 was directed at foreclosing attorneys. Recognizing a private cause of action against attorneys for committing a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation, particularly with respect to a foreclosure on a reverse mortgage, would be consistent with the purposes of the legislative scheme at issue here.
27 
Finally, we consider the additional factor weighed by 
the supreme court in Hungate, that is, whether additional remedies are unnecessary, as we determine whether to recognize a cause of action against attorneys for committing a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation, particularly with respect to a foreclosure on a reverse mortgage. Arguably, an additional cause of action against attorneys was not strictly necessary to protect the interests of the mortgagor because the mortgagor can file a claim against the mortgagee for wrongful foreclosure. See Hungate, 139 
27 This analysis is intended to be construed narrowly and should not
be construed to be applicable to a non-material or less egregious failure to
comply with HRS § 667-17. 
50 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai#i at 407, 391 P.3d at 14. Yet, the whole purpose of HRS 
§ 667-17 was to provide stringent, additional safeguards and 
failsafes, to be carried out by foreclosing attorneys, to address the plague of wrongful foreclosures, particularly against vulnerable members of our community. The existence of other remedies does not preclude an additional remedy against a Hawai#i-licensed attorney who not only fails to comply with the 
statute, but who commits a fraud on the court by submitting a materially false HRS § 667-17 affirmation. See Matsuura, 102 
Hawai$i at 160, 73 P.3d at 698. Here, we hold that the weighing 
of these factors favors recognition of a cause of action against attorneys for committing a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation, with respect to a foreclosure on a reverse mortgage. 
C. Attorney Defendants' Rule 12(b)(6) Motion to Dismiss In their first point of error in CAAP-17-0000859, 
Plaintiffs contend that in the Partial Dismissal Order, the Circuit Court erred in granting in part Attorney Defendants' HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) Motion to Dismiss. In the Complaint, Plaintiffs asserted 13 counts, including the following against the Attorney Defendants: Count I, Legal Malpractice; Count II, Gross Legal Malpractice; Count III, Breach of Fiduciary Duty; Count IV, Wrongful Foreclosure; Count V, IIED; Count VI, UDAP Claims; Count VII, Abuse of Process; Count VIII, Fraud, including fraud on the court; Count X, Elder Abuse; Count XII, Slander of Title; and Count XIII, Punitive Damages. After briefing and a September 29, 
51   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2016 hearing, the Circuit Court dismissed all of Domingo's claims 
against Attorney Defendants, and dismissed all of Namahoe's claims except the fraud on the court claim.
28 
It is well-established that: 
[A] complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff canprove no set of facts in support of his or her claim thatwould entitle him or her to relief. The appellate courtmust therefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light mostfavorable to him or her in order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could warrant relief under anyalternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing a circuitcourt's order dismissing a complaint . . . the appellatecourt's consideration is strictly limited to the allegationsof the complaint, and the appellate court must deem thoseallegations to be true. 
Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai# i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 
(2013) (citation and brackets omitted); see also Bank of Am., 
N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i 249, 257-63, 428 P.3d 761, 769-
75 (2018) (Reyes-Toledo II) (discussing standards applicable to 
HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motions to dismiss). 
Our review is conducted accordingly. 
1. Counts I and II - Legal Malpractice Claims 
It is undisputed that Plaintiffs were not in an 
attorney-client relationship with Attorney Defendants; in fact, Attorney Defendants represented Plaintiffs' litigation adversary. As previously held by the ICA, as well as the supreme court: 
[C]reation of a duty in favor of an adversary of the
attorney's client would create an unacceptable conflict ofinterest. Not only would the adversary's interestsinterfere with the client's interests, the attorney'sjustifiable concern with being sued for negligence would 
28 Count XII, Slander of Title, was dismissed with prejudice. All of 
the other dismissals were without prejudice. 
52 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detrimentally interfere with the attorney-client
relationship. 
Myers v. Cohen, 5 Haw. App. 232, 246, 687 P.2d 6, 16 (1984) 
(citations omitted), reversed on other grounds by 67 Haw. 688 P.2d 1145 (1984); see also Buscher, 114 Hawai# i at 220, 159 P.3d 
at 832). 
In Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai# i 247, 253-63, 21 P.3d 452, 
458-68 (2001), the supreme court examined the legal theories underlying legal malpractice claims and the various reasons that other jurisdictions have created narrow exceptions to the general rule disallowing a legal malpractice action by a non-client against an attorney based on either a negligence or third-party beneficiary (contract-based) claim.
29 While the entire 
discussion is illuminating and informs our decision here, the bottom line is that under Hawai# i law, legal malpractice is 
viewed as a hybrid of tort and contract, permitting claims to proceed under either negligence or contract theories of recovery, and "[t]he class of individuals who may bring a malpractice action is limited to a client's intended beneficiaries, provided no other remedy exists to prevent future harm." Id. at 258, 259, 
261, 21 P.3d at 463, 464, 466; see also Buscher, 114 Hawai# i at 
220, 159 P.2d at 831 (reiterating that the Blair holding did not create a duty of care to all non-client beneficiaries). 
29 The starting place for this discussion was a nineteeth century
United States Supreme Court case that held "a third party not in privity of
contract with an attorney may not maintain a legal malpractice action againstan attorney for negligence absent fraud or collusion." Blair, 95 Hawai #i at 
253, 21 P.3d at 458 (citing Nat'l Sav. Bank v. Ward, 100 U.S. 195, 205-06(1879)). 
53 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We decline to expand the narrow conditions in which a 
non-client can bring a legal malpractice action to the 
circumstances here. Clearly, foreclosure defendants are not intended beneficiaries of the legal services an attorney is contracted to provide to his or her lender clients. The sound policies against creating conflicts of interests are particularly germane in the context of adversaries in litigation proceedings. 
In addition, other remedies exist to address the 
alleged harm and any future harm. Perhaps most important here is the well-recognized principle noted in Buscher: 
Unlike a claim [by a non-client against an attorney]
for negligence, an attorney can be held liable for
fraudulent misrepresentation. See Kahala Royal Corp., 113Hawai #i at 268–69, 151 P.3d at 749–50 (citing caselaw from
other jurisdictions stating that it is well settled that anattorney can be sued by an adverse party for fraud);Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont, 102 Hawai #i 149, 162, 73 P.3d 687,
700 (2003) ("Under Hawai #i law, a party is not immune from
liability for civil damages based upon that party's fraudengaged in during prior litigation proceedings."); Giulianiv. Chuck, 1 Haw. App. 379, 383–84, 620 P.2d 733, 736–37(1980) ("The rule of law that an attorney representing aclient may be held personally liable to an adverse party ora third person who sustains injury as a result of anattorney's intentional tortious acts is well settled."(Citations omitted.)). 
Buscher, 114 Hawai# i at 220 n.13, 159 P.3d at 833 n.13. 
In Kahala Royal Corp., the supreme court pointed to a 
California case that stated: 
[A] fraud claim against a lawyer is no different from
a fraud claim against anyone else. If an attorney commitsactual fraud in his dealings with a third party, the fact hedid so in the capacity of attorney for a client does notrelieve him of liability. While an attorney's professionalduty of care extends only to his own client and intendedbeneficiaries of his legal work, the limitations onliability for negligence do not apply to liability forfraud. 
113 Hawai# i at 269, 151 P.3d at 750 (citing Vega v. Jones, Day, 
Reavis & Pogue, 121 Cal.App.4th 282, 17 Cal.Rptr.3d 26, 31–35 
(2004)) (citation form altered). 
54 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
did not err in dismissing Plaintiffs' legal malpractice claims 
against Attorney Defendants. 
2. Count III - Breach of Fiduciary Duty 
To prove a breach of fiduciary duty, Plaintiffs must 
show that a fiduciary relationship existed between them and Attorney Defendants, Attorney Defendants breached a fiduciary duty to Plaintiffs, and the breach proximately caused injury to the Plaintiffs. See 37 C.J.S. Fraud § 15 (2023) (elements of 
cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty); Cochrane v. Azman, No. 29562, 2001 WL 661714, *5 (Haw. App. Feb. 22, 2011) (mem. op.). A fiduciary duty exists when there is a relationship of trust and confidence. Meheula v. Hausten, 29 Haw. 304, 314 (Haw. 
Terr. 1926). 
Plaintiffs make no argument that a relationship of 
trust and confidence existed between them and Attorney Defendants, instead arguing that HRS § 667-17 supports the existence of a statutory duty owed by attorneys under the circumstances here. We addressed the issue of whether a cause of action should be recognized based on the requirements of HRS § 667-17 in conjunction with Attorney Defendants' cross-appeal from the Partial Dismissal Order. However, viewing the Complaint in the light most favorable to Plaintiffs, it appears beyond doubt that Plaintiffs can prove no set of facts supporting that a relationship of trust and confidence exists between them and Attorney Defendants. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit 
55 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court did not err in dismissing Plaintiffs' claim for breach of 
fiduciary duty. 
3. Counts IV, V, X & XII - Litigation Privilege 
Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing Counts IV (Wrongful Foreclosure), V (IIED), X (Elder Abuse), and XII (Slander of Title) as to Attorney Defendants based on the litigation privilege. In the HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion filed in the Circuit Court, Attorney Defendants cited, inter alia, Kahala Royal Corp. for the proposition that the litigation privilege is generally applicable to bar a claim for damages against the opposing party's attorney if the alleged acts occurred in the course of the prior litigation. Attorney Defendants argued that the allegations pertaining to Counts IV, V, X, and XII "are limited to conduct that occurred in the scope of the Attorney Defendants' representation of [Nutter]," and therefore, they are barred by the litigation privilege.
30 
In the Partial Dismissal Order, the Circuit Court 
reviewed the policy considerations underlying the litigation privilege, which were set forth in Matsuura, wherein the supreme court explained that 
the interrelated policies associated with the litigation
privilege include: (1) promoting the candid, objective, andundistorted disclosure of evidence; (2) placing the burdenof testing the evidence upon the litigants during trial; (3)avoiding the chilling effect resulting from the threat ofsubsequent litigation; (4) reinforcing the finality ofjudgments; (5) limiting collateral attacks upon judgments;(6) promoting zealous advocacy; (7) discouraging abusive
litigation practices; and (8) encouraging settlement.
Therefore, in order to determine whether the litigationprivilege should bar a subsequent collateral proceeding for 
30 Attorney Defendants argue that the litigation privilege also bars
Counts I, II, and III. However, as we have already concluded that the CircuitCourt did not err in dismissing those counts, we need not address themfurther. 
56 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
civil damages based on litigation misconduct, including
fraud, we must first address the policies associated withthe privilege. 
102 Hawai# i at 155, 73 P.3d at 693. 
The Circuit Court noted that the litigation privilege 
applies when statements were made or conduct was undertaken in 
judicial proceedings, but that certain claims for relief are clearly not covered, such as abuse of process and malicious prosecution. The Circuit Court explained its dismissal without prejudice of Counts IV, V, and X based on the litigation privilege as follows: 
Case law does not expressly except the claims
contained in the counts from the application of the
litigation privilege. Also, there is no allegation that[Attorney Defendants] acted with a specific desire to harmPlaintiffs or acted for the purpose of personal gain or withill will toward Plaintiffs. Accordingly, Counts IV, V, andX are dismissed without prejudice. 
We first consider Count IV (Wrongful Foreclosure). 
Under Hawai# i jurisprudence, a mortgagor can bring a wrongful 
judicial foreclosure claim against a mortgagee, even when no 
foreclosure or sale has yet occurred, if the foreclosing mortgagee had no right to foreclosure at the time the foreclosure proceedings were commenced, and the mortgagor suffered an injury in fact and damages as a result. Reyes-Toledo II, 143 Hawai# i at 
263-64, 428 P.3d at 775-76. The wrongful act in the wrongful foreclosure is the lender's attempt, for its own benefit, to foreclose the borrower's rights, title, and interest in the property being foreclosed upon without a lawful basis for doing so. See generally id. No Hawai# i case has recognized a wrongful 
foreclosure cause of action against the lender's attorney. 
57  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As discussed above, in Hungate the supreme court 
recognized the generally unacceptable policy implications of 
creating a cause of action against a lender's attorney in favor 
of an adverse party, so long as the attorney's actions were within the bounds of the law. Hungate, 139 Hawai# i at 412-13, 
391 P.3d at 19-20. In Hungate, the supreme court declined to permit Hungate to sue the lender's attorney for, inter alia, UDAP under HRS § 480-2 in the foreclosure action because allowing a UDAP claim could compromise the attorney's zealous representation of his or her client. Id. at 413, 391 P.3d at 20. In addition, 
the court noted that an attorney is particularly vulnerable to such suit because, under HRS § 480-2 a plaintiff need only allege that the attorney's actions had a capacity to deceive, rather than meeting a more rigorous state of mind, such as actual deception. Id.Broadly recognizing a wrongful foreclosure cause 
of action against attorneys poses similar pitfalls. A wrongful foreclosure claim can be brought, regardless of a lender's state of mind, if the lender cannot establish that it had the right to proceed at the commencement of the foreclosure proceedings, and the borrower-defendant suffered injuries and damages as a result. See Reyes-Toledo II, 143 Hawai# i at 263-64, 428 P.3d at 775-76. 
To allow a parallel wrongful foreclosure claim against 
the lender's attorney in every case wherein the lender's right to sue might be at issue could severely compromise the attorney's ability to zealously represent lender clients. To impose liability on an attorney for wrongful foreclosure would have the undesirable effect of creating a duty to third parties that might 
58 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
take precedence over the attorney's duty to his or her client. 
Thus, we conclude that the supreme court's policy concerns disfavor recognizing a wrongful foreclosure cause of action against a lender's attorney. In most circumstances, the mortgagor's interests can be protected from the wrongful acts of the mortgagee through filing a claim against the mortgagee, without permitting a wrongful foreclosure claim against the lender's attorney. Hungate, 139 Hawai# i at 412, 391 P.3d at 19. 
We further conclude that, while a wrongful foreclosure claim per se should not be permitted against the lender's attorney, based on the policy considerations underlying the litigation privilege, certain wrongful-foreclosure-related claims may lie against the attorney for the attorney's own wrongful conduct in certain circumstances, as discussed in the context of Plaintiffs' fraud on the court claims against Attorney Defendants. 
Accordingly, even accepting the allegations of the 
Complaint as true and viewing the Complaint in a light most favorable to Plaintiffs, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing the wrongful foreclosure claims against Attorney Defendants. 
The Circuit Court also dismissed without prejudice 
Count V, IIED, purportedly based on the Attorney Defendants' litigation privilege, but further stating that "there is no allegation that [Attorney Defendants] acted with a specific desire to harm Plaintiffs or acted for the purpose of personal gain or with ill will toward Plaintiffs." Thus, it appears that dismissal of Count V was on alternative grounds of litigation 
59   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
privilege and failure to state a claim for IIED. The supreme 
court has held: 
The elements of the tort of IIED are: 1) that the
conduct allegedly causing the harm was intentional or
reckless; 2) that the conduct was outrageous; and 3) thatthe conduct caused 4) extreme emotional distress to another.Hac v. Univ. of Hawaii, 102 Hawai #i 92, 106–07, 73 P.3d 46,
60–61 (2003). "The term 'outrageous' has been construed tomean without just cause or excuse and beyond all bounds ofdecency." Enoka v. AIG Hawai #i Ins. Co., Inc., 109 Hawai #i 
537, 559, 128 P.3d 850, 872 (2006) (citations and someinternal quotation marks omitted). Additionally, "[t]hequestion whether the actions of the alleged tortfeasor areunreasonable or outrageous is for the court in the firstinstance, although where reasonable people may differ onthat question it should be left to the jury." Young v.
Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai #i 403, 429, 198 P.3d 666, 692
(2008) (citation omitted). 
Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, 144 Hawai# i 224, 237, 439 P.3d 176, 189 
(2019). 
The allegations of the Complaint include, inter alia, 
the following. Namahoe was "knowingly, purposely [sic], 
wrongfully, fraudulently, conspiratorially, and criminally expelled" from his home via a wrongful foreclosure. Attorney Defendants filed multiple reverse mortgage foreclosures while representing Nutter against elderly mortgagors, including the foreclosures against Domingo and Namahoe, to further Nutter's wrongful, tortious, illegal, and criminal conduct toward Domingo and Namahoe in the foreclosure actions, with various degrees of culpability including, for example, knowing (or they should have known) that Nutter had no right to foreclose under the circumstances. Attorney Defendants refused to agree to a HUD inspection of the completed repairs by Domingo, while admitting that a HUD inspection was determinative of the issue of whether repairs were satisfactory. After service of a writ of ejectment on Namahoe, in order to cover-up and further defraud Namahoe, 
60 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attorney Defendants (and Nutter) offered Namahoe $5,000 to sign a 
paper Namahoe did not understand, under extreme duress. Newly homeless, Namahoe took the $5,000, used it to purchase a van to live in, and Namahoe was left unhoused, helpless, ill, depressed, shamed, and physically, emotionally, and psychologically impaired for life. 
With respect to Domingo, the Complaint additionally 
alleges the following. Even after judgment was entered in favor of Domingo in the Domingo Foreclosure Action, Attorney Defendants (and/or Nutter) notified Domingo, without advising Domingo's attorney, that Domingo remained in default for $6,674, and if he did not enter into a repayment agreement, a new foreclosure action would be filed. Domingo was frightened, fatigued, frail, feeble and impaired when he signed a Repayment Plan Agreement under duress, fear, and serious emotional distress caused by the continued threat of baseless foreclosure. 
Taking these allegations as true for the purposes of 
evaluating the dismissal of Plaintiffs' IIED claims under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), we cannot say that Namahoe and Domingo have failed to state claims for IIED. See Goran Pleho, LLC, 144 Hawai# i at 
238, 439 P.3d at 190. 
Turning to the question of whether the litigation 
privilege bars the IIED claims at issue in this case, Attorney Defendants argue that the litigation privilege has been held to bar other intentional tort claims, pointing to Kahala Royal Corp., 113 Hawai# i at 269-73, 151 P.3d at 750-54, which applied 
the litigation privilege to bar claims of intentional 
61 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interference with contractual relations (IICR) and intentional 
interference with prospective economic advantage (IIPEA) for conduct occurring during the course of the attorney's 
representation of his or her client. In so doing, the supreme court noted that the complainants failed to allege that the attorney defendants were acting outside of the scope of their attorney-client relationship, and they failed to allege facts from which actual malice might reasonably said to exist. Id. at 
271, 151 P.3d at 752. Accordingly, the supreme court concluded that there were no allegations indicating that the attorneys "possessed a desire to harm which is independent of the desire to protect their clients." Id. (citation omitted). The supreme 
court further concluded that there were no allegations that the attorneys were acting for personal gain or with ill will toward the opposing party. Id.
Similarly, in the case at bar, Plaintiffs do not allege 
attorney defendants were acting outside of the scope of their attorney-client relationship, they do not allege facts from which actual malice might reasonably be said to exist,
31 and they do 
not allege that Attorney Defendants acted for personal gain or with ill-will toward Plaintiffs. Attorney Defendants' alleged conduct occurred during and in conjunction with their representation of Nutter in judicial foreclosure proceedings. 
31 Actual malice was not an element of either the IICR or IIPEA 
claims at issue in Kahala Royal Corp. Kahala Royal Corp., 113 Hawai #i at 267 
n.17 & n.18, 151 P.3d at 748 n.17 & n.18 (setting forth the elements of IICR
and IIPEA). However, the supreme court's litigation privilege analysisembraced cases from other jurisdictions that have held that the privilege islost only if the attorney acts with bad faith, personal ill-will, malice, oractual intent to harm. Id. at 270-72, 151 P.3d at 751-53. 
62  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, based on the allegations of the Complaint, we conclude that 
the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing Plaintiffs' IIED based on the litigation privilege. 
Count X (Elder Abuse) asserts that Attorney Defendants 
(and Nutter) wrongfully appropriated and/or assisted in appropriating Plaintiffs' residences with the intent to defraud, they knew or should have known that Plaintiffs had the right to retain ownership of their residences, and that this conduct constituted elder abuse. It is unclear, and the parties have not addressed, whether Hawai# i recognizes a cause of action for elder 
abuse (and what elements must be established), although additional civil penalties may be imposed in a government action for a violation of HRS § 480-2 that is "directed toward, targets or injures an elder." HRS § 480-13.5 (2008). However, Plaintiffs' Elder Abuse claims were dismissed based on Attorney Defendants' litigation privilege on an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion, and we confine our review to that issue.
32 
We accept Plaintiffs' allegations as true and view them 
in the light most favorable to plaintiff, including the allegation that Attorney Defendants' intended to defraud them out of their residences. As stated above, in Kahala Royal Corp., the supreme court pointed favorably to a California case that stated: 
[A] fraud claim against a lawyer is no different from
a fraud claim against anyone else. If an attorney commits
actual fraud in his dealings with a third party, the fact hedid so in the capacity of attorney for a client does notrelieve him of liability. While an attorney's professionalduty of care extends only to his own client and intendedbeneficiaries of his legal work, the limitations on 
32 We do not reach the question of whether an elder abuse claim lies
in Hawai #i. 
63 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liability for negligence do not apply to liability for
fraud. 
13 Hawai# i at 269, 151 P.3d at 750 (citing Vega v. Jones, Day, 
Reavis & Pogue, 121 Cal.App.4th 282, 17 Cal.Rptr.3d 26, 31–35 
(2004)) (citation form altered). 
While Count X may ultimately be found to be otherwise 
infirm, applying the standards applicable to a review of dismissal on an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion, we cannot conclude that the litigation privilege shields Attorney Defendants from defending a claim that they intentionally acted to defraud these elderly Plaintiffs out of their homes. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing Count X on this basis. 
Finally, the Circuit Court dismissed Count XII, Slander 
of Title, on the ground that the litigation privilege expressly applies to slander of title claims, based on this court's decision in Isobe, 127 Hawai# i at 368, 279 P.3d at 33. In Isobe, 
we held that an absolute litigation privilege applies to claims for slander of title. Id. at 383, 279 P.3d at 48. Here, 
Plaintiffs' claim for slander of title against Attorney Defendants is based on the filing of a Notice of Pendency of Action (NOPA) with respect to both the Domingo Foreclosure and 
the Namahoe Foreclosure. The NOPAs were filed in the course of 
judicial proceedings and were related to those proceedings. Therefore, based on Isobe, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing Plaintiffs' slander of title claims in Count XII with prejudice. 
64 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Count VII - Abuse of Process 
Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing without prejudice Count VII for failure to state a 
claim for abuse of process. Count VII states: 
57. Plaintiffs Domingo and Namahoe re-allege and
re-state the allegations of paragraphs 1-56 above. 
58. [Nutter and Attorney Defendants] initiated the
Namahoe Foreclosure for a measly $500.00 worth of cosmetic
repairs that had been completed, but not approved by a HUDinspector and never disclosed to the Court. 
59. [Nutter and Attorney Defendants] initiated the
Domingo Foreclosure for the improper purpose of aninspection of Domingo's residence by Nutter's inspectors andappraisers rather than a HUD approved inspector, to whichNutter vehemently objected. 
60. [Nutter and Attorney Defendants] insidiously
devised the strategy to foreclose reverse mortgages withrepair riders, targeting the impaired, marginal, andimproverished elderly who are unaware of the HUD inspectionrequirement to satisfy the repair rider and also unawareforeclosure was never a remedy per the loan documents andHUD regulations, rules and standard practices. 
61. The acts and omissions of [Nutter and Attorney
Defendants] alleged herein and such other conduct as may be
established at trial, constitute abuse of process
. 
(Format altered). 
The Circuit Court dismissed Plaintiffs' claims for 
abuse of process based on Young v. Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai# i 
403, 198 P.3d 666 (2008). In Young, the supreme court reiterated 
that "there are two essential elements in a claim for abuse of process: (1) an ulterior purpose and (2) a wilful act in the use of the process which is not proper in the regular conduct of the proceeding." Id. at 412, 198 P.3d at 675 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). With respect to the second element, the supreme court emphasized that the defendant must be alleged to have committed a willful act that is not proper in the regular 
65 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conduct of the proceeding. Id.The willful act alleged in 
Young, using lowball settlement offers to punish the claimant in 
that case and "send a message" to other claimants, did not satisfy the second element because offers to settle are "proper" in the regular conduct of proceedings. Id. at 414-15, 198 P.3d 
at 677-78. Noting that the only other willful act alleged was the use of process itself, the supreme court pointed to the following: 
The most recent edition of Professor Prosser's treatise on 
torts teaches that "[s]ome definite act or threat notauthorized by the process, or aimed at an objective notlegitimate in the use of the process, is required; and thereis no liability where the defendant has done nothing morethan carry out the process to its authorized conclusion,even though with bad intentions." Prosser and Keeton on 
Torts § 121, at 898 (5th ed., W. Page Keeton et al. eds.,1984) (emphases added) (footnotes omitted). Thus, more isrequired than the issuance of the process itself. See 
Coleman, 41 Cal.3d at 802, 718 P.2d at 89, 226 Cal.Rptr. at101–02, Simone v. Golden Nugget Hotel & Casino, 844 F.2d1031, 1038, 1040 (3d Cir. 1988) (applying New Jersey law);Clermont Environmental Reclamation Co. v. Hancock, 16 OhioApp.3d 9, 474 N.E.2d 357, 361 (1984); Kaminske v. WisconsinCent. Ltd., 102 F.Supp.2d 1066, 1078–79 (E.D.Wis. 2000). 
Young, 119 Hawai# i at 414-15, 198 P.3d at 677-78 (footnote 
omitted; emphasis altered). 
Here, the Circuit Court's dismissal without prejudice 
of Plaintiffs' abuse of process claims rested on the second 
element, and the court's determination that there was no allegation that Attorney Defendants committed a willful act distinct from the use of process. On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that the willful act committed by Attorney Defendants was the act of filing the foreclosure complaints knowing that Nutter had no right to proceed in the first place, and proceeding in the Namahoe Foreclosure despite the fact that documents mailed to Namahoe were returned. As in Young, while Plaintiffs' 
66 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allegations satisfied the first element of an abuse of process 
claim, the Complaint did not allege the type of improper act upon which a claim of abuse of process may be founded. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing Count VII without prejudice. 
5. Count VIII - Fraud 
Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing Domingo and Namahoe's fraud claims, except for Namahoe's fraud on the court claims. Count VIII states: 
62. Plaintiffs re-allege and re-state the
allegations of paragraphs 1-61 above. 
63. The acts and omissions of [Nutter and Attorney
Defendants] alleged herein and such other conduct as may be
established at trial, constitute clear and convincingevidence of fraud practiced upon Plaintiffs. 
In the Partial Dismissal Order, the Circuit Court 
dismissed Count VIII, in relevant part as follows: 
To the extent that the claims for relief seek recovery
of damages and they are based upon violations of HRS § 667-17, consistent with the discussion in Subsection A[
33] they
are dismissed. 
In regard to [Domingo's] claim for relief for fraud
based upon the Repayment Agreement, it does not have therequisite specificity required by Rule 9 of the HRCP andLarsen v. Pacesetter Systems, Inc., 74 Haw. 1, 30-31 (1992).Of particular concern, the element of detrimental relianceis not clearly articulated. Also, in light of theallegation that the Repayment Agreement has been rescinded,it is not clear what substantial pecuniary damage wassuffered by [Domingo]. See Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45,
52-53 (1969). 
33 In Subsection A of the Partial Dismissal Order, inter alia , the
Circuit Court rejected Plaintiffs' argument that a claim for damages may bebrought against Attorney Defendants pursuant to HRS § 667-17. The Circuit Court reasoned that attorney affirmations are directed at the court, and thatsanctions and other remedies might be available as a result ofmisrepresentations to the court, but that no direct cause of action againstAttorney Defendants was permissible. We did not reach this issue in conjunction with our review of the Circuit Court's dismissal of Counts I, II,and III of the Complaint, as the Circuit Court did. However, it is discussedin conjunction with our review of Attorney Defendants' appeal. 
67 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding [Namahoe's] claim for relief for fraud based
on paragraphs 18, 19 and 20, [Namahoe] characterizes it as a
fraud on the court. 
Plaintiffs' claims for relief for damages based upon
fraud are dismissed without prejudice. [Namahoe's] claimfor relief for fraud on the court is not dismissed. 
On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that the fraud claims were 
sufficient to withstand dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), 
particularly since the facts must be deemed as true. Plaintiffs further argue that the essence of their fraud claim against Attorney Defendants was based on HRS § 667-17, and Attorney Defendants' materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmations. As we held above, applying the standards set forth in the supreme court's jurisprudence, an action for damages is hereby recognized in Hawai# i against an attorney for committing a 
fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation under the circumstance of this case, which involves wrongful foreclosures on Plaintiffs' reverse mortgages. 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing Plaintiffs' fraud claims to the extent that they seek a recovery of damages based upon the egregious violations of HRS § 667-17 that are alleged in this case, which have been held to constitute fraud on the court. See James B. Nutter & Co., 153 
Hawai#i at 166-69, 528 P.3d at 239-42. 
Plaintiffs argue that its allegations of fraud are 
stated with the required particularity. They submit that, in addition to Attorney Defendants' materially deficient and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmations, the claim for fraud was 
68 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
based on the failure to amend the necessary affirmations, the law 
and facts particular to reverse mortgages and the HUD rules and regulations applicable thereto, as well as Attorney Defendants' further actions in seeking summary judgment against Domingo and Namahoe in the foreclosure suits. It seems, however, based on the allegations of the complaint, that these allegations are part of the fraud on the court claim grounded in HRS § 667-17. 
As discussed above, we have recognized a cause of 
action against attorneys arising out of a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation under the circumstances of this case, which involved foreclosure on the Plaintiffs' reverse mortgages. On remand, both Plaintiffs are able to seek damages from Attorney Defendants for their injuries and losses caused by such egregious misconduct. However, Plaintiffs' assertion that there were additional, independent fraudulent acts and/or omissions is unclear, and Plaintiffs do not point to any specific additional fraud. We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing such additional fraud claims without prejudice. 
6. Count VI - Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices 
Plaintiffs contend that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing their UDAP Claims on the grounds that they do not have standing as consumers to sue Attorney Defendants under HRS chapters 480 and 481A. The Circuit Court's ruling on Count VI states, in relevant part: 
HRS § 480-2(d) states: "[n]o person other than a
consumer, the attorney general or the dirctor of the office 
69 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of consumer protection may bring an action based upon unfair
or deceptive acts or practices declared unlawful by thissection." Under HRS § 480-1, "'[c]onsumer' means a naturalperson who, primarily for personal, family, or householdpurposes, purchases, attempts to purchase, or is solicitedto purchase goods or services or who commits money,property, or services in a personal investment." Under the allegations of the Complaint, Plaintiffs did not receive orpursue legal services from [Attorney Defendants].Therefore, the claims for relief under Chapter 480, HRS,should be dismissed. 
Regarding Plaintiffs' claims for relief under Chapter
481A, HRS, Plaintiffs contend that they relate to thelikelihood of Plaintiffs' confusion or misunderstanding.Under Hawai #i law, a: 
likelihood of confusion exists when consumers confronted with products or services bearing one labelor mark would be likely to assume that the source ofthe products or services is the same as or associatedwith the source of a different product or serviceidentified by a similar mark. 
(Citation omitted) 
Carrington v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 5 Haw. App. 194, 199(1984). 
The point is that a claim under Chapter 481A, HRS,
relates to the sale or provision of goods or services. In this case, [Attorney Defendants] may have provided legalservices, but not to Plaintiffs. Plaintiffs do not have standing to bring an action against [Attorney Defendants]under Chapter 481A, HRS. 
Plaintiffs' claims for relief based upon Chapters 480
and 481A are dismissed without prejudice. 
On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that, even though Attorney 
Defendants did not provide legal services to them, they are 
third-party beneficiaries of the protections afforded by the HRS § 667-17 affirmation obligations/duties. We have already recognized a direct cause of action against attorneys arising out of a fraud on the court through an egregious, legally and factually deficient, inaccurate and incomplete, materially false and misleading HRS § 667-17 affirmation under the circumstances of this case. It is unclear how Plaintiffs' argument concerning 
70 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
third-party beneficiary status under HRS § 667-17 entitles them 
to further relief under the UDAP statutes. 34
As Attorney Defendants point out, in Hungate the 
supreme court declined to recognize a UDAP claim against the lender's attorney, although the court stated: "[a]s Hungate asserts, he is a consumer based on the mortgage with Deutsche Bank, and is thus also a 'consumer vis à vis the mortgagee's lawyer for the same transaction.'" Hungate, 139 Hawai# i at 412, 
391 P.3d at 19; see also HRS § 480-1 (defining "consumer"). The supreme court examined the unique nature of the attorney-client relationship, and with respect to UDAP claims the court stated: 
Permitting a party to sue his or her opponent's
attorney for UDAP under HRS § 480-2 in foreclosure actions
presents a similar issue in that an attorney's concern withbeing sued by a party opponent could compromise his or herrepresentation of the client. In a UDAP action, an attorneywould be especially vulnerable to suit because, for example,under HRS § 480-2 actual deception need not be shown; thecapacity to deceive is sufficient. Accordingly, a plaintiffwould need only to allege that opposing counsel has breachedthe statutory duty under HRS § 480-2 not to engage in unfairor deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any tradeor commerce in a way that caused private damages in order tostate a claim under HRS chapter 480. Given that UDAP lacks a more rigorous or precise state of mind requirement, even acarefully rendered opinion could, if incorrect, have thecapacity to deceive. The attorney would therefore have toinsure the correctness of his [or her] opinions andstrategies, rendering it virtually impossible for anattorney to effectively perform the traditional role oflegal counselor. Similar to the negligence issue in Boning,in foreclosure actions an attorney's justifiable concernwith being sued by the opposing party for UDAP couldcompromise the attorney's ability to zealously represent hisor her client. Consequently, based on the allegationsagainst Rosen, we decline to recognize a UDAP claim againsthim by Hungate under HRS § 480-2 in the instant foreclosureaction. 
34 Plaintiffs cite no authority for the proposition that they have
rights as a third-party beneficiary of a statute, as opposed to a third-partybeneficiary of a contract. As discussed above, we have rejected the argumentthat an adverse party is a third-party beneficiary of the legal servicescontract between their litigation adversary and their adversary's attorney. 
71 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 413, 391 P.3d at 20 (citations and footnote omitted; 
punctuation altered). 
Although Domingo and Namahoe are consumers based on 
their reverse mortgages with Nutter, and thus are consumers vis à vis Attorney Defendants, the supreme court's rationale for declining to recognize a UDAP claim against the lender's attorney in Hungate is equally applicable to Plaintiffs' Chapters 480 and 481A Claims against Attorney Defendants here.
35 Thus, we affirm 
the Circuit Court's dismissal of Count VI without prejudice, on this alternative ground. 
7. Count XIII - Punitive Damages 
Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing their claims for punitive damages on the basis that it had dismissed the other tort claims against Attorney Defendants. In light of our conclusion that Plaintiffs may prosecute claims in the nature of fraud for Attorney Defendants' fraud on the court, the Circuit Court erred to the extent that it barred Plaintiffs' pursuit of punitive damages, which was set forth in the Complaint's prayer for relief, as well as in Count XIII. However, "a claim for punitive damages is not an independent tort, but is purely incidental to a separate cause of action." 
35 In Hungate, the supreme court did not decide whether attorneys
could be held liable under HRS § 667-60 (2016), which imposes UDAP liability
on certain foreclosing mortgagees in nonjudicial foreclosures. 139 Hawai #i at 
413 n.23, 391 P.3d at 20 n.23. We similarly are not addressing otherpotential arguments; rather, we are applying Hungate's holding to theallegations of the Complaint in this case. We further note that we have examined the majority opinion in Goran Pleho, LLC, which held that Hungate'sholding concerning UDAP claims against opposing counsel did not apply becausethe issue in that case was whether a lawyer who engaged in unfair or deceptivepractices against his own client was subject to civil liability under HRS§ 480-2, and we conclude that Goran Pleho, LLC does not affect the applicationof Hungate to this case. Goran Pleho, LLC, 144 Hawai #i at 245-52, 439 P.3d at
197-203. 
72 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co. (Haw.), Inc., 76 Hawai# i 454, 466, 879 
P.2d 1037, 1049 (1994) (citation omitted). Thus, on this 
alternative ground, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing Count XIII as a separate cause of action. 
D. Plaintiffs' Partial Summary Judgment Motion As discussed in Section IV.B.1. above, we lack 
appellate jurisdiction to review the Order Granting/Denying MPSJ. Therefore, we do not reach Plaintiffs' arguments on their second point of error in CAAP-17-0000859. V. CONCLUSION 
As set forth above, Nutter's appeal in CAAP-17-0000324 
was dismissed with prejudice. With respect to Attorney Defendants' cross-appeal, we conclude that Plaintiffs' Complaint does not constitute a SLAPP and thus affirm the Circuit Court's Order Denying Attorney Defendants' MJOP, as well as the Order Denying Attorney Defendants' Substantive Joinder to the Nutter MJOP. 
In CAAP-17-0000859, the appeal from the Order 
Granting/Denying MPSJ is dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction. For the reasons stated herein, the Partial Dismissal Order is affirmed in part and vacated in part; the Circuit Court's dismissal of Counts I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, and XIII without prejudice is affirmed; the Circuit Court's dismissal of Count XII with prejudice is affirmed; the Circuit Court's dismissal of Plaintiffs' fraud claims in Count VIII to the extent that they seek a recovery based upon the egregious violations of HRS § 667-17 that are alleged in this case is 
73 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vacated, but the Circuit Court's dismissal without prejudice of 
Plaintiffs' fraud claims other than fraud on the court is otherwise affirmed; the Circuit Court's dismissal of Count X is vacated. 
This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further 
proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
74  On the briefs: 
David J. Minkin,
Jesse J.T. Smith,(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon LLP),
for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee/Appellee. 
William J. Rosdil, AAL,
and 
Rebecca A. Copeland,(Law Office of Rebecca A.
Copeland, LLC),
for Plaintiffs-Appellees/
Cross-Appellees/Appellants. 
A. Bernard Bays,Matthew C. Shannon,(Bays Lung Rose & Holmas),for Defendants-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 