  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000120
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MAY LYNN MAUKELE, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
NICANOR E. CASUMPANG, JR., Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION

 
(DC TRO NO. 12-1-0020)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Respondent-Appellant Nicanor E. Casumpang, Jr.
 
("Casumpang") appeals from the Injunction Against Harassment,
 
filed on January 30, 2012 in the District Court of the Second
 Circuit ("District Court").
1
 
On appeal, Casumpang claims that the District Court
 
erred when it imposed a three-year injunction against him for
 harassment. Specifically, Casumpang contends that the District
 Court erred in using a subjective reasonable-person test and that
 his former co-worker, Petitioner-Appellee May Lynn Maukele
 ("Maukele"), failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence
 that Casumpang's conduct would cause a reasonable person to
 suffer emotional distress under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 
2
§ 604-10.5(a)(2) (Supp. 2013). [OB at 12-14] 
 
1
 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided.
 
2
 HRS § 604-10.5 states, in relevant part:
 
(a) For the purposes of this section:
 
"Course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct
   
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments that they advance and the issues that they raise,
 we resolve Casumpang's point of error as follows and affirm:
 
Casumpang contends that Maukele failed to demonstrate
 
that Casumpang's conduct would cause a reasonable person
 emotional distress, as required under HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2). 
Casumpang does not challenge Maukele's claim that his conduct was
 an "intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at
 [Maukele] that seriously alarm[ed,] or disturb[ed]
 consistently[,] or continually bother[ed her] and serve[d] no
 legitimate purpose[.]" H
AW. REV. STAT. § 604-10.5(a)(2). Thus,
 
the only issues on appeal are whether Casumpang's conduct "would
 cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress[,]" id.,
 and whether the court applied the correct standard in making its
 determination.
 
We review the question of whether Casumpang's conduct 
would cause emotional distress to a reasonable person de novo. Luat v. Cacho, 92 Hawai
'i 330, 343, 991 P.2d 840, 853 (App. 1999) 
(citing State v. Trainor, 83 Hawai 'i 250, 255, 925 P.2d 818, 823 
(1996)). We conclude that Maukele's testimony sufficiently provided clear and convincing evidence, which the District Court determined to be credible, that Casumpang's conduct would cause a reasonable person emotional distress. Maukele told the court that Casumpang told her that "I can be your boyfriend" and made sexual comments on a daily basis about the work tools (e.g. in 
composed of a series of acts over any period of time
evidencing a continuity of purpose.
 
"Harassment" means:
 (1) Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or assault;
or
 (2) An intentional or knowing course of conduct
directed at an individual that seriously alarms or disturbs
consistently or continually bothers the individual and
serves no legitimate purpose; provided that such course of
conduct would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional
distress.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 604-10.5(a)(1) and (2).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
response to her request for a particular tool, "he would say
 
. . . Oh, I got the big one here"). Maukele further described an
 incident when she was walking through the motor shop and
 Casumpang purposefully bumped into her and brushed his arm
 against her "top."
 
Furthermore, Casumpang does not establish, and the 
record does not support the assertion, that the District Court applied a subjective standard in determining that Casumpang's conduct caused emotional distress. Cf. Luat, 92 Hawai
'i at 
344–45, 991 P.2d 854–55 (reversing the trial court where the court's language reflected a misapprehension of the clear and convincing standard of proof and where the court stated that "you have to take the petitioner as you find her or him.") Instead, the District Court appears to have properly used an objective reasonable-person standard in evaluating the evidence before it. 
THEREFORE,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Injunction Against
 
Harassment, filed on January 30, 2012 in the District Court of
 the Second Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 24, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Respondent-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Deborah K. Wright and

Keith D. Kirschbraun 
(Wright & Kirschbraun)
for Petitioner-Appellee.
 
3
 