NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000100
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF J CHILDREN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 13-00022)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights entered on February 11, 2015 in the
 
1
Family Court of the First Circuit  (family court).
 
On appeal, Mother contends the family court erred in

 
making Findings of Facts (FOFs) nos. 164, 165, 166, 179, 180,
 
195, and 198.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Mother's
 appeal is without merit.
 
In her opening brief, Mother does not contest the 
Findings of Fact/Conclusions of Law (FOFs/COLs) as presented in 
her points of error section, but asserts a number of other 
arguments related to the contested FOFs/COLs in her substantive argument. To the extent that some of the FOFs/COLs are not argued, Mother has waived these arguments. See Hawai
'i Rules of 
1 The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be
 
deemed waived."). We address only the points of error for which
 Mother provides substantive arguments.
A. Premature Termination of Parental Rights 
Mother asserts the termination of her parental rights
 
was premature under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-27(a)(7)
 
(Supp. 2015), because the children had been in foster custody for
 
only twenty-two months at the time of the trial. HRS § 587A­27(a) states in relevant part:
 
§587A-27 Service plan. (a) The service plan shall
provide:
 
. . . .
 
(7)	 Notice to the parents that if the child has been
in foster care under the responsibility of the
department for an aggregate of fifteen out of
the most recent twenty-two months from the
child's date of entry into foster care, the
department is required to file a motion to set a
termination of parental rights hearing, and the
parents' failure to provide a safe family home
within two years from the date when the child
was first placed under foster custody by the
court, may result in the parents' parental
rights being terminated[.]
 
Mother misinterprets HRS § 587A-27(a), which merely describes the
 
requirements of a "service plan," including notice to the parent
 of the potential termination of their parental rights. HRS
 § 587A-27(a) does not set forth the time in which a termination
 of parental rights hearing may occur.
 
HRS § 587A-33 (Supp. 2015) is the applicable statute,
 
which addresses termination of parental right hearings. HRS
 § 587A-33 provides in relevant part:
 
§587A-33 Termination of parental rights hearing. (a)
At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court shall
determine whether there exists clear and convincing evidence
that:
 
. . . .

 
(2)	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that the
child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination will become willing and able to
provide the child with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan, within a
reasonable time, which shall not exceed two
years from the child's date of entry into foster
care;
 
. . . .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) If the court determines that the criteria set
forth in subsection (a) are established by clear and
convincing evidence and the goal of the permanent plan is
for the child to be adopted or remain in permanent custody,
the court shall order:
 
(1)	 That the child's parent's parental rights be
terminated;
 
(2)	 Termination of the existing service plan and
revocation of the prior award of foster custody;
 
(3)	 That permanent custody of the child be awarded
to an appropriate authorized agency;
 
(4)	 An appropriate permanent plan; and 
(5)	 The entry of any other orders the court deems to
be in the best interests of the child, including
restricting or excluding unnecessary parties
from participating in adoption or other
subsequent proceedings.
 
(Emphasis added.) The statute requires that to terminate a
 
parent's parental rights, the family court must find that it "is
 not reasonably foreseeable that the child's parent . . . will
 become willing and able to provide the child with a safe family
 home . . . within a reasonable time, . . . not to exceed two
 years from the child's date of entry into foster care[.]" HRS
 § 587A-33(a)(2). The timing of the termination of the parental
 rights hearing was appropriate under the statute. Mother's
 assertion that the termination hearing was premature because the
 children had been in foster care for only twenty-two months is
 without merit. 
B. Domestic Violence Services Omitted From Mother's Service Plan
 
Mother next asserts the family court "was clearly 
erroneous in making the [FOF] that [Mother] was provided a 
reasonable opportunity to reunite with her two children when [Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai
'i Department of Human 
Services (DHS)] did not make available to [Mother] domestic 
violence services that [DHS] believed was necessary before 
reunification." She elaborates, "the evidence is certainly clear and convincing that the [DHS] did not give [Mother] notice of all of the services required for reunification and a reasonable amount of time to complete those services." Mother seems to suggest that DHS required her to complete domestic violence 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
services, but did not include such services in the January 30,
 
2013 service plan (Service Plan).
 
DHS argues in response that "[e]ven if it was an error
 
for [DHS] to not include domestic violence services in Mother's
 [S]ervice [P]lan, the error was harmless due to Mother's lack of
 participation in the services that were contained in the
 [S]ervice [P]lan."
 
Under HRS § 587A-11 (Supp. 2015), DHS is authorized to
 
"enter into a service plan" upon "receiving a report that a child
 is subject to imminent harm, has been harmed, or is subject to
 threatened harm." The family court began ordering compliance
 with the Service Plan on March 15, 2013. The Service Plan
 recommended substance abuse assessment and services, ongoing drug
 monitoring, parenting education classes, psychological
 evaluation, and home-based services. Over the course of the next
 year and a half, the family court held a series of hearings in
 which it found Mother had made only limited progress with regard
 to the Service Plan and the modifications to the Service Plan.
 
The family court found in its FOFs/COLs that Mother had
 
on numerous occasions failed to appear for urinalysis (UA) tests,
 
failed to provide a sample for a UA test, or tested positive for
 
methamphetamines. The family court also found:
 
[FOF] 109. Mother has not completed a UA monitoring
program, despite at least five referrals for the Hina Mauka
UA monitoring program. She has not participated in UA
monitoring since her failure to provide a sample on July 25,
2013. A no-show for a UA test is regarded the same as a
positive/dirty test result.
 
[FOF] 110. Mother has not done a psychological
evaluation. [DHS] has been unable to refer Mother for a
psychological evaluation due to her lack of a 90 day period
of demonstrated sobriety.
 
[FOF] 111. Mother was referred to the Comprehensive
Counseling & Support Services ("CCSS") program for parenting
education, outreach and home based services in May 2013.
She attended assessment meetings with CCSS on October 4 and
10, 2013.
 
[FOF] 112. Mother completed PARENTS, Inc. parenting
classes on October 28, 2013.
 
. . . .
 
[FOF] 119. Mother has failed to compete outreach and
home based services, despite at least 3 referrals to CCSS
for outreach and home based services. She has not engaged
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in outreach and home based services since she was discharged
from CCSS on March 7, 2014. 
[FOF] 120. Although she testified that she understood
that it is crucial to participate in services in order to be
reunified with the Subject Children, Mother was not engaged
in any services at the time of the [motion to terminate
parental rights] trial on February 11, 2015. 
The family court did not err in finding "by abundantly
 
clear and convincing evidence the [DHS] has demonstrated that
 
Mother is not presently willing and able to provide the Subject
 Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 service plan" and also that "it is not reasonably foreseeable
 that Mother will become willing and able to provide the Subject
 Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 service plan, within a reasonable period of time . . . ." Mother
 does not provide any support for her assertion that DHS required
 her to complete domestic violence services to preserve her
 parental rights, but even if the completion of domestic violence
 services were a requirement, Mother failed to comply with
 substantial portions of the Service Plan. The evidence in the
 record supports the family court's finding that Mother was not
 willing and able to provide her children with a safe family home,
 even with the assistance of a service plan.
C. Expert Testimony in March 15, 2013 Trial
 
Mother contends the family court erred "when it allowed
 
Ms. Gladys Bautista [(Bautista)] to testify as an expert in child
 
welfare services during the adjudication trial on March 15, 2013
 
on the basis tha[t] she is employed as a social service worker by
 [DHS]." Mother argues that because Bautista is a human resources
 professional and not a social worker, Bautista is unqualified to
 testify as an expert.
 
Under HRS § 587A-19 (Supp. 2015), "[a] person employed
 
by the department as a social worker in the area of child
 protective services or child welfare services shall be presumed
 to be qualified to testify as an expert on child protective or
 child welfare services." Bautista testified that she worked as
 an Assessment Social Worker with DHS in the Child Welfare
 Services branch and that her duties included determining child
 abuse and neglect.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Despite Mother's objections at trial based on the fact
 
that Bautista's resume lists her as a "Human Services
 
Professional," HRS § 587A-19 created a presumption that Bautista
 was qualified to testify as an expert based on her employment as
 a social worker for DHS. In addition, DHS presented evidence
 that Bautista had an undergraduate degree in sociology and a
 masters degree in counseling psychology, that she had worked as
 an Assessment Social Worker since 2005, that she had received
 additional training in the field of social work in the areas of
 assessment, child maltreatment, engaging with families, and
 substance abuse counseling, and that she had previously been
 qualified four or five times as an expert in child abuse and
 neglect during trial proceedings. Therefore, Mother's argument
 that Bautista should not have been allowed to testify as an
 expert is without merit. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights entered on February 11, 2015 in the Family Court
 of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 25, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada 
for Mother-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Erin K.S. Torres Mary Anne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 

6
 