           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000278 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
SAMUEL B. SNIFFIN and SETH E. CONKLIN, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI# I DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY,
Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
and 
MATTHEW MAZZOCCA, Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC131002943) 
SAMUEL B. SNIFFIN and SETH E. CONKLIN, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
M
ATTHEW MAZZOCCA, Defendant-Appellee,
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC141001193) 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Samuel B. Sniffin and Seth E. 
Conklin  appeal from the Final Judgment in favor of Defendant/ 
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee 
State of Hawai# i Department of 
Public Safety and Third-Party Defendant-Appellee and Defendant-NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellee Matthew Mazzocca1 entered by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit on February 28, 2019.2 For the reasons explained 
below, we affirm. 
Sniffin, Conklin, and Mazzocca were inmates at the 
Hâlawa Correctional Facility. They got into a fight. On 
November 5, 2013, Sniffin and Conklin sued the State. 
They 
claimed they were injured because of the State's negligence. The 
State filed a third-party complaint against Mazzocca. The State claimed that Mazzocca "struck [Sniffin and Conklin] intentionally, maliciously and without warning to the State." 
On May 16, 2014, Sniffin and Conklin sued Mazzocca. 
They claimed they were injured when Mazzocca assaulted and battered them. 
The two lawsuits were consolidated by stipulation. A 
jury-waived trial was held October 29, 2018, and November 13 and 15, 2018. 
The circuit court entered "Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order" on November 19, 2018. The order stated: 
Pursuant to the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
Law, the Court hereby orders that judgment enter in favor of
Defendants State of Hawai #i, Department of Public Safety,
and Matthew Mazzocca, and against Plaintiffs Samuel Sniffinand Seth Conklin. 
The Final Judgment was entered on February 28, 2019. 
This appeal followed. 
Sniffin and Conklin contend that the circuit court 
erred by: (1) concluding that Sniffin and Conklin "failed to show 
that the State owed them a duty"; (2) holding that Sniffin and 
Conklin "failed to provide evidence that the State of Hawai# i 
breached any legal duty to protect them from the consequences of 
their illegal activities at Halawa Correctional Facility or from the consequences of stealing from another inmate"; and 
1 Sniffin and Conklin do not argue error affecting the Final
Judgment in favor of Mazzocca. 
2 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) excluding the deposition testimony of Adult Correctional 
Officer (ACO) Kaipo Fiatoa at trial. 
Sniffin and Conklin do not challenge any of the circuit 
court's findings of fact, which are therefore binding on appeal, 
Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai# i 450, 459, 
40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). 
The circuit court found that Sniffin, 
Conklin, and Mazzocca were housed in Hâ lawa's medium security 
quad 4 Module 2A. On the morning of November 5, 2011, Mazzocca confronted Sniffin and Conklin in the day room about something (prison tattoo ink) he felt Sniffin and Conklin stole from him. Their conversation lasted 30 seconds to one minute. The conversation got heated as obscenities were exchanged. Mazzocca saw Sniffin and Conklin exchange looks, which led him to believe they would not back down and were readying to attack him while he was outnumbered. Sniffin's body language and hand gestures indicated that he was squaring up to fight. When Mazzocca saw Sniffin clench his fist, Mazzocca swung at Sniffin first. Sniffin fell to the ground from Mazzocca's first punch and did not move as Mazzocca and Conklin continued to fight. Conklin was subsequently subdued.
(1) Sniffin and Conklin challenge the first sentence 
of Conclusion of Law (COL
) no. 1: 
1. With respect to the Plaintiffs' negligence claim,
Plaintiffs have failed to show that the State owed them a duty. . . . 
The existence of a duty is entirely a question of law. 
Doe Parents No. 1 v. State, Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai# i 34, 57, 
58 P.3d 545, 568 (2002). 
We review questions of law de novo 
under the right/wrong standard. Id.
"As a general matter, a person does not have a duty to 
act affirmatively to protect another person from harm by a third 
person." Doe Parents, 100 Hawai# i at 71, 58 P.3d at 582 (cleaned 
up). 
However, if there is a "special relationship" between the 
defendant and the plaintiff, the defendant owes the plaintiff a 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
duty to control the conduct of a third person to prevent the 
third person from causing physical harm to the plaintiff. Id.
The relationship between the State and an incarcerated person is such a "special relationship." 
The Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A provides in
relevant part that "[o]ne who is required by law to take orwho voluntarily takes the custody of another undercircumstances such as to deprive the other of his [or her]normal opportunities for protection is under a . . . duty tothe other" "to take reasonable action . . . to protect themagainst unreasonable risk of physical harm[.]" 
Id. at 71 n.40, 58 P.3d at 582 n.40. 
The first sentence of COL no. 1 is wrong. But the 
error is not dispositive; the circuit court's other findings, 
conclusions, and mixed findings and conclusions — which are not erroneous — support the Final Judgment.
(2) Sniffin and Conklin challenge the second sentence 
of COL no. 1, which is actually a finding of fact: 
The Plaintiffs failed to provide evidence that the
State of Hawai #i breached any legal duty to protect
them from the consequences of their illegal activitiesat Halawa Correctional Facility or from theconsequences of stealing from another inmate. 
Whether or not the defendant breached a legal duty by 
failing to exercise reasonable care is a question of fact. Doe 
Parents, 100 Hawai# i at 57–58, 58 P.3d at 568–69. The circuit 
court found,3 and Sniffin and Conklin do not challenge, that 
Mazzocca's prison file contained no indication of institutional 
violence or prior assaultive behavior. Before the fight, neither Sniffin nor Conklin told the State they were at risk of physical harm from Mazzocca because they had stolen from him. On the morning of November 5, 2011, Mazzocca did not tell the State that Sniffin or Conklin had stolen from him. The trial court found 
3 Some of what the circuit court labeled conclusions of law were 
actually findings of fact. Whether a determination is a finding of fact or a
conclusion of law is a question of law that is freely reviewable by areviewing court. Kilauea Neighborhood Ass'n v. Land Use Comm'n, 7 Haw. App.
227, 229, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Mazzocca credibly testified that he didn't "snitch" to ACO 
Fiatoa. We will not disturb credibility determinations. Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai# i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 
16, 22 (2001). 
The State was never placed on notice, before the fight, 
of a specific threat Mazzocca posed to Sniffin or Conklin, and circumstances did not reasonably suggest that a specific harm was likely to arise. 
Gary Kaplan, Corrections Supervisor with the 
Hawai#i Department of Public Safety, testified that the 
altercation between Sniffin, Conklin, and Mazzocca was sudden and unexpected, and there was insufficient time for ACOs to respond. The circuit court found that "It was impossible for ACOs to react to something they knew nothing about[.]" 
The circuit court entered the following conclusions of 
law, which are actually mixed findings of fact and conclusions of law, that are not challenged by Sniffin or Conklin: 
4. The Court, having taken into account the circumstances
of this case, finds that the Plaintiffs could notreasonably expect protection from the State for theconsequences of their illegal enterprise of makingtattoo ink or for stealing from Mazzocca. Plaintiffs did not warn the State that Mazzocca might harm them;they kept their illegal activity to themselves. 
5. There is no evidence that any change in the policiesor practices at [H âlawa] could have prevented the
intentional wrongful conduct by Plaintiffs in theproduction of tattoo ink or that a change in[
Hâlawa]'s policies or practices would have reduced
Plaintiffs' risk of harm from the consequences ofstealing from another inmate and subsequently lying tothat inmate. 
6. The Court also finds that there is no evidence that the State was negligent in the security classificationand/or housing determinations that resulted inSniffin, Conklin and Mazzocca being housed in the samemodule during the time preceding the fight and on theday of the fight. 
. . . . 
10. Plaintiffs are not entitled to any recovery againstthe State[.] 
Conclusions of law that are supported by the trial 
court's findings of fact and reflect an application of the 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
correct rule of law will not be overturned. Est. of Klink ex 
rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 
(2007). 
In Doe Parents
, the supreme court referred to 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A and noted: 
The commentary to this section remarks that the duty that a
"special relationship" imposes upon a defendant "is only oneto exercise reasonable care under the circumstances. The defendant is not liable where he [or she] neither knows norshould know of the unreasonable risk[.]" Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A Comment e, at 120 (1965).Correlatively, this court has noted that even if thedefendant and the plaintiff share a "special relationship,"the defendant will not become liable to the plaintiff for aninjury that a third person inflicts upon the plaintiffunless the harm was reasonably foreseeable. See, e.g., Lee,
83 Hawai #i at 160, 925 P.2d at 330. 
100 Hawai# i at 71 n.40, 58 P.3d at 582 n.40. 
On this record, we conclude that the circuit court's 
mixed finding and conclusion that the State did not breach a 
legal duty owed to Sniffin or Conklin is neither clearly erroneous nor wrong.
(3) Sniffin and Conklin contend that the circuit court 
erred by excluding ACO Fiatoa's "deposition testimony" at trial. We initially note that the opening brief's statement of the points of error does not comply with Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(A). 
According to the opening brief's argument section and 
the transcript of proceedings it cites, the issue arose when Sniffin and Conklin offered their Exhibit 21 into evidence. Plaintiffs' Exhibit 21 is ACO Fiatoa's deposition transcript. Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 32(a)(1) provides that 
"[a]ny deposition may be used by any party for the purpose of contradicting or impeaching the testimony of deponent as a witness, or for any other purpose permitted by the 
Hawai#i Rules 
of Evidence." 
At trial, after ACO Fiatoa testified to a lack of 
memory, Sniffin used ACO Fiatoa's deposition to have ACO Fiatoa 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affirm his prior testimony on a number of facts.  Sniffin 
questioned ACO Fiatoa: "Let me ask you -- but would you lie at
your deposition?" ACO Fiatoa answered: "No." Sniffin again asked: "But you wouldn't lie at a deposition, would you?" ACOFiatoa again answered: "No." Sniffin asked a third time: 4
 
 
Q. Okay. In fact, wouldn't you agree, Mr. Fiatoa,
that all the testimony that you -- all the -- all the
testimony you gave at your deposition here was based uponwhat you remembered at the time in March 9, 2017, correct? 
A. Yeah. 
Q. And that it was the truth? 
A. It was what I remembered, yes. 
Q. Yes. But it was the truth that you testified
to? 
A. Yeah. 
Q. Okay. You would not, as you testified earlier,
you would not lie at a deposition, correct? 
A. No. 
Finally, Sniffin asked: 
Q. Okay. Okay. Even though you don't remember
what you said in March 9, 2017, you would agree that thestatement you gave here was truthful and correct; correct? 
A. How can I say correct if I can't really
remember? 
Q. Yes. Well, you wouldn't lie at a deposition? 
A. Then I guess, yeah. 
Sniffin then moved the entire deposition transcript — 
Plaintiffs' Exhibit 21 — into evidence. Sniffin correctly argues 
that the circuit court erroneously believed that because ACO Fiatoa was present at trial, he was not "unavailable" under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 804(a)(3) after he testified 
4 During trial, Sniffin read questions and answers from ACO Fiatoa's
deposition transcript to ACO Fiatoa, ostensibly to refresh his recollection.
ACO Fiatoa's recollection was generally not refreshed. However, ACO Fiatoaalso acknowledged on the record that the deposition transcript accuratelyreflected his answers to the questions that were asked during the deposition. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to a lack of memory. However, the basis for the circuit court's 
ruling actually was: 
You've been using [the deposition transcript] throughout the
examination of Mr. Fiatoa for whatever purposes you saw fitand the court has allowed that, but the court will not admitthe deposition transcript. 
Portions of ACO Fiatoa's former testimony were already 
in evidence through his examination at trial. See HRE Rule 
804(b)(1). The actual deposition transcript, to the extent it 
contained questions and answers already in evidence, was a "needless presentation of cumulative evidence." HRE Rule 403. Sniffin failed to establish how the remainder of the transcript was relevant. See HRE Rule 402. We conclude that the circuit 
court did not err by refusing to admit Plaintiffs' Exhibit 21 into evidence. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Final Judgment entered 
by the circuit court on February 28, 2019, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate JudgeJoseph P.H. Ahuna, Jr., David K. Ahuna,for Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Caron M. Inagaki,Kathy K. Higham, Deputy Attorneys General, Department of the AttorneyGeneral, State of Hawai# i,
for Defendant/Third-PartyPlaintiff-AppelleeState of 
Hawai#i Department
of Public Safety. 
Richard D. Gronna,
for Third-PartyDefendant-Appelleeand Defendant-AppelleeMatthew Mazzocca. 
8 