NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000763
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NELSON A. CHUNG, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
 
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION,
Employer-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2008-558 (2-08-04079))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
In this workers' compensation case, the Labor and
 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) denied the claim for 
psychological stress injury made by Claimant-Appellant Nelson A.
 Chung. Chung was employed as a recreation director by Employer-
Appellee City and County of Honolulu, Department of Parks and
 Recreation (City). Chung's claim stemmed from a remark made by
 his supervisor that Chung would be assigned to the teen program
 and the gym at Manoa Valley District Park if he was still there
 during the summer. Chung's supervisor was referring to the
 City's practice of transferring staff to different parks to run
 summer fun programs at the last minute. This practice, which had
 been applied to Chung the prior summer, was being discussed
 immediately before the supervisor's remark. Chung misperceived
 the supervisor's comment as a derogatory remark about his
 potential termination. The LIRAB found that Chung's claimed
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"psychological condition" was the result of his "misperception of
 
various events and communications" and "was not caused or
 aggravated by work but was entirely imported by [Chung] into the
 workplace." It therefore concluded that Chung had not sustained
 a personal psychological injury arising out of his employment. 
Chung appeals from the LIRAB's Decision and Order. On
 
appeal, Chung contends that: (1) the LIRAB erred in making, and
 failing to make, numerous findings that led to its denial of his
 claim; (2) the LIRAB's denial of his claim was contrary to law;
 and (3) the LIRAB erred in admitting hearsay evidence at the
 hearing on his claim. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 A.
 
In December 2006, Chung began his employment with the
 
City as a Recreation Director I at the Manoa Valley District
 Park. At the end of Chung's six-month probationary period, 
Chung's supervisor, Pamela Okihara, gave him a satisfactory
 
rating, and Chung became a permanent employee. In October 2007,
 the Recreational Director II at the Manoa Valley District Park
 was transferred to become a Recreational Director III at another
 park. In November 2007, Okihara conducted an annual performance
 review of Chung and found that his work performance was
 substandard. Chung was placed on a special three-month
 performance evaluation. 
On February 15, 2008, a staff meeting was held in which
 
Chung, Okihara, and others were present. One of the matters
 discussed was staff assignments at the Manoa Park for the City's
 summer fun program. Chung had been sent to Paki Community Park
 the previous summer to run its summer fun program. During the
 discussion about the summer fun staff assignments, Elizabeth
 Sunuda commented that the staff never knew who would be at the
 Manoa Park until the last minute because they could be
 transferred to another park. It was in this context that Okihara
 told Chung that his summer fun assignment at the Manoa Park would
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
be the teen program and the gym if he was still at the park -- in
 
other words, if he was not transferred to another park. 
On March 2, 2008, Chung was involved in a motor vehicle
 
accident, in which he was going too fast around a curve and
 crashed into a palm tree.
 
B. 
On April 1, 2008, Chung filed a workers' compensation
 
claim, which identified February 15, 2008, as the "Date of
 Accident" and which alleged that "[d]uring a mandatory complex
 meeting, Supervisor directed a[n] unnecessary derogatory remark
 about my potential termination, in front of co-workers. I was
 humiliated and shocked by the statement as I had no prior
 warning." Chung described his injury/illness as "[a]nxious, lack
 of ability to concentrate, depression." 
The City denied liability for Chung's claim pending
 
investigation. In an April 30, 2008, statement, Okihara
 explained the comment she made at the February 15, 2008, meeting,
 which formed the basis for Chung's workers' compensation claim,
 as follows:
 
The comment was in reference to Mr. Chung being detailed to
another park for the summer and not about his possible
termination. The discussion that preceded this remark was
about summer staffing at Manoa. The senior director at
 Manoa made the comment that we never know what's going to
happen until the last minute. I then in[fo]rmed Mr. Chung
that he would be assigned the Teens and the gym during the
summer and would need to work all nights. I then joked,
"That is if you are still here in June." Then I said I'm
 only joking because in all probab[i]lity he would be
assigned to Manoa and would not be detailed as he was last
summer.
 
C.
 
Chung sought treatment from psychiatrist Dennis B.
 
Lind, M.D., whom Chung had seen on prior occasions from as early
 
as 1990. Dr. Lind diagnosed Chung as having an Adjustment
 
Disorder with Anxiety and Depressed Mood.
 
At the City's request, clinical psychologist Joseph P.
 
Rogers, Ph.D., performed an independent psychological examination
 (IPE) of Chung. As part of his IPE, Dr. Rogers reviewed medical
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
records from Dr. Lind. These records revealed that Chung had
 
encountered problems with previous employers and that Chung had a
 "thin skin" and "a low threshold for anxiety."
 
Based on his IPE, Dr. Rogers opined that Chung "did not
 
sustain a 'mental injury' that arose out of and in the course of
 his employment with the City and County of Honolulu." Dr. Rogers
 cited several reasons for his conclusion. Dr. Rogers referred to
 Okihara's April 30, 2008, statement explaining her comment at the
 February 15, 2008, meeting as well as the written statements of
 two staff members present at the meeting who confirmed that they
 did not observe any derogatory remarks made toward Chung at the
 meeting. Dr. Rogers opined that Chung's workers' compensation
 claim was based on Chung's clear "misperception or
 misinterpretation" of his supervisor's comments at the February
 15, 2008, meeting. 
Significantly, Dr. Rogers opined that:
 
there is evidence of underlying Dependent/Obsessive-
Compulsive/Histrionic Personality Traits. These same
 personality traits clearly emerged on current psychometric
testing. Essentially, Mr. Chung tends to be hypersensitive
to any criticism and tends to overreact with a combination
of perseveration/dwelling on his circumstances and excessive
emotionality. Thus, the true cause of his stress in the
workplace with his current supervisor at the City and County
of Honolulu is due to his Dependent/Obsessive-
Compulsive/Histrionic Personality Traits. . . . The fact
 that he remains off work indicates that there are much more
 profound psychodynamics involved. In my opinion, these
psychodynamics involve his hypersensitivity to criticism
caused by his underlying Dependent/Obsessive-
Compulsive/Histrionic Personality Traits. His personality
traits are clearly pre-existing in nature and causally
unrelated to his employment at the City and County of
Honolulu. 
(Emphases added.) 
Dr. Rogers also noted that Chung's March 2, 2008, motor
 
vehicle accident, which was not work related, was a significant
 
personal source of stress in his life. Dr. Rogers opined that
 the motor vehicle accident "has resulted in clinically
 significant anxiety symptoms that may reach diagnostic criteria
 for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder[.]" Dr. Rogers further opined
 that the fact that the City had placed Chung on a performance
 
4
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evaluation, which Dr. Rogers characterized as disciplinary
 
action, was a cause of stress to Chung. 
Dr. Rogers reported that "[Chung] would meet the
 
diagnostic criteria for a Depressive Disorder, Not Otherwise
 Specified." In response to specific questions posed by the City,
 Dr. Rogers stated (1) that Chung did not suffer a work-related
 stress/mental injury as a result of the February 15, 2008,
 meeting and (2) that Chung suffers from a pre-existing and
 underlying medical/psychological condition, namely,
 Dependent/Obsessive-Compulsive/Histrionic Personality Traits,
 that has impacted his current mental condition. 
In response to a September 16, 2008, letter, Dr. Lind
 
acknowledged that he had reviewed Dr. Rogers' IPE report; that he
 essentially agreed with Dr. Rogers' findings; and that he had no
 points of disagreement with the medical conclusions rendered by
 Dr. Rogers. After Chung learned that Dr. Lind had agreed with
 Dr. Rogers' report, Chung stopped treatment with Dr. Lind and
 began receiving treatment from clinical psychologist, Chalsa M.
 Loo, Ph.D. Unlike Dr. Rogers, Dr. Loo believed that Chung's
 
psychological distress and his condition -- which she diagnosed
 
as anxiety disorder not otherwise specified and adjustment
 disorder with depressed mood, chronic -- was work-related.
 
D.
 
On November 14, 2008, the Director of the Department of
 
Labor and Industrial Relations denied Chung's claim for
 compensation. In rendering this decision, the Director credited
 the opinions of Drs. Rogers and Lind. The Director adopted the
 opinion of Dr. Rogers, as agreed to by Dr. Lind, and concluded
 that Chung "did not sustain a work-related stress injury on
 2/15/2008." 
E.
 Chung appealed the Director's decision to the LIRAB.
 
The LIRAB filed a Pretrial Order which set forth the issue to be
 determined in Chung's appeal to the LIRAB. The Pretrial Order
 provided that "[t]he sole issue to be determined is whether
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Chung] sustained a personal psychological injury on February 15,
 
2008, arising out of and in the course of employment."
 
The LIRAB held a hearing on Chung's appeal, at which 
Chung, Dr. Loo, and Okihara testified. The LIRAB also admitted
 over Chung's hearsay objection: (1) Okihara's testimony that she
 spoke to Elizabeth Sunuda and that Sunuda had reservations about
 whether they should find Chung's job performance had been
 satisfactory during his initial six-month probationary period
 after being hired; and (2) two exhibits consisting of Dr. Lind's
 acknowledgment of his agreement with Dr. Rogers' IPE report
 findings and Dr. Lind's handwritten treatment notes. 
The LIRAB entered its Decision and Order on 
September 28, 2011. The LIRAB credited Dr. Rogers' diagnosis of
 
Chung as having a Depressive Disorder, not otherwise specified. 
The LIRAB did not, however, adopt Dr. Rogers' opinion that this
 diagnosis could be related to disciplinary action because Chung
 was not subject to "disciplinary action" as defined by the
 workers' compensation statute. Based on Okihara's testimony and
 other evidence, the LIRAB made the following finding as to the
 February 15, 2008, meeting:
 
The meeting on February 15, 2008 included a discussion
of the upcoming summer fun program and a comment as to
[Chung's] anticipated job duties if he was still at
Manoa Park, which followed a discussion of [Chung's]
temporary transfer to a different park the previous
summer. There was no insinuation that he would be
 terminated.
 
With respect to the cause of Chung's psychological
 
condition, the LIRAB found:
 
The [LIRAB] finds that [Chung's] psychological condition,
whether it is an anxiety disorder, adjustment disorder, or
depressive disorder was the result of [Chung's]
misperception of various events and communications. His
 condition was not caused or aggravated by work but was
entirely imported by [Chung] into the workplace.
 
The LIRAB ultimately concluded that "[Chung] did not
 
sustain a personal psychological injury on February 15, 2008,
 
arising out of and in the course of employment." Accordingly,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the LIRAB affirmed the decision of the Director to deny Chung's
 
workers' compensation claim.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Chung contends that the LIRAB erred in making, and in
 
failing to make, numerous findings which ultimately led to its
 decision to deny his claim. The essence of Chung's argument is
 that the LIRAB erred in accepting the testimony and opinions of
 Okihara, Dr. Rogers, and Dr. Lind over that of Chung and Dr. Loo. 
Based on this premise, Chung contends that the LIRAB erred in (1)
 making various findings and (2) not making other findings that
 were supported by evidence he presented.
 
We review LIRAB's findings of fact under the clearly 
erroneous standard. Moi v. State, Dept. of Public Safety, 118 
Hawai
'i 239, 242, 188 P.3d 753, 756 (App. 2008). In reviewing 
LIRAB decisions, we also give deference to the LIRAB's assessment of the credibility of witnesses and the weight it gives to the evidence. Id. Here, the LIRAB chose to credit and give weight 
to the testimony and opinions of Okihara, Dr. Rogers, and Dr. Lind, and it chose not to accept the contrary testimony and opinions of Chung and Dr. Loo. We decline to overturn the LIRAB's assessment of the evidence. Based on the LIRAB's credibility and weight determinations, we conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the LIRAB's material findings and that those findings were not clearly erroneous. We also conclude that the LIRAB did not err in failing to make findings based on the evidence presented by Chung.
1 
1We note that Chung's appeal to the LIRAB was limited to
"whether [Chung] sustained a personal psychological injury on
February 15, 2008, arising out of and in the course of
employment." However, Chung's arguments that the LIRAB erred in
failing to make findings include matters that were unrelated to
the February 15, 2008, meeting and beyond the scope of the issue
presented for appeal to the LIRAB. This provides an additional
reason for rejecting these arguments.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We reject Chung's contention that the LIRAB's denial of
 
his claim was contrary to law. The LIRAB found that Chung's
 
"psychological condition . . . was the result of [Chung's]
 misperception of various events and communications" and that 
"[h]is condition was not caused or aggravated by work but was
 entirely imported by [Chung] into the workplace."
2 In other
 
words, the LIRAB found that Chung's claim for psychological
 stress injury was not work-related because it was not based on
 anything that actually happened at work, but only on Chung's
 misperception of what had happened. Chung's misperception, in
 turn, was based on his pre-existing psychological personality
 traits. 
For an injury to be compensable under Hawaii's workers' 
compensation law, "there must be a requisite nexus between the employment and the injury." Tate v. GTE Hawaiian Telephone Co., 
77 Hawai
'i 100, 103, 881 P.2d 1246, 1249 (1994). We conclude 
that the LIRAB did not err in determining that the requisite nexus or causal connection between Chung's employment and his claimed injury was not present in this case. See id.; McGarrah 
v. State Acc. Ins. Fund Corp., 675 P.2d 159, 170 (Or. 1983)
 ("[O]n-the-job stress conditions causing the disorders must be
 real. That is, the events and conditions producing the stress
 must, from an objective standpoint, exist in reality. . . . A
 worker's misperception of reality does not flow from any factual
 work condition."); Papa v. Workmen's Compensation Appeal Board
 (Franklin Mint Corp.), 549 A.2d 1352, 1354-55 (Pa. Commw. Ct.
 1988) (upholding denial of claim for psychic injury that was
 based on claimant's misperception of harassment by co-workers and 
2The LIRAB's finding was supported by Dr. Rogers' opinion
that the "true cause" of Chung's stress was his
Dependent/Obsessive-Compulsive/Histrionic Personality Traits,
which "are clearly pre-existing in nature and causally unrelated
to his employment at the City and County of Honolulu."
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
improper training, which were imagined and did not exist in her
 
work environment).
 
III.
 
Chung's contention that we must overturn the LIRAB's
 
decision based on its admission of hearsay evidence is without
 merit.
 
Chung challenges on hearsay grounds the LIRAB's
 
admission of the City's Exhibits 3 and 7 and a portion of
 Okihara's testimony. The LIRAB admitted this evidence over
 Chung's hearsay objection. Exhibit 3 is a letter sent to and
 signed by Dr. Lind, which confirms that (1) Dr. Lind had
 "reviewed Dr. Rogers' [IPE] report and essentially agree[d] with
 [Dr. Rogers'] findings"; and (2) Dr. Lind had "no points of
 disagreement with the medical conclusions rendered by Dr. Rogers
 relative to Mr. Chung's case." Exhibit 7 is Dr. Lind's progress
 notes relating to Chung, and it includes notes dated from
 September 10, 1990, to September 11, 2008. Chung objected to
 
Okihara's testimony that at the end of Chung's six-month
 
probationary period after he was hired, Okihara spoke to Sunuda
 who had some reservations about whether they should find that
 Chung had satisfactorily completed his probation. Okihara
 further testified that despite Sunuda's reservations, Okihara
 gave Chung a satisfactory rating.
 
The LIRAB is not precluded from admitting and 
considering hearsay evidence. See Price v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals 
of City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 77 Hawai
'i 168, 176, 883 P.2d 629, 
637 (1994) ("[T]he rules of evidence in administrative hearings, unlike those applicable to judicial proceedings, allow admission of hearsay evidence."). Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 91-10 (2012) sets forth evidentiary standards for contested cases, such as Chung's appeal to the LIRAB. HRS ยง 91-10(1) provides in pertinent part: "[A]ny oral or documentary evidence may be received, but every agency shall as a matter of policy provide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence . . . . The agencies shall give effect to 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the rules of privilege recognized by law[.]" The relevant LIRAB 
rule, Hawai 'i Administrative Rules ยง 12-47-41, provides: 
The [LIRAB] shall not be bound by statutory and common law
rules relating to the admission or rejection of evidence.
The [LIRAB] may exercise its own discretion in these
matters, limited only by consideration of relevancy,
materiality, and repetition, by the rules of privilege
recognized by law, and with a view to securing a just,
speedy, and inexpensive determination of the proceedings.
 
The evidence challenged by Chung was not irrelevant,
 
immaterial, repetitious, or barred by rules of privilege, and the
 
LIRAB did not abuse its discretion in allowing its admission. 
Exhibits 3 and 7 were relevant to the extent and cause of Chung's
 claimed injury. Okihara's testimony was relevant to providing
 background regarding her relationship with Chung. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the LIRAB's 
Decision and Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
R. Steven Geshell 
for Claimant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Robert Carson Godbeyfor Employer-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
10
 