NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000509
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FIRST HORIZON HOME LOANS, A DIVISION OF FIRST TENNESSEE BANK
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee,
v.
 
WILMER GALIZA AND FLORDELIZA TAPAT,
Defendants/Plaintiff Counterclaimants/Appellants,
and
 
JOHN and MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants/Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0629(2))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Wilmer Galiza and Flordeliza
 
Tapat (Appellants) appeal from the Judgment filed on May 3, 2012
 
in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court).1 The
 
Judgment was entered based on a summary judgment ruling and a
 writ of ejectment was issued in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee First
 Horizon Home Loans, a Division of First Tennessee Bank National
 Association (FHHL) and against the Appellants.
 
On appeal, the Appellants contend that the circuit
 
court erred when it granted summary judgment because FHHL did not
 
1
 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano signed the Judgment and the Honorable
Shackley F. Raffetto presided over the hearing for summary judgment.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have standing to conduct a non-judicial foreclosure and to file
 
an ejectment action.
 
For the reasons set forth below we vacate and remand.
 
I. Background
 
On November 23, 2005, the Appellants signed an 
Adjustable Rate Note (Note) in favor of First Horizon Home Loan Corporation (First Horizon) for a property located in Kahului, Maui, Hawai
'i (the Property). On December 2, 2005, a Mortgage 
was recorded on the Property with the State of Hawai 'i Bureau of 
Conveyances (Bureau of Conveyances). 
In a letter dated April 2, 2009, Notice of Default was
 
sent to the Appellants, stating, inter alia, the Appellants had
 thirty days to reinstate their loan and the total due was
 $7,392,61.
 
On January 27, 2010, an Assignment of Mortgage and Note
 
was recorded, which stated that Mortgage Electronic Registration
 Systems, Inc. (MERS) acting solely as nominee for First Horizon
 "does hereby, without recourse, sell, assign, transfer, set over
 and deliver unto [FHHL], its successors and assigns, the mortgage
 and note."
2
 
On April 27, 2010, FHHL conducted a public auction sale
 
of the Property and the Property was sold to the highest bidder,
 FHHL, for $339,150. On May 5, 2010, FHHL's attorney filed the
 Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale
 (Affidavit of Foreclosure). The Affidavit of Foreclosure states,
 inter alia, that FHHL is the holder of the Promissory Note and
 Mortgage dated November 23, 2005, and that FHHL complied with the
 requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 667-5 to 667-10
 (1993 and Supp. 2010) (repealed 2012). 
On July 19, 2010, a Quitclaim Deed was filed with the
 
Bureau of Conveyances, listing FHHL as both the Grantor and the
 
2
 The Mortgage states: "Borrower does hereby mortgage, grant and
convey to MERS (solely as nominee for Lender and Lender's successors and
assigns) and the successors and assigns of MERS, with power of sale, the
following property located in the County of Maui[.]"
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Grantee.
 
On September 30, 2010, FHHL filed the Complaint for
 
Ejectment in this case. On February 1, 2012, FHHL filed a motion
 
for summary judgment, requesting summary judgment and a writ of
 ejectment. On May 3, 2012, the circuit court filed an "Order
 Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, and for Writ of
 Ejectment Against Wilmer D. Galiza and Flordeliza Tapat." Also
 on May 3, 2012, the circuit court filed the Judgment and Writ of
 Ejectment. On May 23, 2012, the Appellants timely appealed.
II. Standing
A. Assignment of Mortgage and Note
 
The Appellants contend that FHHL did not have standing
 
to conduct a non-judicial foreclosure and file an ejectment
 
action because First Horizon had allegedly securitized the
 Mortgage and Note in 2005 and thus MERS did not have ownership
 rights on January 20, 2010, to assign the Mortgage and Note to
 FHHL. The Appellants also contend that even if MERS had the
 power to assign the Mortgage and Note, the assignment was
 ineffective because it did not comply with HRS chapter 490.
 
As this court has noted numerous times, "[t]ypically, 
borrowers do not have standing to challenge the validity of an assignment of its loans because they are not parties to the agreement . . . ." U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Salvacion, 134 
Hawai
'i 170, 175, 338 P.3d 1185, 1190 (App. 2014). 
Further, "[a] party who shows a direct chain of paper
 
title that the party is the owner of land demonstrates prima
 facie evidence of their contents and that title is vested in that
 party." Id. (citation, quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
In this case, FHHL provided a direct chain of paper title. 
FHHL's motion for summary judgment included, inter alia, a
 certified copy of the Affidavit of Foreclosure recorded on May 5,
 2010. Attached to the Affidavit of Foreclosure was the Note,
 Mortgage, and Assignment of the Mortgage and Note. The Affidavit
 of Foreclosure states that FHHL was the holder of the Note and
 Mortgage. The motion for summary judgment also included a 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
certified copy of the Quitclaim Deed. The Supreme Court of 
Hawai'i stated that "[t]hese documents established a direct chain 
of title from the original lender . . . to [the assignee], which became the holder of the Note and Mortgage on the Property." U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Castro, 131 Hawai
'i 28, 40, 313 P.3d 
717, 729 (2013). Therefore, FHHL produced documents that constituted a prima facie showing that it had a right to foreclose on the Property. 
The Appellants contend that MERS did not have authority
 
to transfer the Note because it was not the holder of the Note, a
 negotiable instrument. Specifically, the Appellants contend that
 an affidavit by their counsel's paralegal related to her research
 regarding the subject loan and an attached document she printed
 from a Bank of New York Mellon website showed that First Horizon
 Alternative Mortgage Securities Trust 2005-AA12 owned the
 Appellants' loans as of February 2012 (the date of the attached
 document), thus allegedly showing that FHHL did not hold the note
 at that time and MERS could not have had authority to assign the
 Mortgage and Note to FHHL back in January 2010. However, the
 affidavit and document that the Appellants rely on do not appear
 to present admissible evidence. Moreover, even if the attached
 document and information in the affidavit were admissible, they
 do not establish that another party held the Note or that MERS
 had no authority to assign the Mortgage and Note to FHHL. 
Appellants do not present any admissible evidence to
 
refute FHHL's direct chain of title, or to show that FHHL was not
 the holder of the Note, and thus they did not raise a genuine
 issue of material fact on these issues.
 
B. Robo-signers
 
The Appellants contend the assignment of the Mortgage
 
and Note to FHHL was ineffective because the documents were
 signed by robo-signers.
 
This court has rejected similar arguments that an
 
assignment is invalid when it was signed by alleged robo-signers
 because the argument failed to assert facts or law explaining how
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
robo-signing caused the defendant any harm or damages. U.S. Bank
 
Nat'l Ass'n v. Benoist, No. CAAP-14-0001176, 2015 WL 7260350, at
 
*4 (Haw. App. Nov. 12, 2015) (SDO). Therefore, this court
 concluded "[w]e join other courts that have addressed similar
 issues and find that such conclusory assertions of 'robo-signing'
 fail to state a plausible claim." Id. (citation and some internal
 quotation marks omitted); Bank of N.Y. Mellon v. Rumbawa, No.
 CAAP-15-0000024, 2016 WL 482170, at *2 (Haw. App. Feb. 4, 2016)
 (SDO) ("The use of 'robo-signers' in the AOM and Corrective AOM
 did not affect BNYM's standing to foreclose on the mortgage
 property.").
 
Similarly, in this case, the Appellants did not assert
 
any specific harm or damages caused by the robo-signing. 
Therefore, the Appellants did not present a genuine issue of
 material fact in this regard.
C. Notice of Default
 
The Appellants contend that the Notice of Default did
 
not comply with paragraph 22 of the Mortgage because (1) the
 Notice of Default did not give the amount to be tendered to cure
 the default and how the amount was calculated; and (2) FHHL was
 not the holder of the Note at the time it sent the Notice of
 Default. 
The Appellants, however, did not make this argument in 
their memorandum in opposition for summary judgment. Moreover, there is no transcript for the summary judgment hearing in the record, and the Appellants do not contend that they preserved this issue below. Therefore, the Appellants waived this argument for appeal. See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. 
Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 619 (2002) 
("Legal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal.").
III. Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi
 
Although FHHL had standing to pursue the non-judicial 
foreclosure and ejectment action, we must vacate the Judgment in 
this case under the recent Hawai
'i Supreme Court decision, 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 136 Hawai 'i 227, 361 P.3d 
454 (2015); see also JPMorgan Chase Bank, Nat'l Ass'n v. Benner,
 
2016 WL 2928173, — Hawai 'i —, — P.3d — (App. 2016). 
In Kondaur, the supreme court held that "the duties set
 
forth in [Ulrich v. Security Investment Co., 35 Haw. 158 (Haw.
 Terr. 1939)] remain viable law and are applicable to non-judicial
 foreclosures of real property mortgages." 136 Hawai
'i at 229, 
361 P.3d at 456. The supreme court stated:
 
Ulrich requires mortgagees to exercise their right to
non-judicial foreclosure under a power of sale in a manner
that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to
demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for the
property. In instances where the mortgagee assumes the role
of a purchaser in a self-dealing transaction, the burden is
on the mortgagee, or its quitclaim transferee or non-bona
fide successor, to establish its compliance with these
obligations. Its failure to do so would render the
foreclosure sale voidable and could therefore be set aside
 at the timely election of the mortgagor.
 
Id. at 240, 361 P.3d at 467 (citations and footnotes omitted) 
(emphasis added). Thus, in a self-dealing transaction, where the
 mortgagee assumes the role of the purchaser in a non-judicial
 foreclosure sale, the mortgagee has the "burden to prove in the
 summary judgment proceeding that the foreclosure sale was
 regularly and fairly conducted in every particular." Id. at 241,
 
361 P.3d at 468 (citation and quotation marks omitted). "A prima
 facie case demonstrating compliance with the foregoing
 requirements [shifts] the burden [to the mortgagor] to raise a
 genuine issue of material fact." Id. at 242, 361 P.3d at 469. 
In Kondaur, the mortgagee, Resmae Liquidation
 
Properties LLC (RLP), conducted the non-judicial foreclosure on
 the subject property, was the highest bidder, and thereby
 obtained title to the property. Id. at 230, 361 P.3d at 457. 
RLP then executed a quitclaim deed conveying the property to
 Kondaur Capital Corporation (Kondaur) and Kondaur brought an
 ejectment action against the mortgagor. Id. at 230-31, 361 P.3d
 
at 457-58. The supreme court held that Kondaur had "whatever
 rights RLP had on the Property," and that "the strength and
 validity of Kondaur's title is unavoidably intertwined with the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
validity of the foreclosure sale." Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468.
 
Kondaur thus needed "to demonstrate that the foreclosure sale was
 
conducted in accordance with Ulrich" Id.
 
In discussing Kondaur's motion for summary judgment,
 
the supreme court further stated that the "mortgagee's minimal
 adherence to the statutory requirements and terms of the mortgage
 under which the foreclosure sale is conducted ... does not
 establish that the foreclosure sale similarly satisfied the
 Ulrich requirements." Id. at 243, 361 P.3d at 470. Thus,
 
although Kondaur attached to its motion for summary judgment
 RLP's Affidavit of Sale, which certified that RLP had complied
 with the mortgage and HRS §§ 667-5 through 667-10, Kondaur did
 not satisfy its burden of showing compliance with the Ulrich
 requirements because the "Affidavit of Sale fail[ed] to provide
 any averments as to the fairness and regularity of the
 foreclosure sale or as to whether RLP conducted the foreclosure
 sale in a diligent and reasonable manner[,]" the document did not
 speak to why the foreclosure sale was conducted on a different
 island than where the property was located, and, although the
 document identified the purchase price, it did not "make any
 declaration concerning the adequacy of this price." Id. at
 
242–43, 361 P.3d at 469–70. 
Because Kondaur failed to satisfy its initial burden of
 
showing that the foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that
 was fair, reasonably diligent, in good faith, and would obtain an
 adequate price for the property, the burden never shifted to the
 mortgagor and the mortgagor did not have to raise any genuine
 issue of material fact. Id. at 243, 361 P.3d at 470. Thus, the
 
supreme court vacated the summary judgment and remanded for
 further proceedings. Id. at 244, 361 P.3d at 471. 
This case, like Kondaur, involved a self-dealing
 
transaction because FHHL was the foreclosing mortgagee and the
 purchasing high bidder at the non-judicial foreclosure sale. In
 addition, like in Kondaur, the Affidavit of Foreclosure submitted
 by FHHL's attorney did not attest to anything concerning the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adequacy of the purchase price. Thus, FHHL did not satisfy its
 
initial summary judgment burden of showing compliance with the
 Ulrich requirements.
 
Under Kondaur, summary judgment for FHHL was in error.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed on May 3,
 
2012, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, is vacated. 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 proceedings consistent with this order to address the issues
 related to Kondaur. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Gary V. Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,Andrew D. Goff,Daniel J. O'Meara,for Defendants-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Gary Y. Okuda,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8

 