NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-15-0000510 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
PETER GELSEY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
KA ONO ULU ESTATES COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, INC.,
Defendant-Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS 
1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50 and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,and all other persons unknown claiming any right, title,
estate, or interest in the subject proceedings, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(S.P. NO. 14-1-0083(1)) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Peter Gelsey (
Gelsey) appeals from 
the Final Judgment (Judgment) in favor of Defendant-Appellee 
Ka Ono Ulu Estates Community Association, Inc. (Association) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)
1 on June 10, 2015. Gelsey raises four points of error: 
1. the Circuit Court erred in dismissing his 
Complaint and Petition for Contract Enforcement (Complaint) by 
concluding that it was not a proceeding listed under Hawai# i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 81(b); 
2. the Circuit Court erred in dismissing his 
Complaint pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) by concluding that it 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted; 
3. the Circuit Court erred in denying his Motion for 
Reconsideration and Leave to Amend Petition and Complaint (Motion 
to Amend); and 
4. the Circuit Court erred in awarding attorneys' 
fees and costs to the Association. 
Upon careful review of the record and the parties' 
briefs, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory 
and case law, we hold as follows: (a) the Circuit Court erred in 
dismissing the Complaint; and (b) the award of attorneys' fees 
and costs to the Association is vacated, subject to any party's 
right to request an award of attorneys' fees and/or costs 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d) at the appropriate time. Because the 
dismissal is vacated we need not address the Circuit Court's 
denial of Gelsey's Motion to Amend. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
On December 29, 2014, Gelsey – who was self-represented 
– filed the Complaint against the Association. The action was 
docketed as Special Proceeding No. 14-1-0083(1). The Association 
was served on December 30, 2014. On January 20, 2015, the 
Association filed a Motion to Dismiss Complaint and Petition 
(MTD). On February 4, 2015, Gelsey filed "Plaintiff Peter 
Gelsey's Motion for Summary Judgment" (MSJ). 
Both motions were heard on March 10, 2015. Gelsey 
failed to request a transcript of proceedings, but it appears 
that the Circuit Court orally granted the Association's MTD and 
denied Gelsey's MSJ2 because on March 13, 2015, Gelsey filed the 
Motion to Amend. 
The order granting the Association's MTD and denying 
2 Gelsey has not appealed the denial of his MSJ. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gelsey's MSJ was entered on April 2, 2015. On April 30, 2015, 
the Association filed a Motion for Attorney's Fees and Costs 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) section 421J-10 
(2004).3 
On June 10, 2015, an order was entered denying Gelsey's 
Motion to Amend. An order awarding the Association $14,092 in 
attorney's fees and $650.65 in costs and a judgment in favor of 
the Association and against Gelsey were also entered on June 10, 
2015. 
3 HRS § 421J-10 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) All costs and expenses, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, incurred by or on behalf of the association for: 
(1) Collecting any delinquent assessments against any unit
or the owner of any unit; 
(2) Foreclosing any lien on any unit; or 
(3) Enforcing any provision of the association
documents or this chapter; against a member, occupant,tenant, employee of a member, or any other person who in anymanner may use the property, shall be promptly paid ondemand to the association by such person or persons;provided that if the association is not the prevailingparty, all costs and expenses, including reasonableattorneys' fees, incurred by any such person or persons as aresult of the action of the association, shall be promptlypaid on demand to the person by the association. The reasonableness of any attorney's fees paid by a person or byan association as a result of an action pursuant toparagraph (2) shall be determined by the court. 
(b) If any member is the prevailing party in any
action against an association, any of its officers ordirectors, or its board of directors to enforce anyprovision of the association documents or this chapter, thenall reasonable and necessary expenses, costs, and attorneys'fees incurred by the member shall be awarded to themember[.] 
. . . . 
If a member is not the prevailing party in any court
action against an association, any of its officers or
directors, or its board of directors, to enforce anyprovision of the association documents or this chapter, thenall reasonable and necessary expenses, costs, and attorneys'fees incurred by the association shall be awarded to theassociation, unless the action was filed in small claimscourt, or, prior to filing the action in a higher court, theowner has first submitted the claim to mediation pursuant tosection 421J-13, and made a good faith effort to resolve thedispute under any of those procedures. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 18, 2015, the Association filed a Motion for 
Additional Attorney's Fees and Costs. 
Gelsey's notice of appeal was filed by counsel on 
July 8, 2015. 
On August 14, 2015, the Circuit Court entered the Order 
Awarding Additional Attorney's Fees and Costs Pursuant to HRS 
421J-10. The Association was awarded additional attorney's fees 
of $7,150 and additional costs of $239.66. 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Gelsey's Opening Brief fails to comply with Hawai# i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(5) because it does not 
set forth the standards of appellate review applicable to the 
Circuit Court's various orders. It is well established that "[a] 
circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is reviewed de 
novo." Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i 249, 
256, 428 P.3d 761, 768 (2018). A reviewing court applies the same standard of decision that is to be applied by a circuit 
court: 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff canprove no set of facts in support of his or her claim thatwould entitle him or her to relief. The appellate court musttherefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light mostfavorable to him or her in order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could warrant relief under anyalternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing a circuitcourt's order dismissing a complaint . . . the appellatecourt's consideration is strictly limited to the allegationsof the complaint, and the appellate court must deem thoseallegations to be true. 
Id., 143 Hawai# i at 257, 428 P.3d at 769. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Motion to Dismiss 
Gelsey challenges the Circuit Court's rulings that 
(1) Gelsey's Complaint was misfiled as a special proceeding 
because it did "not raise any issues excepted by" HRCP 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 81(b); and (2) the Complaint failed to state claims against 
the Association upon which relief could be granted. 
1. Incorrect Filing 
The Circuit Court accepted the Association's argument 
that Gelsey's Complaint was misfiled as "a special proceeding 
under Rule 81(b)" of the HRCP. Rule 81(b) provides a list of 
proceedings to which the HRCP apply. On appeal the Association 
contends that the Circuit Court "correctly recognized that Mr. 
Gelsey's Petition was civil in nature and that HRCP Rule 81(b) 
was inapplicable to the underlying proceedings." 
Gelsey's Complaint does not allege that it was filed 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 81(b), nor does it purport to be one of the 
proceedings enumerated by that rule. Rather, it appears to have 
been docketed as a "Special Proceeding" pursuant to Rule 1 of the 
Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai# i (RCCH), which 
provides: 
All proceedings shall be divided into classes, viz.: CIVIL;
CRIMINAL; CONSERVATORSHIP; CONSERVATORSHIP-GUARDIANSHIP;SMALL CONSERVATORSHIP; PROBATE; GUARDIANSHIP; SMALL ESTATE;SMALL GUARDIANSHIP; TRUST; SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS; MECHANIC'SAND MATERIALMAN'S LIEN; AND FAMILY COURT. 
(emphasis added). The HRCP "govern the procedure in the circuit 
courts . . . in all suits of a civil nature whether cognizable as 
cases at law or in equity[.]" HRCP Rule 1. The docketing of 
Gelsey's Complaint with a special proceeding number rather than a 
civil number, and Gelsey's use of the term "petition" in the 
title of the document, do not affect the legal sufficiency of the 
pleading. If a claim for relief is otherwise alleged, substance 
controls over form. In re Eric G., 65 Haw. 219, 224, 649 P.2d 
1140, 1144 (1982) (misdesignation of action as "special 
proceeding" and mistaken label of complaint as "Notice of Appeal" 
did not vitiate clear statement in pleading that proceeding was 
based on federal statute and dismissal was erroneous). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Failure to State a Claim 
Against the Association 
"It is well established that Hawai# i is a notice-
pleading jurisdiction." Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i at 259, 428 
P.3d at 771. HRCP Rule 8(a) requires only that a complaint set 
forth "a short and plain statement of the claim" that provides a 
defendant with fair notice of what the plaintiff's claim is and 
the grounds upon which the claim rests. HRCP Rule 8(f) requires 
that "pleadings . . . be . . . construed as to do substantial 
justice." Thus, "[u]nder Hawaii's notice pleading approach, it is 'not necessary to plead legal theories with precision.'" 
Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i at 259, 428 P.3d at 771 (brackets and 
ellipsis omitted) (quoting Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 93 Hawai# i 
1, 4, 994 P.2d 1047, 1050 (2000)). "[W]hether a pleading states 
evidence, facts, or conclusions of law [is] not dispositive." 
Id., 143 Hawai# i at 258, 428 P.3d at 770. 
The Association argues that Gelsey's Complaint, rather 
than being "a short and plain statement" of his claim, is a 
"verbose pleading" that sets forth "no actionable statements of a 
legally cognizable claim against the Association." 
The Complaint 
is in fact a rambling narrative. It begins: 
I request the Court to order contract compliance regarding
violations of the Ka Ono Ulu Estates (KOU) governingdocuments, including the Covenants Conditions & Restrictions(CC&Rs) document, the Design Review Guidelines and relatedgoverning documents of this master planned communitysubdivision. 
Other "governing documents" mentioned in the Complaint include 
the Association's Bylaws, Architectural & Building Design 
Requirements, and Declaration of Protective Covenants for Ka Ono 
Ulu Estates. The Association argues that Gelsey improperly 
sought to require that the Association exercise governmental 
police powers by enforcing Maui County traffic ordinances dealing 
with on-street parking and Maui County zoning and building code 
provisions dealing with single family residences. However, the 
Complaint – viewed in the light most favorable to Gelsey – also 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sought a mandatory injunction requiring the Association to 
enforce (1) requirements in the governing documents that two-
story houses have, at a minimum, a 600 square-foot three-car 
garage with a driveway length of at least sixteen feet, 
(2) prohibitions in the governing documents against # ohana 
rentals,(3) restrictive covenants in the governing documents against the owner of lot 3001,(4) restrictive covenants in the 
governing documents against the owner of lot 1024, and 
(5) restrictive covenants in the governing documents against the 
owners of Lot 1011. Deeming these allegations to be true, as we 
must under Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i at 257, 428 P.3d at 769, 
Gelsey's Complaint states a claim against the Association upon which equitable relief (such as a mandatory injunction) could be 
granted. 
The Association also argues that the owners of lots 
1011, 1024, and 3001 were indispensable parties whom Gelsey 
failed to join, so that the Complaint should be dismissed 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 19. Even if the lot owners were 
indispensable parties, Gelsey's failure to name them as 
defendants does not by itself warrant dismissal of the action. 
In Life of the Land v. Land Use Comm'n, 58 Haw. 292, 568 P.2d 
1189 (1977), the Supreme Court held that 
the circuit court's dismissal of appellants' complaint for
failure to join indispensable parties was also erroneous.If, as the circuit court implicitly found, that [sic] thereare indispensable parties, these parties should have beenjoined as parties to the action for declaratory judgment andthey have not been so joined, the court should have orderedthat they be made parties. If the necessary parties cannotbe made parties to the action then the court should"determine whether in equity and good conscience the actionshould proceed among the parties before it, or should bedismissed, the absent person(s) being thus regarded asindispensable." Since the record does not indicate that thealleged necessary parties were not subject to service ofprocess, the court's dismissal was premature. 
58 Haw. at 298, 568 P.2d at 1194 (citations omitted). 
B. Motion to Amend 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because the order granting the Association's MTD is 
being vacated we need not address the Circuit Court's denial of 
Gelsey's Motion to Amend. 
C. Attorneys' Fees and Costs 
Because we are vacating the order granting the 
Association's MTD, the Association's motions for awards of 
attorneys' fees and costs were premature. The Circuit Court's 
orders awarding attorneys' fees and costs to the Association are 
vacated, subject to any party's right to request an award of 
attorneys' fees and/or costs pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d) at the 
appropriate time. 
CONCLUSION 
The April 2, 2015 order granting Defendant's motion to 
dismiss and June 10, 2015 judgment entered in the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit are vacated. The June 10, 2015 and August 
14, 2015 orders awarding attorneys' fees and costs to the 
Association are vacated. This case is remanded to the Circuit 
Court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 24, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Terrance M. Revere 
Andrew D. Chianese,for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Karin L. Holma David R. Major,(Bays Lung Rose & Holma),for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8 