  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000850 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
KÔKUA COUNCIL FOR SENIOR CITIZENS, AN UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff-Appellant, v. DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-1421) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Kôkua Council for Senior Citizens 
(Kôkua Council), appeals from the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit's (Circuit Court) (A) "Order Granting in Part and Denying 
in Part Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed December 23, 2016," filed on April 5, 2017 (April 5, 2017 Order), and (B) Final Judgment, entered on November 9, 2017 (Final Judgment).
1 
On appeal, Kôkua Council contends that the Circuit 
Court misinterpreted Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 92F-15 (2012)
2 and Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 81.13 in 
1 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone entered the former and the 
Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka entered the latter. 
2 Section 92F-15, HRS, principally provides that "[a] person
aggrieved by a denial of access to a government record may bring an action
against the agency at any time within two years after the agency denial tocompel disclosure." HRS § 92F-15(a) (2012). 
3 Rule 81.1 of the HRCP declares that 
[t]he writ of mandamus is abolished in the circuit
courts, except when directed to a court of inferior 
(continued...)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concluding that it lacked jurisdiction and erroneously dismissed 
Kôkua Council's claim for relief in the nature of mandamus associated with Kôkua Council's request under HRS chapter 92F to access inspection reports on Adult Residential Care Homes and Expanded Adult Residential Care Homes (collectively, ARCH) from Defendant-Appellee Director of the Department of Health, State of Hawai# i (the Director or DOH). 
I. 
On December 13, 2015, Kô kua Council accessed DOH's 
website to view inspection reports mandated by HRS § 321-1.8 (Supp. 2017)). This provision required DOH, "[b]eginning with inspections occurring on January 1, 2015," to "post on its website electronic copies of reports for all inspections [DOH] performs" of, among others, ARCH, "within five working days of the conclusion of each inspection[.]" HRS § 321-1.8(a), (b).
4 
On the date of Kôkua Council's review, the DOH website contained a total of only 469 healthcare facilities inspection reports, none of which were for ARCH and only three for expanded ARCH. As of December 13, 2015, there were, collectively, approximately 500 ARCH licensed to operate in the State of Hawai# i. 
3(...continued)
jurisdiction. Relief heretofore available by mandamus may
be obtained by appropriate action or by appropriate motionunder the practice prescribed in these rules. 
In any action
in the nature of mandamus the court may shorten the timeprescribed by these rules for pleading or doing any otheract. 
4 HRS § 321-1.8(a) and (b) provide, in pertinent part, 
(a) Beginning with inspections occurring on January 1, 2015,
the department of health shall post on its websiteelectronic copies of reports for all inspections it performsof the following state-licensed care facilities: 
. . . . 
(6) Long-term care facilities as defined in section
349-21(f);[] 
. . . . 
(b) Each report shall be posted on the department of
health's website within five working days of the conclusion
of each inspection[.] 
Under HRS § 349-21(f) (2015), "long-term care facility" includes "[a]dultresidential care home, including any expanded adult residential care home[.]" 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The following day, Kôkua Council began a series of 
attempts to obtain these inspection reports, both directly from 
DOH and through the Office of Information Practices (OIP). 
Eventually, on January 29, 2016, DOH's Office of 
Healthcare Assurance (OHCA), which is designated by DOH to perform all state licensing activities on healthcare facilities, agencies, and organizations in the State of Hawai# i, e-mailed 
Kôkua Council, offering that, although inspection reports "are available online on [DOH's] website, and more are being posted. They are and will be free of charge," it would grant Kôkua Council's request to provide these records in hard copies "upon receipt of a prepayment for the records." 
By letter dated January 29, 2016, Kôkua Council 
acknowledged OHCA's e-mail, noting that from the time of Kô kua 
Council's December 14, 2015 letter and United Information Practice Act (UIPA) request, 271 reports for ARCH and expanded ARCH had been posted on the DOH website. Kôkua Council further reminded OHCA of the outstanding request for the remainder of the inspection reports that had not yet been posted and an inventory of licensed facilities that DOH was required to maintain pursuant to HRS § 321-15.62(e) (2010).
5 
The next day, OHCA e-mailed Kôkua Council a "Notice to 
Requester" pursuant to Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 2-71-32
6 to explain that ARCH inspection reports for 2015 were not 
5 HRS § 321-15.62(e) provides that, "[t]he department shall maintain
an inventory of all facilities licensed under this section and shall maintain
a current inventory of vacancies therein to facilitate the placement ofindividuals in such facilities." 
6 § 2-71-32 Waiver of fees when public interest served. (a) An
agency shall waive $60 of the fees that may be assessed undersection 2-71-31 when: 
(1) The request for a waiver of fees is supported by astatement of facts, including the requester'sidentity, in accordance with section 2-71-12; and 
(2) The agency finds that the waiver of fees would be inthe public interest pursuant to this section. 
(b) A waiver of fees is in the public interest when: 
(1) The requested record pertains to the operation oractivities of an agency; however, the agency shallnot consider the record's relative importance tothe public in applying this subsection; 
(continued...) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
posted on the DOH website because the ARCH facilities had not 
been inspected or the inspection reports were not finalized. 
On March 4, 2016, OIP issued a letter to Kôkua Council, 
advising that "[o]n March 2, 2016, [OIP] discussed the DOH's January 30 and February 4, 2016, responses and the Reports posted on the DOH's website . . . which, combined, appear to respond to your request for the Reports." While OHCA "did not provide an itemized fees and costs structure" to Kôkua Council, OIP closed the UIPA request at Kôkua Council's request. Thereafter, no further communications between Kôkua Council and OHCA transpired. Kôkua Council filed no formal appeal from OIP's decision. 
On July 25, 2016, Kôkua Council filed a four-Count 
Complaint against the Director. Relevant to this appeal, Kôkua Council alleged, in Count III, an "Action in the Nature of Mandamus" because the Director failed to fulfill his ministerial duty to the public to post inspection reports within five business days after the inspection, and that Kôkua Council lacked alternative legal means to redress this wrong or obtain this action. 
In response to Kôkua Council's December 23, 2016 motion 
for summary judgment, the Circuit Court concluded that, as to Count III, it lacked jurisdiction to grant mandamus relief under HRCP Rule 81.1 and, even if the court had jurisdiction, Kôkua Council had 
not demonstrated a clear and indisputable right to the
relief requested and a lack of other means to redressadequately the alleged wrong or to obtain the requestedaction. Kema v. Gaddis, 91 [Hawai #i] 200, 982 P.2d 334
(1999). Therefore, the motion is DENIED as to Count III. 
In addition, the Circuit Court determined that HRS § 92F-15 
provides a remedy of judicial enforcement and an "alternative 
6(...continued)
(2) The record is not readily available in the public
domain; and 
(3) The requester has the primary intention and theactual ability to widely disseminate informationfrom the government record to the general publicat large. 
HAR § 2-71-32. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
means to address the alleged wrong and obtain the requested 
action."7 
II. 
Kôkua Council raises the following three points of 
error on appeal: 
(1) the circuit court committed clear error and 
incorrectly dismissed Count III[8] on the basis, in part,
that HRS § 92F-15 provided "other means" whereby K ôkua 
Council could obtain for DOH’s failure to post the
inspection reports within five days[;] 
(2) the circuit court incorrectly interpreted HRCP
Rule 81.1, providing for mandamus, and other authorities asdepriving the circuit court of jurisdiction to issue theorder in the nature of mandamus requested under Count III[;] 
(3) the circuit court clearly erred, abused its
discretion, and incorrectly concluded that K ôkua Council had 
not shown a clear and indisputable right to the mandamusrelief requested under Count III. 
III. 
The gravamen of this appeal is whether the Circuit 
Court properly denied Kôkua Council's motion for summary judgment 
as to Count III of the Complaint, which asked for relief in the nature of mandamus. The Circuit Court ruled that it lacked jurisdiction, under HRCP Rule 81.1, to grant relief in the nature of mandamus but, assuming it had jurisdiction, Kô kua Council had 
not made a sufficient showing of entitlement to such relief. 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo." Peer News LLC v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 138 Hawai# i 53, 60, 376 P.3d 1, 8 (2016) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co., 133 Hawai# i 332, 343, 328 P.3d 341, 352 (2014); First Ins. Co. of 
Hawaii v. A & B Props., Inc., 126 Hawai# i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 
1165, 1172 (2012)). 
7 Subsequently, in conjunction with its decision to deny K ôkua 
Council's motion for summary judgment on Count IV and Count VI, added in an
April 7, 2017 Amended Complaint, the Circuit Court, the Honorable Keith K.Hiraoka presiding, interpreted the five-day posting deadline contained in HRS§ 321-1.8 as the earlier of (1) the department's determination that there areno violations, or (2) the department's approval of the care home's plan ofcorrection pursuant to HRS § 321-1.8(b). 
8 Although the Circuit Court did not dismiss Count III during the
February 2, 2017 hearing or the April 5, 2017 Order denying K ôkua Council's 
motion for summary judgment cited in this point on appeal, the Final Judgmentdismissed Count III. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This case turns on the Circuit Court's authority to 
grant mandamus relief. The Circuit Court rested its decision, in 
this regard, on HRCP Rule 81.1. 
In 1972, HRCP Rule 81.1 was added and read, 
The writ of mandamus is abolished in the circuit 
courts, except when directed to a court of inferior
jurisdiction. Relief heretofore available by mandamus maybe obtained by appropriate action or by appropriate motionunder the practice prescribed in these rules. In any actionin the nature of mandamus the court may shorten the timeprescribed by these rules for pleading or doing any otheract. 
(Emphasis added). 
As reflected in the language of this rule, the writ, 
but not the remedy available in a mandamus action, was 
eliminated, except with regard to a writ directed to a court of inferior jurisdiction. As Kôkua Council sought, in Count III of their Complaint, relief in the nature of mandamus, the Circuit Court was not prohibited, by virtue of HRCP Rule 81.1, from issuing an order granting such relief. 
However, our review of the relevant statutory authority 
leads us to the conclusion that the Circuit Court could not issue an order in the nature of mandamus to a public officer. 
Along with adoption of the newly minted Hawai# i Rules 
of Civil Procedure, of which HRCP Rule 81.1 was a part, the 1972 Legislature passed wholesale changes to the Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
The purpose of the statutory revision program of the
Committee on Coordination of Rules and Statutes (Committee
on Coordination) and of Your Committee has been to reviewand revise the Hawaii Revised Statutes and rules relating tocivil procedure so as to coordinate them and eliminateinconsistencies; delete outmoded provisions; makeimprovements of a technical nature; and transfer proceduralmatters to court rules where advisable. Such comprehensive
updating and unifying of statutes is long overdue in
[Hawai #i]. Obsolete civil procedure provisions dating from
legislative acts of 1869 are now to be found in ourstatutes. When the [Hawai #i] Rules of Civil Procedure were
adopted, revision became a critical need. While many otherstates have permanent law revision commissions, the workundertaken by the Committee on Coordination and thisCommittee is the first comprehensive revision of statutoryprocedural provisions of [Hawai #i] in this century. 
Spec. Comm. Rep. No. 9, reprinted in 1972 House Journal, at 1115-
16; see also S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 623-72, in 1972 Senate Journal, at 1006. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As a part of this comprehensive revision, HRS § 603-
21.7(b) (1972) was created, in large part reenacting the 
longstanding authority granted to the circuit courts with regard to extraordinary remedies: 
Of actions or proceedings in or in the nature of habeas
corpus, prohibition, mandamus, quo warranto, and all otherproceedings in or in the nature of applications for writsdirected to courts of inferior jurisdiction, to corporationsand individuals, as may be necessary to the furtherance ofjustice and the regular execution of the law. 
(Emphasis added); see also, HRS § 603-22(8) (1968) and Pringle v. 
Bicknell, 22 Haw. 589, 590 (Haw. Terr. 1915) (As far back as 1892, "it was provided that 'The judges of the several circuit courts shall have power in chambers within their respective jurisdictions, but subject to appeal . . . to issue writs of . . . mandamus . . . to courts of inferior jurisdiction, to corporations and individuals.'" (ellipses in original) quoting S.L. 1892, Ch. 57, § 37; Revised Laws of Hawaii, ch. 131, § 2272 (1915)). 
Thus, the circuit courts have had the authority, even 
before territorial times, to issue mandamus to "individuals." However, DOH argued below and on appeal, that the Director is not an "individual" but a public officer, and as such is not subject to mandamus but by the Hawaii Supreme Court as provided by HRS § 602-5(a)(3) (2016). 
Relevant to this case, in the 1972 comprehensive 
revision, the legislature added to the supreme court's jurisdiction and powers the ability 
[t]o exercise original jurisdiction in all questions arising
under writs directed to courts of inferior jurisdiction andreturnable before the supreme court, or if the supreme courtconsents to receive the case arising under writs of mandamusdirected to public officers to compel them to fulfill theduties of their offices; and such other originaljurisdiction as may be expressly conferred by law[.] 
1972 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88, § 2, at 326. This language remains 
unchanged to the present. HRS § 602-5(a)(3). 
In light of this amendment, the question then becomes 
whether the circuit courts' mandamus jurisdiction over individuals includes, or is exclusive of, public officers. Based on the historical evolution of this extraordinary remedy, we believe it is the latter. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Writs of mandamus have been recognized in the islands 
as early as 1876, when it was defined as an order, issued by the 
supreme court or a justice thereof, on behalf of the government (sovereign or the territory) "addressed to an individual, or corporation or court of inferior jurisdiction, directing him or it to perform some certain act belonging to the place, duty or quality, with which he or it is clothed." Compiled Acts of the Hawaiian Kingdom, L. 1876, c.39, § 1; Cp.L. p. 587. Furthermore, "[t]he order may be directed to individuals, whether holding offices or not, to corporations, and to judges on inferior tribunals[,]" id. § 3, and "[i]t may be directed to public officers to compel them to fulfill any of the duties attached to their office, or which may be legally required of them." Id. at § 5. 
In 1915, the circuit courts were included in this 
statutory definition of mandamus relief. 
Revised Laws of Hawaii 
(RLH), ch. 151, §§ 2675, 2677, 2679 (1915). However, also in 1915, referencing the mandamus chapter 151, the circuit courts were given the power 
To issue writs of error, certiorari, mandamus, ne exeat,
prohibition and quo warranto, and all other writs andprocesses, according to law, to courts of inferiorjurisdiction, to corporations and individuals, that shall benecessary to the furtherance of justice and the regularexecution of the law[.] [see c. 151] 
RLH, ch. 131, § 2272, Eighth (1915). By contrast, in 1915, the 
supreme court's jurisdictional statutes gave it 
original jurisdiction in all questions arising under writs
of error, certiorari, mandamus, prohibition and injunctiondirected to circuit courts, or to circuit judges, or tomagistrates, or other judicial tribunals. . . . 
RLH § 2252 (2015). The supreme court was also given the 
. . . power to . . . allow the issuance of writs of error,certiorari, mandamus, prohibition and injunction accordingto law, to circuit courts, circuit judges, districtmagistrates and other judicial tribunals and to partieslitigant before such courts, judges, magistrates, andtribunals. . . . 
RLH § 2253 (1915). The statutes then in existence regarding 
authority of the supreme and circuit courts to issue mandamus were interpreted as follows: 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus construed it is clear that while this court has 
original jurisdiction in mandamus in cases where the writ isdirected to a circuit court, circuit judge, magistrate orother judicial tribunal, the jurisdiction to issue the writagainst an individual in the first instance has beenconfided to the circuit judges, the jurisdiction of thiscourt in such cases being appellate only. Sections 2675 and 2682 are definitional in character while sections 2252, 2253and 2272 confer jurisdiction. 
Pringle, 22 Haw. at 591 (interpreting all five sections together 
as they were in pari materia). 
Fast forward to the 1972 changes, the mandamus sections 
in Chapter 659, "Extraordinary Legal Remedies," were deleted, but had provided, in pertinent part,
Part 1. Mandamus 
§659-1 Definition.  This is an order issuing in the
name of the State, by the supreme court or any justice
thereof or a circuit judge, and addressed to an individual,or corporation, or court of inferior jurisdiction, directinghim or it to perform some certain act belonging to theplace, duty or quality, with which he or it is clothed. 
. . . . 
§659-3 Directed to whom.  The order may be directed to
individuals, whether holding offices or not, tocorporations, and to judges of inferior tribunals. 
When officer dead or resigned. It may be directed to
an individual, as to the heir or other legal representativeof a deceased public officer, or to the officer himself, ifhe be alive, or has resigned, or has been removed, to compelhim to deliver to the successor of the officer, the papers
and other effects belonging to his office. 
To compel officers to perform duty. It may be
directed to public officers to compel them to fulfill any of
the duties attached to their office, or which may be legallyrequired of them. 
Along with eliminating the mandamus sections,9 1972 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 90, § 3(j) at 355-56, the 1972 amendments 
retained the circuit courts' power to issue mandamus to "individuals," without amendment, 1972 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88, § 3 at 330, and amended
10 the supreme court's powers with regard 
9 However, the legislature disavowed abolishing the writ of mandamus
despite the deletion of the provisions regarding mandamus. 1972 Haw. Sess. 
Laws Act 90, § 4 at 356. 
10 Prior to 1972, the supreme court's powers were as follows: 
§602-5. Jurisdiction and powers.  The supreme court
shall have appellate jurisdiction to hear and determine allquestions of law, or of mixed law and fact, which are
(continued...) 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to mandamus as follows: 
(4) To exercise original jurisdiction in all questions
arising under writs directed to courts of inferiorjurisdiction and returnable before the supreme court,or if the supreme court consents to receive the casearising under writs of mandamus directed to publicofficers to compel them to fulfill the duties of theiroffices; and such other original jurisdiction as maybe expressly conferred by law. 
1972 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 88, § 2 at 326. The provisions 
regarding the supreme court and circuit courts' powers remain unchanged until the present. 
This historical review reveals that the power of the 
supreme court to issue a writ was long limited to inferior courts and judges, and a circuit court's power was limited to courts inferior to it, as well as to corporations and individuals. Although the meaning of the term "individuals" was defined as all-encompassing, i.e., "whether holding offices or not," HRS § 659-3 (1968) in the mandamus provisions, the 1972 amendments resulted in explicitly adding public office holders to the jurisdiction of the supreme court while not adding this expansive language previously used in the definitional provisions of the mandamus chapter to define the individuals to whom the circuit court could issue its mandamus orders. Taking the legislature's changes in context, it seems clear that it intended to carve out a species of "individual" i.e., public officers, for the supreme court's writs, while leaving the circuit courts to issue mandamus relief to other individuals. 
10(...continued)
properly brought before it on exceptions, error, or appeal
duly perfected from any other court, judge, magistrate, ortribunal, according to law or by reservation of any circuitcourt or judge; and original jurisdiction in all questionsarising under writs of error, certiorari, mandamus,prohibition, and injunction directed to circuit courts, orto circuit judges, or to magistrates, or other judicialtribunals and returnable before the supreme court. The
supreme court and the several justices thereof in aid of the
appellate jurisdiction of the court may issue writs ofmandamus, certiorari, prohibition, and habeas corpus and allother writs necessary or proper to the complete exercise ofthe appellate jurisdiction of the court. Each of the justices shall have original jurisdiction and power to issuewrits of habeas corpus and may make the writs returnablebefore himself or the supreme court or before any circuitcourt or any judge thereof. 
HRS § 602-5 (1968) (emphasis added). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As Kô kua Council sought mandamus relief against the 
Director, an appointed officer of the Hawai# i State Department of 
Health, we conclude the Circuit Court did not have the authority 
to grant such relief and was correct, albeit for different reasons, to deny Kôkua Council's motion for summary judgment in, and ultimately dismissing, Count III of its complaint. 
Our resolution of this issue makes it unnecessary to 
address the other arguments raised in this appeal.
IV. 
For the reasons stated, we affirm the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit's April 5, 2017 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, Filed December 23, 2016, and the November 9, 2017 Final Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 24, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Lance D. Collins 
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge 
Heidi M. Rian Angela A. Tokuda,Deputy Attorneys General,for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11 