 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000044
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARY LOU JACK, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
THOMAS EDWARD JACK, II, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 10-1-0269)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Thomas Edward Jack, II, (Husband)
 
timely appeals from the December 9, 2011 Decree Granting Absolute
 
Divorce entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family
 
Court).1
 
2

On appeal, Husband argues  that the Family Court erred
1 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
 
2 The Opening Brief filed by Husband's attorney, Steven J. Kim
(Kim), violates the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) in several
respects. First, although HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) requires "[a] concise statement
of the case, setting forth . . . the course and disposition of the proceedingsin the court or agency appealed from, and the facts material to considerationof the questions and points presented, with record references supporting eachstatement of fact or mention of court or agency proceedings[,]" this briefprovides at best an incomplete recitation of the Family Court's proceduralposture and inconsistent record references. This rule also requires that theparty append "a copy of the judgment, decree, findings of fact and conclusionsof law, order, opinion or decision relevant to any point on appeal[,]" whichwas not done. 
Next, Kim's Points of Error section is devoid of references to the
record and does not contain quotations of the findings and conclusions he is
challenging. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by: (1) entering default against him at the August 29, 2011
 
trial when he failed to appear; (2) denying his September 8, 2011
 
Motion to Set Aside Entry of Default in which he provided the
 
Family Court with evidence that he failed to appear at trial due
 
to Hurricane Irene; (3) making clearly erroneous findings of fact
 
based upon insufficient evidence, incompetent evidence, hearsay
 
arguments of Plaintiff-Appellee Mary Lou Jack's (Wife) counsel,
 
and exhibits admitted without foundation; (4) making erroneous
 
conclusions of law based upon insufficient findings of fact, and
 
(5) admitting Wife's and Husband's exhibits into evidence. As
 
3
Wife did not file an answering brief,  our task is to determine
whether Husband has presented prima facie reversible error in his
 
brief. Kaiu v. Tasaka, 33 Haw. 484, 485 (Haw. Terr. 1935).
 
Based on a careful review of the record, the arguments
 
made and the issues raised by Husband, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve those issues as follows and affirm.
 
1. The Family Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
entering default against Husband for his failure to personally
 
appear for trial. The August 23, 2011 Order Re: Trial set trial
 
for August 29, 2011 and specifically required Husband to appear
 
2(...continued)
Next, despite the mandate of HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), Kim's Argument
section fails to provide "citations to authorities, statutes and parts of the
record relied on." 
Finally, Kim failed to include a Statement of Related Cases as
required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(11).
 
Counsel is warned that future violations of HRAP Rule 28 may
result in sanctions.
 
3
 Attorney Donna Davis Green (Green) is the attorney of record for
Wife in this case and as such, documents in this appeal were served upon her,
including the amended notice of appeal, opening brief, and notice of default
of the answering brief. As such, absent any other relevant circumstances, she
was required to either withdraw as counsel or file an answering brief in
Wife's behalf. HRAP Rule 28(c); Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct Rules
1.3; 1.16 and Comments thereto. 
It further appears that Green is in violation of HRAP Rule 25(a),
which provides, "[u]nless excused by order of the supreme court or the
intermediate court of appeals, each attorney who represents a party before the
appellate courts shall register as a JEFS User and file all documents through
JEFS." Green has not submitted evidence of such excuse.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
at the scheduled trial date.4 The Family Court was authorized to 
enter a default upon Husband's failure to appear at trial.5 Our 
review of the record does not reveal an abuse of discretion in 
entering default. Cnty. of Hawai 'i v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 
Hawai'i 391, 404, 235 P.3d 1103, 1116 (2010) (construing the 
analogous Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 55). 
2. The Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
refusing to set aside the default entered against Husband. At
 
the time Husband filed his September 9, 2011 Motion to Set Aside
 
Default and/or Divorce Decree, the Family Court had not yet
 
entered a default judgment or a divorce decree, although it had
 
rendered an oral ruling deciding the terms of the decree.
 
The Family Court was authorized to set aside the entry
 
of default under HFCR Rule 55(c) "for good cause shown." While
 
defaults are not favored, and any doubt should be resolved in
 
favor of the party seeking relief, 
[i]n general, a motion to set aside a default entry or a
default judgment may and should be granted whenever the
court finds (1) that the nondefaulting party will not be
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party
has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not
the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. The mere
 fact that the nondefaulting party will be required to prove
his [or her] case without the inhibiting effect of the
default upon the defaulting party does not constitute
prejudice which should prevent a reopening.
 
4 Husband was present by telephone on August 18, 2011 when the trial
date was set.
 
5 Hawai'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 55 provides, in pertinent
part, 
(a) Entry. When a party against whom a judgment for
affirmative relief is sought has failed to plead or
otherwise defend as provided by these rules and that fact is
made to appear by motion supported by affidavit or
declaration or as otherwise provided hereinbelow, the court
shall enter the party’s default. 
(b) Judgment. In a contested or uncontested action,
where it appears from the record and by testimony (or by
affidavit or declaration in an uncontested matrimonial
 action) that the adverse party has been duly served with the
complaint or dispositive motion, and the adverse party has
failed to appear or otherwise defend as provided by these
rules, the court may grant an entry of default and proceed
with a proof hearing, when a hearing is required, and enter
a default judgment.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150 
(1976) (citations omitted); see Rearden Family Trust v. 
Wisenbaker, 101 Hawai 'i 237, 65 P.3d 1029 (2003). "We review the 
denial of a motion to set aside default for abuse of discretion." Cnty. of Hawaii, 123 Haw. at 423, 235 P.3d at 1135 (reviewing a 
motion under HRCP Rule 55(c)). 
We can see no abuse of discretion here. First and 
foremost, Husband has failed to provide an adequate record to 
review the Family Court's decision to deny his motion to set 
aside. No transcript of the hearing on Husband's motion has been 
included in the record. See HRAP Rule 11(a) (The appellant 
"shall take any other action necessary to enable the clerk of the court to assemble and transmit the record. It is the 
responsibility of each appellant to provide a record . . . that 
is sufficient to review the points asserted[.]"); Bettencourt v. 
Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995). 
In any event, a review of the documents submitted by 
the parties to the Family Court reveals that Husband's motion to 
set aside, filed by his current appellate counsel, focused solely 
on the reasons for his non-appearance and provided documentation 
for his assertion that his flight from Maryland was cancelled by 
the airline due to Hurricane Irene. Husband made no argument 
that Wife would not be prejudiced by setting aside the default or 
that he had a meritorious defense that he was prevented from 
presenting. Conversely, Wife argued that Husband's credibility 
was doubtful based on (1) prior failures to comply with court 
orders, including orders to appear; (2) misrepresentations of 
fact during the course of the case; and (3) that Husband's own 
exhibits supported the notion that he had (a) the financial means 
to purchase an airline ticket, and (b) advance notice that 
Hurricane Irene would likely interfere with travel. The Family 
Court noted that Wife, who also had to travel from the east coast 
to Hawai 'i for the trial was able to obtain a flight out and was 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
present. Thus, the record supports the notion that Husband did
 
not establish good cause for his failure to appear.
 
3. and 4.  We decline to review the findings of fact
 
and conclusions of law enumerated by Husband. As already noted,
 
Husband has not only failed to provide record citations and to
 
quote the challenged findings and conclusions in his points on
 
appeal, but he has failed to make the document part of the record
 
on appeal. 
Moreover, Husband's challenge to these findings and 
conclusions appears to be based on his position that, because all 
of Wife's and his exhibits were improperly admitted, and there 
was minimal testimony presented, any findings of fact based 
thereon were clearly erroneous and any conclusions based on these 
findings were wrong. However, as Husband's arguments with regard 
to the admissibility of the exhibits consist of conclusory 
statements without citation to authority nor analysis of the 
applicable law governing the admissibility of evidence or how the 
law would apply to particular exhibits, he has failed to provide 
a discernable argument and therefore we decline to review these 
points. Taomae v. Lingle, 108 Hawai 'i 245, 257, 118 P.3d 1188, 
1200 (2005) ("This argument does not contain any reasoning, supported by citations to case law or authority to constitute a 
discernible argument[.]"). 
Therefore, we affirm the December 9, 2011 Decree
 
Granting Absolute Divorce entered by the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 26, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Steven J. Kim,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
5

 