NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000731 29-NOV-2023 08:09 AM Dkt. 110 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000731 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
ERIC STROEVE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-21-0000568) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge and Nakasone, J.,
with Hiraoka, J., concurring and dissenting separately) 
Self-represented Defendant-Appellant Eric Stroeve
1 
appeals from the " Judgment  of Conviction and Sentence" entered by 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on December 5, 2022.2 For 
the reasons explained below, we vacate and remand. 
In the early morning hours of May 10, 2021, someone set 
fire to Ali#iōlani Hale, a state historical building that houses 
the Hawai #i Supreme Court. Stroeve was indicted by a grand jury 
on May 14, 2021. He was charged with Arson in the First Degree, 
1 According to Stroeve, his last name "is pronounced like scuba.
It's Dutch[.]" 
2 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza presided. An amended judgment was
entered on December 20, 2022, effective nunc pro tunc  December 5, 2022. The 
amended judgment corrected a typographical error in the amount of credit for
time served.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 708-8251(1)(b).3 
He pleaded not guilty. 
The State filed a motion to determine voluntariness of 
statements Stroeve made to a Honolulu Police Department ( HPD) 
officer. The circuit court entered "Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting State's Motion to Determine Voluntariness" on June 6, 2022. 
Jury trial began on July 12, 2022. The State adduced 
evidence that Stroeve was identified as the person shown in a surveillance video lighting a fire near the koa doors of the Judiciary History Center entrance, located at the front of the Hawai#i Supreme Court building. The fire caused smoke damage, 
damage to the koa doors, and damage to parts of the interior carpet, for a total amount of $815,637.40.
4 
The jury found Stroeve guilty as charged. The Judgment 
was entered on December 5, 2022. Stroeve was sentenced to twenty years in prison, with credit for time served. A Free Standing Order of Restitution of $115,721.45 was entered on December 7, 2022. This appeal followed. 
Stroeve contends that the circuit court erred by:
(1) admitting into evidence footage from the body-worn camera of 
HPD officer Timothy Massie during the hearing on the State's 
motion to determine voluntariness; (2) granting the State's 
motion to determine voluntariness; (3) "suppressing" Officer 
Massie's body-worn camera footage on July 8 and 13, 2022; and
(4) admitting "false testimony" from a trial witness.
5 
(1) Stroeve contends that the circuit court erred by 
admitting footage from Officer Massie's body-worn camera into evidence during the hearing on the State's motion to determine 
3 HRS § 708-8251(1)(b)(2014) provides: "(1) A person commits the
offense of arson in the first degree if the person intentionally or knowingly
sets fire to or causes to be burned property and: . . . (b) Knowingly orrecklessly damages the property of another, without the other's consent, in anamount exceeding $20,000." 
4 $815,637.40, the total amount of damages introduced at trial,
consisted of $55,500.00 to repair the koa doors; new carpet, $7,894.00; airduct cleaning, $30,235.34; and smoke remediation, $722,008.06. 
5 Stroeve did not appeal his sentence or the restitution order. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
voluntariness. The hearing was held on May 17, 2022. Stroeve 
watched Officer Massie's body-worn camera video on the circuit court's monitor. Stroeve initially declined to stipulate the video into evidence. The State called Officer Massie as a witness. Officer Massie identified Stroeve as the person he arrested on May 11, 2021. Officer Massie authenticated State's Exhibit No. 1 as a compact disc containing video footage from his body-worn camera depicting his interaction with Stroeve on May 11, 2021. The State moved Exhibit No. 1 into evidence. The circuit court asked Stroeve if he had any objection. Stroeve said, "No, Your Honor." The court then admitted State's Exhibit No. 1 into evidence "for the purposes of this motion only." The court did not err in so doing. See Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
Rule 103(a)(1) ("Error may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits . . . evidence unless . . . a timely objection . . . appears of record[.]"); Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co. , 85 Hawai #i 
336, 379 n.29, 944 P.2d 1279, 1322 n.29 (1997) (noting that "complete failure to object will waive the point" concerning admissibility of evidence).
(2) Stroeve contends that the circuit court erred by 
granting the State's motion to determine voluntariness. During the hearing on the motion, Officer Massie testified that Stroeve made three statements after he was handcuffed and patted down: "Not a survivor left tomorrow morning[,]" "All the courtrooms burned to the ground[,]" and "Courts of bullshit." Stroeve argues that "the Miranda warning was never provided" and he "never waived his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination." Whether a person's constitutional right against self-incrimination was violated is a question of law reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. State v. Kazanas, 138 Hawai #i 23, 33, 375 P.3d 1261, 1271 (2016). 
In Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436 (1966), the Supreme 
Court held that a suspect must be warned "that he has the right to remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appointed for him." Id. at 479. Under Hawai #i law, a defendant 
objecting to admissibility of their statement must establish that 
the statement resulted from (1) "interrogation" while they were (2)
 "in custody." State v. Hewitt, 153 Hawai#i 33, 43, 526 P.3d 
558, 568 (2023). There is no dispute that Stroeve was in custody when he made the statements. The issue presented is whether he was under interrogation. 
The circuit court made findings of fact and conclusions 
of law when granting the State's motion. 
Hawai#i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(C) requires that Stroeve's opening brief quote or reference any findings or conclusions urged as error. Stroeve didn't do this, although he generally contends the circuit court abused its discretion in finding Officer Massie credible, in finding that Stroeve was not questioned by police during his arrest, and ruling that the statements in question were voluntary. To promote access to justice, the supreme court instructs that self-represented litigants shouldn't be automatically foreclosed from appellate review because they fail to comply with court rules. 
Erum v. 
Llego
, 147 Hawai#i 368, 380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827-28 (2020). 
Accordingly, we review the circuit court's findings to determine whether they were clearly erroneous, 
Est. of Klink ex rel. Klink 
v. State , 113 Hawai#i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007). 
The circuit court found: 
6. Officer Massie was in the process of arresting
[Stroeve], checking for weapons, and attempting to get
on-scene booking information, such as name and birthday.During this process, [Stroeve] did not give his bookinginformation. 
7. While [Stroeve] was in custody, Officer Massie
asked [Stroeve] whether he had anything sharp with respectto his pockets. Officer Massie did not ask [Stroeve] anyother questions. 
8. At the time [Stroeve] made the three utterances,
[Stroeve] was not responding to any particular questions. 
10.
[6] The court finds Officer Massie's testimony to be
credible and reliable. 
6 There was no finding of fact numbered 9. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11. Through Officer Massie's testimony, [Stroeve]
spontaneously uttered the following statements: "not a
survivor left tomorrow. Every courtroom burned to theground." "Court of bullshit." 
Based on our review of the record, including Officer 
Massie's body-worn camera video, findings of fact nos. 6, 7, and 
8 were supported by substantial evidence and were not clearly erroneous. As to finding of fact no. 10, "[i]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai#i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting In re Doe , 
95 Hawai #i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001)). 
Finding of fact no. 11, however, was clearly erroneous. 
Officer Massie's body-worn camera video reflects that while walking up to Stroeve, Officer Massie asks Stroeve to put down his knife. Stroeve complies. Officer Massie asks Stroeve to drop his scissors. Stroeve complies. Officer Massie asks Stroeve, " can you give me your name and stuff now? " 
Stroeve looks at a second police officer at the scene 
and says, "you guys are back again." 
The second officer tells Stroeve, "'kay right now we're 
speaking to you because you're a suspect, that matches the description, or your person matches the description of an arson suspect, okay?" 
Officer Massie asks what Stroeve has in his hand, and 
says, "what is that, keys? Drop 'em please." Stroeve bends down and Officer Massie says, "no, don't reach for stuff my man." 
The second officer continues, "so that's why we're 
talking to you . . ." 
Stroeve says to Officer Massie, "you don't have to 
worry about me doing anything." 
Officer Massie replies, "well, you never know anymore 
with people, right?" 
Stroeve says, "You guys have to ask questions and 
listen . . ." 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The second officer continues, "so now I'm telling you 
why we're speaking to you, because you match the description of 
an arson suspect. Okay? You want to give us your information ?" 
Stroeve pauses, looks at the second officer, and says, 
"Um, I want to give you the whole info ." 
"I'll take whatever you got ," says the second officer. 
Stroeve says, "Okay, April 4, 2012." "No, I don't want to go that back far [sic]," says the 
second officer. 
"I am the victim of attempted murder by the Maui County 
Police Department," says Stroeve. 
The second officer replies, " Right now, we're only 
talking about an arson case ." 
During this time Officer Massie is taking out his 
handcuffs and asks Stroeve to turn around. 
Stroeve asks, "Why are you putting me in cuffs?" Officer Massie responds, "Because you're going to be 
arrested for that now." 
"For what?" Officer Massie responds, "He just told you, the arson." "Arson?" asks Stroeve, as he turns to face Officer 
Massie. 
"Stop trying to turn," says Officer Massie. The second 
officer secures the handcuffs on Stroeve. 
"Wait, somebody's alleging I arsoned a place?" "Yes, that's exactly what it is," says Officer Massie. 
"And you matched the description, the video, the clothing, so right now you're going to be placed under arrest for the arson, okay." 
As the second officer informs dispatch that he has "one 
custody," a third officer arrives at the scene. 
Stroeve asks, "And you guys conspired to murder me how 
many times since I got out of prison?" 
"You know, I don't know what you're talking about," 
says the second officer. 
"And take my hands?" 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Massie responds, "No, would you like to give us 
your information before you get into a blue-and-white, or will 
you give us your information right now?" 
"Well, I guess I'm going to talk to a detective." Officer Massie asks the third officer to take photos of 
Stroeve. 
"You guys are forgetting that you tried to murder me 
and take my hands, twice. Right. And, this is not a reasonable seizure. You haven't even asked questions and investigated anything." 
"That's because we can't ask you the questions ," says 
Officer Massie. 
"It's justified for me to go to war against you since 
you guys declared war against me." 
Officer Massie asks Stroeve, "Can you face this way 
please?" 
While being photographed, Stroeve says, 
And you've been stalking me illegally, without a
warrant, this entire time. Unreasonable seizures. 
[Unintelligible] You guys owe me like five hundred milliondollars. And you're going to keep going more and more inthe hole. You think you're in the right, and you're goingto put me in cuffs now. Once again. You're full of shit. I don't give a fuck. You guys are so full of shit it ain'teven fuckin' possible. [Unintelligible] This is an unreasonable seizure. 
As Officer Massie instructs the other officers about 
recovering evidence, Stroeve says, "Yeah, I want evidence against 
every fucking cop that's been stalking me twenty-four seven. Fucking assholes. Twice tried to take my hands. Murder [unintelligible]." 
Officer Massie asks Stroeve, "You got anything that's 
going to poke me?" 
Stroeve doesn't respond. Officer Massie searches 
Stroeve's pockets. Stroeve says, "You're taking stuff out of my pockets and moving it around." 
Officer Massie explains, "Feels like you might have a 
knife or some kind of weapon in here, that's why." 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Ah, you could have asked and I would have told you no. 
But you can't do that." 
"We can." 
"No you can't." "'Kay, I gotta take this off you okay, this 
right . . ." 
"You can't arrest me. I own this fucking police 
department." 
"I heard that many a time." Stroeve continues: 
And the state of bullshit. You guys don't have enough
money to afford [unintelligible] fucking retarded. Hey, ah,
what happened to my dead kids? Ann Margaret that youmurdered? You guys murder people during the Arita[phonetic] trial, and uh, covered it up and haven't told 'emany kids [unintelligible]. Really. God I wonder. How longago did this happen? And your fucking needs. This is 
awesome. 
  
During this time, Officer Massie is searching through 
Stroeve's many layers of clothing, pockets, and a bag attached to 
his belt by a chain, while the other officers are standing by. Officer Massie asks Stroeve, "Can you lift your hands please? Thank you." 
Officer Massie continues searching through Stroeve's 
clothing. 
Stroeve then made the following underscored statements, 
which the circuit court found to be spontaneous utterances: 
Somebody please pull out a [unintelligible]. Not a 
survivor left tomorrow morning. Every courtroom. Burned to 
the ground. Court of bullshit.  Broke every fucking rule oflaw, been in violation of my rights for nine years now. And counting. And keep on going. Takes a licking and keeps onticking. You guys are dead. Not by me, the whole world'sgonna come [unintelligible]. Twenty-two million dead,murdered. But you couldn't stop. And never gave closure toeverybody on planet earth, they're all coming here to
fucking kill you. 
After additional conversation not relevant here, Stroeve was 
placed in a marked police vehicle. 
"[T]he touchstone in analyzing whether 'interrogation' 
has taken place is whether the police officer should have known that his or her words and actions were reasonably likely to 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
elicit an incriminating response from the defendant." Kazanas , 
138 Hawai#i at 38, 375 P.3d at 1276 (cleaned up). Although 
Officer Massie only asked Stroeve for his "name and stuff," the 
second police officer told Stroeve he resembled the suspect in an arson case and asked, "You want to give us your information?" At that time, the police officers knew they were going to arrest Stroeve. When Stroeve responded, "Um, I want to give you the whole info," the second officer should have realized that his question to Stroeve was likely to elicit an incriminating response. At that point, Stroeve should have been given the 
Miranda warnings. 
He was not. Instead, the second officer said, 
"I'll take whatever you got" and "right now, we're only talking about an arson case." Under Kazanas , this constituted 
interrogation. Stroeve's later statements should not have been admitted at trial. 
The circuit court erred by granting the State's motion 
to determine voluntariness and allowing the admission of Stroeve's un-Mirandized statements. We conclude that the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
At trial, Officer Massie was asked whether Stroeve said 
anything after he was arrested, and testified to the statements as follows: 
He had said three things. They were -- the
first one was: Courts of bullshit. The second one 
was: All courts burn to the ground. And then the last thing he said was: Not a survivor left tomorrow morning. 
The gist of Stroeve's defense was twofold: (1) that he 
lit a different fire at the same location three days before this 
incident; and (2) that he did not intend for the fire he lit to cause any damage at all, and certainly not in an amount exceeding $20,000.00. Stroeve testified that "[he] was not there on May 10th", the date of the incident at issue, and stated: "I believe 100 percent that this incident occurred on Friday, May 7th." Stroeve claimed that the surveillance video from the date of the incident was forged using his image from three days before. He lit the fire to "make an example of the capitol patrol sheriffs" 
9  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
who he claimed had robbed him "five weeks before." Stroeve 
wanted to show that the capitol patrol sheriffs were "probably too busy robbing people, that their building security [wa]s so poor that somebody could potentially set up a fire at one of their buildings and not get caught." Stroeve explained that he "didn't have a motive to really damage the building at all[,]" and that "this is a criminal conspiracy . . . to frame me for damages and a crime that I did not commit . . . ." Stroeve 
testified that "the first thing [he] lit on fire" were the "No 
Trespassing" laminated cards, which Stroeve "placed on the ground[,]" "not touching the doors." Stroeve claimed the "flames were not going to touch the doors[,]" and the flames were "self-extinguished." Stroeve then placed the stanchions over the laminating cards but said "none of these stanchions are touching the doors[,]" and explained that "even if these stanchions caught fire, the doors are not going to catch fire."  Stroeve "did not 
believe that there was any risk of any damage at all."  Stroeve asserted that when he "got back with the trash bag, those two 
laminating cards were no longer burning" and when he looked back at the fire from nearby he believed that the fire "completely went out" because "there was [sic] no more flickering lights coming from the fire." Stroeve testified: "I concluded that the fire self-extinguished itself [sic] like it should have. Although I cannot confirm that it completely went out, I believe that it did." Stroeve specifically denied any intention to cause over $20,000 of damage, as follows: 
[By standby counsel]: Let me ask you this, then,
Mr. Stroeve: Did you intend to cause more than $20,000 of
damage to the Judicial [sic] History Center? 
[By Stroeve]: No, I did not. 
Stroeve also maintained that he "had no motive to damage the 
doors." 
"Erroneously admitted evidence is evaluated under the 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard." 
State v. Jones , 
148 Hawai#i 152, 170, 468 P.3d 166, 184 (2020) (quoting 
State v. 
Matsumoto , 145 Hawai#i 313, 327, 452 P.3d 310, 324 (2019)). "The 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erroneous admission of evidence is not harmless when there is a 
reasonable possibility that the error might have contributed to 
the conviction." 
State v. Baker, 147 Hawai#i 413, 435, 465 P.3d 
860, 882 (2020) (emphasis added) (citing 
State v. McCrory , 
104 Hawai#i 203, 210, 87 P.3d 275, 282 (2004)). 
Here, the record reflects that there is a reasonable 
possibility that the erroneous admission of Stroeve's statements might have contributed to his Arson in the First Degree conviction. See
 id. The element of proof at issue, based on 
Stroeve's testimony, was whether the State proved Stroeve's state of mind with respect to the result of his conduct, of damage "in an amount exceeding $20,000." HRS § 708-8251(1)(b). The State had to prove that Stroeve acted at least recklessly with respect to the resulting amount of damage, i.e. that Stroeve "consciously disregard[ed] a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such a result." HRS § 702-206(3)(c) (2014). Stroeve's defense minimized the scope of the fire he admitted lighting as "no longer burning"; that it "completely went out"; and that there was no "risk of any damage at all" to the building because neither the lit laminated cards nor the stanchions he later placed on top of the cards were "touching the doors." Stroeve's defense attempted to show that any risk that the doors would catch fire causing over $20,000 in damage was not "substantial and unjustifiable" and that even if such level of risk was shown by the evidence, he did not "consciously disregard" that risk. See id. 
Stroeve's statements of "Every courtroom. Burned to 
the ground" such that "Not a survivor [would be] left tomorrow morning"–-contradicted Stroeve's defense that he never intended the fire to damage the doors or the building in an amount over $20,000. The statements on their face indicated that Stroeve had motive against the "[c]ourts," which he felt were "bullshit," that he intended to cause catastrophic damage to, and loss of life by burning "[a]ll courtrooms" "to the ground" with "[n]ot a survivor left." The statements contradicted Stroeve's testimony in which he denied any "motive to really damage the building at 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
all." The erroneously admitted statements constituted powerful 
evidence against Stroeve's credibility and logically headlined the State's closing argument as follows: 
THE COURT: . . . Ms. [Prosecutor], you may get set up,
and then when you're ready, let us know, and you may begin
your closing argument. 
[The State]: Not a survivor left tomorrow. All courts 
burned to the ground. Court of bullshit. These were [Stroeve]'s statements to Officer Massie. What courtroom? You heard testimony that the Supreme Court is a historicalbuilding. It's in the City and County of Honolulu. It is one where tourists flock to to take photos. It houses the Judiciary History Center. There was testimony that thereare very intricate areas in that building. And most importantly, there were koa wooden doors. 
This is the Hawaii Supreme Court building. This is 
what [Stroeve] burned. He burned the koa doors at the Judiciary History Center on May 10th, 2021 . 
(Emphases added.) See State v. Lora, 147 Hawai#i 298, 310-11, 
465 P.3d 745, 757-58 (2020) (holding that based on "the manner in 
which [an erroneous admission] was presented by the DPA, and the reliance upon it during closing argument" rendered the error "highly prejudicial" and not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt); see also State v. Williams, 149 Hawai #i 381, 393-94, 491 P.3d 
592, 604-05 (2021) (holding that the prosecutor's opening statement introduction of out-of-court communications–-that had previously been barred by the defense's motion in limine–
-
constituted prosecutorial misconduct that was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because it "greatly undermined [the defendant]'s credibility"). 
Here, the State's prominent reliance 
on Stroeve's improperly admitted statements to undercut Stroeve's credibility and his defense of lack of the requisite state of mind and motive to cause damage exceeding $20,000 was "highly prejudicial." See Williams, 149 
Hawai#i at 393-94, 491 P.3d at 
605-05 (2021). On this record, there is a reasonable possibility that the erroneous admission of the statements might have contributed to Stroeve's arson conviction, and the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Baker, 147 Hawai #i at 
435, 465 P.3d at 882 (citing 
State v. McCrory , 104 Hawai#i at 
210, 87 P.3d at 282.) 
12  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Stroeve contends that the circuit court erred by 
"suppressing" Officer Massie's body-worn camera footage on July 8 
and 13, 2022. 
On July 8, 2022, the circuit court conducted a trial 
status conference and heard motions in limine.  Toward the end of 
the proceeding, Stroeve asked, "in trial, are we going to get to 
see the body-worn camera data that comes from the [Axon evidence.com] website?"  The circuit court informed Stroeve, "as 
your own attorney in this case, if you believe that the State is 
proffering certain items of evidence that is inappropriate or objectionable, it will be your duty and responsibility, then, to object, state your reason for the objection. And the Court will rule upon that objection."  Stroeve acknowledged, "Okay."  The 
circuit court did not "suppress" anything during the July 8, 2022 
proceeding. 
On July 13, 2022, the second day of trial was held. 
The State did not offer Officer Massie's body-worn camera footage into evidence. Neither did Stroeve. The circuit court did not "suppress" the footage during the second trial day. 
Stroeve argues that during the second trial day, he 
"makes a reasonable request . . . for the court to produce [Officer Massie's body-worn camera] video to 'prove [Officer Massie was] committing perjury.'"  The transcript of Stroeve's 
cross-examination of Officer Massie doesn't support his argument: 
Q. Twice you stated in your arrest affidavit
that I refused to give you any information. And if 
you were going to testify before the grand jury on May14th, 2021, and state under oath that I made threestatements to you that you are alleging isinformation, why would you write that I gave you noinformation in your arrest report and in youraffidavit? 
A. Because the information provided was done
after the fact. 
Q. It was after the arrest; correct? 
A. It was found out after the arrest, when I
rewatched the body camera. 
Q. Weren't these statements added to the body
camera? 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. They were not. 
Q. You're sure about that? A. A hundred percent positive. Q. You realize that you're under oath right now? A. Yes, sir. Q. And we could show the body camera and prove
that you are committing perjury? 
THE COURT: I'm going to strike that last
question as being argumentative. 
Next question, Mr. Stroeve. MR. STROEVE: I am going to pass for cause. THE COURT: No further questions, you mean? Mr. Stroeve, no further questions? MR. STROEVE: No further questions, Your Honor. 
Stroeve never requested that the circuit court 
"produce" Officer Massie's body-worn camera footage, which was 
Exhibit 1 for the hearing for the State's motion to determine voluntariness. Stroeve never offered the footage into evidence, nor does he point to any part of the record showing that he objected or raised an issue to the circuit court about not being able to use the footage at trial. Because Stroeve never requested or offered it, the circuit court cannot be said to have "suppressed" it. Stroeve's third argument is without merit.
(4) In light of our disposition, it is not necessary 
to reach Stroeve's last point of error. 
For the reasons explained above, the December 5, 2022 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered by the circuit court is vacated, and we remand for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, November 29, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
Eric M. Stroeve,Self-Represented Defendant-
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Appellant. Associate Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OPINION BY HIRAOKA, J.
CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART 
I concur with parts (1) and (3) of the majority's 
summary disposition order. I also concur with the portion of 
part (2) holding that the trial court erred by granting the State's motion to determine voluntariness, and by allowing Officer Massie to testify about Stroeve's statements at trial. But I respectfully disagree with the majority's conclusion that the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Trial error is not to be viewed in isolation or 
considered in the abstract; it must be examined in light of the entire proceeding and given the effect to which the whole record shows it is entitled. 
State v. McDonnell, 141 Hawai#i 280, 
297–98, 409 P.3d 684, 701–02 (2017) (citation omitted). We must determine whether there is a reasonable possibility the error might have contributed to the conviction. 
Id. "[E]ven if the 
trial court erred in admitting evidence, a defendant's conviction will not be overturned if the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." 
State v. Veikoso, 126 Hawai#i 267, 276, 270 
P.3d 997, 1006 (2011) (cleaned up). "Where there is a wealth of overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, errors in the admission or exclusion of evidence are deemed harmless." 
Id. 
(cleaned up). 
As acknowledged by the majority, Stroeve asserted two 
defenses at trial: (1) he didn't light the fire shown in the surveillance video because he actually lit a different fire at the same location three days before, and the video shown at trial was "forged" using his image from three days before; and (2) he didn't intend for the fire he lit to cause any damage at all, and 
certainly not in an amount exceeding $20,000. 
The majority 
concludes that Stroeve's incriminating statements contradicted Stroeve's defense that he never intended  the fire to cause any 
damage, much less cause more than $20,000 in damage. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
But "intention" is not a state of mind applicable to 
the results-of-conduct  element  of Arson in the First Degree. 
HRS § 708-8251 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 7
(1) A person commits the offense of arson in the first
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly setsfire to or causes to be burned property and: 
. . . . 
(b) 
Knowingly or recklessly  damages the property of
another, without the other's consent, in anamount exceeding $20,000 . 
(Emphasis added). "A person acts recklessly with respect to a 
result of his conduct when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such a result." HRS § 702-206(3)(c) (2014). 
The jury was instructed, without objection: 
The Defendant, ERIC STROEVE, is charged with the
offense of Arson in the First Degree. 
A person commits the offense of Arson in the First
Degree if he intentionally or knowingly sets fire to or
causes to be burned property and knowingly or recklessly
damages the property of another , without the other's
consent, in an amount exceeding $20,000 . 
There are six material elements of the offense of 
Arson in the First Degree, each of which the prosecutionmust prove beyond a reasonable doubt. 
These six elements are: 
1. That, on or about May 10, 2021, in the City and
County of Honolulu, the Defendant, ERIC STROEVE, set fire to
or caused to be burned property of another; to wit the Stateof Hawaii; and 
2. That the Defendant did so intentionally or
knowingly; and 
3. That the Defendant knowingly or recklessly
damaged the property of another; to wit the State of Hawaiiby such conduct; and 
4. That the Defendant did so without the consent of 
the State of Hawaii; and 
7 HRS § 702-205 (2014) defines the elements of an offense as
"(1) conduct, (2) attendant circumstances, and (3) results of conduct[.]" 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. That the Defendant was aware that the damage
exceeded $20,000 or consciously disregarded a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that the damage exceeded $20,000; and 
6. That the damage to the property exceeded
$20,000. 
. . . . 
A person acts knowingly with respect to a result of
the person's conduct when the person is aware that it is
practically certain that the person's conduct will causesuch a result. 
. . . . 
A person acts recklessly  with respect to a result of 
the person's conduct  when the person consciously disregards
a substantial and unjustifiable risk  that the person's
conduct will cause such a result. 
A risk is substantial and unjustifiable  if,
considering the nature and purpose of the person's conduct
and the circumstances known to the person, the disregard ofthe risk involves a gross deviation from the standard of
conduct that a law abiding person would observe in the same
situation . 
(Emphasis added.) 
Stroeve's testimony was: 
Well, I can talk about what -- what I observed, because I am
the only witness in this case, and I was there at the scene . 
And so I've seen a lot of versions of the surveillance video. I really don't want to go through it anymore. I 
think the jury's going to have an opportunity to view this
video when they deliberate . 
. . . . 
And what they're going to see is that I did -- the 
first thing that I lit on fire was some plastic laminating
cards that said "No Trespassing."  And the video's going to
show that they self-extinguished. And what I intended to do 
with those, there was a few of them placed in thewindowsill. There were two stanchions placed near them, and
it damaged some of the paint on the stanchions . 
Then I'm going to carry two of these burning
laminating cards to the door . And I wanted to check for a 
draft because there was a gap underneath that door. I wanted to see if there was any air going in and out, andthere wasn't. There's no wind happening. And you willnotice that these laminating cards were placed on theground. They were not touching the doors. The flames were not going to touch the doors. 
Then I'm going to go get another stanchion . And I'm 
going to lay it parallel to the doors and set it directly 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
over the burning laminating cards . And that stanchion is 
not going to catch fire because these stanchions are
painted. So first, a fire would have to burn through thepaint. And then I am going to get three more stanchions . 
So there's a pattern of these stanchions where one is
laying down. The next one goes across the first one. Third one's going to go across the second one. The last one that is perpendicular to the doors is the top stanchion. And none of these stanchions are touching the doors. So even if these stanchions caught fire, the doors are not going tocatch fire. 
Even if -- so when I go get this trash bag of
discarded mail  and I'm walking back to the Supreme Court,
I'm actually in shock that nobody has arrived. I reallydidn't plan on being able to succeed at bringing that bagback, because I already lit these two fires that are goingout. And you will notice that I don't go back onto thestep. I dump it where the two stanchions are . They're the
farthest away from the doors. And when I light this paper
on fire, it is the farthest away from the doors, on the edge
of the step. 
And so there has to be a chain of events that is going
to happen here. And this is the first deviation from the truth in the surveillance video. All the fires of paper,wood, are going to be yellow flames. What you're going to
see in this video is flames that become white, and you can't
see through them. 
And you will notice the two laminating cards that I
lit and brought to the door are going to burn out. So you're going to see now these small yellow flames, whereit's flickering. So imagine now this paper fire. It's not one big fire. It's a bunch of individual paper letters.They were going to burn very quickly, and then they're goingto all self-extinguish. So what you should see is a lot oflittle flames at the end of this, burning out. 
But you will notice that once this fire starts, it's
going to turn white. It's going to become massive, and it'snever going to stop burning. Now, this fire's going tocontinue to burn for some time. Then the video's going to 
stop. 
(Emphasis added.) Stroeve also admitted he used a "high butane 
lighter" to light the paper he got from the trash bin at the post office. 
State's Exhibit 34 is the Judiciary's security camera 
video of Stroeve and the fire. It was admitted into evidence without objection. It shows Stroeve lighting the cards in a windowsill. Stroeve places the burning cards at the base of the Judiciary History Center's koa doors. Stroeve goes in and out of the frame, returning each time with stanchions. He puts them, as 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he testified, "directly over the burning laminating cards." The 
video clearly shows that the cards didn't "self-extinguish." Stroeve leaves the frame for a longer time. He returns with a trash bag. The fire still hasn't gone out. He empties the bag on the burning stanchions. He sets the trash on fire with his high-butane lighter. He leaves the frame — for the last time — while the fire is still burning . The video clearly shows none of 
the fires he set "self-extinguished." After he leaves, the fire becomes "massive." It doesn't go out until first responders appear and extinguish the blaze. The video shows a large burned-out hole in one of the doors. The hole wasn't there before the fire. Firefighters enter the History Center but the external security camera doesn't clearly show what they do inside. 
Stroeve admitted intentionally  setting fire to State 
property — the "No Trespassing" cards. 
The security video and Stroeve's testimony clearly 
showed Stroeve either intentionally  or knowingly  caused other 
State property — the stanchions — to burn by "set[ting] it directly over the burning laminating cards." 
The video also showed overwhelming and compelling 
evidence that Stroeve's leaving the still-burning fire unattended was at least  reckless. In my view, no reasonable juror could 
conclude that Stroeve's leaving the fire burning at the base of the History Center's doors wasn't "a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a law abiding person would observe in the same situation." Thus, it doesn't matter whether Stroeve intended  to cause more than $20,000 of damage to State property. 
It is enough that Stroeve recklessly  caused it. 
The majority relies upon cases which, in my view, are 
distinguishable. 
In State v. Lora, 147 Hawai#i 298, 465 P.3d 745 
(2020) and 
State v. Williams , 149 Hawai#i 381, 491 P.3d 592 
(2021), the improperly admitted evidence was the testimony of the complaining witness. In both cases, the verdict hinged either completely or largely upon the jury's evaluation of the complaining witness's credibility. 
Lora, 147 Hawai#i at 311, 465 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 758 ("The jury's verdict rested on it accepting the CW's 
account as true, and the erroneously admitted testimony was specifically used to bolster the credibility of her account."); Williams
, 149 Hawai#i at 397, 491 P.3d at 608 ("T.Y., the 
complaining witness, was the only witness other than the defendant who could describe the actual acts constituting the offenses."). 
Here, the only witnesses to the results-of-conduct 
element were Stroeve and the videotape — which, in my view, overwhelmingly and compellingly defeats both of Stroeve's defenses and shows that Stroeve's leaving the fire when and where he did was at least "a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a law abiding person would observe in the same situation." 
In my view, the erroneous admission of Stroeve's 
statements was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Because of my conclusion, I must address Stroeve's 
fourth point of error. Stroeve contends that Wayne Taniguchi 
gave false testimony. Taniguchi is the Judiciary's Facility Management Division manager. He testified at trial and also at Stroeve's restitution hearing. 
During the trial, Taniguchi authenticated State's 
Exhibit No. 27F as an invoice for $722,008.06 from Eco Clean Hawaii for fire and smoke remediation. The exhibit was received in evidence without objection. Taniguchi explained that the remediation process involved "cleaning up water damages and smoke damages within the building[.]" 
During the restitution hearing, Stroeve asked 
Taniguchi, "during your testimony to the jury, you had testified that the air conditioning  was $730,000  in the trial. Is -- do 
you -- do you recall making that statement?" (Emphasis added.) 
Taniguchi testified, "I don't recall making that 
statement, sir." 
Stroeve asked, "You don't recall telling them that the 
damages was [sic] over $700,000?" 
Taniguchi responded, "Not at all." 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stroeve argues Taniguchi's testimony during the 
restitution hearing "represents fraud" because Taniguchi didn't 
recall his testimony from the criminal trial five months earlier. Taniguchi's testimony that he doesn't recall making the statement was consistent with his trial testimony. 
The $722,008.06 paid to 
Eco Clean Hawaii was for fire and smoke remediation, not air conditioning. Stroeve asked Taniguchi whether the smoke would be contained in the office by the fire. Taniguchi explained that the heavy smell will travel through the air-conditioning system, 
but Taniguchi didn't testify that the $722,008.06 was to repair or remediate the air conditioning. Taniguchi didn't remember testifying "that the air conditioning was $730,000" because he never gave such testimony. 
Stroeve also argues that Taniguchi's trial testimony 
was false because the restitution documentation attached to the presentence report "does not contain any invoice from Eco Clean Hawaii for 'fire and smoke remediation[.]'" Stroeve didn't call the person who prepared the restitution report as a witness to ask why the State wasn't claiming an additional $722,008.06 in restitution. The record contains no evidence that the Judiciary did not actually incur that cost because of the arson committed by Stroeve. 
For these reasons, I would affirm the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence. 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
7 