 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000023 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
PM, Appellant-Appellant,
v. 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY,
STATE OF HAWAII AND EM,
Appellees-Appellees. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO.  FC-AP 20-1-6004) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
In this secondary agency appeal, self-represented 
Appellant-Appellant PM (
Father), appeals from the "Decision and 
Order Affirming the Administrative Findings and Order Filed July 
8, 2020" (
Decision and Order) and the "Notice and Judgment on 
Appeal" (Judgment), both filed on December 21, 2020 by the Family 
Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1 The underlying 
appeal to the Family Court challenged a July 8, 2020 
Administrative Findings and Order (Administrative Order), filed 
by the Office of Child Support Hearings (OCSH), which denied 
Father's request to modify monthly child support payments. On 
December 21, 2020, the Family Court issued its Decision and Order, and Judgment, from which Father timely appealed.
2 
1 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided. 
2 Father's opening brief contains no record references as required
by Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3), (4)(ii)-(iii),
and (4)(C). Nevertheless, to promote access to justice, pleadings prepared by
self-represented litigants should be interpreted liberally, and self
-
(continued...) 2(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Father contends: (1) the OCSH Hearings 
Officer (Hearings Officer) failed to calculate the correct number 
of days pursuant to the 2014 Child Support Guidelines 
(Guidelines) per the "Order RE Evidentiary Hearing on Final 
Divorce"  and the May 15, 2019 divorce decree (Divorce Decree); 
and (2) the Hearings Officer "failed to enforce HRS § 576D-7."3
 4
represented litigants should not be automatically foreclosed from appellate
review because they fail to comply with court rules. Erum v. Llego
, 147
Hawai #i 368, 380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827-28 (2020). Accordingly, we address
Father's appeal on the merits to the extent feasible and practicable. 
3 The "Order RE Evidentiary Hearing on Final Divorce" is not
included in this record. 
4 Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 576D-7 (2018), entitled
"Guidelines in establishing amount of child support," provides in pertinentpart: 
(a) The family court, in consultation with the agency,
shall establish guidelines to establish the amount of childsupport when an order for support is sought or beingmodified under this chapter. The guidelines shall be basedon specific descriptive and numeric criteria and result in acomputation of the support obligation. . . . 
[(A list of criteria is set forth in subsections (a)(1) -
(a)(9))] 
(b) The guidelines shall be: 
. . . . 
(5) Transmitted to the agency and all family court
judges when available or updated, and shall be
considered by the judges in the establishment ofeach child support order. 
. . . . 
(d) The establishment of the guidelines or the adoption of
any modifications made to the guidelines set forth in thissection may constitute a change in circumstances sufficientto permit review of the support order. A material change ofcircumstances will be presumed if support as calculatedpursuant to the guidelines is either ten per cent greater orless than the support amount in the outstanding supportorder. 
The most current guidelines shall be used to
calculate the amount of the child support obligation. 
(e) The responsible or custodial parent for which child
support has previously been ordered shall have a right to
petition the family court or the child support enforcementagency not more than once every three years for review andadjustment of the child support order without having to showa change in circumstances. The responsible or custodialparent shall not be precluded from petitioning the familycourt or the child support enforcement agency for review and
(continued...) 
2 4(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We construe Father's contentions as also challenging the Family 
Court's affirmance of the Hearings Officer's Administrative Order. 
Upon careful review of the record and the brief 
submitted by Father,
5 the supplemental briefs submitted by the 
CSEA and Mother,6 and having given due consideration to the 
arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Father's points of error as follows, and affirm. 
The background of this case is set forth in the Family 
Court's Decision and Order, which Father does not dispute. Father and Mother have one child (Child) together, born in 2013. 
On May 15, 2019, the Family Court's Divorce Decree ordered, in 
relevant part: sole physical custody of Child to Mother, subject to Father's reasonable visitation rights; Father to pay child support of $1,136 per month; Father to maintain medical and dental insurance for the Child; and Father to pay Mother alimony of $1,000 per month for 24 consecutive months. Father filed for reconsideration with the Family Court in May 2019, but was denied. 
Approximately nine months later, on February 21, 2020, 
Father initiated a request to the CSEA to modify his child support obligation. A proposed Administrative Order was 
adjustment of the child support order more than once in any
three-year period if the second or subsequent request issupported by proof of a substantial or material change ofcircumstances. 
5 Appellee-Appellee Child Support Enforcement Agency ( CSEA) filed a
"Statement of No Position," and Appellee-Appellee-Custodial-Parent EM ( Mother)
filed a notice that no Answering Brief would be filed. Father did not file a Reply Brief. 
6 We ordered supplemental briefing pursuant to HRAP Rule 28(b)(4),
and Father and the CSEA were ordered, and Mother was allowed, to file asupplemental brief regarding whether this was Father's "second or subsequentrequest" for child support modification under HRS §§ 576D-7(e) and 576E-14(d),and whether the correct burden of proof under these statutes was applied bythe Family Court and OCSH. Father's mailed copy of the Order for SupplementalBriefing was returned and filed as "not deliverable" on February 24, 2022.The CSEA and Mother filed their supplemental briefs on March 11, 2022. Father did not file a supplemental brief. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
generated, proposing a child support obligation of $1,041 per 
month for Father. Father objected and requested a hearing. 
The OCSH hearing was held on June 4, 2020, where Father 
represented himself, and Mother attended with her attorney. The Hearings Officer admitted only the Divorce Decree, submitted by the CSEA, into evidence. The Divorce Decree did not have an attached Child Support Guidelines Worksheet (Guidelines 
Worksheet).
7 Father argued: 1) his monthly income from his 
Alabama property should be $77; 2) Mother's income should include 
alimony she receives; 3) he should be given credit for paying for Child's dental health insurance; 4) Mother should not get credit for child care; and 5) the Hearings Officer should consider utilizing either an extensive timesharing worksheet or an exceptional circumstances worksheet to determine his child support obligation. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearings Officer 
found that Father failed to meet his burden of proof to establish his monthly gross income, Mother's monthly gross income, and credit for dental care. The Hearings Officer was thus unable to complete the Guidelines Worksheet, and denied Father's request for a modification. 
Father thereafter appealed to the Family Court 
challenging the OCSH's findings regarding: 1) Father's income; 2) Mother's income; 3) calculating time sharing hours; and 4) the child support amount. The Family Court construed and applied HRS § 576D-7(e), stating: "Father can request a modification of his child support obligation within three (3) years of the Family Court Order pursuant to HRS § 576D-7(e), if the request is supported by proof of a substantial or material change in circumstances." The Family Court affirmed the Administrative Order, concluding in pertinent part as follows: 
[D]espite the harmless errors on some of OCSH's findings and
conclusions, as noted above, Father failed to show that 
7 The Hearings Officer noted in the Administrative Order that no
Guidelines Worksheet was attached to the Divorce Decree; nor was the worksheetprovided at the June 4, 2020 hearing. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there has been a substantial and material change in his
circumstances since the May 15, 2019 Decree, which set hiscurrent child support obligation at $1,136 per month, towarrant modification of his child support obligation. 
Our review of a family court decision on an appeal from 
an administrative agency determination is a secondary appeal; we 
must determine whether the family court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g)
8 to 
the agency's decision. CH v. Child Support Enf't Agency, 149 
Hawai#i 523, 531, 495 P.3d 373, 381 (App. 2021); see Flores v. 
Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 143 Hawai# i 114, 120, 424 P.3d 469, 475 
(2018) (citations omitted) (reviewing circuit court agency appeal). 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion under subsection (6)." Flores, 143 Hawai# i at 121, 424 P.3d at 
476 (brackets and citations omitted). 
(1) In his first point of error, Father contends that 
the "court or agency failed to calculate the correct number of days per the [Guidelines] per the Order RE Evidentiary Hearing . . . and [Divorce Decree]." Father argues that: 
the number of over nights [sic] is not calculated correctly
by either the court and/or agency. The total number of daysevery month, is 12 overnight. The mathematical calculation is, 13 4-week segments for each calendar year (52 weeks peryear ÷ 4-week cycle = 13 4-week cycle per year), 12overnights x 13 4-week cycle = 156 overnight [sic] per year. 
The Order Re: Evidentiary Hearing is not included in this record, 
and Father's figures and calculation above, do not appear in the Divorce Decree. 
8 HRS § 91-14 (2012 & Supp. 2019) provides for "Judicial review of
contested cases." 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Family Court found that the Hearings Officer did 
erroneously calculate Father's overnights, but concluded the 
miscalculation was harmless: 
Time Sharing.  Father requested that the hearing
officer consider an Extensive Visitation Calculation, which
requires at least 143 overnights. Id. at 52. Although
OCSH's calculation of Father's overnights appear to be
miscalculated, 
the error is harmless because the correct
calculation based on the Divorce Decree would still yieldless than 143 overnights. 
(Emphasis added). 
The time sharing calculation is a factual finding that 
we review under the clearly erroneous standard. See P.O. v. 
J.S., 139 Hawai# i 434, 439, 393 P.3d 986, 992 (2017). A finding 
of fact is clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial 
evidence to support it. Id.In its Decision and Order, the 
Family Court calculated Father's overnights at "approximately 138 overnights during odd-numbered years, and about 142 overnights during even-numbered years."
9 The Family Court's calculation is 
9 The Divorce Decree ordered sole physical custody to Mother,
subject to Father's reasonable visitation rights, which the Family Court
summarized in its Decision and Order: 
• Week 1: Child has 2 overnights with Father
• Week 2: Child has 2 overnights with Father
• Week 3: Child has 4 overnights with Father
• Week 4: Child has 2 overnights with Father
• Child has overnights with Father for either Spring orFall break every year.
• Child has overnights with Father on Thanksgiving,Christmas, and New Year during even-numbered years.
• Child has overnights with Father on Father's birthdayand Father's Day.
• Child has overnights with Father on Child's birthdayduring odd-numbered years.
• Child has overnights with Father for half of theroughly 3-month summer time. 
Based on the Divorce Decree, the Family Court calculated that Father wouldhave: 
6-8 overnights during two months with Spring and Fall Breaks= 13-15 overnights depending on the week of the breakSummer months = 45 overnights each 
(continued...) 
6 9(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
supported by the Divorce Decree, appears accurate, and is not 
clearly erroneous. See id. The overnights as correctly 
calculated by the Family Court were still not sufficient to qualify Father for the "Extensive Visitation Calculation" referenced in the Decision and Order. The Family Court did not err in its conclusion of law that the Hearings Officer's calculation error was nevertheless harmless. See id. (reviewing 
conclusions of law de novo). 
(2) In his second point of error, Father contends that 
"the court or agency failed to enforce HRS § 576D-7," due to failure to "enforce" the Guidelines. In his argument, Father asserts that the "amount of alimony received by [Mother] and the imputed amount which was agreed by [Mother]" was a "substantial change in circumstance." In his Statement of the Case,
10 Father 
challenges Mother's counsel's "erroneous theory that alimony is not taxable and should not be considered in [sic] part of gross monthly income." Father points to the Guidelines, and asserts that the Guidelines "clearly stated that alimony (spousal support) income is included in gross income." However, Father does not refer to, or identify, any finding, conclusion, or ruling, by OCSH or the Family Court, that contains the claimed error regarding alimony. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). Father also 
10 overnights during a 4-week cycle for 7 months = 
70
Other holidays and breaks = 10-12 overnights depending on
the year.  . . . 
(Emphases added). 
10 While some of Father's argument regarding his challenge to the
alimony issue appears in the Statement of the Case rather than in the argumentsection as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), we have nevertheless considered it.See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai #i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012) (internal
citations, quotation marks, brackets, ellipses omitted) ("[N]oncompliance withRule 28 does not always result in dismissal of the claims, and this court hasconsistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity tohave their cases heard on the merits, where possible. 
This is particularly so
where the remaining sections of the brief provide the necessary information toidentify the party's argument."). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that the Guidelines were not followed, no child support 
worksheet was filled out, and no exceptional circumstances were established to deviate from the Guidelines. These arguments are also untethered to any claimed error in any finding, conclusion, or ruling, by OCSH or the Family Court. We do not address Father's contention. See id. 
Based on the foregoing, the "Decision and Order 
Affirming the Administrative Findings and Order and "Notice and Judgment on Appeal," Filed July 8, 2020," both filed on December 21, 2020 by the Family Court of the First Circuit, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 31, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate JudgePM, Self-RepresentedAppellant-Appellant 
Mark T. Nugent
Jorge Keoki R. Cadiz Deputy Attorneys General for Appellee-Appellee ChildSupport Enforcement Agency,State of Hawaii 
Michael A. Glenn 
for Appellee-Appellee EM 
8 