NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000356 11-JUL-2024 07:50 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
CAAP-20-0000356 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
GREGORY K. GARCIA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2PR191000012(4) [2FC121000327 and 2PC121000541]) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Self-represented Petitioner-Appellant Gregory K. Garcia 
(Garcia) appeals from the April 16, 2020 Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition to Vacate, Set 
Aside, or Correct Illegal Sentence (Order Denying Second HRPP 
Rule 40 Petition) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
 1
In 2013, pursuant to a plea agreement, Garcia pled no 
contest in FC–CR No. 12–1–0327(4) to: (1) Felony Abuse (by 
choking) of a Family or Household Member and (2) Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree, and in Cr. No. 12–1–0541(4) to: (1) the reduced charge of Unlawful Imprisonment in the First 
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Degree (Count 2); (2) Felony Abuse (by choking) of a Family or 
Household Member (Count 3); (3) Intimidating a Witness (Count 4); (4) Assault in the Second Degree (Count 5); and (5) Violation of Order of Protection (Count 6). The State moved for consecutive terms of imprisonment; Garcia requested probation. On August 21, 2013, particularly in light of Garcia's long history of violence and abuse convictions (as well as other factors), the Circuit Court sentenced Garcia to concurrent and consecutive prison sentences totaling 20 years, with credit for 365 days. In the first case, the Circuit Court sentenced Garcia to five years imprisonment on the charge of felony abuse of a household member, and one year imprisonment for terroristic threatening, with the sentences to run concurrently. For the second case, the Circuit Court sentenced Garcia to five years on each of Counts 2 through 5, and one year on Count 6, with the sentences on Counts 2 through 4 running consecutively, and the sentences on Counts 5 and 6 running concurrently to the prior counts, with the sentences in the second case running consecutive to the sentences in the first case. 
On direct appeal, this court addressed "whether the 
statements made by the [Circuit Court] at sentencing were sufficient to justify its imposition of consecutive terms of imprisonment totaling twenty years on [Garcia]. 
"State v. 
Garcia, CAAP-13-0003458, 2014 WL 3796889, *1 (Haw. App. July 31, 2014) (mem. op.) (Garcia I). This court affirmed the consecutive 
sentences, reasoning as follows: 
[T]he Circuit Court made extensive statements on the
record that explained its reasons for imposing consecutive 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentences on Garcia. The Circuit Court recounted its 
involvement in Garcia's prior criminal cases, the numerousopportunities for rehabilitation it gave to Garcia, and thenumerous attempts it made to help Garcia change. The Circuit Court stated that as Garcia's continuing criminalconduct in the instant cases had shown, its attempts torehabilitate Garcia had failed, and the Circuit Court statedthat it was "giving up on [Garcia]" and believed that he wasnot entitled to further attempts at rehabilitation. The Circuit Court discussed the nature and circumstances of Garcia's offenses and Garcia's character. The Circuit Court stated that Garcia's conduct resulted in "one of the worst cases of psychological harm" the Circuit Court had seen.The Circuit Court specifically referred to Garcia's conductin sending a video of his intimate sexual acts with the CWto the CW's daughter, her employer, her ex-husband, and hermother-in-law. The Circuit Court stated that it "[could]not imagine what it takes for another human being to do thatto someone[,]" and it characterized Garcia's sending thevideo tape to the CW's support group as "the ultimate inmanipulation[.]" The Circuit Court prefaced its impositionof the consecutive sentences on Garcia by stating that itwas "the sentence you deserve today[.]" 
Although the Circuit Court could have done a better
job of explaining its reasons for imposing consecutivesentences by specifically linking its statements to thefactors set forth in HRS § 707–606,
4 we conclude that the 
Circuit Court's statements were sufficient to satisfy therequirements of [State v. Hussein
, 122 Hawai i # 495, 229 P.3d
313 (2010)]. The purposes of the statement of reasonsrequired by 
Hussein
 are to: "(1) identify[] the facts or
circumstances within the range of statutory factors that thecourt considered, and (2) confirm[] for the defendant, thevictim, the public, and the appellate court that thedecision was deliberate, rational, and fair." Kong, 131
Hawaii # at 102–03, 315 P.3d 728–29. The Circuit
 Court's 
statements at sentencing were sufficient to fulfill thesepurposes. 
The Circuit Court's statements at sentencing
demonstrated that in imposing consecutive sentences, it wasrelying on the statutory factors of: (1) the nature andcircumstances of the offense and the history andcharacteristics of the defendant; and (2) the need for thesentence imposed to reflect the seriousness of the offense,to promote respect for law, to deter Garcia from additionalcriminal conduct, and to protect the public from furthercrimes by Garcia. The Court explained that it had givenGarcia numerous previous chances and opportunities forrehabilitation, and that Garcia had squandered and rejectedthose chances. The Circuit Court discussed the significantharm resulting from Garcia's conduct. The Circuit Court's statements reveal that it believed Garcia was not entitled to any more chances, and that his character was depraved,mean-spirited, manipulative, and lacking in compassion forothers. The Circuit Court's statements show that it believed that Garcia was not amenable to rehabilitation and thus the focus of Garcia's sentencing should be on punishinghim and deterring him from future crimes by imposing anextensive total term of incarceration. 
The Circuit Court's extensive statements at sentencing
provided clear insight into its thinking and reasoning inimposing the consecutive sentences. We conclude that the 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court's statements served the purposes of, and were
sufficient to: (1) "identify[] the facts or circumstanceswithin the range of statutory factors that the [CircuitCourt] considered" in imposing consecutive sentences; and(2) "confirm[] for the defendant, the victim, the public,and the appellate court that the decision was deliberate,
rational, and fair."  See  Kong, 131 Hawai #i at 102–03, 315
P.3d 728–29. 
4 In this regard, we note that the Circuit
Court's written Order Granting State's Motion
for Consecutive Terms of Imprisonment, which wasfiled after sentencing, clearly explained theCircuit Court's reasons, with reference to thespecific factors under HRS § 706–606 that theCircuit Court relied upon, for determining thatconsecutive terms of imprisonment werenecessary. Certainly, had the Circuit Courtused this same format at sentencing to expressits views, there would be no question that theCircuit Court had complied with the requirementsof Hussein. In Hussein, however, the supremecourt stated that circuit courts must state their reasons for imposing consecutive sentences"on the record at the time of sentencing[.]"Hussein
, 122 Hawai #i at 510, 229 P.3d at 328.
Thus, based on 
Hussein, we cannot rely on the
Circuit Court's post-sentence order, but mustrely on the Circuit Court's statements atsentencing, in determining whether the CircuitCourt sufficiently explained its reasons forimposing consecutive sentences. 
Id. at *9-10. 
Garcia's conviction and sentence were affirmed in 
Garcia I. Id. at *10. 
On September 16, 2015, Garcia filed his first petition 
pursuant to Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40, 
which did not raise any issues concerning his consecutive 
sentences. The first HRPP Rule 40 petition was dismissed without a hearing, Garcia appealed, and this court affirmed. 
On September 18, 2019, Garcia, self-represented, filed 
his second HRPP Rule 40 petition, a Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Illegal Sentence Through a Writ of Habeas Corpus Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 (Second Rule 40 Petition). In 
the Second Rule 40 Petition, Garcia argued that his consecutive 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentences are illegal under State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai# i 321, 
389 P.3d 916 (2016). 
The Circuit Court denied the petition 
without a hearing, and Garcia timely filed a notice of appeal. 
Garcia raises two interrelated points of error on 
appeal, challenging Finding of Fact 10 and Conclusions of Law 1-
3, 7, and 8, and contending that the Circuit Court erred in entering the Order Denying Second HRPP Rule 40 because the sentencing court did not adequately explain its rationale for each
 consecutive sentence as required under Barrios.2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Garcia's points of error as follows: 
As set forth above, in 2014, this court rejected 
Garcia's argument that his consecutive sentences were illegal based on the Hawai# i Supreme Court's decisions in Hussein and 
Kong. See, e.g., Hussein, 122 Hawai# i at 510, 229 P.3d at 328 
("circuit courts must state on the record at the time of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence"). The Circuit Court stated on the record its reasons of imposing consecutive sentences on Garcia.
 However, in Barrios, the supreme court applied its 
consecutive sentencing mandate to an appeal from the imposition 
2 Although not properly raised as a point of error, Garcia also
argues that the presiding Circuit Court judge should have granted Garcia's
Motion for Recusal filed October 3, 2019. While we note that it appears themotion was meritless, as the only ground stated was the presiding judge's biasallegedly demonstrated at the November 5, 2013 sentencing hearing, we cannotreach this issue as there is no order or ruling on the motion. As the presiding judge has since retired, the issue also appears to be moot. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of multiple consecutive sentences – not just two, as was the case 
in Hussein and Kong – and held: 
[C]onsistent with the Hussein principles, a sentencing
court should explain its rationale for each consecutive
sentence in order to inform the defendant and appellatecourts of the specific factors underlying each sentence.This helps to ensure that a sentencing judge takes intoaccount the differences among convictions prior to imposingmultiple consecutive sentences. Thus, in order to provide arational basis for imposing consecutive sentences asrequired by Kong, sentencing courts must state on the recordthe HRS § 706–606 factors that support each consecutive 
sentence . While the same factors could be sufficiently
aggravated to justify imposing more than one consecutivesentence, the sentencing court should specify that basis oridentify another basis for determining how many consecutivesentences to impose. 
This requirement is particularly important in cases
such as this one, where the circuit court expressly statedits intent to ensure that Barrios would never be released from prison, in contrast to the maximum twenty-year termapplicable to the Class A felonies for which he wasconvicted. While such a sentence can be imposed in anappropriate case, a clearly articulated rationale isnecessary when there is a large disparity between themaximum statutory sentence for each offense and theaggregate consecutive sentence imposed by the court. 
Barrios, 139 Hawai# i at 337-38, 389 P.3d at 932-33 (emphasis 
altered). 
Thus, Barrios requires that the sentencing court 
explain its rationale for each of multiple consecutive sentences 
in order to inform the defendant (and the appellate courts) of the specific HRS § 706-606 factors underlying each consecutive sentence. 
Accordingly, we must consider whether the Barrios 
holding is a "new rule," and if so, whether it applies retroactively to Garcia's consecutive sentences. We look to two supreme court cases providing guidance on whether a new rule has been created, Schwartz v. State, 136 
Hawai#i 258, 361 P.3d 1161 
(2015), and Rapozo v. State, 150 Hawai# i 66, 497 P.3d 81 (2021). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Schwartz , the supreme court started with the 
principles that "[w]hen questions of state law are at issue, 
state courts generally have the authority to determine the retroactivity of their own decisions," and the quintessential "new rule" is when the supreme court overrules a prior case and announces a superseding legal standard. 
136 Hawai#i at 272-73, 
361 P.3d at 1175-76 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). A "new principle of constitutional law" is a new rule, but clarification of an existing principle of law is not. 
Id.
at 273-74, 361 P.3d at 1176-77 (citations omitted). 
Explicatory 
statutory construction intended to "elucidate the meaning and application of specific provisions of a statute" does not constitute a new rule. Id. at 274, 361 P.3d at 1177 (citation 
omitted). If a supreme court holding does not constitute a new rule, it replies retroactively. Id.
In Rapozo
, the supreme court again had to assess 
whether a case that was decided after the HRPP Rule 40 appellant's (Rapozo's) conviction and sentence became final was a new rule. 150 
Hawai#i at 80, 497 P.3d at 95. Rapozo
 reconfirmed 
the four guiding principles stated in Schwartz, and applied the "clarifying" legal principle and statutory construction at issue therein retroactively to Rapozo. Id. at 81, 497 P.3d at 96 
(citations omitted). The supreme court emphasized that HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) did not bar Rapozo's claim because, although he could have raised it in, inter alia, one of his previous seven HRPP Rule 40 petitions, it was a claim of an illegal sentence. Id. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the holding in Barrios that a 
sentencing court must explain its rationale for each of multiple 
consecutive sentences is not a new rule; rather it is a clarification of the legal principles stated in Hussein and Kong, which provided meaning and instructions for application of statutory consecutive sentencing factors. Therefore, Barrios applies retroactively to Garcia's multiple consecutive sentences, and the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Garcia's illegal sentencing claim was patently frivolous and failed to present a colorable claim with respect to his consecutive sentences pursuant to Barrios. This illegal sentencing claim is not barred by HRPP Rule 40(b)(3). See Rapozo, 150 
Hawai#i at 81, 497 P.3d 
at 96. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 16, 2020 
Order Denying Second HRPP Rule 40 Petition is vacated with respect to Garcia's illegal consecutive sentencing claims pursuant to 
Barrios, and this case is remanded to the Circuit 
Court for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, July 11, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Gregory K. Garcia,Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se. /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
Gerald K. Enriques,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Karen T. NakasoneCounty of Maui, Associate Judge
for Respondent-Appellee. 
8 