NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000103 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
LAURA SCHICK, Personal Representative of the
Estate of Robert A. Schick, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
NATIONSTAR MORTGAGE LLC; FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE
ASSOCIATION; NENITA JOSE WESTBERG; CENTRAL PACIFIC HOMELOANS,
INC.; MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEMS, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50, Defendants 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 17-1-0039) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Laura Schick (Schick), personal 
representative of the Estate of Robert A. Schick (Decedent
), 
appeals from the Amended Final Judgment entered against her by 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)  on 
December 24, 2018 (Amended Judgment), which entered judgment 1 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Schick and in favor of Defendants-Appellees Nationstar 
Mortgage, LLC (Nationstar), Federal National Mortgage Association 
(Fannie Mae) (collectively, Nationstar Defendants), and Nenita Jose Westberg (Westberg), Central Pacific Homeloans, Inc. (Central Pacific) (collectively, Westberg Defendants).
2 In 
addition, Schick challenges the Circuit Court's December 12, 2017 
Order Granting [Nationstar Defendants'] Motion for Judgment on 
the Pleadings (Order Granting Nationstar Motion) and December 14, 
2017 Order Granting [Westberg Defendants] Motion for Judgment on 
the Pleadings or, Alternatively, Summary Judgment (Order Granting 
Westberg Motion). 
I. RELEVANT BACKGROUND 
A. The Property It appears to be undisputed that on March 14, 2008, 
Decedent executed a promissory note (Note) secured by a mortgage 
(Mortgage) on certain real property located on Kuukama Street in Kahului, Hawai# i (Property). The Mortgage identified the 
Decedent as the borrower, Herman-Morris Enterprises Inc. (
HMEI) 
as the lender, and MERS as the beneficiary, solely as nominee for 
HMEI and its successors and assigns. The Mortgage's power of 
sale clause granted MERS the right to, inter alia, "foreclose and sell the Property; and to take any action required of [HMEI] 
2 Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems ( MERS ) was a defendant
until October 4, 2017, when the Circuit Court approved a stipulation for
dismissal without prejudice of Schick's Complaint as to MERS. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
including, but not limited to, releasing and canceling this 
Security Instrument." 
On October 26, 2010, an Assignment of Mortgage was 
recorded in the State of Hawai# i Bureau of Conveyances (Bureau). 
The assignment reflected MERS's transfer of right, title, and interest in the Property to Nationstar. 
It appears that Decedent 
subsequently defaulted, and on Novermber 8, 2010, Nationstar filed a Notice of Mortgagee's Intention to Foreclose Under Power 
of Sale (Notice of Sale) with the Bureau. The Notice of Sale was 
posted at the Property on November 11, 2010, and published in the 
Honolulu Star-Advertiser on November 16, November 22, and November 29, 2010. The Notice of Sale stated that the Property would be sold at public auction on January 10, 2011. 
On February 10, 2011, Nationstar recorded Mortgagee's 
Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale executed by 
Nationstar attorney Peter Stone (A
ffidavit of Foreclosure). The 
Affidavit of Foreclosure stated that the Property was sold at 
auction on January 31, 2011, rather than January 10, 2011, to Nationstar, or its nominee. 
On March 29, 2011, Nationstar conveyed the property to 
Fannie Mae. Nationstar recorded a quitclaim deed at the Bureau on April 4, 2011. On September 7, 2011, Fannie Mae conveyed the Property to Westberg and recorded a limited warranty deed with the Bureau on September 9, 2011. On August 25, 2011, Westberg apparently executed a promissory note in favor of MERS, as 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nominee for Central Pacific, secured by a mortgage on the 
Property (Westberg Mortgage), which was recorded on September 9, 
2011. 
B. Circuit Court Proceedings 
On January 31, 2017, Schick filed a Complaint 
(Complaint), asserting claims of (1) quiet title, ejectment, and 
for declaratory relief and/or damages against all defendants; and 
(2) wrongful foreclosure against the Nationstar Defendants. 
In Count I, Schick alleged, inter alia, that the 
Nationstar Defendants failed to comply with Part I of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 667 (Supp. 2008), that the deed 
from Nationstar to Fannie Mae was "void, or at the very least 
voidable," and thus, "the deed from Fannie Mae to Westberg was likewise void or at the very least voidable." Schick requested that the Circuit Court award her title and possession of the Property and quiet any claim of title by the defendants, or in the alternative, that the Circuit Court "fashion a remedy in money damages against Nationstar and Fannie Mae that would be equivalent to having title and possession restored." 
In Count II, Schick alleged, inter alia, that the 
Nationstar Defendants' conduct constituted wrongful foreclosure, and that as a result of the wrongful foreclosure, Decedent lost possession of and title to the Property, including a loss of the market value of the Property, as well as a loss of the use and/or rental value of the Property. As remedy for the alleged wrongful 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreclosure, Schick requested that the Circuit Court award actual 
and punitive damages. 
The Complaint also asserted that the twenty-year 
statute of limitations under HRS § 657-31 (2016)3 applies to the 
action, or in the alternative, that the six-year statute of limitations under HRS § 657-1(4)(2016)
4 applied. 
On August 23, 2017, the Nationstar Defendants filed an 
Answer to Complaint, asserting, inter alia, various affirmative 
defenses, including laches, and requested that the Circuit Court 
enter judgment in their favor. 
On September 27, 2017, the Westberg Defendants filed an 
Answer to Complaint (Westberg Answer), as well as a Cross-Claim 
against the Nationstar Defendants (Westberg Cross-Claim). The 
Westberg Answer asserted several affirmative defenses, including 
that the Complaint was barred by the statute of limitations, undue delay, waiver, laches, estoppel, and unclean hands. The 
3 HRS § 657-31 provides: 
§ 657-31 Twenty years . No person shall commence an
action to recover possession of any lands, or make any entry
thereon, unless within twenty years after the right to bringthe action first accrued. 
4 HRS § 657-1 provides, in pertinent part: 
§ 657-1 Six years.  The following actions shall be
commenced within six years next after the cause of actionaccrued, and not after: 
. . . . 
(4) Personal actions of any nature whatsoever notspecifically covered by the laws of the State. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Westberg Cross-Claim was later dismissed without prejudice, by 
stipulation. 
On September 28, 2017, the Nationstar Defendants filed 
[Nationstar Defendants'] Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings 
(Nationstar Motion for JOP), which was supported by a declaration 
of counsel and exhibits. Movants argued that the Complaint was 
untimely and that a two-, or at most six-, year statute of limitations applies to bar Schick's claims. The Nationstar Defendants also asserted that, should the Circuit Court find the Complaint timely, the doctrine of laches applies as a bar to Schick's claims because Schick had not been vigilant in safeguarding her rights, and her unreasonable delay resulted in significant prejudice to the Nationstar Defendants. 
On October 11, 2017, the Westberg Defendants filed 
[Westberg Defendants'] Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings or, 
Alternatively, Summary Judgment (Westberg Motion), which was 
support by a declaration of counsel and exhibits. The Westberg 
Defendants argued that they were innocent purchasers for value, and that even if the Property was wrongfully foreclosed, the title was voidable, not void. They further argued that they did not have constructive notice of any alleged defects in the Property's title, and that Schick's argument was inconsistent with Hawai# i Supreme Court precedent in Santiago v. Tanaka, 137 
Hawai# i 137, 366 P.3d 612 (2016), and Mount v. Apao, 139 Hawai# i 
167, 384 P.3d 1268 (2016). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On November 6, 2017, Schick filed oppositions to the 
defendants' motions, which were supported by declarations of 
counsel and exhibits. In response to the Westberg Motion, Schick 
argued, inter alia, that the Westberg Defendants' reliance on Santiago was misplaced because, in that case, the property sale 
did not take place until the nonjudicial sale had been approved by a circuit court judge, and because the new buyer had not been made a party in Santiago. Schick also relied on Pelosi v. Wailea Ranch Estates, 91 Hawai# i 478, 985 P.2d 1045 (1999), arguing that 
the Westberg Defendants were not bona fide purchasers because they had constructive notice of Nationstar's wrongful foreclosure of the Property. 
In response to the Nationstar Motion for JOP, Schick 
argued that at least a six-year statute of limitations should apply to the Complaint, and that her cause of action did not 
accrue at least until the injury occurred – i.e., the recording of the Affidavit of Foreclosure on February 10, 2011 -- and was 
discoverable by Schick. Schick argued that Silva v. Lopez, 5 Haw. 262, 271 (1884), should be considered in analyzing whether the deed was void or merely voidable. Schick also argued that the equitable defense of laches should not be applied to this case. 
On November 8, 2017, the Nationstar Defendants filed a 
reply memorandum, arguing that Schick's claims accrued on November 8, 2010 - the date the Notice of Sale was received and 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recorded. The Nationstar Defendants argued that Schick's claims 
were barred by either the two-year or six-year statute of limitations, and that the 20-year statute of limitations did not apply because this was not an adverse possession case. The Nationstar Defendants reiterated that even if the nonjudicial foreclosure did not comply with statutory requirements, the deed was merely voidable, rather than void, under Santiago. Lastly, the Nationstar Defendants responded to Schick's claim that laches was not a viable defense. 
On November 8, 2017, the Westberg Defendants filed a 
reply memorandum, arguing that they did not have constructive notice of any alleged defects in the title to the Property, thus they were innocent good faith purchasers, and even assuming the nonjudicial foreclosure was wrongful, Schick's remedy was limited to monetary damages from the Nationstar Defendants, rather than possession. 
On November 14, 2017, a hearing was held on the 
Westberg Motion. The Circuit Court did not exclude the exhibits submitted with the motion and appears to reference facts supported by them. The court announced its ruling as follows: 
The Court, having had an opportunity to review the
motion, the opposition, the reply, the Court's going to
grant defendant's motion for judgment on the pleadings. 
In the wrongful foreclosure action, plaintiff seeks to
render all subsequent conveyances void or, two, seeks afinding that the subsequent buyer had constructive notice ofthe alleged defective foreclosure. 
The Court finds that defendant has met their burden of 
proof by establishing no material issues of fact that remain 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to be resolved in either of these issues; thereby,
entitling them to judgment as a matter of law. 
On the issue of voidability, plaintiffs are mistaken
on their reliance of the Silva v. Lopez case. 
Silva has, in
fact, been impliedly overturned. The Federal Court and the Supreme Court of Hawaii [have] specifically addressed theissue of voidability and found that improperly conductedforeclosure sales are voidable, not void, and that previouscases that state the contrary have been overturned,including Silva. 
Second, a plain reading of the disputed affidavit of
foreclosure leads the Court to conclude that the subsequentbuyers did not have constructive notice. The affidavit of foreclosure plainly certifies that the foreclosure auctionwas conducted in compliance with statutory requirements.The Court finds that the subsequent buyers acted with commonreason and prudence in their reading of the affidavit offoreclosure and other foreclosure recordings at the Bureau. 
Therefore, the Court's going to grant defendant's
motion. 
On November 16, 2017, the Circuit Court held a hearing 
on the Nationstar Motion for JOP, The Circuit Court did not 
exclude the exhibits submitted with the motion and appears to reference facts supported by them. The court ruled as follows: 
The Court, having had an opportunity to review the
motion, the opposition, the reply, the Court's going to
grant defendant's motion for judgment on the pleadings. 
The Court finds that the wrongful foreclosure claim
accrued upon receipt and recording of the November 8th, 2010notice of sale. Therefore, plaintiff's wrongful foreclosureclaim is barred by the two-year statute of limitations fortorts. But more importantly, plaintiff's wrongfulforeclosure claim is also barred by the six-year statute oflimitations as a tort contract claim under HRS Section 657-1(1). 
The Court also finds that even if plaintiff's claims
were founded in equity, it would still be barred by thedoctrine of laches. Plaintiff's delay in bringing in herclaims is unreasonable. Seven years has passed since theNovember 8, 2010 alleged defective notice of sale, andplaintiff's delay has resulted in prejudice to thedefendant. 
Robert Schick, the mortgagor in this case, has since
died and is now unavailable to testify. Therefore, thedoctrine of laches does apply. 
Finally, the Court finds that even if the nonjudicial
foreclosure was defective, the foreclosure would be voidable 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and not void. And the Hawaii Supreme Court and Federal
Courts have held that improperly completed foreclosures aremerely voidable, and cases stating they are void areimpliedly overturned. 
Therefore, the Court is going to grant defendant's
motion. 
The written orders, which summarily state that the 
motions were granted, were entered thereafter. A judgment, and 
subsequently the Amended Judgment, were entered thereafter. A notice of appeal was timely filed. II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Schick raises one point of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in granting the Nationstar Motion for JOP and the Westberg Motion. 
Within her point of error, 
Schick contends that the Circuit Court reached four erroneous 
conclusions of law (COLs), as stated at the hearings on the 
motions, and argues that the Circuit Court erred in concluding 
that: (1) an improperly conducted nonjudicial foreclosure sale was merely voidable and not wholly void; (2) Westberg and Central 
Pacific were bona fide purchasers (BFPs); (3) the statute of 
limitations barred Schick's claim against Nationstar and Fannie 
Mae; and (4) laches barred Schick's claim against Nationstar and Fannie Mae. III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Hawai
#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(c) 
governs motions for judgment on the pleadings and states: 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) Motion for judgment on the pleadings . After 
the pleadings are closed but within such time as not
to delay the trial, any party may move for judgment onthe pleadings. If, on a motion for judgment on thepleadings, matters outside the pleadings are presentedto and not excluded by the court, the motion shall betreated as one for summary judgment and disposed of asprovided in Rule 56, and all parties shall be givenreasonable opportunity to present all material madepertinent to such a motion by Rule 56. 
Here, because the Circuit Court did not exclude the 
matters outside the pleadings that were presented to the court, 
we review the court's orders as rulings on summary judgment. See 
Foytik v. Chandler, 88 Hawai# i 307, 313, 966 P.2d 619, 625 
(1998). 
We review the granting or denial of summary judgment de 
novo. See, e.g., First Ins. Co. of Hawai# i, Ltd. v. A & B 
Props., Inc., 126 Hawai# i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 1165, 1172 (2012) 
(citing Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai# i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008)). As often stated: 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions onfile, together with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue as to any material fact and that themoving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effectof establishing or refuting one of the essential elements ofa cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to thenon-moving party. In other words, we must view all of theevidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light mostfavorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Id. at 413–14, 271 P.3d at 1172–73 (citation omitted). 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Statute of Limitations As a threshold issue, we first address the Circuit 
Court's ruling that Schick's wrongful foreclosure claim against the Nationstar Defendants "is barred by the two-year statute of limitations for torts" and "is barred by the six-year statute of limiations as a tort contract claim under HRS Section 657-1(1)." As this court noted in Delapinia, the supreme court has yet to address the issue of which statute of limitations period applies to wrongful foreclosure claims. Delapinia v. Nationstar Mortg. 
LLC, 146 Hawai# i 218, 224, 458 P.3d 929, 935 (App. 2020) rev'd on 
other grounds, 150 Hawai# i 91, 497 P.3d 106 (2021) (Delapinia 
II).  In Delapinia, this court stated: 
In determining whether the statute of limitations
under HRS § 657-1 or § 657-7 applies, the question is not
whether the action is ex contractu or ex delicto, butwhether or not the plaintiff is suing for damage or injuryto persons or property. Gomez v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 111Hawai #i 67, 69, 137 P.3d 381, 383 (2006). The relevant 
limitations period is determined by the nature of the claimor right asserted, which is in turn determined from theallegations contained in the pleadings. Au v. Au, 63 Haw.
210, 214, 626 P.2d 173, 177 (1981). 
Id. at 224-25, 458 P.3d at 935-36. 
There, we held that the plaintiff's wrongful 
foreclosure claim was subject to the six-year statute of 
limitations under HRS § 657-1(4). Id. In doing so, we reasoned 
that the supreme court has indicated that the two-year statute of limitations does not apply. See, e.g., Hungate v. Law Off. of 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
David B. Rosen, 139 Hawai# i 394, 400, 391 P.3d 1, 7 (2017) 
(recognizing the validity of a wrongful foreclosure claim in a 
complaint filed four years after the foreclosure sale at issue). We further reasoned that the HRS § 657-1(4) six-year statute of limitations applied because wrongful foreclosure caused the Delapinia's "non-physical injury to their intangible interests," namely, title and right to possession of the property in dispute. Delapinia, 146 Hawai# i at 225, 458 P.3d at 936. 
Here, Schick similarly contends that Decedent was 
deprived of possession, title, use, and occupancy of the Property, which further deprived him of lost market value and rental value of the Property. Accordingly, we conclude that the HRS § 657-1(4) six-year statute of limitations applied to the Schick's claim for wrongful foreclosure. 
As this court discussed in Delapinia, under Hawaii's 
discovery rule, the statute of limitations begins to run when the plaintiff "discovers or should have discovered the negligent act, the damage, and the causal connection between the former and the latter." Delapinia, 146 Hawai# i at 226, 458 P.3d at 937 (quoting 
Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai# i 125, 132, 267 P.3d 1230, 1237 
(2011)). 
In concluding that the earliest date of accrual was the 
day that the title was transferred, we reasoned that "[s]ince the actual damage being claimed was the loss of title, the damage 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
occurred when title was transferred to someone other than the 
Delapinias." Id. at 226, 458 P.3d at 937. 
Here, Nationstar deeded title to someone other than the 
Decedent, namely, Fannie Mae, on March 29, 2011; that quitclaim deed was recorded with the Bureau on April 4, 2011. The Complaint was filed on January 31, 2017, clearly within the six-year statute of limitations. See id. Therefore, the Circuit 
Court erred in concluding that Schick's wrongful foreclosure claim was time-barred and in granting summary judgment in favor of the Nationstar Defendants on that basis. 
B. Laches Schick challenges the Circuit Court's ruling that "even 
if plaintiff's claims were founded in equity, it would still be barred by the doctrine of laches." As stated above, as to the application of the doctrine of laches to bar Schick's claims against the Nationstar Defendants, the Circuit Court stated in full: 
The Court also finds that even if plaintiff's claims
were founded in equity, it would still be barred by the
doctrine of laches. Plaintiff's delay in bringing in herclaims is unreasonable. Seven years has passed since theNovember 8, 2010 alleged defective notice of sale, andplaintiff's delay has resulted in prejudice to thedefendant. 
Robert Schick, the mortgagor in this case, has since
died and is now unavailable to testify. Therefore, thedoctrine of laches does apply. 
The doctrine of laches is a defense available in all 
civil actions, which includes both legal and equitable claims. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Royal Aloha v. Certified Mgmt., 
Inc., 139 Hawai# i 229, 235, 386 P.3d 866, 872 (2016). Laches 
"reflects the equitable maxim that equity aids the vigilant, not those who slumber on their rights." Ass'n of Apartment Owners of 
Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Dir. v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai# i 232, 284, 167 P.3d 225, 277 (2007) (quoting Adair v. 
Hustace, 64 Haw. 314, 320, 640 P.2d 294, 300 (1982)). The supreme court has held: 
There are two components to laches, both of which must
exist before the doctrine will apply. First, there must
have been a delay by the plaintiff in bringing his claim []and that delay must have been unreasonable under thecircumstances. Delay is reasonable if the claim was broughtwithout undue delay after plaintiff knew of the wrong orknew of facts and circumstances sufficient to impute suchknowledge to him. Second, that delay must have resulted inprejudice to defendant. Common but by no means exclusiveexamples of such prejudice are loss of evidence with whichto contest plaintiff's claims, including the fading memoriesor deaths of material witnesses, changes in the value of thesubject matter, changes in defendant's position, andintervening rights of third parties. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court's ruling on the first component 
to laches – a delay by plaintiff that is unreasonable under the 
circumstances – was grounded solely in the Circuit Court's erroneous finding that the wrongful foreclosure claim accrued upon the filing of the Notice of Sale, and that seven years had passed since the accrual of Schick's action. As there are no other findings or undisputed facts supporting the Circuit Court's conclusion that, under the circumstances, Schick's delay in 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filing suit was unreasonable, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
erred in applying laches to Schick's claims on this basis. 
In addition, the only undisputed fact identified in 
support of the Circuit Court's conclusion that the Nationstar Defendants were prejudiced by Schick's delay was that the Decedent was dead. However, the Nationstar Defendants did not identify what testimony they were prevented from seeking from Decedent with respect to Schick's claims in this case. Moreover, there are no findings or evidence identified by the Nationstar Defendants as to the date of Decedent's death, whether his death may have contributed to Schick's delay in filing suit, and whether that delay might have been reasonable under the circumstances. Thus, it appears that the Circuit Court erred in concluding, in effect, that there were no genuine issues of material fact as to the second prong of the laches analysis. 
C. An Improper Nonjudicial Foreclosure is Voidable Having determined that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting summary judgment on Schick's claims against the Nationstar Defendants on the grounds that they are time-barred, we turn to the question of whether the Circuit Court erred in determining that an improperly-conducted non-judicial foreclosure sale is merely voidable and not wholly void. Schick argues that Silva is binding precedent, and that because the power of sale 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 was violated by improper publication of notice of sale, the sale 
is void and not merely voidable. 
In Delapinia II, the supreme court explained: 
If void, the sale is "invalid" and "unenforceable," and a
subsequent purchaser "is entitled only to return of [their]down [] payment plus accrued interest. If voidable, thesale can be invalidated at the timely election of themortgagor, but "where the property has passed into the handsof an innocent purchaser for value, rendering the voiding ofa foreclosure sale impracticable, an action at law fordamages is generally the appropriate remedy." 
150 Hawai# i at 101, 497 P.3d at 116 (2021) (internal citations 
omitted). 
In Delapinia II, the supreme court held that "Silva is 
inconsonant with the direction of our recent precedent, and we 
clarify today that a wrongful foreclosure that violates the power of sale is voidable, not void." Id. Accordingly, we conclude 
that wrongful foreclosure in this case renders the sale voidable, rather than void. 
D. The BFP Issue Schick contends that the Westberg Defendants' claimed 
status as BFPs - that is, innocent purchasers for value – is an affirmative defense that is not apparent from the face of the Complaint, and therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting the Westberg Motion. This issue stems from the established principle that a plaintiff is not entitled to possession or return of title to a defectively foreclosed property if it was subsequently sold to a BFP. Mount, 139 Hawai# i at 180, 384 P.3d at 1281 (citing 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Santiago, 137 Hawai# i at 158, 366 P.3d at 633). When a property 
has passed to an innocent purchaser for value, thereby rendering 
the voiding of a foreclosure sale impracticable, "an action at law for damages is generally the appropriate remedy." Id.
"An innocent purchaser is 'one who, by an honest 
contract or agreement, purchases property or acquires an interest therein, without knowledge, or means of knowledge sufficient to charge him in law with knowledge, of any infirmity in the title of the seller.'" Ka'u Agribusiness Co., Inc. v. Heirs or Assigns 
of Ahulau, 105 Hawai# i 182, 193, 95 P.3d 613, 624 (2004) (quoting 
Pelosi, 91 Hawai# i at 489, 985 P.2d at 1056). The supreme court 
has defined a BFP as a purchaser "who acquires an interest in a property for valuable consideration, in good faith, and without notice of any outstanding claims which are held against the property by third parties." Kondaur Cap. Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 
136 Hawai# i 227, 240 n.27, 361 P.3d 454, 467 n.27 (2015) 
(citation omitted). 
Conversely, "[a] non-bona fide purchaser is 
one who does not pay adequate consideration, 'takes with knowledge that his transferor acquired title by fraud, or buys registered land with full notice of the fact that it is in litigation between the transferor and a third party." Id. 
(brackets, citation, and ellipsis omitted)). 
Purchasers who have constructive notice of another's 
interest in a property "cannot accurately be referred to as 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
'innocent purchasers.'" Pelosi, 91 Hawai# i at 489, 985 P.2d at 
1056. "Constructive notice arises as a legal inference, where 
'circumstances are such that a reasonably prudent person should make inquiries, [and therefore] the law charges a person with notice of facts which inquiry would have disclosed.'" In re 
Henshaw, 585 B.R. 605, 615 (D. Haw. 2018) (quoting SGM P'ship v. Nelson, 5 Haw. App. 526, 529, 705 P.2d 49, 52 (1985)). 
Schick alleged that the Westberg Defendants are not 
BFPs because, based on the public record, there was plainly an infirmity in the seller's title. In particular, Schick points to the Complaint's allegations that: 
48. Prior to accepting and recording the deed from
Fannie Mae, Westberg, Central Pacific and MERS had
constructive notice of the recorded Foreclosure Affidavit,the terms of sale in the recorded Notice of Sale and,further, had constructive if not actual notice that FannieMae had acquired its putative title from Nationstar, which
had purported to purchase the Property at its own 
foreclosure sale. They knew or reasonably should have known
that there was a break in the chain of title since the last owner of record was Schick but Westberg's deed was fromFannie Mae, meaning that they knew Westberg's title was onlyvalid if the foreclosure was valid. 
. . . . 
54. Because Nationstar and Fannie Mae failed to 
strictly comply with HRS §§ 667-5 et seq.  ([Supp.] 2008) and
the power of sale in the Mortgage as set forth above, thenon-judicial foreclosure sale and transfer of the Propertyto Fannie Mae was void as a matter of law, or at leastvoidable, and hence all subsequent transfers were likewisevoid or at least voidable as to non-bona fide purchasers. 
(Underlined emphasis added). 
We reject Schick's contention that notice from the 
chain of title that a foreclosure sale has occurred constitutes 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
actual notice of a break in title that constitutes notice of an 
outstanding claim against a property and precludes subsequent purchasers from being BFPs. We agree with the proposition cited above that "[c]onstructive notice arises as a legal inference, where circumstances are such that a reasonably prudent person should make inquiries." In re Henshaw, 585 B.R. at 615 (internal 
quotation marks omitted). There is nothing on the face of the Affidavit of Foreclosure, the Notice of Sale, or the Mortgage that would have provided the Westberg Defendants with constructive notice that the foreclosure was defective. We also reject Schick's contention that Decano v. Hutchinson Sugar Co., 45 Haw. 505, 371 P.2d 217 (1962) should be interpreted as concluding that notice that there has been a foreclosure is sufficient to provide notice to a subsequent purchaser for value that a foreclosure was defective. See Tilley v. Bank of N.Y. 
Mellon, No. 17-00524 HG-RLP, 2018 WL 1415171, at *13 (D. Haw. Mar. 21, 2018); Lynch v. Bank of N.Y. Mellon, No. 17-00195 LEK-RLP, 2017 WL 3568667, at *4-5 (D. Haw. Aug. 15, 2017). 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in 
refusing to make a legal inference that, based on the public record, the Westberg Defendants could be found to have had 
constructive notice of an alleged defect in title, i.e., constructive notice that Nationstar's foreclosure was improperly 
conducted. We further conclude that the Circuit Court did not 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
err in granting summary judgment on Schick's claims against the 
Westberg Defendants. V. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's December 
24, 2018 Amended Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated in part. The Amended Judgment is affirmed to the extent that it enters judgment in favor of the Westberg Defendants and against Schick. The Amended Judgment is vacated to the extent that it enters judgment in favor of the Nationstar Defendants and against Schick. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2022. 
On the briefs: James J. Bickerton,
Stanley H. Roehrig (Of Counsel),Bridget G. Morgan,(Bickerton Dang, LLLP),
and 
John F. Perkin,(Perkin & Faria LLLC),
and 
Van-Alan H. Shima,(Affinity Law Group),for Plaintiff-Appellant. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
Charles A. Price,(Koshiba Price & Gruebner),for Defendants-Appellees
NENITA JOSE WESTBERG and
 CENTRAL PACIFIC HOMELOANS, INC. 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Andrew J. Lautenbach,
Kukui Claydon,(Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher),for Defendants-Appellees
NATIONSTAR MORTGAGE LLC and
 FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION. 
22 