NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0006152
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BERT KAPAHU, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
SAM'S CLUB WEST, INC., Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 1-5,
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0071)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Bert Kapahu passed away before his
 
slip-and-fall lawsuit against Defendant-Appellee Sam's Club West,
 
Inc., came to trial.1/ On April 5, 2013, Sam's Club filed a
 
Suggestion of Death Upon the Record ("Suggestion of Death") and
 
properly served Kapahu's attorney and Ms. Tassilyn Kapahu ("Ms.
 Kapahu"), Kapahu's widow, with copies that same day. After more
 than 120 days passed without a motion to substitute for Kapahu
 being filed, Sam's Club brought a motion to dismiss under both
 Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") Rules 25(a)(1) and 
41(b) ("Motion to Dismiss").2/  Kapahu's non-hearing Motion for
 
1/
 Kapahu died on February 3, 2013. Kapahu's attorney informed the
court of his client's death at a trial setting conference on February 5, 2013.
 
2/
 A dismissal under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) relates to a party's failure
to substitute upon the party's death:
 
(continued...)
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Substitution of Party ("Motion for Substitution") was filed on
 
September 10, 2013, the same day that his opposition to the
 Motion to Dismiss was filed. 
At the September 19, 2013 hearing on the Motion to
 
Dismiss, the court addressed Kapahu's motion for substitution. 
During the hearing and upon inquiry of the court, Kapahu's
 counsel orally moved for an extension of time to file the motion
 for substitution. Nonetheless, the Circuit Court of the First
 
3/
Circuit ("Circuit Court")  granted the Motion to Dismiss based
on Rule 25, but without ruling on Kapahu's pending motion to
 
4/
substitute.  Moreover, the court later denied the Motion for
 
Substitution on the basis that it was "moot" because the
 Dismissal Order had already been entered. On November 22, 2013,
 
2/(...continued)
If a party dies and the claim is not thereby
extinguished, the court may order substitution of the proper
parties. The motion for substitution may be made by any party
or by the successors or representatives of the deceased party
. . . . Unless the motion for substitution is made not later
 than 120 days after the death is suggested upon the record by
service of a statement of the fact of the death . . . , the
action shall be dismissed as to the deceased party.
 
Haw. R. Civ. P. 25(a)(1). A dismissal under HRCP Rule 41(b), on the other
hand, relates more generally to a failure to prosecute:
 
For failure of the plaintiff to prosecute or to comply
with these rules or any order of the court, a defendant may
move for dismissal of an action or of any claim against it.
 
Haw. R. Civ. P. 41(b)(1).
 
3/
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 
4/
 The Order Granting Defendant Sam's West, Inc.'s Motion to Dismiss
with Prejudice ("Dismissal Order") states that the Circuit Court reviewed the
Motion to Dismiss, Kapahu's memorandum in opposition to the motion, and Sam's
Club's reply memorandum in reaching its decision, but says nothing about
considering Kapahu's Motion for Substitution. That apparent anomaly appears
to be explained by the court's two findings that:
 
9. Neither Plaintiff's former attorney . . . nor any
successors or representatives of the deceased party, filed a
Motion for Substitution of Party within the 120-day time
period, as required under Rule 25 of the Hawaii Rules of Civil
Procedure.
 
10. Plaintiff's former attorney did not file a motion
to extend the 120-day deadline.
 
It appears from these findings that the Circuit Court's Dismissal Order was
 based on the Circuit Court's view that HRCP Rule 25 requires dismissal if a
timely written motion to extend the 120-day deadline is not made.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Circuit Court entered the Judgment in favor of Sam's Club and
 
against Kapahu. Kapahu timely appealed. 
Because we conclude that the Circuit Court was required
 
to consider the Motion for Substitution and, in this case, the
 related motion for extension of time under HRCP Rule 6(b),
5/
 
before ruling on the Motion to Dismiss under HRCP Rule 25, we
 hold that the Circuit Court abused its discretion, vacate the
 Judgment, and remand the case to the Circuit Court for further
 proceedings.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
According to the allegations in the Complaint, on
 
January 10, 2010, Kapahu slipped and fell on the premises of a
 
Walmart store located at 750 Keeaumoku Street, Honolulu, Hawaii. 
On February 5, 2013, at a trial setting conference, Kapahu's
 counsel informed the Circuit Court that Kapahu had recently
 passed away and that he would be checking with the family to
 determine how they would like to proceed. The matter was
 continued until April 4, 2013, at which time it was continued
 again to July 10, 2013.
6/
  
On April 5, 2013, Sam's Club filed the Suggestion of
 
Death under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) and served copies of the same on

 
Kapahu's counsel and Ms. Kapahu.7/ At the July 11, 2013 trial
 
setting conference, Kapahu's counsel requested an additional
 
5/
 The rule provides that:
 
When by these rules or by a notice given thereunder or
by order of court an act is required or allowed to be done at
or within a specified time, the court for cause shown may at
any time in its discretion (1) with or without motion or
notice order the period enlarged if request therefor is made
before the expiration of the period originally prescribed or
as extended by a previous order or (2) upon motion made after
the expiration of the specified period permit the act to be
done where the failure to act was the result of excusable
 neglect[.]
 
Haw. R. Civ. P. 6(b).
 
6/
 The trial setting conference was later continued by minute order
to July 11, 2013. 
7/
 Under the rule, Kapahu had 120 days from April 5, or until
August 5, 2013, to file a motion for substitution of party. Haw. R. Civ. P.
 25(a)(1).
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
continuance to allow time for the family to decide what should be
 
done. Without objection or discussion of the effect that a
 further continuance might have under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1), the
 Circuit Court granted counsel's request and continued the matter
 until October 9, 2013. 
On August 6, 2013, Sam's Club filed its Motion to
 
Dismiss. The motion was set for hearing on September 18, 2013. 
On August 20, 2013, Kapahu's counsel, on Ms. Kapahu's
 
behalf, filed an Application for Informal Appointment of Personal
 Representative (Without Will) and an Acceptance of Appointment
 with the probate court. On September 3, 2013, the probate court
 issued Letters of Administration and informally appointed Ms.
 Kapahu as personal representative of the decedent's estate. 
On September 10, 2013, Kapahu's counsel filed a
 
memorandum in opposition to Sam's Club's Motion to Dismiss and a
 non-hearing Motion for Substitution, which asked the court to
 substitute Ms. Kapahu as personal representative of the Estate of
 Bert Kapahu, deceased, as Plaintiff. Counsel explained that
 after several failed attempts at contacting Ms. Kapahu following
 the filing of the Suggestion of Death, he finally succeeded in
 calling her in mid-August, and she had then authorized him to
 obtain an appointment for her from the probate court and to
 subsequently represent her in this case. 
On September 19, 2013, at the hearing on the Motion to
 
Dismiss, the court early on noted that it understood the motion
 to be based on Kapahu's alleged "failure to comply with [HRCP]
 Rule 25," and noted that "prejudice" was only one of the factors
 that the court would look at. The court noted that the period of
 time provided for in HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) had expired and inquired
 why Kapahu had not sought to extend time to file his Motion for
 Substitution. Kapahu's counsel explained that he was orally
 moving for an extension and requested that the Circuit Court
 extend the time to file a motion for substitution:
 
THE COURT: Then why didn't you move to extend the time?
 
[COUNSEL FOR KUPAHU]: 
Well, I am.  I'm asking you to
extend the time.
 
THE COURT: 
You've got to move to extend before the
deadline.
 
4
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[COUNSEL FOR KUPAHU]: No, I can do it afterwards.  I
 
can do it afterwards. I can do it right now, and I'm doing
 
it. I'm asking you to use your judicial authority to extend
that time to the time the motion was filed properly.
 
. . . . [FURTHER DISCUSSION BETWEEN THE COURT AND
 
COUNSEL FOR THE PARTIES]
 
[COUNSEL FOR KUPAHU]: . . . And under the circumstances,
we would again ask that you exercise your discretion and
authority to do justice and extend the time for the filing of
that motion to substitute, under the circumstances of this
 case.
 
In support of its Motion to Dismiss, Sam's Club argued
 
that the court should consider the prejudice that Sam's Club had
 
experienced throughout the case as a whole, and told the court
 that the burden was on Kapahu to demonstrate "good faith" and a
 "reasonable basis for noncompliance with the rules":
 
Your Honor, I think that -- an analysis of this
situation requires kind of stepping back and looking at the
whole case. And [Kapahu's counsel] has brought it down to,
["]Well, this is only a matter of two weeks. ["] That's not
true. That's not true.  He's failed to prosecute this case
from the start until we filed the motion to dismiss, and even
then still has not properly prosecuted the case.  We are still
 talking three years and eight months for an incident . . . .
 
. . . But at some point you have to ask -- you know, it
becomes unreasonable for her to not communicate with her
 attorney, and at some point it becomes unreasonable for
[Kapahu's counsel] not to send somebody over the Pali to
Kaneohe and knock on her door.  And we are way past that
point.
 
So I don't think there were any extenuating
circumstances here where the Court should deviate from the
 words "shall dismiss." I don't think [Kapahu's counsel] has
shown any good faith on their end where he has the burden to
show reasonable basis for noncompliance with the rules.
 
After further argument, the Circuit Court orally
 
granted the Motion to Dismiss. In announcing its ruling, the
 
court relied on both what it perceived as the mandatory nature of
 HRCP Rule 25 and also on the prejudice that it concluded had
 resulted to Sam's Club from the overall conduct of the case:
 
Okay. I've heard enough argument.
 
The Court's ruling on the defendant's motion to dismiss
will be as follows.
 
For the reasons that I'm going to state and for any
other good cause shown in the record, and based on the
entirety of what the defendants have presented, and that's the
authority for the Court's decision, I'm going to grant the
motion to dismiss.
 
. . . The 120-day period expired on or about August 5th,
 
2013.  No motion to extend the time -- and the rule clearly
 
5
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
says "shall be dismissed." No motion to extend the time was
 
filed within the [120]-day period. The record indicates that
 the plaintiff's family themselves . . . were not maintaining
contact with Plaintiff's counsel, and it was not until mid-
August 2013, [which] is already after the 120-day deadline has
expired, [and] without any motion for extension being filed,
. . . that Plaintiff's counsel was able to finally get a hold
of a member of Plaintiff's family.
 
The Probate Court petition was not filed until August
20th, 2013. . . . That's also past the August 5th, 2013,
deadline, which Rule 25 says -- the terms used in the rule are
"shall."
 
. . . Based on the entirety of what the defendants have
presented in terms of delay, the case being filed on the last
day of the statute of limitations period is something the
Court did consider. The lack of one eyewitness no longer
being employed by the defendant, that is another factor the
Court did consider. The four deposition attempts on May 4,
2012; July 18, 2012; September 21, 2012; December 10, 2012;
and including the September 21, 2012, deposition that was
terminated by mutual agreement based on the plaintiff's
condition, and the fact that even after that a fifth
 deposition attempt was made after September 2012, to which
there was no response, according to the Defense Declaration.
The Defense also articulated that no [independent medical
examination] is now possible . . . .
 
The Court notes –- the record also established that the
 
plaintiff's death occurred February 3rd, 2013.  The defendants
 were notified by Plaintiff's counsel February 4, 2013, yet it
is the defendants who actually filed the Suggestion of Death
on April 5th; and it was not until then that, I guess,
appropriate steps or activity regarding the substitution
appeared to have commenced.
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court filed its Dismissal Order on
 
October 9, 2013.
 
On October 21, 2013, Kapahu's counsel filed a non-
hearing motion for reconsideration, which the Circuit Court
 denied on November 22, 2013. The court also denied Kapahu's
 Motion for Substitution as moot. Kapahu timely appealed from the
 subsequent Judgment in favor of Sam's Club to this court, and,
 based on the discussion below, we vacate and remand.
 
II. POINT OF ERROR

 
On appeal, Kapahu contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
"in granting the motion to dismiss for failure to file a motion
 
to substitute parties, thereby rendering the motion to substitute
 parties moot[.]" 
6
      
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Conclusions of Law ("COLs")
 
[The appellate] court reviews the trial court's COLs
de novo. A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and
is freely reviewable for its correctness. Moreover, a COL
that is supported by the trial court's [Findings of Fact]
and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law
will not be overturned.
 
Bhakta v. Cty. of Maui, 109 Hawai 'i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets
 
omitted).
 
Motion for Extension of Time

 
"The 120-day time period [provided for in HRCP Rule
 
25(a)(1)] is subject to extension under HRCP Rule 6(b), at the
 discretion of the circuit court." Elsenbach v. Elsenbach, No.
 
CAAP-14-0000877, 2015 WL 4878412 at *3 (Hawai
'i App. Aug. 14 
2015) (footnote omitted). An abuse of discretion occurs if the
 trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
 substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v.
 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26
 (1992).
 
Motion to Dismiss

 
"A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
 
reviewed de novo." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel,
 
117 Hawai 'i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
Statutory Interpretation

 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 390,
219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Our construction of statutes is guided by the following rules: 
First the fundamental starting point for
 statutory-interpretation is the language of the
statute itself. Second, where the statutory
language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty
is to give effect to its plain and obvious
 meaning.  Third, implicit in the task of
 statutory construction is our foremost obligation
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of
the legislature, which is to be obtained
 primarily from the language contained in the
 statute itself.  Fourth, when there is doubt,
doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
uncertainty of an expression used in a statute,
an ambiguity exists.
 
Id. (citation omitted).
 
First Ins. Co. of Haw. v. A&B Props., Inc., 126 Hawai 'i 406, 414, 
271 P.3d 1165, 1173 (2012). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Kapahu contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it declined to extend the 120-day deadline to
 
substitute parties pursuant to HRCP Rule 6(b) following an oral
 request to do so at the September 19, 2013 hearing on Sam's
 Club's Motion to Dismiss. We agree.
 
The Dismissal Order finds that "Plaintiff's former
 
attorney did not file a motion to extend the 120-day deadline." 
That Kapahu did not "file" a motion, however, is a slender reed
 on which to rely in light of the fact that counsel for Kapahu
 moved orally to extend the deadline at the September 19, 2013
 hearing, albeit after 120 days had already lapsed. Indeed, under
 HRCP, a motion shall be made in writing unless it is made during
 a hearing or trial. See Haw. R. Civ. P. 7(b)(1). Since the
 
motion here was made during a hearing, we focus on the merits of
 Kapahu's motions and consider whether the court abused its
 discretion in denying them.
 
The HRCP state that "the [underlying] action shall be 
dismissed . . . [u]nless the motion for substitution is made not later than 120 days after the death is suggested upon the record." Haw. R. Civ. P. 25(a)(1) (emphasis added). Nevertheless, we have previously held that "[t]he 120-day time period [provided for in HRCP Rule 25(a)(1)] is subject to extension under HRCP Rule 6(b), at the discretion of the circuit court." Elsenbach, 2015 WL 4878412, at *3 (footnote omitted). 
In other words, although we would ordinarily hesitate to conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in applying what appears to be a straightforward reading of a procedural rule, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that "the discretion of the court 
[pursuant to HRCP Rule 6(b)] should be exercised to permit an extension of time, in the absence of a showing of bad faith on 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the part of the movant for substitution or undue prejudice to the
 
other parties to the action." Bagalay v. Lahaina Restoration
 
Found., 60 Haw. 125, 141, 588 P.2d 416, 426 (1978) (emphasis
 added) (analogizing HRCP Rule 6(b) to Federal Rules of Civil
 Procedure ("FRCP") Rule 6(b) and noting that "[t]he 90-day time
 period [of FRCP Rule 25(a)(1)] is subject to extension under Rule
 6(b), F.R.C.P., at the discretion of the trial court").
 
Bagalay states that "[t]he burden is on the movant to
 
demonstrate good faith and to show some reasonable basis for
 noncompliance with the rules." 60 Haw. at 141, 588 P.2d at 426
 (citing Yonofsky v. Wernick, 362 F.Supp. 1005, 1012 (S.D.N.Y.
 1973)). Here, the Circuit Court notes in its Dismissal Order
 that "[Kapahu's counsel] failed to contact the deceased
 Plaintiff's daughter to discuss continuing prosecution of the
 deceased Plaintiff's lawsuit in this action until mid-August
 2013." While Sam's Club experienced no similar difficulty in
 locating Ms. Kapahu to serve notice that it had filed the
 Suggestion of Death, neither the Circuit Court nor Sam's Club
 contends that Kapahu proceeded in bad faith. Furthermore,
 counsel's "reasonable basis for noncompliance," as set out in
 counsel's declaration was not found to be lacking. Therefore,
 the Circuit Court's decision to deny Kapahu an extension of time
 rests squarely on its conclusion that "[a]s a result of delay,
 [Sam's Club] suffered actual prejudice." 
As for "actual prejudice," the Dismissal Order includes
 
but one finding that might have any bearing on its conclusion:
 "At the time of the hearing on Defendant's Motion to Dismiss,
 three years and eight months had passed since the date of the
 subject incident."
8/ The "delay" to which that finding points,
 
however, is the passage of time from the date of the underlying
 accident rather than any delay associated with substitution in
 2013. In Bagalay, the court addressed the related question of
 
8/
 The only other finding of potential "actual prejudice" was "2.
Defendant attempted to take the Plaintiff's oral deposition on at least five
(5) separate occasions" if understood in conjunction with the unstated finding
that the deposition, though commenced, was never terminated. Any prejudice
associated with the incomplete deposition, however, arose upon Kapahu's death,
after which the deposition could no longer be completed, and was not
associated with any subsequent delay in filing the motion for substitution.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
when substitution of a party must occur in order to preserve the
 
right of survival.9/ In holding that substitution should occur
 
within a "reasonable time" after the death of a party, the court
 stated that "[t]he 'reasonable time' is determined by whether the
 delay in substitution has (or would) materially prejudice [sic]
 the substantial rights of any party." Bagalay, 60 Haw. at 142,
 
588 P.2d at 427 (quoting Morse v. Deschaine, 163 N.W.2d 693,
 695–96 (Mich. App. 1968)).
 
Here, Kapahu died on February 3, 2013; the Suggestion
 
of Death was filed on April 5, 2013; the 120-days proscribed by
 HRCP Rule 25 expired on August 5, 2013; the Motion to Dismiss was
 filed on August 6, 2013; the Motion for Substitution was filed on
 September 10, 2013; and the oral request for an extension of time
 was made at the hearing on September 19, 2013. Applying the
 Bagalay principle here, anything that occurred from the date of
 the underlying incident through at least the date of Kapahu's
 death does not constitute actual prejudice for purposes of the
 extension analysis.
 
Sam's Club would distinguish Bagalay on the basis that,
 
for over two years after the death of the Bagalay plaintiff, the
 parties continued to proceed as if the proper parties were before
 the court; the Bagalay defendant did not take prompt action after
 the plaintiff's death was known and therefore "acquiesced in the
 delay"; there was legitimate difficulty in contacting heirs of
 the deceased in Bagalay; and the defendant had not moved for
 dismissal. We are unpersuaded. These factors reference that
 Sam's Club moved promptly and did not acquiesce in any delay as
 contrasted with its counterpart in Bagalay, and that Kapahu's
 counsel could arguably have contacted the heirs more promptly. 
Nevertheless, they do not change the fact that the HRCP Rule
 25(a)(1) time period is subject to extension at the discretion of
 the trial court, Elsenbach, 2015 WL 4878412, at *3, that courts
 
9/
 It is unclear whether "the delay in substitution" under Bagalay
 
refers to any time from the date of the party's death, the date the Suggestion
of Death was filed, or 120 days after the date the Suggestion of Death was
filed. Nevertheless, because in this case there is no finding issued or
argument made that any specific prejudice arose from the date of death
forward, we need not determine that issue.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
generally have given HRCP Rule 6(b) a liberal interpretation in
 
order to work substantial justice, that the discretion of the
 trial court should ordinarily be exercised to permit an extension
 of time in the absence of a showing of bad faith or undue
 prejudice, and that the burden is on the party seeking an
 extension of time to demonstrate good faith and some reasonable
 basis for noncompliance with the rules. Bagalay, 60 Haw. at
 
140–41, 588 P.2d at 426 (citing Yonofsky v. Wernick, 362 F. Supp.
 1005, 1012 (S.D.N.Y. 1973)).
 
In sum, despite the Circuit Court's conclusion to the 
contrary, neither the court nor Sam's Club has pointed to any actual prejudice that arose between February 3 and September 19, 2013.
10/ And, while Kapahu's counsel might have moved faster to 
identify an heir and obtain an informal appointment from the probate court, the Hawai
' Supreme Court has stated that "'[t]he 
Rules of Civil Procedure are to be liberally construed to promote justice,' and the court may depart from the literal application of the rule where such action is necessary to prevent the miscarriage of justice." Bagalay, 60 Haw. at 141, 588 P.2d at 
426 (quoting Struzik v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 50 Haw. 241, 246, 437 P.2d 880, 884 (1968)). Accordingly, we give significant weight to the "lack of prejudice" in an HRCP Rule 6(b) determination, and when there is no prejudice to the opposing party, it weighs in favor of granting the motion. See Yanofsky, 
362 F. Supp. at 1015. 
In the absence of a showing of actual prejudice to
 
Sam's Club in the eight months between Kapahu's death and the
 motion for substitution, and in light of the fact that Kapahu's
 counsel did not abandon the case but continued with pretrial
 proceedings while attempting to locate his client's heirs, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in granting
 
10/
 Sam's Club, in fact, contends that it need not show actual
prejudice due to delay in filing the Motion for Substitution, but, rather, the
relevant inquiry is whether Sam's Club was prejudiced by conduct occurring
throughout the entire case. We conclude, however, that while such an "entire
case" analysis might be appropriate for determining a motion to dismiss for
failure to prosecute under HRCP Rule 41(b), it is not an appropriate basis
upon which to dismiss a case under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) for failure to timely
substitute a party plaintiff.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the motion to dismiss under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1), in not granting
 
the motion for extension of time under HRCP Rule 6(b), and in
 refusing to permit Ms. Kapahu to substitute as plaintiff in the
 case. See Amfac, 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d at 26.
 
Therefore, the Judgment is vacated and the case is
 
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 31, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Charles H. Brower,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Shawn M. Nakoa,Lisa Strandtman, andReginauld T. Harris(Rush Moore LLP)for Defendant-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
12

 