NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-15-0000409, CAAP-15-0000414,
CAAP-15-0000576, CAAP-15-0000598, and CAAP-15-0000632
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CAAP-15-0000409
 
In the Matter of the Trust Agreement
dated June 6, 1974, as amended
 
and
 
CAAP-15-0000414
 
In the Matter of the Trust Agreement
dated June 6, 1974, as amended
 
and
 
CAAP-15-0000576
 
In the Matter of the Trust Agreement
dated June 6, 1974, as amended
 
and
 
CAAP-15-0000598
 
In the Matter of the Trust Agreement
dated June 6, 1974, as amended
 
and
 
CAAP-15-0000632
 
In the Matter of the Trust Agreement
dated June 6, 1974, as amended
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(TRUST NOS. 14-1-0019 and 14-1-0097)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth, J., and
Circuit Court Judge Crabtree, in place of
Ginoza, C.J., Leonard and Chan, JJ., recused.)
 
On appeal are five consolidated cases, CAAP-15-0000409,
 
CAAP-15-0000414, CAAP-15-0000576, CAAP-15-0000598, and CAAP-15­
0000632, arising out of the same matter in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (Probate 
Court).12
 
In CAAP-15-0000409, Petitioner-Appellant Association of
 
Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay (AOAO) appeals from the 
"Second Order Granting in Part and Continuing in Part Petition
 
for Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of Successor Trustee,
 
Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's Accounts Covering
 
the Period from January 1, 2008 Through December 31, 2013"
 
(Trustee Fee Order) and corresponding "Judgment" (Trustee Fee
 
Judgment) both entered on April 17, 2015.
 
In CAAP-15-0000414, Michael David Bruser and Lynn 
Bruser (collectively, Brusers) appeal from the "Order Denying 
Interested Parties Michael David Bruser and Lynn Bruser, Trustees 
Under Revocable Living Trust Agreement Dated July 11, 1988, as 
Amended, Doing Business As Discovery Bay Center's Petition Under 
[Hawai'i Probate Rules (HPR)] Rule 36 for Relief From Order and 
Reconsideration of Interim Order Relating to Petition for Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of Successor Trustee, 
Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's Accounts Covering 
the Period from January 1, 2008 Through December 31, 2013" (Order 
Denying Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration), corresponding 
"Judgment" (Judgment Denying Brusers' Motion for 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 
2
 On September 30, 2015, this court issued its "Order Consolidating
Appellate Court case Numbers CAAP-15-0000409, CAAP-15-0000414, CAAP-15­
0000576, CAAP-15-0000598, and CAAP-15-0000632 under Appellate Court Case
Number CAAP-15-0000632."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reconsideration), the Trustee Fee Order, and the Trustee Fee
 
Judgment, all entered on April 17, 2015.
 
In CAAP-15-0000576, the AOAO appeals from the "Order
 
Granting Petition for Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of
 
Successor Trustee, Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's
 
Accounts Covering the Period from January 1, 2008 Through
 
December 31, 2013 as to All Pending Issues" (Trust Amendment
 
Order) and corresponding "Judgment," (Trust Amendment Judgment)
 
both entered on July 13, 2015.
 
In CAAP-15-0000632, the AOAO appeals from the "Order
 
Granting Petition for Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of
 
Successor Trustee, Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's
 
Accounts Covering the Period from January 1, 2008 Through
 
December 31, 2013 as to Last Pending Issue Regarding Attorneys'
 
Fees and Costs" (Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order) and
 
accompanying "Judgment" (Attorneys' Fees and Costs Judgment) both
 
entered on August 13, 2015. The AOAO also appeals, via an
 
Amended Notice of Appeal, from the "Order Denying Respondent
 
Association of Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay's Petition for
 
Reconsideration of the Court's April 30, 2015 Decision With
 
Respect to Modification of the June 6, 1974 Trust Agreement Filed
 
June 10, 2015" (Order Denying AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration)
 
and corresponding "Judgment" (Judgment Denying AOAO's Motion for
 
Reconsideration) both entered on September 22, 2015.
 
In CAAP-15-0000598, the Brusers also appeal from the
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order and Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
Judgment.
 
On appeal, the AOAO argues that the Probate Court erred
 
by (1) failing to deny Bank of Hawaii's (BOH) Original Petition
 
and instead continuing the matter; (2) modifying a land trust in
 
violation of contract principles, or, in the alternative,
 
modifying a traditional trust indenture without unanimous consent
 
of the trust beneficiaries and without emergency circumstances;
 
(3) issuing the Trustee's Fee Order, Trust Amendment Order, and
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order without substantial evidence in
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the record; (4) modifying the Trust Agreement to provide an
 
unreasonable increase in trustee's fees without unanimous consent
 
of the Trust beneficiaries; (5) awarding BOH attorneys' fees, and
 
(6) denying the AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration, which
 
compounded the errors in earlier orders.
 
On appeal, the Brusers argue that the Probate Court
 
erred by (1) exercising jurisdiction over the trustee fee
 
"reasonable amount" issue; (2) holding the Brusers liable for
 
increased trustee fees despite fraud; (3) failing to correctly
 
interpret the plain meaning of contractual language in their
 
commercial Condominium Conveyance Document (CCD); (4) refusing to
 
permit discovery regarding the reasonableness of the trustee fee;
 
and (5) awarding attorneys' fees and costs to BOH.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we (1) affirm the
 
(a) Trustee Fee Order in part, (b) Trustee Fee Judgment, (c)
 
Order Denying Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration, (d) Judgment
 
Denying Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration, (e) Order Denying
 
AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration, and (f) Judgment Denying
 
AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration; (2) vacate the (a) Trust
 
Amendment Order and (b) Trust Amendment Judgment; and (3) vacate
 
and remand the (a) Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order and
 
(b) Attorneys' Fees and Costs Judgment for further findings
 
consistent with this opinion.
 
I. Background
 
A. Formation of the Trust Agreement
 
BOH, as successor by merger with Hawaiian Trust
 
Company, Limited (HTC), is the trustee under the Trust Agreement
 
dated June 6, 1974, as amended,3 executed by the Original
 
3
 The original Trust Agreement has undergone three revisions,
resulting in the First (November 27, 1974), Second (November 27, 1974), and
Third (December 15, 1976), Amended Trust Agreements. References to the Trust
 Agreement refer to the original version, unless otherwise specified (i.e.
"Trust Agreement (Third)").
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlors4 and HTC, as trustee. In the Trust Agreement, the
 
Original Settlors conveyed title to the leased fee interest in
 
their respective lots to HTC, which enabled MEPC to build the
 
Discovery Bay condominium project (Discovery Bay) on these lots. 
The Trust Agreement therefore governs the development of
 
Discovery Bay and the management of the trust estate, including
 
the leased fee interest and distribution of trust income to the
 
Original Settlors' beneficiaries.
 
B. Relevant Trust Agreement Provisions
 The stated purposes of the Trust Agreement (Third) are
 
as follows:
 
1. Purpose of Trust. At the special request of
Lessee, for convenience only, and for no other
consideration, Settlors have established this trust and
created the trust estate to facilitate the accomplishment,
with their approval hereafter to be obtained, of the
following purposes:
 
(a) The submission of the project site and the
improvements to be constructed thereon to a single
horizontal property regime.
 
(b) The construction of one or more buildings
by Lessee across the existing common boundaries of the
project site.
 
(c) The efficient and uniform administration of
 
the Settlors' separate interests in the trust estate and in
the condominium conveyance documents relating to the
apartments of the horizontal property regime.
 
(d) The determination of valuation through an
appraiser or appraisers under the existing leases and the
condominium conveyance documents to be hereafter issued.
 
(e) The distribution of rents received by
Settlors under the existing leases and the condominium
conveyance documents to be hereafter issued.
 
(f) The administration of the project upon
expiration or earlier termination of the leasehold interest
created under said condominium conveyance documents.
 
4
 The six original settlor groups under the Trust Agreement included
five individuals and their families and Mainline-MEPC Properties (Hawaii),
Inc. (MEPC). Together, the Original Settlors and MEPC owned thirteen
contiguous lots in Waikiki. Under the terms of the Trust Agreement, MEPC is
the Lessee. The ground leases held by MEPC were cancelled when the CCDs for
the Discovery Bay Condominium were issued in December 1976, pursuant to
amendments by the Trust Agreement (Third).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Paragraph 2 of the Trust Agreement (Third), titled
 
"Powers and Duties of Trustee" specifies that the powers of the
 
trustee "shall be limited to the powers hereinafter expressly
 
provided, and such other incidental powers as are reasonably
 
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the trust." These powers
 
include collecting rents pursuant to the CCDs, filing tax returns
 
and other reports as required by law, and collecting and
 
distributing the income of the trust estate for the Settlors. 
The trustee's power is limited to "administrative and ministerial
 
duties only" and the trustee is "neither intended or permitted to
 
exercise discretion or judgment in determining whether to take or
 
omit to take any action" without direction of the Settlors.
 
Paragraph 3 of the Trust Agreement (Third), titled
 
"Management of Trust Estate" specifies, inter alia, that "it is
 
the intent of the parties hereto that the management and all
 
decisions concerning the disposition of the fee simple
 
reversionary interest in the trust estate shall remain with the
 
Settlors."
 
Paragraph 4 of the Trust Agreement (Third), titled
 
"Distribution of Trust Net Income" provides, inter alia, that the
 
trustee shall distribute the net income generated by the rental
 
income of the property on a quarterly basis to the Settlors or
 
their respective heirs, administrators, executors, and assigns.
 
Paragraph 5 of the Trust Agreement (Third), titled
 
"Rental Renegotiation" provides that for rental redeterminations
 
pursuant to the CCDs, the trustee shall negotiate with the
 
apartment owner but "shall not agree to the rents for any new
 
rental period without the prior written consent of all the
 
Settlors." If an agreement cannot be reached either between
 
Settlors or between the trustee and apartment owner, the rental
 
shall be determined by appraisal, and appraiser shall be
 
designated by the largest landowner by square footage amongst the
 
Settlors.
 
Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement, titled "Trustee's
 
Fees" provides:
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11. Trustee's Fees. The Trustee shall be entitled to
 
such reasonable fees as from time to time may be mutually
agreed upon. In addition to said reasonable fees, the
Trustee shall have the right to incur such expenses and to
be reimbursed by the Lessee[
5] as provided for by the
leases; and to incur such expenses and be reimbursed for
extraordinary services. The Lessee or its assigns will pay
the Trustee's fee and expenses until December 31, 2039 or
the earlier termination of this trust.
 
Paragraph 17 of the Trust Agreement, titled
 
"Resignation, Removal and Substitution of Trustee" provides, in
 
relevant part:
 
(a) Resignation of Trustee. The Trustee may resign
its duties hereunder by filing with each person designated
as a representative its written resignation. No such
 resignation shall take effect until sixty (60) days from the
date thereof unless prior thereto a successor Trustee shall
have been appointed. 
. . . .
 
(c) Appointment of Successor Trustee. A successor
 
Trustee hereunder may be appointed hereunder upon the
majority vote of representatives of Settlors having an
interest in the majority in square footage in the jointly
developed parcel[.] . . . 
Any successor Trustee shall be a corporation
authorized and empowered to exercise trust powers within theState of Hawai 'i. . . . 
If within sixty (60) days after notice of resignation
shall have been given under the provisions of this paragraph
a successor Trustee shall not have been appointed, the
resigning Trustee or any Settlor may apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor
Trustee. 
Paragraph 21 of the Trust Agreement, titled
 
"Amendment[,]" provides that "[a]ny amendment of this Trust
 
Agreement shall require the consent of Trustee and every person
 
with a beneficial interest under this trust."
 
5
 The Trust Agreement specifies that "Lessee" means MEPC. On or
 
about December 11, 1984, the Brusers acquired the Commercial Unit (Commercial
Unit) via an Apartment Deed from 1778 Ala Moana Properties, Inc., f/k/a MEPC,
assuming the responsibilities of the "Lessee" under the Trust Agreement
pursuant to their Apartment Deed. On February 23, 1989, the Brusers conveyed
their individual interests in the Commercial Unit to themselves as trustees of
 their own revocable living trust through a quitclaim deed. It is not disputed
that the Brusers are the current owners of the Commercial Unit.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. The Discovery Bay Condominium Project
 
Discovery Bay consists of 665 leasehold residential
 
units and one leasehold Commercial Unit. Each unit is held by an
 
"Apartment Owner" under the terms and conditions of a separate
 
CCD for that unit originally issued in 1976, as each such CCD may
 
have been subsequently assigned. Each Apartment Owner is a
 
member of the AOAO. The AOAO retains a management company as
 
Managing Agent of the Discovery Bay Condominium.
 
The lease term of the CCDs is through December 31, 2039
 
and each Apartment Owner pays rent on a quarterly basis to the
 
trustee as the lessor under the CCD. The rent for the 31-year
 
period through December 31, 2007 was fixed in the CCDs, but must
 
be reset again on January 1, 2019 and on January 1, 2030.
 
In addition to paying rent, the CCD of the Commercial
 
Unit obligates the Commercial Unit owner to pay the trustee's
 
fees as specified in Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement, stating
 
"[t]he [Commercial] Apartment Owner shall also pay to the Lessor
 
all fees and expenses charged or incurred by the Lessor as
 
Trustee under the terms of said Trust Agreement dated June 16,
 
1974, as amended, as the same become due or are incurred."
 
D. AOAO Acquisition of a Majority Interest in the Trust
 
In 2005, the AOAO began acquiring beneficial interests
 
in the Trust and now holds approximately 62.6785% of such
 
beneficial interests. The balance of the beneficial interests is
 
held by heirs of the Original Settlors, including the
 
Gowans/Henderson,6 Yokoyamas, and Sheetz appellees (collectively,
 
Non-AOAO Beneficiaries), among others.7
 
6
 Julie G. Henderson, as Trustee of the Julie G. Henderson
Irrevocable Trust, the Jean K. Gowans Irrevocable Trust and the Louis L.
Gowans, Jr. Irrevocable Trust, and Richard L. Gowans, as Trustee of the
Richard L. Gowans Irrevocable Trust, hereinafter Gowans/Henderson.
 
7
 The Non-AOAO Beneficiaries are Susan Sheetz, Patricia Sheetz Bow,
Derek W. C. Wong, Bryant W.C. Wong, Arthur G.H. Wong Limited Partnership,
Melissa Yoshioka, Kevin I. Yokoyama, as Trustee of the Kevin I. Yokoyama Trust
and the Irvine K. Yokoyama, Jr. Trust, and the Gowans/Henderson.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
E. Procedural History
 
On March 1, 2013, BOH notified the AOAO and Non-AOAO
 
Beneficiaries that it intended to resign as trustee, citing its
 
"need to focus [its] efforts on . . . trusts with full
 
discretionary powers." The AOAO contacted First Hawaiian Bank
 
and Central Pacific Bank, the only eligible entities to serve as
 
trustee per Paragraph 17(c) of the Trust Agreement, asking if
 
they would serve as successor trustee. Both declined.
 
On January 28, 2014, BOH filed its "Petition for
 
Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of Successor Trustee,
 
Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's Accounts Covering
 
the Period from January 1, 2008 Through December 31, 2013"
 
(Original Petition), seeking, inter alia, probate court approval
 
to resign as trustee, appointment of a successor trustee, and
 
amendment of the Trust Agreement to eliminate the requirement of
 
a corporate trustee.
 
At the March 13, 2014 hearing on the Original Petition,
 
the Probate Court denied the AOAO's request to dismiss the
 
Original Petition, and instead continued the matter to give the
 
parties an opportunity for further negotiation.
 
On May 9, 2014, BOH filed its first supplement to its
 
Original Petition (First Supplement), proposing certain Trust
 
Agreement reformations in lieu of resigning as trustee,
 
including, inter alia: assured payment of reasonable trustee's
 
fees and expanded trustee powers to conduct rent renegotiations.
 
On June 5, 2014, BOH filed its "Affidavit in Support of
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs" (first affidavit).
 
At the July 24, 2014 further hearing on the Original
 
Petition, the Probate Court reiterated the fact that "whatever
 
way the Petition goes" the Trust "needs a Trustee" and that "from
 
the pleadings it looks like we're not going to get another
 
corporate entity to come on board[.]" In its ruling, the Probate
 
Court continued in part the hearing on the Original Petition,
 
issuing its accompanying order on September 2, 2014.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Meanwhile, on August 29, 2014, in the United States 
District Court for the District of Hawai' i (District Court), the 
Brusers filed a "Complaint for Declaratory Judgment", seeking a 
determination as to whether they were liable for the trustee fee 
pursuant to Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement (Brusers' federal 
case). 
On September 8, 2014, BOH filed its "Statement of
 
Position" (First Statement of Position) with the Probate Court,
 
in preparation for an upcoming September 11, 2014 hearing on the
 
Original Petition. BOH requested that the Probate Court approve,
 
inter alia, (1) a monthly trustee fee of $9,850 per month as a
 
"reasonable fee" pursuant to Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement
 
for five years, (2) payment of the monthly fee from the
 
beneficiaries' trust income distributions for the five-year
 
period, (3) increasing discretion for BOH, as trustee, to conduct
 
rent renegotiations, and (4) instituting a 2% fee for conducting
 
rent renegotiations, based on the average annual rent amount for
 
one year for the rent period in question under the CCDs, also to
 
be paid from the beneficiaries' trust income distributions
 
instead of from the Commercial Unit owner. Requests (1) and (2)
 
would later become and be referred to as the "Base Case"
 
amendments, and requests (3) and (4) became the "Base Case Plus."
 
At the September 11, 2014 hearing, the Probate Court
 
again noted the dearth of qualified alternative trustees. 
Pursuant to BOH's Statement of Position requests, the Probate
 
Court held that it would use its "equitable powers and approve a
 
monthly sum of $9,850 as a reasonable fee under Paragraph 11 of
 
the trust for the five year period and approve the withholding of
 
the monthly fee from the distributions to the beneficiaries for a
 
five year period." The Probate Court further emphasized that its
 
ruling was "subject to final determination" and the parties'
 
ongoing negotiations regarding, inter alia, a reasonable trustee
 
fee, and that the matter would be continued.
 
On October 1, 2014, BOH and the Non-AOAO Beneficiaries
 
entered into the Agreement on Trustee's Fees, the terms of which
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included that (1) BOH would be entitled to a monthly fee of
 
$9,850 commencing October 1, 2014, for a five-year period,
 
(2) after the five-year period, BOH would be entitled to a
 
reasonable fee where BOH's standard fee schedule would be "one
 
benchmark of reasonableness," (3) during the five-year period,
 
BOH was entitled to withhold its fee from distributions to the
 
beneficiaries, who would be reimbursed by amounts recovered from
 
the Commercial Unit Owner (Brusers) and (4) BOH would be entitled
 
to, "for the conduct of rent redeterminations" a fee of 2% of the
 
average annual rent amount, for the remainder of the lease, i.e.,
 
through December 31, 2039.
 
On December 24, 2014, the Probate Court entered its
 
"Interim Order" relating to the Original Petition, approving,
 
inter alia, the Base Case amendments.
 
On January 6, 2015, the Brusers filed their "Petition
 
Under HPR Rule 36 for Relief from Order and Reconsideration of
 
Interim Order" relating to the Original Petition (Brusers' Motion
 
for Reconsideration). 
The Brusers disputed that there was
 
substantial evidence to show the new trustee fee was
 "reasonable," and argued that the Probate Court proceeding should
 
have been stayed pending the Brusers' federal case.
 
On February 23, 2015, BOH filed another "Statement of
 
Position for the March 5, 2015 Hearing" (Second Statement of
 
Position), in which BOH argued again for Base Case Plus. The
 
AOAO objected to the Base Case Plus.
 
At the March 5, 2015 hearing on the Original Petition
 
and the Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration, the Probate Court
 
again reiterated, and the AOAO agreed, that it did not appear a
 
qualified successor trustee existed or would be willing to step
 
in. The AOAO argued that the $9,850 fee requested by BOH was not
 
reasonable. BOH again requested that the Probate Court approve
 
the Base Case and Base Case Plus amendments, the latter over the
 
objections of the AOAO. In its oral ruling, the Probate Court
 
denied the Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration, continued the
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Base Case Plus matter, and approved Base Case amendments as
 
included in the Interim Order.
 
In a March 31, 2015 letter from BOH's counsel to the
 
other parties, Vincent Piekarski (Piekarski) stated that if the
 
Non-AOAO Beneficiaries decided not to advocate for Base Case
 
Plus, then:
 
In light of the March 5 hearing, Trustee's preference is to
bring the issues raised by its Petition to resolution on the
basis of one of the following: (i) the Base Case
Reformations, (ii) [Base Case Plus reformations], or (iii) a
withdrawal of the request for Trust reformations (although
this is the least desirable of the three alternatives).
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On April 16, 2015, in the District Court, BOH filed a
 
"Motion for Partial Summary Judgment" including a counterclaim
 
seeking a ruling that the Commercial Unit CCD requires the
 
Brusers to pay the trustee fee pursuant to the Trust Agreement.
 
On April 17, 2015, the Probate Court issued its Trustee
 
Fee Order and corresponding Judgment. The Trustee Fee Order
 
approved the October 1, 2014 "Agreement on Trustee's Fees" as to:
 
(1) the monthly $9,850 trustee fee as a "reasonable fee" pursuant
 
to Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement, and (2) withholding of
 
the trustee fee from distributions to the beneficiaries for a
 
five-year period pending resolution of the Brusers' federal case. 
The Trustee Fee Order also stated that the parties would continue
 
to discuss further Trust Agreement reformations, specifically the
 
Base Case Plus amendments and BOH's counsels' request for
 
attorneys' fees and costs.
 
Also on April 17, 2015, the Probate Court issued its
 
Order Denying the Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration and
 
corresponding Judgment.
 
Also on April 17, 2015, BOH filed another "Affidavit in
 
Support of Attorneys' Fees and Costs" (second affidavit).
 
On April 27, 2015, BOH filed its "Statement of Position
 
for the April 30, 2015 Hearing" (Third Statement of Position), in
 
which, among other things, BOH reported that there was not
 
unanimous approval of the Base Case Plus amendments.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 28-29, 2015, the AOAO, Gowans/Henderson,
 
Sheetzs, and Yokoyamas filed their respective Statements of
 
Position in preparation for the April 30, 2015 hearing.
 
At the April 30, 2015 hearing on the Original Petition
 
and the BOH Affidavit in Support of Attorneys' Fees and Costs,
 
counsel for BOH explained that Base Case Plus was better for the
 
beneficiaries because granting the trustee greater discretionary
 
powers during rent renegotiation would be more efficient. 
Attorneys for the Non-AOAO Beneficiaries added that the previous
 
lease rent negotiations took over a year and cost "tens of
 
thousands of dollars" in attorneys' fees, and resulted in an
 
agreement on how to proceed that was incorporated in the Base
 
Case Plus amendment, with the exception of the 2% fee. The AOAO
 
argued that the Base Case Plus amendments were unnecessary as the
 
Trust Agreement could be read to give the trustee the authority
 
to negotiate the lease rents. The Brusers argued that they
 
should not be saddled with the expense of the fees and costs
 
sought by BOH without proof of the work done by BOH. In response
 
to the AOAO's argument that BOH's attorneys' fees were not
 
"appropriately incurred," BOH pointed out that its second
 
affidavit reflected billing exclusive of work done for BOH's
 
resignation, and included work done to bring the pending issues
 
to resolution. The Probate Court ruled that it would adopt the
 
Base Case Plus amendments and also approved BOH's request for
 
fees and costs for the periods of May 12, 2014 through March 31,
 
2015 and April 1, 2015 through June 15, 2015 and allowed counsel
 
to submit their arguments regarding why certain fees were not
 
acceptable.8
 
8
 Gowans/Henderson, joined by AOAO, argued that BOH's attorneys'
fees request should be reduced due to duplicative and otherwise unnecessary
work by BOH's attorneys. The AOAO also separately objected to BOH's request
in total, arguing that all the attorneys' work related to BOH's request to
resign and should not be charged against the trust. The Brusers also
 objected, arguing BOH had failed to prove the costs and fees request was
reasonable, improperly included claims for "clerical monitoring of tasks
within their own firm[,]" contained impermissible block billing and non­
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 18, 2015, the Brusers filed their timely appeal
 
from the Order Denying the Brusers' Motion for Reconsideration
 
and corresponding Judgment.
 
Also on May 18, 2015, the AOAO filed their timely
 
appeal from the Trustee Fee Order and corresponding Judgment.
 
On May 22, 2015, BOH filed its third "Affidavit in
 
Support of Attorneys' Fees and Costs" (third affidavit) in
 
support of additional fees and costs during the April 1, 2015 to
 
May 15, 2015 time frame.
 
On June 10, 2015, the AOAO filed its "Petition for
 
Reconsideration of the Court's April 30, 2015 Decision with
 
Respect to Modification of the June 6, 1974 Trust Agreement"
 
(AOAO Motion for Reconsideration).
 
On July 13, 2015, the Probate Court entered its Trust
 
Amendment Order and Trust Amendment Judgment. The Order
 
specified that the Trust Agreement would be reformed by adopting
 
the Base Case Plus reformations. The new "Paragraph 2A"
 
provided, inter alia, that the trustee shall have the discretion
 
without need of approval from the Probate Court or beneficiaries
 
to conduct rental redeterminations pursuant to the CCDs. The
 
Order also granted BOH's counsels' request for attorneys' fees
 
and costs, subject to further proceedings.
 
On July 21, 2015 in the Brusers' federal case, the
 
District Court granted BOH's motion for partial summary judgment
 
and held that the "plain and ordinary meaning of the terms of the
 
Apartment Deed and the CCD require the Brusers to pay 'all fees
 
and expenses' as provided in the Trust Agreement. One such fee
 
is the Trustee Fee."
 
On August 12, 2015,9 the AOAO filed its timely appeal
 
of the Trust Amendment Order and Trust Amendment Judgment.
 
8(...continued)
awardable costs, contained duplicative services, and were not allocated
according to the parties to which the services pertained.
 
9
 The AOAO's notice of appeal was amended on September 30, 2015,
subsequent to this court's consolidation order.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 13, 2015, the Probate Court issued its
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order and corresponding Judgment. The
 
Order listed the representations made by BOH's counsel at the
 
April 30, 2015 hearing and subsequent pleadings on the matter as
 
the basis for its decision.
 
Also on August 13, 2015, the Probate Court held a
 
hearing on the AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration. For the first
 
time, the AOAO argued its position that the Trust Agreement was a
 
land trust. The Probate Court noted that the land trust argument
 
had not been previously raised nor communicated to the other
 
parties. The AOAO also argued that the reformations in the Base
 
Case Plus proposal "changed the fundamental nature" of the Trust
 
Agreement, contradicting the Original Settlors' intent. BOH
 
argued that the unanticipated circumstances of the instant case
 
justified the modifications, specifically the AOAO being both a
 
beneficiary and representative of the apartment owners, thereby
 
creating a conflict of interest. The Probate Court denied the
 
AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration.
 
On August 27, 2015, the AOAO filed its timely appeal
 
from the Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order and Attorneys' Fees and
 
Costs Judgment.
 
On September 22, 2015, the Probate Court entered its
 
Order denying the AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration and
 
corresponding Judgment.
 
II. Standards of Review
 
1. Continuances
 
"A court has the discretion to grant or refuse a
 
continuance of a proceeding in the orderly administration of
 
justice. This discretion is a judicial one and is subject to
 
review for abuse." Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 41, 609 P.2d 137,
 
142 (1980). "Generally, to constitute an abuse it must appear
 that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
 
substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. Kong, 140
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 103, 109, 398 P.3d 692, 698 (2017) (quoting State v. 
Kahapea, 111 Hawai' i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 451 (2006)). 
2. Equitable Relief
 
The relief granted by a court in equity is discretionary and
will not be overturned on review unless the circuit court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that clearlyexceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules orprinciples of law or practice to the substantial detrimentof the appellant. Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., Inc., 84 
Hawai'i 447, 453, 935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (internal
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
Matter of Ishida-Waiakamilo Legacy Trust, 140 Hawai' i 69, 73, 398 
P.3d 658, 662 (2017).
 
3. Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
This court reviews a lower court's award of attorneys' feesfor abuse of discretion. Allstate Ins. Co. v. Pruett, 118 
Hawai'i 174, 179, 186 P.3d 609, 614 (2008) (citation
omitted). "The trial court abuses its discretion if it bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on aclearly erroneous assessment of the evidence." Id. (quoting 
Lepere v. United Pub. Workers, 77 Hawai 'i 471, 473, 887 P.2d
1029, 1031 (1995)). In other words, "[a]n abuse ofdiscretion occurs where the trial court has clearly exceededthe bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a partylitigant." Id. (quoting TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 
Hawai'i 243, 253, 990 P.2d 713, 723 (1999)). 
Hart v. Ticor Title Ins. Co., 126 Hawai' i 448, 455, 272 P.3d 
1215, 1222 (2012) (brackets in original).
 
4. Motion for Reconsideration 
An order ruling on a motion for reconsideration is
 
reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. Kamaka v.
 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 
91, 103 (2008) (citing Cho v. State, 115 Hawai' i 373, 381, 168 
P.3d 17, 25 (2007)).
 
III. Discussion
 
This opinion will first address the points of error
 
raised by the AOAO, followed by the points of error raised by the
 
Brusers.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. AOAO
 
1. Continuance
 
The AOAO argues that the probate court erred in failing
 
to deny the Original Petition in its entirety at the March 13,
 
2014 hearing and instead continuing the matter.10
 
HPR Rule 13(a) provides that the Probate Court, "in its
 
discretion may continue any hearing to a later date and time
 
. . . when in the interest of justice, judicial efficiency, or
 
fairness, a continuance will permit all parties to the proceeding
 
to be properly and fully represented." The commentary to HPR
 
Rule 13 provides: "[t]his rule would also allow the court to
 
continue the hearing when justice demands; for example, when an
 
heir or beneficiary appears without counsel and may want to
 
object to the petition." HPR Rule 13(a) cmt.
 
In Sapp, the Supreme Court of Hawai' i held that the 
trial court had abused its discretion in failing to grant a 
motion to continue, citing, inter alia, the following factors: 
(1) the circumstances did not suggest that the appellant, movants
 
for the continuance, merely sought general delay; (2) the
 
continuance was instead sought for the limited purpose of
 
locating appellees to serve them with subpoenas and compel their
 
attendance in court; (3) granting the continuance would not have
 
been prejudicial to, or have inconvenienced, the appellees; and
 
(4) the failure to grant the continuance was prejudicial to the
 
appellants, as they did not have a reasonable opportunity to try
 
their case upon its merits. Sapp, 62 Haw. at 41, 609 P.2d at
 
142.
 
At the March 13, 2014 hearing, the AOAO argued that
 
BOH's Original Petition sought to reform the Trust Agreement
 rather than seeking a more collaborative solution, and therefore
 
should be dismissed. The Probate Court responded:
 
Well, maybe because there hasn't been an opportunity to
communicate and work something out. I mean, I've seen that
 
10
 This opinion will address AOAO's arguments regarding the merits of
its motion to dismiss in section A.2.a  infra.
  
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alternative alluded to in the submissions. And, if it
cannot be worked out, if they [sic] cannot be just
compensation for work done, then maybe the court of equity
should do something about it.
 
Later, the Probate Court added that although it understood the
 
AOAO's argument that it was odd for BOH to file their petition
 
and then seek a continuance, the Probate Court stated it would
 
"rather see that this issue be addressed" and "like to give the
 
parties an opportunity to try and resolve the issues."
 
The continuance was not for general delay, but for the
 
limited purpose of facilitating further negotiation between the
 
parties so that they could reach an out-of-court resolution. 
Furthermore, AOAO has not identified any prejudice suffered as a
 
result of the continuance. Based on the foregoing, it does not
 
appear that the Probate Court abused its discretion in continuing
 
the Original Petition. 
2. Trust Agreement Amendments
 
The main thrust of the AOAO's appeal is that the 
Probate Court did not have the power to amend the Trust 
Agreement, either as a land or traditional trust indenture, 
absent unanimous consent of the beneficiaries and "emergency 
circumstances" pursuant to Hawai' i precedent. The amendments 
with which the AOAO takes issue include the (1) increase of the trustee fee to $9,850 per month, (2) requirement that the fee 
come from the beneficiaries' disbursements instead of payment by 
the Commercial Unit owner, the Brusers, for five years, and 
(3) rent renegotiation reformations, including the trustee's fee
 
and discretionary powers.
 
As an initial matter, the fact that the AOAO raised the
 
land trust argument for the first time at the August 13, 2015
 
hearing on their motion for reconsideration would normally render
 
the argument waived.
11 Notwithstanding waiver, the facts of the
 
11
 In State ex rel. Office of Consumer Protection v. Honolulu Univ. 
of Arts, Sciences and Humanities, 110 Hawai 'i 504, 517-18, 135 P.3d 113, 126­
27 (2006), the Supreme Court of Hawai 'i held that: 
(continued...)
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instant case do not support the AOAO's argument that the Trust
 
Agreement created a land trust.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 558-2 located in
 
Chapter 558 titled "Land Trusts–-Beneficiary Controlled," and
 
which became effective on June 1, 1978 (1978 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 
151, § 2 at 285), provides:
 
[§558-2] Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to
authorize those trusts which incorporate it by reference to
convey legal and equitable title to real estate in trust to
a qualified trustee; to define the nature and extent of the
beneficiaries' interest in the trust property; to define the
obligations of persons dealing with the trustee to inquire
into the trustee's authority; and to provide for disclosure
of the identity and interest of the trust beneficiaries.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Although the Trust Agreement was amended three times,
 
these amendments preceded the effective date of HRS § 558-2,
 
precluding incorporation by reference. The amendments also
 
indicate that the Original Settlors understood they could amend
 
the terms of the Trust Agreement, but did not elect to amend it a
 
fourth time to make explicit any intent to create a land trust. 
Furthermore, neither the statutory language nor legislative
 
history indicate that HRS § 558-2 was intended to apply
 
retroactively or that it was merely a codification of preexisting
 
law.12
 
11(...continued)
[t]his court has previously stated that the purpose of a
motion for reconsideration is to allow the parties to
present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have
been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion.
Stated differently, reconsideration is not a device to
relitigate old matters or to raise arguments or evidence
that could and should have been brought during the earlier
proceeding.
 
(Citations and internal brackets omitted.) In this case, the land trust
statute was enacted in 1978, well before this litigation commenced and well
before the AOAO filed any responsive pleadings.
 
12
 The Standing Committee Report from the House Committee on Consumer
Protection and Commerce and Judiciary for Senate Bill 518, the bill that would
become HRS § 558-2, states:
 
The purpose of this bill is to authorize the creation
of land trusts in which legal and equitable title to real
(continued...)
  
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We therefore disagree with the AOAO's argument that the
 
Trust Agreement created a land trust and analyze the issues
 
raised under the law of traditional trusts.
 
Modification of trust documents was addressed long ago 
in Hawaiian Tr. v. Gosner, 40 Haw. 245 (1953) and Hawaiian Tr. 
Co. v. Breault, 42 Haw. 268 (1958). In the former, the Supreme 
Court of the Territory of Hawai' i was asked to overturn the 
chancery court's denial of the request of the beneficiaries to convey the trust real property to them rather than to sell the 
property and distribute the proceeds as specified in the trust. 
The Gosner court granted the beneficiaries relief, deciding that 
the beneficiaries could revoke the power of sale. Gosner, 40 
Haw. at 256 (quoting from 3 George Gleason Bogert, The Law of Trusts and Trustees: a Treatise Covering the Law Relating to 
Trusts and Allied Subjects Affecting Trust Creation and 
Administration, with Forms § 741 (1946). 
In the latter case, the settlor's will provided that
 
the trustee "shall pay" trust income for the maintenance of the
 
settlor's mother and her maid who lived in the settlor's home, an
 
asset of the trust. Breault, 42 Haw. at 269-70. The will also
 
provided that the trustee "shall not" sell or otherwise dispose
 of the home, and "shall pay" all expenses for its preservation
 
from the trust income. Id. By the time of the Breault
 
litigation, the funds held by the trustee had been exhausted and
 the only remaining substantial asset was the home, which required
 
substantial repairs. Id. at 270. Neither the mother nor the
 
(...continued)
estate is held in trust by a qualified trustee while rights
and benefits of ownership are retained by the beneficiary
and treated as his personal property.
 
. . . .
 
This bill would specifically authorize such land
trusts by adding a new chapter to the Hawaii Revised
Statutes containing the necessary 
enabling  provisions
thereto. It allows such trusts to be created[.]
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 827-78, in 1978 House Journal, at 1782 (emphasis
added).
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maid lived in the home at that time. Id. at 270-71. The circuit
 
court decided that selling the home was necessary to preserve the
 
corpus of the trust, that the trustee could sell the residence,
 
provided the right to live therein was waived by the mother and
 
maid, and that the net proceeds of the sale should be held by the
 
trustee as principal with income from the investment of those
 
proceeds going towards the maintenance of the mother and maid. 
Id. at 271.
 
The Supreme Court of the Territory of Hawai' i held that 
"[w]here certain emergencies occur or unusual circumstances arise 
not anticipated by the settlor in order to carry out the ultimate 
purpose of the settlor and to preserve or prevent destruction of 
the trust estate, the chancellor may order a deviation from the 
terms thereof." Id. at 271 (emphasis added). The court also 
noted that "[s]omething in the nature of an emergency is required to move the court to authorize a deviation from the settlor's 
plan of administration." Id. at 272 (quoting Bogert, supra, Law 
of Trusts and Trustees § 742); and citing Gosner, 40 Haw. at 253. The Breault court explained: 
the present case is an excellent illustration of the
necessity to deviate from the prohibition of the sale as the
property is deteriorating rapidly, needs extensive repairs
for which the trustee has no funds, and is not being used
for residence purposes, as provided. The property must be
sold to preserve the intent of the trust.
 
Id. at 272.
 
Breault and Gosner dealt with the trustee's ability to
 
sell trust assets. However, it stands to reason if such
 
fundamental provisions may, under the right circumstances, be
 
modified, provisions that do not involve such significant trust
 
provisions could also be modified, again, under the right
 
circumstances and if consistent with the purposes of the trust. 
Although deciding that the trustee had the ability to sell trust
 
property, the Breault court appeared to recognize broader
 
modification authority when it stated,
 
There are many cases in which conditions and circumstances
arise which a settlor could not have foreseen and it is
 desirable and wise to free the trust from the directions
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
which the settlor has made in his effort to continue his
 
control. Chancery has evolved the doctrine that it has power
and a duty under certain circumstances to authorize a
modification of or deviation from the terms of the trust.
 (54 Am. Jur., Trusts, § 284, pp. 224, 225.)
 
Breault, 42 Haw. at 271.
 
The ability to modify administrative provisions of a
 
trust is recognized by Bogert, often cited by Hawai' i courts: 
The court of equity possesses power to alter the
administrative provisions of a private trust where, due to
circumstances not known to the settlor or anticipated by
him, or due to the unwisdom of the settlor's direction, a
change is necessary or highly convenient to insure the
accomplishment of the settlor's fundamental purposes. The
court has no power to make other changes in administrative
terms nor can it alter the financial interests of the
 
beneficiaries or add new beneficiaries. 
George Gleason Bogert and George Taylor Bogert, Handbook of the
 
Law of Trusts § 146 (5th ed. 1973). See also Restatement (Third)
 
of Trusts § 66 (2003) (A court may "modify an administrative or
 distributive provision of a trust, or direct or permit the
 
trustee to deviate from an administrative or distributive
 
provision, if because of circumstances not anticipated by the
 
settlor the modification or deviation will further the purposes
 
of the trust.") (emphasis added) (Restatement 3d). Although the
 
unanticipated circumstances referred-to here are likely to be
 
circumstances that have changed since the creation of the trust,
 
this is not a requirement; the unanticipated circumstances
 
requirement is satisfied so long as the settlor was unaware of
 
the circumstances in establishing the trust. Restatement 3d
 
cmt. (a). Furthermore, the circumstances need not rise to the
 
level of an emergency nor cause the frustration of the trust
 
purposes. Id. Thus, a probate court has the authority, under
 
certain circumstances, to modify the terms of a trust.
 
With these concepts in mind, we turn to the decisions
 
challenged by the AOAO.
 
a. Resignation of BOH as Trustee.
 
AOAO argues that the Probate Court erred in not
 
dismissing BOH's Original Petition as BOH did not show that its
 requested relief could be granted. In support, AOAO argues that,
 
22
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under the terms of the Trust Agreement, BOH could not resign
 
before a successor trustee was appointed and amendment of the
 
trust to remove the corporate trustee requirement could not be
 
made without unanimous agreement by the Beneficiaries. We
 
disagree.
 
The plain language of Paragraph 17 of the Trust
 
Agreement governing "Resignation, Removal and Substitution of
 
Trustee" does not specify that a successor trustee must be
 
appointed for the trustee's resignation to be effective. It
 
states only that the resignation shall not take effect for sixty
 
days after notice is given unless before that time a successor
 
trustee is appointed and if no successor trustee is appointed
 
within this sixty day period, application to the court for that
 
purpose can be made. The Trust Agreement specifies no
 
preconditions for resignation.
 
Here, BOH applied to the Probate Court by filing its
 
Original Petition almost eight months after its notice of
 
resignation. While the Probate Court could have modified the
 
Trust Agreement because changed or unknown circumstances--the
 
lack of an eligible and willing alternative trustee13--arguably
 
prevented the purpose of the Original Settlors to create a trust
 to administer the trust property for the benefit of the
 
Beneficiaries, see Breault, 42 Haw. at 271-72, it was clearly
 
authorized under the terms of the Trust Agreement to appoint a
 
successor trustee after the resignation of an existing trustee. 
As a result, the Probate Court was not categorically prevented
 
from considering the Original Petition and it was not error for
 
it to continue rather than dismiss this action.
 
b. Trustee Fee Order
 
The Trustee Fee Order granted the Base Case amendments,
 
which included (1) an increased trustee fee of $9,850 per month
 
13
 Neither the AOAO, Non-AOAO Beneficiaries, nor BOH disputes the
fact that there was no other qualified successor trustee willing to replace
BOH. In fact, as events unfolded, the Probate Court never did modify the
Trust Agreement to remove the corporate trustee requirement.
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and (2) payment for five years from the disbursements to the
 
Beneficiaries, with reimbursements as are received from the
 
Brusers. This amount was adopted from the October 1, 2014
 
"Agreement on Trustee's Fees" entered into by BOH and the non-
AOAO Beneficiaries. The purpose of the five year period, as
 
stated in the Agreement on Trustee's Fees, was "to allow time to
 
resolve the liability of the Commercial Unit Owner for Trustee's
 
fees" presumably in response to the pending Brusers' federal case
 
which was to determine who was liable to pay the trustee's
 
fees.14 The AOAO argues that, in addition to violating the
 
unanimous consent requirement for amendments to the Trust
 Agreement, there was not "substantial evidence" to support the
 
new $9,850 trustee fee amount.
 
The Trust Agreement does not specify how to measure or
 
evaluate the trustee's fee. Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement
 
provides only that the "Trustee shall be entitled to such
 
reasonable fees as from time to time may be mutually agreed
 
upon." There was not unanimous agreement by the Beneficiaries
 
regarding the amount of BOH's fee going forward and there is no
 
provision in the Trust Agreement to resolve the failure of the
 
Beneficiaries to mutually agree. Thus, the modification here
 
was, at most, the addition of recourse to the court in the event
 
the Beneficiaries could not mutually agree as to the trustee's
 
fee. However, the lack of a trust provision to resolve the
 
failure to mutually agree is provided by statute.
 
HRS § 607-18 (2016)
15 provides, in relevant part:
 
§607-18 Compensation of trustees. (a) Unless the
trust instrument otherwise provides, or the settlor and
trustee otherwise agree, or, after the settlor's death, all
the beneficiaries and the trustee otherwise agree, the
trustee shall be entitled to the compensation set forth in
this section and the compensation shall be deemed to be
 
14
 As previously stated, the District Court decided, on July 21,
2015, that the Brusers, as owners of the Commercial Unit, were responsible for
paying the trustee's fee under the terms of the Commercial Unit's CCD.
 
15
 The published fee schedule portion of HRS § 607-18 was enacted in
2014, and became effective on January 1, 2015, prior to the April 17, 2015
Trustee Fee Order. 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 212, §2 at 727, 730.
 
24
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable. For good cause shown, the court may also
approve any other fee arrangement that it deems reasonable.
 
(b) Banks, trust companies, and individuals who in
the ordinary course of business serve as fiduciaries shall,
when serving as trustees, be entitled to reasonable
compensation, which may be set forth in their published fee
schedules and may be amended from time to time; provided
that advance written notice of any amendment to the fee
schedule is provided to the settlor or, after the settlor's
death, to all beneficiaries who are vested at the time of
the notice.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The AOAO itself recognized the value of a corporate
 
trustee given the substantial nature of the trust assets, the
 
lack of a bond requirement, and the experience and financial
 
wherewithal of a corporate trustee. According to its published
 
fee schedule, BOH charges a trustee's fee based on six percent of
 
a trust's annual income for properties managed by a third-party
 
property manager. The Base Case, agreed-to by the Non-AOAO
 
Beneficiaries, resulted in a fee of $9,850 per month, equivalent
 
to 3.5% of the trust's annual income. Therefore, as measured by
 
the statute, the Base Case fee amount was authorized and
 
reasonable.
 
The AOAO argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support the fee amount. However, it is undisputed that the Trust
 
Agreement lists a number of tasks and responsibilities of the
 
trustee, including granting apartment leases, employing
 
assistants, accountants and attorneys, filing tax returns,
 
collecting and distributing trust income to the Beneficiaries,
 
enforcing the apartment leases, and facilitating the
 
Beneficiaries' renegotiation of lease rents. AOAO does not argue
 
that these tasks were not, or would not be done.
 
The Base Case did not remove the Brusers' liability, as
 
the Commercial Unit owners, to pay the trustee's fee.16 However,
 
16
 Paragraph 4 of the Agreement on Trustee's Fees provides:
 
4. During the Five-Year Period, Trustee shall be
entitled to withhold Trustee's fees from distributions to
 
the beneficiaries. The amounts that are recovered by Trustee
(continued...)
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Agreement on Trustee's Fees does state that the Non-AOAO
 
Beneficiaries "shall support a reformation of the Trust
 
consistent with the foregoing" including the provision allowing
 
withholding the fee from the Beneficiaries' distributions. The
 
Trustee Fee Order "approves" the Agreement on Trustee's Fees but
 
does not explicitly modify the Trust Agreement in this regard. 
Finally, the Trustee Fee Order does not explain why such a
 
modification was necessary or even highly convenient. Breault,
 
42 Haw. at 271; Bogert, supra, Handbook of the Law of Trusts
 § 146. Therefore, to the extent the Trustee Fee Order obligates
 
the trustee's fee to be paid, at least initially, from the
 
Beneficiaries' distributions, it is vacated.
 
c. Trust Amendment Order
 
Pursuant to the Agreement on Trustee's Fees, the Trust
 
Amendment Order adopted the Base Case Plus reformations. The
 
main thrust of the AOAO's argument against the Trust Amendment
 
Order is that there were not sufficient circumstances pursuant to
 
Breault to deviate from the Trust Agreement.
 
Again, a court may modify administrative provisions of
 
a trust only where there are unknown or unanticipated
 
circumstances, and the deviation will preserve the trust estate
 
or prevent its destruction. Bogert, supra, Handbook of the Law
 
of Trusts § 146.
 
In a March 27, 2015 letter from BOH's counsel Piekarski
 
to the other parties, Piekarski stated:
 
As you know, the Bank's position throughout this
Proceeding has been that the fee arrangements and the Trust
 
16(...continued) 
from the Commercial Unit Owner shall be distributed to the
 
beneficiaries, as and when recovered, as reimbursement for
the amounts that have been withheld as aforesaid. The
 Beneficiary Parties are agreeing to the withholding of
Trustee's fees for the Five-Year Period in order to allow
 time to resolve the liability of the Commercial Unit Owner
for Trustee's fees. Such withholding shall not discharge the
Commercial Unit Owner from its obligation to pay Trustee's
fees.
 
As of the date of the Trustee Fee Order, the Brusers' litigation in the
District Court was still pending.
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
reformations were a package. However, at the March 5
hearing, the Bank acquiesced to the request of [the
Gowans/Henderson's counsel] and others to separate the fee
arrangements from the Trust reformations so that, if the fee
arrangements were approved, the Bank would withdraw its
resignation regardless of whether the Trust reformations
were approved. . . . Accordingly, this letter confirms that
the Bank will withdraw its resignation when the order and
judgment approving the [Base Case Proposal] and confirming
ordering paragraphs A and B of the Interim Order become
final without regard to whether the Trust has been reformed
[pursuant to Base Case Plus proposals].
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In the subsequent March 31, 2015 letter from Piekarski
 
to the other parties, Piekarski stated that if the Non-AOAO
 
Beneficiaries decide not to advocate the previously proposed
 
reformations dealing with Rental Renegotiation, then:
 
In light of the March 5 hearing, Trustee's preference is to
bring the issues raised by its Petition to resolution on the
basis of one of the following: (i) the Base Case
Reformations, (ii) [Base Case Plus], or (iii) a withdrawal
of the request for Trust reformations (although this is the
least desirable of the three alternatives).
 
(Emphasis added.)
  
The Probate Court's aforementioned power to modify
 
administrative provisions of the trust does not apply to the Base
 
Case Plus reformations based on the statements in Piekarski's
 
letters. The letters indicate that BOH, as trustee, would
 
(1) withdraw its resignation if granted the requested increase in
 
monthly fees, and (2) prefer, although as a least-favored option,
 
to bring its Original Petition to resolution by withdrawing the
 
request for approval of the Base Case Plus reformations.
 
None of the other parties' Statements of Position filed
 
in preparation of the April 30, 2015 hearing, nor anything stated
 
at the hearing itself, pointed to a continued exigency meriting
 
deviation from the Trust Agreement. 
Several parties pointed to
 
past difficulties in organizing the 2008 rent renegotiation which
 resulted in an agreement between all parties similar to the
 
proposed rent renegotiation reformations. The next rent
 
renegotiation, for the period to begin on January 1, 2019, was,
 
at the time of the Trust Amendment Order, years away and not
 
"something in the nature of an emergency" as presented in
 
27
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Breault. 42 Haw. at 270-273 (citing, inter alia, the presently
 
"exhausted" funds held by the Breault trustee, neither the mother
 
or maid occupying the home any longer, and ongoing rapid
 
deterioration of the home for which no funds currently existed to
 
make the needed repairs).
 
In their response to BOH's Statement of Position for
 
the April 30, 2015 hearing, the Sheetz appellees cite to a
 
treatise section which provides:
 
6. The Court has power to order the reformation:
 
As shown in earlier sections, the court possesses
and frequently exercises the power, on the application
of the trustee or one or more beneficiaries, to modify
the terms of the trust in order to effectuate the
 accomplishment of the purposes of the settlor. Where
administrative provisions handicap the trustee, or the
trustee lacks an essential power, the court frequently
releases the trustee from the objectionable provision,
or grants the needed authority, or otherwise changes the
trust as to methods of operation, so as to enable the
trustee to achieve the primary purposes of the settlor.
 
George G. Bogert et al, The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 994
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
However, this provision would not support granting the
 
rent renegotiation reformations outlined in Base Case Plus. 
Unlike the renegotiated trustee fee of $9,850, made pursuant to
 
Paragraph 11 of the Trust Agreement which provides for such fee
 
to be mutually agreed upon from time to time, the Trust Agreement
 
is clear regarding the Trustee's limited role in the lease rent
 
renegotiations.17 While the negotiations in the prior term may
 
have been onerous, it is equally true that despite the trustee's
 
17
 Section 68 of the American Jurisprudence treatise on Trusts
further provides, in relevant part:
 
A trust can be modified if provision are ambiguous or
if a slavish adherence to the terms of the trust would
 
defeat the primary purpose of the trust; however, the common
law of trusts does not permit the creation of a new
agreement under the guise of a modification or reformation.
In any event a court has no authority to modify trust
provisions if there is not a 
compelling reason for the
modification.
 
76 Am. Jur. 2d Trusts, §68 (emphasis added).
 
28
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lack of authority to participate in the negotiations in a
 
substantive way, the parties to the negotiations reached an
 
agreement as to procedure. There is no evidence that the same
 
procedure--without BOH's substantive participation--could not be
 
followed in the next round of negotiations.
 
Based on the foregoing, we hold that the Probate Court
 
abused its discretion by granting the Base Case Plus rent
 
renegotiation reformations in its Trust Amendment Order and
 
corresponding Judgment.
 
3. BOH's Attorneys' Fees and Costs Order
 
As a general rule, each party to litigation must pay 
his own counsel's fees, in the absence of an agreement or 
statutory authority for the recovery thereof. In re Campbell's 
Estate, 46 Haw. 475, 522, 382 P.2d 920, 953 (1963); Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 130 Hawai' i 162, 166, 307 P.3d 142, 146 
(2013). However, "[a]s an exception to this general rule, when litigation is in the advancement of, and not in opposition to, 
the interests of all the beneficiaries of a trust, counsel fees 
may be allowed to litigants out of the estate. Evans v. Garvie, 
23 Haw. 694[, 695 (1917)]; Estate of Lalakea, 26 Haw. 243, [at 275-76 (1922).]" In re Campbell's Estate, 46 Haw. at 522, 382 
P.2d at 953 (emphasis added). 
The AOAO argues none of the tasks charged by BOH
 
counsel were in the interest of all beneficiaries, namely:
 (1) efforts to increase in BOH's trustee fee, (2) assurance that
 
the trustee fee would come from the Beneficiaries' distributions
 
rather than the Commercial Unit owner, and (3) pursuit of the the
 
Base Case Plus rent renegotiation modifications.
18 The Probate
 
Court did not make any findings regarding whether and to what
 extent this litigation was for the benefit of all beneficiaries.
 
18
 The AOAO also challenges the fees charged by BOH's counsel in
relation to BOH's effort to resign. However, as explained at the April 30,
2015 hearing and in BOH's answering brief, such fees were written off by BOH
and its counsels' law firm or were awarded in an order not appealed by the
AOAO in this consolidated appeal.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furthermore, assuming that the litigation was in the 
interest of all parties, it is not clear, on this record, how the 
Probate Court reached the amount of its award. In its Attorneys' 
Fees and Costs Order, the Probate Court granted BOH's counsels' 
request for fees for the period of May 12, 2014 through June 15, 
2015 in the amount of $152,605.10. However, BOH's counsels' 
affidavits in support of its attorneys' fees and costs request 
specify that they cover the dates of May 12, 2014 through May 14, 
2015, with a combined requested amount of $154,826.75.19 The 
Probate Court did not include, nor does the record reveal, any reasons for the reduction of the fees and costs requested. See 
Ranger Ins. Co. v. Hinshaw, 103 Hawai' i 26, 33, 79 P.3d 119, 126 
(2003) (in the denial of attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14, 
"[t]he reasonableness of an expenditure of attorneys' fees is a 
matter within the discretion of the circuit court . . . [and, 
thus, a] detailed explanation of the rationale underlying the 
reduction in attorneys' fees awarded is not necessary." However, 
the denial or reduction of attorneys' fees must have support in 
the record." (citation omitted)). 
Therefore, we must vacate the Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
Order and remand for a determination of which portions, if any,
 
of this litigation were in the advancement of, and not in
 
opposition to, the interests of all the beneficiaries under the
 
Trust Agreement and to state its reasons for reducing the amount
 
of attorneys fees awarded.
 
4. The AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration 
In its AOAO Motion for Reconsideration, AOAO argues
 
that the Probate Court erred in granting the Base Case Plus rent
 
renegotiation amendments because there was not unanimous
 
beneficiary consent.
 
19
 This amount does not include $1,884.78 that BOH's counsel listed
as fees arising out of work anticipated after the May 22, 2015 affidavit.
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In light of the foregoing discussion, we need not
 
address the AOAO's argument with regard to the Order Denying
 
AOAO's Motion for Reconsideration and corresponding judgment.
 
B. Brusers
 
1. Jurisdiction
 
On appeal, the Brusers argue that the Probate Court did
 
not have jurisdiction to determine the trustee's fee amount.
 
However, this argument contradicts their position taken before
 
the Probate Court at the September 11, 2014 hearing:
 
We're not taking a position today as to what the [trustee]
fees should be because that's between -- that's under the
 
trust. And this court has jurisdiction under the trust.
And we can't take a position because we're not one of the
beneficiaries. We're just simply here to protect the
Brusers' rights and to ask this court to not overstep its
jurisdiction as we've laid out. I don't want to repeat the
jurisdictional arguments that we've laid out.
 
(Emphasis added.)
  
Furthermore, HRS § 560:7-201 (2006) provides, in
 
relevant part:
 
§506:7-201 Court; jurisdiction of trusts. (a) The
court has jurisdiction of proceedings initiated by trustees
and interested persons concerning the internal affairs of
trusts. Proceedings which may be maintained under this
section are those concerning the administration and
distribution of trusts, the declaration of rights and the
determination of other matters involving trustees and
beneficiaries of trusts. These include, but are not limited
to, proceedings to:
 
. . . .
 
(2) 
Review trustees' fees  and to review and settle
interim or final accounts[.] . . .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Based on the foregoing, we find the Brusers' argument
 
to be without merit.
 
2. Nondisclosure
 
The Brusers argue that they are victims of fraud
 
because the "Fee Owners and/or the Trustee" failed to disclose to
 
them at the time they purchased the Commercial Unit that the
 
Trustee Fee could increase dramatically.
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As an initial matter, the fact that the Brusers are 
raising this argument for the first time on appeal ordinarily 
deems the argument waived. Molinar v. Schweizer, 95 Hawai' i 331, 
339-340, 22 P.3d 978, 986-87 (2001), Mauna Kea Power Co., Inc. v. Board of Land and Natural Resources, 76 Hawai' i 259, 262 n. 2, 
874 P.2d 1084, 1087 n. 2 (1994), Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai' i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 
608, 618 (2002) (holding that "[l]egal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal."). 
Even if not waived, the Brusers' argument is 
unpersuasive. In Santiago v. Tanaka, the Supreme Court of 
Hawai'i held that claims for nondisclosure are governed by the 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551 (Am. Law Inst. 1977) which provides, in relevant part: 
(1)	 One who fails to disclose to another a fact that he
 
knows may justifiably induce the other to act or
refrain from acting in a business transaction is
subject to the same liability to the other as though
he had represented the nonexistence of the matter that
he has failed to disclose, if, but only if, he is
under a duty to the other to exercise reasonable care
to disclose the matter in question.
 
(2)	 
One party to a business transaction is under a duty to
exercise reasonable care to disclose to the other
 before the transaction is consummated,
 
(b)	 matters known to him that he knows to be necessary to
prevent his partial or ambiguous statement of the
facts from being misleading; . . . .
 
Santiago v. Tanaka, 137 Hawai' i 137, 149, 366 P.3d 612, 624 
(2016). 
When the Brusers purchased the Commercial Unit, their
 
Apartment Deed stated that they agreed to "pay all other costs,
 
expenses, assessments and charges payable by the apartment owner
 
as set forth in the [commercial CCD.]" The Commercial CCD
 
provides: "[t]he Apartment Owner shall also pay to the Lessor all
 
fees and expenses charged or incurred by the Lessor as Trustee
 
under the terms of said Trust Agreement dated June 16, 1974, as
 
amended, as the same become due or are incurred." Paragraph 11
 
of the Trust Agreement additionally provides:
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11. Trustee's Fees. The Trustee shall be entitled to
 
such reasonable fees as from time to time may be mutually
agreed upon. In addition to said reasonable fees, the
Trustees shall have the right to incur such expenses and to
be reimbursed by the Lessee
20 as provided for by the leases;
and to incur such expenses and be reimbursed for
extraordinary services. The Lessee or its assigns will pay
the Trustee's fee and expenses until December 31, 2039 or
the earlier termination of this trust.
 
(Emphasis added.) Based on the foregoing, it does not appear
 
that the Brusers' duty to pay the Trustee Fee or the Trustee
 
Fee's variability were not disclosed to the Brusers at the time
 
of their purchase.
 
3. Commercial CCD Interpretation
 
The Brusers also argue that the Probate Court erred in
 
interpreting the plain meaning of the language pertaining to the
 
Trustee Fee in the Trust Agreement, as incorporated in their
 
Commercial Unit CCD. Specifically, the Brusers argue that the
 
duties of the trustee under the Trust Agreement, prior to the
 
Probate Court's amendments, generated "purely administrative
 
work," whereas the new duties generate "fiduciary fees" for which
 
the Brusers did not bargain and are thus not responsible to pay.
 
As with the previous point of error, the Brusers are 
raising this argument for the first time on appeal, and would 
ordinarily be subject to waiver. Molinar, 95 Hawai' i at 339-340, 
22 P.3d at 986-87, Mauna Kea Power Co., Inc., 76 Hawai' i at 262 
n. 2, 874 P.2d at 1087 n. 2, Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea 
Elua, 100 Hawai' i at 107, 58 P.3d at 618. 
Even if the argument was not waived, the Brusers'
 
"plain meaning" argument still must fail. In addition to
 
allotting responsibility for "all" trustee fees to the Commercial
 
Unit owner, the Trust Agreement also states that "[a]ny amendment
 
to this Trust Agreement shall require the consent of Trustee and
 
every person with a beneficial interest under the trust." Apart
 
20
 In the Trust Agreement, MEPC is the Lessee. MEPC was renamed 1778
 
Ala Moana Properties, Inc. in 1983, prior to selling the Commercial Unit to
the Brusers.
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from requiring unanimous consent, there do not appear to be any
 
restrictions on how the Trust Agreement may be amended.
 
The language of the Commercial Unit CCD and the Trust
 
Agreement are unambiguous: by purchasing the Commercial Unit,
 
the Brusers have an obligation to pay the trustee's fees,
 
pursuant to the amendable provisions of the Trust Agreement. 
Based on the foregoing, it does not appear that the Probate Court
 
erred in its interpretation of the Brusers' contract.
 
4. Discovery
 
The Brusers argue that the Probate Court erred by
 
refusing to permit discovery to investigate the reasonableness of
 
the trustee fee amount.
 
The Hawai' i Probate Rules do not confer an automatic 
right to discovery. See HPR Rule 20(d) cmt. To initiate 
discovery, a petitioner must first file an objection and have the subject of his or her objection be classified as a "contested 
matter" by the probate court. HPR Rule 19. Next, the probate 
court may, in its discretion and by written order, elect to 
retain the contested matter on the regular probate calendar or 
assign it to the civil trials calendar. HPR Rule 20(a). If the 
probate court retains the contested matter, the court may also, 
again in its discretion and "at the request of the parties, 
designate and order that any one or more of the Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure" be applicable to the contested matter. HPR Rule 20(d) (emphasis added). 
The Brusers do not present citations to the record
 
establishing, nor is it apparent from our review of the record,
 
that the Brusers complied with the HPR procedures. Therefore,
 
the Brusers' argument that the Probate Court erred by denying
 
them discovery is without merit.
 
5. BOH's Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
Separate from the AOAO's issues with the Attorneys'
 
Fees and Costs Order and Judgment as discussed supra, the Brusers
 
argue that the Probate Court erred because BOH's request for fees
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and costs was (1) "riddled with block billing," and (2) failed to
"submit any evidence that the claimed billing rates and charges
 
were both customary and reasonable, it not being sufficient to
 
show merely that the time was allegedly spent and that BOH
 
believes by its self-serving Declaration that the charges were
 
reasonable[.]"
  
The Brusers' opening brief fails to provide any
 
citation to the alleged block billing in the BOH's requests for
 
fees and costs. Therefore, we deem the argument waived and will
 
not address this argument further. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7).21
 
With regard to the Brusers' second argument, HPR
 
Rule 40(a) provides:
 
(a) Amount.  A fiduciary may pay fees for services of a
fiduciary, attorney, or other professional that are not set
by statute or court rule as long as the fees are just and
reasonable in amount for the scope of services rendered.
The reasonableness of the fees allowed shall be determined
 by all the facts and circumstances of the work performed
including the complexity or ease of the matter, the
experience, expertise, and uniqueness of services rendered,
the amount of time spent on the matter, and the amount
charged by others in similar situations.
 
HPR Rule 41 provides the procedure for the approval of
 
such fees and costs:
 
Whenever there is an objection to the fees of a fiduciary or
attorney, or court approval of such fees is sought for any
reason, the fiduciary or attorney whose fees are at issue
shall file an affidavit, setting forth the amount and basis
of calculation of the fees sought and any costs advanced
which are to be reimbursed, at the same time as any petition
seeking approval of such fees or any response to a petition
objecting to such fees. The affidavit should specifically
detail the charges for the services and costs rendered to
the date of the affidavit and the anticipated charges and
costs to complete the matter through preparation,
processing, and service of the order.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
21
 HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) provides that an appellant's opening brief
shall contain "[t]he argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on
the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the
authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on. . . . Points not
 argued may be deemed waived." (Emphasis added.)
 
35
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the September 11, 2014 hearing, the Probate Court
 
noted that the trust was "unique[.]" In support of its request
 
for fees and costs, BOH filed two affidavits detailing its
 
counsels' hourly rates, hours expended, and types of services
 
provided in this litigation.
 
The Supreme Court of Hawai' i has noted that circuit 
court judges know "as well as a legal expert what are reasonable 
attorney fees, and that the amount of attorney's fees is within 
the judicial discretion of the court, and in fixing that amount 
the trial court may proceed upon its own knowledge of the value 
of the solicitor's services." Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity 
House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 306, 141 P.3d 459, 479 (2006) 
(quoting In re Thz Fo Farm, 37 Haw. 447, 453 (1947)). 
Based on the foregoing, we find the Brusers' arguments
 
unpersuasive.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we:
 
Affirm the "Second Order Granting in Part and
 
Continuing in Part Petition for Resignation of Trustee,
 Appointment of Successor Trustee, Reformation of Trust and
 
Approval of Trustee's Accounts Covering the Period from
 
January 1, 2008 Through December 31, 2013" and corresponding
 
"Judgment," as to the trustee's fee amount and vacate it to the
 
extent it obligates the trustee's fee to be paid from the
 
Beneficiaries' distributions for five years and remand to
 
determine whether it is necessary to modify the Trust Agreement
 
provision specifying the trustee's fee shall be paid by the
 
Lessee.
 
Affirm the "Order Denying Interested Parties Michael
 
David Bruser and Lynn Bruser, Trustees Under Revocable Living
 
Trust Agreement Dated July 11, 1988, as Amended, Doing Business
 
As Discovery Bay Center's Petition Under HPR Rule 36 for Relief
 
From Order and Reconsideration of Interim Order Relating to
 
Petition for Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of Successor
 
Trustee, Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's Accounts
 
36
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Covering the Period from January 1, 2008, Through December 31,
 
2013," corresponding "Judgment," all entered on April 17, 2015 in
 
the Probate Court;
 
Vacate the "Order Granting Petition for Resignation of
 
Trustee, Appointment of Successor Trustee, Reformation of Trust
 
and Approval of Trustee's Accounts Covering the Period from
 
January 1, 2008, Through December 31, 2013 as to All Pending
 
Issues" and corresponding "Judgment," both entered on July 13,
 
2015 in the probate court, and the "Order Denying Respondent
 
Association of Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay's Petition for
 
Reconsideration of the Court's April 30, 2015 Decision with
 
respect to Modification of the June 6, 1974 Trust Agreement" and
 
corresponding "Judgment," both entered on September 22, 2015 by
 
the probate court; and
 
Vacate and remand the "Order Granting Petition for
 
Resignation of Trustee, Appointment of Successor Trustee,
 
Reformation of Trust and Approval of Trustee's Accounts Covering
 
the Period from January 1, 2008, Through December 31, 2013 as to
 
Last Pending Issue Regarding Attorneys' Fees and Costs" and
 
accompanying "Judgment" both entered on August 13, 2015 in the
 
circuit court, for further findings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Andrew V. Beaman,
Nathaniel A. Higa, andAdrienne S. Yoshihara,(Chun Kerr),for Petitioner-AppellantAssociation of ApartmentOwners of Discovery Bay. 
Gary Victor Dubin and
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,for Respondent-AppellantMichael David Bruser and LynnBruser, Trustees. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
37
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Vincent A. Piekarski and
 
Jonathan C. Bolton,
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn &
Stifel),
for Petitioner-Appellee Bank
of Hawaii, as Trustee.
 
Robert Bruce Graham, Jr.,
Clara Park, and
Sarah M. Simmons,
(Ashford & Wriston),
for Respondents-Appellees
Susan Sheetz and Patricia
 Sheetz Bow.
 
Douglas C. Smith and
Christopher J.I. Leong,
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak
Hastert),
for Respondent-Appellee
Kevin I. Yokoyama, as Trustee.
 
Corey Y.S. Park,
for Respondents-Appellees
Julie G. Henderson, as
Trustee.
 
38
 