NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000381 and NO. CAAP-19-0000382 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
CAAP-19-0000381 
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
PHILIP BIKLE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
PUNA DIVISION 
(Case No. 3DTC-16-005744) 
and 
CAAP-19-0000382 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
PHILIP BIKLE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
PUNA DIVISION 
(Case No. 3DTI-16-016896) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Self-represented Defendant-Appellant Philip Bikle 
appeals from: (1) the "Judgment After Trial De Novo & Notice of 
Entry of Judgment" entered by the District Court of the Third 
Circuit, Puna Division, on April 12, 2019, in case 3DTI-16-016896 (Traffic Infraction Case); and (2) the "Judgment and Notice of 
Entry of Judgment" entered by the District Court of the Third 
Circuit, Puna Division, on April 12, 2019, in case 3DTC-16-005744 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Traffic Crime Case).1  For the reasons explained below, we 
affirm the judgments in both cases. 
On November 11, 2016, a Hawai# i County Police 
Department (HCPD
) police officer stopped a vehicle that did not 
have a license plate, safety check sticker, or registration or 
weight tax sticker.  Bikle was the driver.  He was unable to produce a driver's license, vehicle registration, or proof of motor vehicle insurance. 
The police officer issued two citations to Bikle: 
(1) Notice of Traffic Infraction(s) no. 3DTI-16-016896 
( 
Infraction Citation) for no vehicle license plate in violation 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 249-7, delinquent vehicle tax in violation of HRS § 249-2, no certificate of inspection in 
violation of HRS § 286-25, and no registration in vehicle in violation of HRS § 286-47(3); and (2) Citation for Traffic Crimes 
no. 3DTC-16-005744 (Criminal Citation), for driving motor vehicle 
without valid driver's license in violation of HRS § 286-102 and 
no motor vehicle insurance policy in violation of HRS § 431:10C-104. 
Bikle contested both citations.  In the Traffic 
Infraction Case, the district court entered a judgment for the State and against Bikle on all counts of the Infraction Citation on December 29, 2016.  Bikle requested a trial de novo under Rule 19(a) of the Hawai# i Civil Traffic Rules (HCTR).  In the 
Traffic Crime Case, Bikle was arraigned on January 4, 2018.  Over the next two-and-a-half years, the district court held multiple hearings addressing legal and procedural challenges made by Bikle in both cases. 
A consolidated trial de novo for the Traffic Infraction 
Case and trial for the Traffic Crime Case took place on March 1, 2019, and continued on April 12, 2019.  On April 12, 2019, in the Traffic Infraction Case, Bikle was found guilty of no vehicle 
1 The Honorable Harry P. Freitas presided over the consolidated 
trial. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
license plate, delinquent vehicle tax, and no certificate of 
inspection.  The no registration in vehicle charge was dismissed. In the Traffic Crime Case, Bikle was found guilty of Driving Motor Vehicle Without Valid Driver's License and No Motor Vehicle Insurance Policy.  These appeals followed.
2 
Bikle contends in both cases that he was not charged 
within the statute of limitations and therefore the alleged offenses were time-barred.  The applicable statute for both cases is HRS § 701-108 (2014).  It provides, in relevant part: 
Time limitations . 
. . . . 
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this section,
prosecutions for other offenses are subject to the following
periods of limitation: 
. . . . 
(f) A prosecution for a petty misdemeanor or aviolation other than a parking violation must becommenced within one year  after it is committed. 
. . . . 
(5) A prosecution is commenced  either when an 
indictment is found or a complaint filed, or when an arrestwarrant or other process is issued , provided that such
warrant or process is executed without unreasonable delay. 
(bold italics added).  Bikle contends that his prosecution in 
both cases commenced when he was arraigned, which in both cases was more than one year after his traffic infractions and crimes took place. 
2 Bikle's opening briefs in both appeals fail to comply with
Rule 28(b)(4) of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure.  Nevertheless, to 
promote access to justice the 
Hawai #i Supreme Court instructs that pleadings
prepared by self-represented litigants should be interpreted liberally, and
self-represented litigants should not automatically be foreclosed fromappellate review because they fail to comply with court rules.  Erum v. Llego, 147 Hawai #i 368, 380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827-28 (2020).  We address Bikle's 
points of error to the extent we can discern them. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Traffic Infraction Case 
HCTR Rule 6 provides: 
An action is commenced by serving the notice of infraction
on the driver of a motor vehicle or by affixing the noticeconspicuously to the vehicle. 
HCTR Rule 7 provides: 
The officer or some other person authorized by the issuingentity shall file the original of the notice of infractionwith, or transmit an electronic copy of the notice ofinfraction to, the Traffic Violations Bureau or DistrictCourt in the circuit where the alleged infraction occurred,no later than ten (10) calendar days after the date thenotice is issued. 
"Officer" is defined as "[p]olice or other person authorized by 
law to issue a notice of infraction."  HCTR Rule 3. 
For purposes of HRS § 701-108, the Infraction Citation 
was "other process" issued to Bikle.  The prosecution of the Traffic Infraction Case commenced when the HCPD officer served the Infraction Citation on Bikle.  Bikle's contention that the statute of limitations barred his prosecution lacks merit. Bikle's related argument that the Infraction Citation was invalid because the police officer who issued it was "not licensed as an attorney, nor does he work from the prosecutor's office" lacks merit. 
Although not stated as a point of error, Bikle argues 
that the Infraction Citation "could not possibly be construed as conveying all of the elements of the offenses alleged and it would be a violation of due process to allow such a vague instrument to be used for 'informing' a defendant of the allegations for which a defense must be prepared."  HCTR Rule 9 provides, in relevant part: 
The notice of infraction is sufficient if it contains either 
a written description of or statutory designation for theinfraction. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Infraction Citation contained the statutory 
designation for each of Bikle's infractions.  Bikle's due process
argument lacks merit.  
Traffic Crime Case 
The traffic crimes for which Bikle was charged were 
petty misdemeanors or violations.  Police officers are authorized
to issue citations for petty misdemeanors or violations.  HRS § 803-6 (2014) provides, in relevant part:  
(b) In any case in which it is lawful for a police
officer to arrest a person without a warrant for a
misdemeanor, petty misdemeanor or violation, the policeofficer may, but need not, issue a citation in lieu of[making an arrest] if the police officer finds and isreasonably satisfied that the person: 
(1) Will appear in court at the time designated; 
(2) Has no outstanding arrest warrants which wouldjustify the person's detention or giveindication that the person might fail to appearin court; and 
(3) That the offense is of such nature that there will be no further police contact on or aboutthe date in question, or in the immediatefuture. 
. . . . 
(d) Where a citation has been issued in lieu of 
[arrest], the officer who issues the summons or citation maysubscribe to the complaint: 
. . . . 
(2) By declaration in accordance with the rules ofcourt. 
Bikle's Criminal Citation stated: 
COMPLAINT:  The undersigned officer, on behalf of Plaintiff
State of Hawai #i, declares under penalty of law that he/she
has probable cause to believe and does believe that on thedate, at the time, and under the conditions indicated, thenamed defendant did commit the criminal offense(s) notedbelow and that the same is true and correct to the best of his/her knowledge and belief. 
This form of declaration complies with Appendix B of the Rules of 
the District Courts of the State of Hawai# i. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For purposes of HRS § 701-108, the Criminal Citation 
was "other process" issued to Bikle.  The prosecution of the 
Traffic Crime Case commenced when the HCPD officer issued the Criminal Citation to Bikle on November 11, 2016 (the date the offenses were committed).  Bikle's contention that the statute of limitations barred his prosecution lacks merit. 
Bikle raises five additional arguments in the Traffic 
Crime Case: 
1. "The [district court] Erred [sic] in
conducting and establishing a prima facie
case, and by not finding that, as a matter oflaw, the prosecution had failed to complywith the requirements of process forinitiating a criminal case that causedharmful effects and injustice to [Bikle]." 
The Traffic Crime Case was called for arraignment and 
plea on December 15, 2016.  Bikle stated he was challenging 
jurisdiction and wanted a bill of particulars.  The district court referred Bikle to the Office of the Public Defender and continued the proceeding.  Bikle argues: 
There were no valid charges against me and no proof of
service of a summons and Judge Freitas should not haveordered me to appear after the December 15, 2016 hearing andhe should not have required that I file a written motion todismiss when the foundational pleadings for initiating acase against me had not even been filed, and this waspointed out to him on the record.  This was a violation of the right to due process. 
(citation to the record omitted).  As explained above, the 
Traffic Crime Case was properly commenced when the HCPD officer issued the Criminal Citation to Bikle.  Bikle was orally charged on January 4, 2018.  The district court did not deprive Bikle of his right to due process.  
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. "[The district court] erred by ordering
[Bikle] to a bench trial without conducting a
probable cause hearing to determine if thewarrantless seizure of [Bikle] by [HCPD]Officer Clarence Davies was lawful and also without conducting an arraignment hearing, orobtaining the knowing waiver of said hearingby [Bikle]." 
Bikle argues, for the first time on appeal, that the 
district court erred by failing to hold a probable cause hearing 
to determine the validity of his warrantless seizure.  "As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal and civil cases."  State v. Moses, 102 Hawai# i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) (citations 
omitted).  Bikle's opening brief does not identify when or how this issue was raised to the district court.  We decline to address this point of error. 
3. "[The district court] erred by failing to
acknowledge that only a licensed prosecutor
may initiate prosecution for a criminal caseand a police officer is not a prosecutingofficer.  This is a due process violation." 
As explained above, the Traffic Crime Case was properly 
commenced when the HCPD officer issued the Criminal Citation to 
Bikle.  The district court did not deprive Bikle of his right to due process. 
4. "The totality of the actions by Judge Harry
Freitas present clear bias and prejudice that
prevented [Bikle] from having fairproceedings and a fair trial." 
Judge Freitas presided over the initially set 
December 15, 2016 arraignment and plea hearing, and continued the 
hearing to January 4, 2018.  Bikle contends: "Judge Freitas ignored me when I entered multiple objections to being charged after the statute of limitations and he entered a plea for me." 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The January 4, 2018 transcript of proceedings shows 
that after Bikle was arraigned by the deputy prosecuting attorney 
in the Traffic Crime Case he refused to enter a plea, stating: "You've already past the statute of limitations for when he's allowed to arraign me."  He also stated: "I would . . . like to leave here today with a dismissal because, uh, prosecution failed to initiate any charges.  They're the only ones authorized in the State of Hawaii to bring charges. . . . You guys –- you guys past [sic] the statute of limitations."  Judge Freitas responded: 
Okay. Then at this time what I'll do is I'll note your
representation and the fact that you don't wanna enter aplea as to the arraignment, so at this time the Court'sgonna enter your not guilty pleas as to the arraignment. . . of the charges. 
. . . . 
I'm gonna set it for a trial, you can file whatever
you want, and then we'll just go from there. 
The record does not support Bikle's argument that Judge Freitas 
was biased or prejudiced.  Bikle's point of error lacks merit. 
5. "The totality of the actions by Judge Michael
Udovic present clear bias and prejudice that
prevented Defendant-Appellant from havingfair proceedings." 
Judge Udovic presided over the March 30, 2017 
evidentiary hearing on Bikle's motion to suppress evidence.  
Bikle contends: 
[O]n March 2 [sic], 2017 [Judge Udovic] scheduled a trial
date even though . . . there were no written charges filedand the Official Transcript for the arraignment day ofDecember 15, 2016 shows [the deputy prosecuting attorney]failed to enter any oral charges.  Judge Michael Udovic alsorequired Defendant-Appellant to file a motion to suppressbefore  any charges were ever filed.  This is irregular
process and a complete violation of due process rights. 
During the hearing on March 30, 2017, Judge Udovic 
denied Bikle's motion to suppress.  Bikle stated an intention to 
take an interlocutory appeal.  Judge Udovic then set a status 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conference regarding the filing of an interlocutory appeal for 
June 1, 2017.  The record does not support Bikle's argument that Judge Udovic was biased or prejudiced.  Bikle's point of error lacks merit. 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Judgment After Trial De 
Novo & Notice of Entry of Judgment" entered on April 12, 2019, in the Traffic Infraction Case; and the "Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment" entered on April 12, 2019, in the Traffic Crime Case, are affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 3, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
Philip Bikle, Self-represented Defendant-Appellant. 
Leneigha S. Downs,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Hawai# i, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
9 