NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001068
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
IKUA A. PURDY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-1252)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ikua A. Purdy (Purdy) appeals from
 
a Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on July 23, 2014, in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).  Judgment
was entered against Purdy after he was found guilty of Promoting
 a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree (Count I), in violation of
 
2
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243 (2014);  Unlawful Use of
Drug Paraphernalia (Count II), in violation of HRS § 329-43.5
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1243 provides:
 
§712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount.
 
(2)	 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree
is a class C felony.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
(2010);  and Theft in the Fourth Degree (Count III), in violation
of HRS § 708-833 (2014).4
 
On appeal, Purdy contends that the circuit court abused
 
its discretion when it denied his motion to dismiss Counts I and
 
II based on a de minimis violation pursuant to HRS § 702-236(1)
 
5
 (2014) because the circuit court applied the wrong legal 
standard to the motion.6 Purdy further contends that he was
 
deprived of the effective assistance of counsel because his trial
 counsel failed to properly assert all relevant elements of a
 motion to dismiss based on a de minimis violation.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
3 HRS § 329-43.5 provides in pertinent part:
 
[§329-43.5] Prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia. (a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or
to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.
4 HRS § 708-833 provides:
 
§708-833. Theft in the fourth degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of theft in the fourth degree if the
person commits theft of property or services of any value
not in excess of $100.
 
(2) Theft in the fourth degree is a petty misdemeanor.
5 HRS § 702-236(1) provides in pertinent part:
 
§702-236 De minimis infractions.  (1) The court may
dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the
conduct alleged and the nature of the attendant
circumstances, it finds that the defendant's conduct:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or
evil sought to be prevented by the law defining
the offense or did so only to an extent too
trivial to warrant the condemnation of
 conviction[.]
6
 Purdy does not challenge his conviction on Count III. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Purdy's
 points of error as follows and affirm.
1. Motion to Dismiss for De Minimis Infractions. In
 
this case, Purdy is alleged to have stolen a charitable
 contribution container from a 7-11 Store. When Purdy was
 subsequently arrested, approximately thirty (30) minutes after
 the theft, a pat down by the arresting officer revealed that
 there was a prescription pill bottle in Purdy's pants in which
 there was a glass pipe. Testing of the glass pipe showed that it
 had residue weighing .002 grams and containing methamphetamine.
 
HRS § 702-236(1)(b) provides that a court may dismiss a 
prosecution as a de minimis infraction if "having regard to the nature of the conduct alleged and the nature of the attendant circumstances," the court finds that the defendant's conduct "[d]id not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense or did so only to an extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction[.]" We review the circuit court's decision under HRS § 702-236 for abuse of discretion. State v. Viernes, 92 Hawai
'i 130, 133, 988 
P.2d 195, 198 (1999). 
Purdy contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in denying his motion to dismiss because, in both its oral denial of the motion and its filed order, the circuit court erroneously relied on the following three-prong test from Justice Acoba's dissent in State v. Carmichael, 99 Hawai
'i 75, 53 P.3d 
214 (2002)(plurality opinion):7 
7
 In a footnote in his opening brief, Purdy contends that, despite his
moving to dismiss both Counts I and II as de minimis infractions, the record
appears to reflect that the circuit court only denied the motion as to Count
I. Purdy does not raise this as a point of error, therefore the argument is
waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). Also,
Purdy's argument before the circuit court as to why Count II should be
dismissed as a de minimis infraction was dependent on the circuit court firstfinding his violation in Count I to be de minimis. The circuit court denied 
the motion as to Count I. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The threshold qualification establishing that the
defendant's conduct either does not cause the harm sought to
be proscribed by HRS § 712-1243 or does so to an extent too
trivial to warrant conviction is possession of an amount of
drug not (1) saleable or (2) useable, i.e. capable of
producing an illicit pharmacological effect, or (3) linked
to the defendant's involvement in a crime to support a drug
habit at the time.
 
Id. at 100, 53 P.3d at 239 (Acoba, J., dissenting) (emphasis
 
added). Purdy asserts instead that "[t]he case law in Hawaii for
 a finding of conduct to be de minimis in the context of drug-
related offenses is whether the drugs are saleable or useable." 
Purdy is correct that the third prong of Justice 
Acoba's test in his Carmichael dissent has not been adopted by a majority of a Hawai
'i appellate court. However, although the 
circuit court should not have pointed to that test, it appears that the circuit court ultimately ruled in a manner that is consistent with Hawaii case law regarding de minimis infractions and HRS § 712-1243, such that its denial of Purdy's motion to dismiss was not an abuse of discretion. 
In its oral ruling, although the circuit court
 
discussed Justice Acoba's three-part test in his Carmichael
 dissent, the court concluded its ruling by stating:
 
When defendant's possession of the drugs arises out of
his arrest for a theft, then under these circumstances, the
Court cannot find that to be trivial because that is what
 the statute sought to abrogate.
So for those reasons, the Court will, in its
discretion, will deny the motion.
 
Moreover, in its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, And Order
 
Denying Defendant's Motion To Dismiss For De Minimis Violation
 (Findings and Conclusions), filed on January 22, 2014, the
 circuit court properly referenced the language under HRS § 702­236(1)(b) and standards set forth in the plurality opinion in
 Carmichael. Although, like its oral ruling, the circuit court
 also discussed Justice Acoba's three-part test in his Carmichael
 dissent, the circuit court's ultimate conclusion was that:
 
Based on Defendant's possession of a methamphetamine smoking
device and smoked methamphetamine residue upon his person
during the commission of a property crime, this court cannot
conclude that Defendant's conduct did not actually cause or
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
threaten the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law
defining the offense of promoting a dangerous drug in the
third degree, HRS § 712-1243, or that it did so only to an
extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation of
 conviction.
 
Thus, it appears that the circuit court denied the motion because
 
Purdy possessed a pipe containing methamphetamine residue while
 committing a property crime. This conclusion is in line with
 Hawai
'i case law. 
Moreover, we disagree with Purdy's contention that, in
 
determining whether a drug offense is de minimis, Hawaii case law
 limits the analysis to whether the drugs are saleable or useable. 
In State v. Fukagawa, 100 Hawai
'i 498, 60 P.3d 899 (2002), the 
Hawaii Supreme Court stated that:
 
In determining whether a defendant's conduct caused or
threatened the evils sought to be prevented by drug laws,
this court has considered the amount of drugs a defendant
possessed as one of the relevant circumstances to be
considered. . . . However, quantity is only one of the
surrounding circumstances a court must consider. Before
dismissing a charge as a de minimis infraction, a court must
consider the amount of drugs possessed and the surrounding
circumstances to determine if the defendant's conduct caused
 or threatened the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the
law defining the offense sufficiently to warrant the
condemnation of conviction.
 
Id. at 505, 60 P.3d at 906 (emphasis added)(citations omitted). 
"The legislative purpose of the penal statutes relating to drugs and intoxicating compounds - including HRS § 712-1243 - is to respond to 'abuse and social harm.' The legislature increased the penalties attendant to the possession or distribution of methamphetamines 'to counter increased property and violent crimes.'" Viernes, 92 Hawai
'i at 134, 988 P.2d at 199 (citations 
omitted). 
This court's decision in State v. Sanford, 97 Hawai 'i 
247, 35 P.3d 764 (App. 2001), cert denied, 97 Hawai 'i 247, 35 
P.3d 764 (2001), is instructive. In Sanford, the defendant was detained in a store for shoplifting and, while detained, drug contraband was found in her bag (.004 grams of a substance containing methamphetamine in a Ziploc bag and .005 grams of a residue containing methamphetamine found in a glass pipe). Id. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at 251-52, 35 P.3d at 768-69. The trial court found that the
 
combined .009 grams of methamphetamine was a useable amount, the
 defendant did not challenge that finding on appeal, and thus this
 court treated the finding as binding. Id. at 256, 35 P.3d at
 
773. Given that finding, it was noted that, unlike in Viernes,
 
this court could not say that, because the amount in question was
 "infinitesimal and was neither useable nor saleable, it could not
 engender any abuse or social harm, and hence, did not threaten

 
the harm sought to be prevented by HRS § 712–1243." Id. at 256,
 
35 P.3d at 773 (citation, brackets and quotation marks omitted). 

However, this court did not end its analysis there, simply
 relying on whether the amount was useable. Rather, this court
 further reasoned that:
 
viewing, as we must, “all of the relevant facts bearing on the
defendant's conduct and the nature of the attendant circumstances
 regarding the commission of the offense,” including the
juxtaposition of drug repositories, smoking device and smoked
residue, and especially the possession of such depleted drug
contraband by one engaged in shoplifting, we cannot conclude that
[defendant's] conduct “did not actually cause or threaten the harm
or evil sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense or
did so only to an extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation
of conviction,” HRS § 702–236(1)(b), or agree with [defendant]
that the punishment “does not fit the crime” as a matter of law.
 
Id. (emphasis added)(citations and brackets omitted). This court
 
concluded that the defendant's conduct, committing a property
 crime, was "precisely the harm or evil that the legislature
 sought to prevent in HRS § 712-1243."
8 Id. 
In State v. Vance, 61 Haw. 291, 602 P.2d 933 (1979), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court noted that under HRS § 712-1243, it was 
an offense for a person to knowingly possess any dangerous drug "in any amount," that the statute was "part of a statutory scheme 
8
 Purdy's contention that Sanford is distinguishable is without merit.
While the defendant in Sanford had more drugs on her person, and was detained
while still in the store, as opposed to Purdy being detained approximately
thirty minutes after the theft in this case, the general proposition stated in
Sanford is applicable. The trial court may, upon its consideration of all of
the attendant circumstances, properly consider a defendant's possession of a
smoking device and smoked residue, and the possession of such depleted
contraband by one committing a property crime, as creating "precisely the harm
or evil that the legislature sought to prevent in HRS § 712-1243." 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
designed to provide more severe punishment for possession of 
greater quantities of drugs[,]" and that given the statutory design and that the Legislature carefully considered the precise amount of drug needed to constitute an offense, "the direct and unambiguous language of our statute prohibits us from judicially amending the provision to include a usable quantity standard." Id. at 306-07, 602 P.2d at 943-44. Subsequently, in Viernes, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the trial court did not abuse its 
discretion in dismissing a charge under HRS § 712-1243 where there was uncontroverted evidence that the .001 gram substance containing methamphetamine involved in that case could not produce any pharmacological action or physiological effect, and was not saleable. 92 Hawai
'i at 134, 988 P.2d at 199. As stated 
by the supreme court, however, "[i]t should be noted that, in so holding, this court should not be seen as contradicting Vance and applying a 'usable quantity standard' to HRS § 712-1243." Id. at 
135, 988 P.2d at 200. 
In this case, it appears that the circuit court denied 
the motion to dismiss in consideration of the amount of drugs Purdy possessed and the attendant circumstances that the evidence indicated that Purdy possessed a dangerous drug and drug paraphernalia while committing a property crime.
9 "With specific 
reference to HRS § 712-1243, this court has noted that Hawai 'i's 
drug laws were intended to control the use and sale of illicit drugs, and to address related social harms, including property and violent crimes." Fukagawa, 100 Hawai
'i at 504-05, 60 P.3d at 
905-06 (citations omitted). Because the circuit court considered the nature of the conduct and the surrounding circumstance as presented by Purdy and its conclusion did not clearly exceed the bounds of reason or disregard rules or principles of law, it did 
9
 Purdy's denial of possessing the pertinent state of mind is an issue
for trial, not a motion to dismiss for de minimis infraction. See Viernes, 92 
Hawai'i at 135, 988 P.2d at 200 (providing that a de minimis infraction arises 
where the conduct technically violates a statute, but the conduct is so
harmless as to be de minimis pursuant to HRS § 702-236). 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not abuse its discretion.
 
2. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel. Purdy did not 
receive constitutionally deficient assistance of counsel because 
the alleged specific errors or omissions did not reflect counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, and, even if trial counsel was ineffective, it did not deprive Purdy of a possibly meritorious defense. See State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 
504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 (2003) (providing test for ineffective assistance of counsel). 
Purdy contends that his counsel provided ineffective
 
assistance because counsel failed to present attendant
 circumstances necessary to support the motion to dismiss for de
 minimis infractions.
10 In general, Purdy contends the
 
circumstances not highlighted by his counsel show that Purdy had
 borrowed the shorts he was wearing from a friend; that the pill
 bottle and its contents were already in the shorts; and that
 Purdy did not commit the theft to support a drug habit. There is
 nothing in the record to show that this evidence existed at the
 time the circuit court ruled on Purdy's motion to dismiss. 
Moreover, even if such evidence were presented to the
 
circuit court, it would not have affected the circuit court's
 analysis as to whether to dismiss based on a de minimis
 infraction. Rather, whether Purdy borrowed the shorts he was
 wearing and whether the bottle containing methamphetamine was
 already in the shorts, were germane to whether he was guilty of
 the offense, not whether the "nature of the conduct alleged and
 the nature of the attendant circumstances" warranted a
 determination that the alleged conduct was de minimis.
11
 
10 Purdy contends that counsel failed to present relevant attendant
circumstances, but also states in his reply brief that "as required, both at
the hearing on the motion and on appeal, the defense adduced evidence
concerning the minuscule, trace amount of methamphetamine and the attendant
circumstances. This adduced evidence demonstrates that a dismissal for de
 minimis violation was indicated." 
11 The nature of the conduct alleged is that Purdy "knowingly
 
possesse[d] any dangerous drug in any amount." HRS § 712-1243 (emphasis
added).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, as to Purdy's argument that his trial counsel should
 
have argued the attendant circumstance that he committed the
 theft to buy food and cigarettes, and not to support a drug
 habit, as noted above, the case law does not require a property
 crime to be committed exclusively to buy drugs or support a drug
 habit. Counsel's representation of Purdy was not
 constitutionally ineffective and did not deprive Purdy of a
 possibly meritorious defense. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, filed on July 23, 2014, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 23, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Lars Peterson,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9

 