NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000494 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
COURTNEY SHAWN WILKINS, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-18-0000474(1)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Courtney Shawn Wilkins (Wilkins) 
appeals from the June 26, 2019 Judgment; Conviction and Probation 
Sentence; Terms and Conditions of Probation; Notice of Entry 
(Judgment), entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(Circuit Court).1 
Wilkins asserts a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in denying her September 
24, 2018 Defendant's Motion to Suppress Statements and Evidence 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gathered in Violation of Defendant's Rights Under Article I, 
Section 7 of the Hawai# i Constitution (Motion to Suppress). 
After the Motion to Suppress was denied, Wilkins 
entered a conditional plea of no contest to Entry of Animals 
Without Inspection Prohibited, in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 142-4 (2018),  and Arrival Ports, in violation 
of Hawaii Administrative Rules (
HAR) Rule 4-29-5 (2018).2
  3
2 HRS § 142-4 provides: 
§ 142-4 Entry of animals without inspection
prohibited. No animal shall be allowed to enter the State 
except after inspection by the department of agriculture and
the issuance of a permit by the department to the consigneeor owner; provided that no fees for inspection shall becharged, nor delays caused, concerning the landing of anydomestic animal for which a certificate of health has been issued as prescribed by the Federal Cattle ContagiousDisease Act. Every carrier, owner, or handler bringinganimals into the State shall be required to present theseanimals to the department of agriculture for inspection. 
3 HAR § 4-29-5 provides: 
§ 4-29-5 Arrival ports. (a) Dogs, cats, and other
carnivores which are subject to quarantine pursuant tosection 4-29-9 or inspection pursuant to section 4-29-22shall be landed at a port or airport on the island of Oahuor a port or airport approved by the department that hasfacilities and an agent designated by the department toprocess dogs and cats for entry.
(b) Dogs, cats, and other carnivores to be
quarantined at the quarantine station or to be inspectedpursuant to section 4-29-22 who arrive at neighbor islandports or airports not approved by the department shall beshipped to the island of Oahu at the owner's expense on thefirst available aircraft. 
(c) To land a dog, cat, or other carnivore at a
neighbor island port or airport approved by the department,the animal owner, shipper, or handler shall:
(1) Meet the requirements of sections 4-29-8,4-29-8.1, and 4-29-8.2 for direct airportrelease for each animal except that all requireddocuments shall be submitted to the departmentno less than thirty days before the arrivaldate;
(2) Submit a request for a Neighbor IslandInspection Permit to the department no less thanthirty days before the arrival date; 
(continued...) 
2 3(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wilkins's plea was conditioned on her ability to appeal the 
denial of the Motion to Suppress. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Wilkins's point of error as follows: 
Wilkins does not contend that she was subjected to a 
custodial interrogation, which would require Miranda warnings.
4 
Rather, citing State v. Won, 137 Hawai# i 330, 372 P.3d 1065 
(2015), Wilkins argues that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Wilkins's statements and physical evidence were obtained through voluntary and consensual interactions. Wilkins bases this argument on the assertions that (1) the Circuit Court did not consider Wilkins's perception of the interactions, in light 
of her post-traumatic stress disorder (
PTSD), and (2) no one told 
(3) Contract with an agent approved by the
department to inspect and release each animalupon arrival; and
(4) Possess a valid Neighbor Island InspectionPermit issued by the department for each animal.
(d) Dogs, cats, and other carnivores arriving or
landing at neighbor island ports or airports without a validNeighbor Island Inspection Permit issued by the departmentshall be transported out of the State or quarantined andtransported to the Honolulu International Airport at thecarrier's expense on the first available aircraft.
(e) Dogs, cats, and other carnivores aboard
transiting private and commercial vessels are subjectto section 4-29-7. 
4 See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wilkins that she had a right to refuse to speak with them and 
provide them statements or documents. 
Wilkins does not challenge any of the 90 findings of 
fact (FOFs)5 or specifically point to any of the 30 conclusions 
of law (COLs) set forth in the Circuit Court's December 24, 2018 
[FOFs]; [COLs]; Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Suppress 
Evidence and Statements (FOFs, COLs and Order). 
As to Wilkins's first assertion, the FOFs clearly 
demonstrate that the Circuit Court considered Wilkins's 
perception of her interactions with various persons at the Maui 
airport, where she entered the State of Hawai# i (State) with her 
service animal, Riley. Riley did not have a valid rabies blood 
test upon entry to the State. 
The FOFs also recognize Wilkins's 
testimony regarding her perceptions and feelings when she was contacted by and interacted with Dr. Richard Willer, a 
veterinarian employed by the Department of Agriculture (Dr. 
Willer). The FOFs specifically note, inter alia, that Wilkins 
told Dr. Willer that she had PTSD. Thus, although the Circuit 
Court did not find Wilkins's testimony to be credible, the record does not support Wilkins's assertion that the Circuit Court failed to consider Wilkins's perceptions as part of the totality of the circumstances. 
5 FOFs not challenged on appeal are binding. Kaho #ohanohano v. Haw. 
Dep't of Hum. Servs., 117 Hawai #i 262, 267, 178 P.3d 538, 543 (2008). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wilkins also asserts that none of the airline 
employees, airport employees, nor the Department of Agriculture 
employees that Wilkins interacted with, told Wilkins she could refuse to talk to them. Thus, Wilkins points to Won and argues (obliquely) that the Circuit Court erred in not specifically addressing this lack of advisement. However, Won makes clear that courts must consider the totality of the circumstances and that "the constitution does not require that individuals be expressly informed of their right to refuse a search, [but] whether they were so informed remains a relevant factor in a determination of whether consent was, in fact, free and voluntary under the totality of the circumstances." Won, 137 Hawai# i at 
342, 372 P.3d at 1077. 
Wilkins does not challenge the factual bases or legal 
conclusion that Wilkins did not have an actual subjective nor objective expectation of privacy when she voluntarily boarded a plane and entered a public airport, both of which adhere to strict and heightened security measures. Wilkins makes no cogent argument that a warrant was required prior to asking her for the proper Department of Agriculture paperwork/permit when she entered the State with a dog. Wilkins does not challenge the Circuit Court's findings and conclusions that Wilkins was never detained, handcuffed, seized, deprived of her freedom of action in any significant way, by anyone, and/or threatened, coerced, promised, or even questioned by Dr. Willer. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Notwithstanding that Wilkins was not specifically told 
that she could refuse to talk to, e.g., Dr. Willer, under the 
totality of the circumstances, as reflected in the FOFs and COLs, as well as all of the evidence presented at the hearing on the Motion to Suppress, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in concluding that Wilkins's statements were voluntary. Therefore, we further conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in denying the Motion to Suppress. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 26, 2019 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i
 , October 14, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeKevin O'Grady, (Law Office of Kevin O'Grady,
LLC), 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Gerald K. Enrigues, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
6 