  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000571
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DEAN VICTOR MATUU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-0128)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Dean Victor Matuu (Matuu) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment), filed on
 
July 20, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1
 Following a jury trial, Matuu was convicted of Assault
 
in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 707-710 (2014).2
 Matuu was sentenced to a five-year term
 
of incarceration.
 
Matuu raises two points of error on appeal, arguing: 
(1) there was no substantial evidence to support Matuu's
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-710 provides in relevant part:
 
§707-710 Assault in the first degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the first degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly causes serious bodily
injury to another person.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conviction because the State did not prove beyond a reasonable
 
doubt facts negating his justification defenses; and (2) the
 Circuit Court's instruction on the use of deadly force in self-
protection was prejudicially erroneous and misleading.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Matuu's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Matuu contends that there was no substantial
 
evidence to support his conviction because the State did not
 prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Matuu did not act in self-
defense or defense of others. The State submits that the record
 contains substantial evidence to support the conviction, and that
 the verdict indicates that the jury simply did not believe Matuu
 or that it did not believe that his actions were justified.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has long held: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction. The test on appeal is not whether
guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether
there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of
the trier of fact. Indeed, even if it could be said in a
bench trial that the conviction is against the weight of the
evidence, as long as there is substantial evidence to
support the requisite findings for conviction, the trial
court will be affirmed. Substantial evidence is credible
 evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value
to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion.
 
State v. Xiao, 123 Hawai 'i 251, 257, 231 P.3d 968, 974 (2010) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and emphasis omitted; format 
altered). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 703-304 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 703-304 Use of force in self-protection.  (1)
Subject to the provisions of this section and of section
703-308, the use of force upon or toward another person is
justifiable when the actor believes that such force is
immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself
against the use of unlawful force by the other person on the
present occasion.
(2) The use of deadly force is justifiable under this
section if the actor believes that deadly force is necessary
to protect himself against death, serious bodily injury,
kidnapping, rape, or forcible sodomy.
 
"[Self-defense] is not designated as an affirmative
 
defense by the Hawai 'i Penal Code or any other statute." State 
v. Lubong, 77 Hawai 'i 429, 431, 886 P.2d 766, 768 (App. 1994). 
Furthermore, 
a defendant who comes forward with some credible evidence of
 facts constituting the defense is, pursuant to HRS
§ 701–115(2)(a) (1985), "entitled to an acquittal if the
trier of fact finds that the evidence, when considered in
the light of any contrary prosecution evidence, raises a
reasonable doubt as to the defendant's guilt[.]" Moreover,
once the issue of self-protection is raised, the burden is
on the prosecution to disprove the facts that have been
introduced or to prove facts negativing the defense and to
do so beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
 
Id. (citations omitted).
 
Here, whether sufficient evidence negated Matuu's
 
justification of self-defense requires an analysis of whether (1)
 
Matuu used deadly force, and (2) whether Matuu's belief as to the
 necessity of deadly force was reasonable. HRS § 703-304(2).
 
"'Deadly force' means force which the actor uses with
 
the intent of causing or which the actor knows to create a
 substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily harm." HRS §
 703-300 (2014). HRS § 703-300 also provides that "'believes'
 means reasonably believes." In
 Lubong, this court concluded that
 
charging at an attacker with a knife constituted deadly force. 
Lubong, 77 Hawai
'i at 432, 886 P.2d at 769. The undisputed 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence in this case is that during an incident involving the
 
decedent, Frank Kapesi (Frank), Matuu, and Kapesi Kapesi
 
(Kapesi), Matuu left the room, obtained a knife from the kitchen,
 and upon returning to the room, stabbed Frank, who died of the
 
wounds. To this end, the evidence sufficiently supports a jury
 finding that Matuu used deadly force.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has adopted a two-prong test 
for assessing the reasonableness of a defendant's belief as to the need to use deadly force in self-protection: 
The first prong is subjective; it requires a
determination of whether the defendant had the requisite
belief that deadly force was necessary to avert death,
serious bodily injury, kidnapping, rape, or forcible sodomy.
 
If the State does not prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant did not have the requisite belief that
deadly force was necessary, the factfinder must then proceed
to the second prong of the test. This prong is objective;
it requires a determination of whether a reasonably prudent
person in the same situation as the defendant would have
believed that deadly force was necessary for
self-protection. 
State v. Culkin, 97 Hawai 'i 206, 215, 35 P.3d 233, 242 (2001) 
(citations and ellipsis omitted). 
Assuming, arguendo, that the jury determined Matuu
 
believed deadly force was necessary to avert death or serious
 
bodily injury, we conclude that the evidence adduced at trial was
 sufficient to negate Matuu's argument that a reasonably prudent
 person would have believed that deadly force was necessary to
 prevent death or serious bodily injury. 
Matuu testified that he was afraid of Frank because he
 
had previously witnessed Frank punch Kapesi unconscious, another
 family member appears to have been attacked by Frank, and Frank
 had previously threatened to beat him up. In addition, on the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
day of the incident, Frank appeared to be high on drugs, and
 
became aggressive toward Matuu, threatening him and throwing
 punches. Matuu testified that when Frank started throwing
 punches, Matuu began to wrestle him and they were "crashing all
 over through everything." Kapesi then tried to break them up and
 Frank slammed Kapesi to the ground and, according to Matuu, 
punched Kapesi several times. Matuu testified that he was
 thinking that when Frank was done with Kapesi, he would be next,
 and so he went to the kitchen and grabbed a knife. Although two
 knives were found, Matuu only admitted to grabbing one. Matuu
 testified that when he returned, Frank was on Kapesi, and Matuu
 stabbed him. Matuu stated that he only remembered stabbing Frank
 once, in the side, to stop him and that he did not intend to kill
 Frank.
 
Kapesi testified, inter alia, that he heard Matuu and
 
Frank arguing and then heard something break. He ran to where
 they were, saw them sort of wrestling, and then he jumped in to
 try to break them apart. Kapesi testified that Frank then
 grabbed him, slammed him on the ground, causing Kapesi to lose
 his breath. Kapesi stated that Frank was on top of him, but that
 Frank was not hitting him. Kapesi testified that after he got
 his wind, he got up and was yelling to "[s]top already" and then
 he saw Matuu, coming quickly from the kitchen area. Kapesi said
 he was standing between Frank and Matuu and put his hand up to
 stop Matuu, to block him, and got a little cut on his hand, like
 a stab. Kapesi said he was in shock, tending to his cut. The
 next thing he knew, Frank was on the ground, gasping for air,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
asking for help, saying that he could not breathe. At the time,
 
he saw Frank bleeding from the side; later he saw what looked
 like little cuts in his chest. Kapesi did not observe any wounds
 on Matuu. There was no evidence that Frank was armed. 
The police found a broken knife blade near Frank's
 
foot. The medical examiner found a second knife blade broken off
 in the wound track in Frank's chest. Frank had both sharp force
 injuries, including four stab wounds of the torso and two incised
 wounds, and blunt force injuries to the head, torso, and
 extremities. Three of the stab wounds were on the left side of
 the chest and the fourth was on the left side of the back. The
 cause of death was the stab wounds to Frank's torso; the wound to
 the back and the wound where the knife blade was found were both
 potentially fatal, meaning either of them could have led to death
 on their own. Frank had methamphetamine and amphetamine, a
 metabolite of methamphetamine, in his blood, but not at levels
 that were relevant to Frank's cause of death. 
In light of the above, as well as the other testimony
 
and evidence presented at trial, there is substantial evidence to
 support the jury's conclusion that Matuu's use of deadly force in
 self-defense was not justified. The jury could have given
 greater weight to Kapesi's testimony as to how the stabbing
 incident unfolded or disbelieved Matuu's version altogether. The
 evidence suggested that Frank, who was unarmed, was stabbed with
 two knives, perhaps with the second knife being used after the
 first knife broke. We conclude that there was substantial
 evidence to support a conclusion that a reasonably prudent person
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would not believe that it was necessary to stab Frank in the
 
torso multiple times to protect himself against death or serious
 injury.
 
Regarding the defense of others, HRS § 703-305 (2014)
 
provides:
 
§ 703-305. Use of force for the protection of other
persons. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and
of section 703-310, the use of force upon or toward the
person of another is justifiable to protect a third person
when: 
(a) Under the circumstances as the actor believes them 
to be, the person whom the actor seeks to protect
would be justified in using such protective force;
and 
(b) The actor believes that the actor's intervention 
is necessary for the protection of the other
person.
 
A defendant's belief that intervention is necessary 
must be "reasonable." State v. Mark, 123 Hawai 'i 205, 220, 231 
P.3d 478, 493 (2010) (citing HRS § 703-300). Whether Matuu's 
actions were justified in defense of Kapesi requires an analysis of (1) whether Kapesi would have been justified in using deadly force under the circumstances as Matuu believed them to be, and (2) whether Matuu reasonably believed that his use of deadly
 force was necessary for Kapesi's protection. See id. at 220, 231
 
P.3d at 493 (citing HRS §§ 703-300 & 703-305).
 
For roughly the same reasons that the self-defense
 
argument fails, this argument fails as well. Particularly, if
 the jury believed Kapesi's testimony, although Frank slammed
 Kapesi to the ground, Frank did not hit Kapesi and Kapesi had
 regained his wind and was on his feet trying to keep Frank and
 Matuu apart when Frank was stabbed. It appears that the jury was
 well within its province to conclude that the evidence proved
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Kapesi would not have been 
justified in stabbing Frank under these circumstances. "[I]n order to use force to protect a third person, the actor must have a reasonable belief that, as to the third person, . . . deadly force is necessary to protect himself against death [or] serious bodily injury[.]" Mark, 123 Hawai
'i at 220, 231 P.3d at 493. We 
conclude that the record contains evidence of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to conclude that Matuu did not reasonably believe that deadly force was necessary for Kapesi's protection. 
(2) Matuu contends that the Circuit Court erred by
 
rejecting Defendant's Proposed Instruction 1 over his objection. 
Defendant's Proposed Instruction 1 modified the Circuit Court's
 proposed instruction as follows (the proposed added wording is
 underlined):
 
If you unanimously determine beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant used "deadly force," then you are to
proceed to the section in this instruction entitled "Deadly
Force Used." If you determine that the defendant did not
use "deadly force," or are unable to reach unanimous
aqreement on this issue, then you are to proceed to the
section in this instruction entitled "Deadly Force Not
Used." You must then follow the law in the applicable
section to determine the second issue, which is whether the
force used by the defendant was justified. 
Matuu contends that the Circuit Court's instruction was
 
prejudicially erroneous and misleading because "the jury may not
 
have unanimously determined beyond a reasonable doubt that Matuu
 had used deadly force." The State counters that because the jury
 first had to find that Matuu committed Assault in the First
 Degree before considering self-defense, it must have found
 
8
  In its self-defense instruction, the court instructed
 
the jury as follows regarding the issue of deadly force: 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unanimously and beyond a reasonable doubt that Matuu used deadly
 
force.
 
As the State submits, Matuu's conviction for Assault in
 
the First Degree establishes that the jury, unanimously and
 beyond a reasonable doubt, found that Matuu had used deadly
 force. 
The jury instruction for Assault in the First Degree
 
reads in pertinent part:
 
A person commits the offense of Assault in the First
Degree if he intentionally or knowingly causes serious
bodily injury to another person.
There are two material elements of the offense of
 
Assault in the First Degree, each of which the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These two elements are: 
1. That on or about January 24, 2015, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, the Defendant caused
serious bodily injury
 to Frank Kapesi; and
2. That the Defendant did so intentionally or
knowingly. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury which
creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious,
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Emphasis added). 
The Circuit Court also instructed the jury that "[i]n
 
order for the prosecution to prove an element, all twelve jurors
 
must unanimously agree that the same act has been proved beyond a
 reasonable doubt." 
The first issue is: Did the defendant use "deadly
force?
 
"Deadly Force" means force which the defendant uses
with the intent of causing, or which he knows to create a
substantial risk of causing, death or serious bodily injury. 
. . . . 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury which
creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious
 permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Emphasis added). 
According to these instructions, the commission of
 
Assault in the First Degree requires the use of deadly force. It
 
requires the actor to cause serious bodily injury either
 intentionally or knowingly. In addition, the self-defense
 instruction defines deadly force as force that the defendant
 intends or knows will create "a substantial risk of . . . death
 or serious bodily injury." Therefore, where the jury found that
 Matuu committed Assault in the First Degree, it necessarily found
 that he used deadly force. Since the jury was instructed that,
 for each element, they must unanimously agree that the same act
 has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, the jury's decision
 that the element of deadly force had been satisfied must have
 been both unanimous and beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In addition, "[j]ury instructions . . . must be 
considered as a whole. Moreover, a refusal to give an instruction that correctly states the law is not in error if another expressing a substantially similar principle is given.” Samson v. Nahulu, 136 Hawai
'i 415, 425, 363 P.3d 263, 273 (2015) 
(citation omitted). Here, the court sufficiently instructed the jury regarding unanimity. The court first stated that in order to convict, the jury must unanimously agree to each element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. Then the court gave a general unanimity instruction. In addition, in the instruction for self-defense, the court instructed the jury that "[t]he burden is on the prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the force used by the defendant was not justified. If the 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecution does not meet its burden, then you must find the
 
defendant not guilty." The additional unanimity instruction
 requested by Matuu was unnecessary. 
Accordingly, we conclude that, when viewed as a whole,
 
the jury instructions given by the Circuit Court were not
 prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent or
 misleading. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 20, 2016 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: John M. Tonaki,
Public Defender,Jon N. Ikenaga,Deputy Public Defender,For Defendant-Appellant. 
Keith M. Kaneshiro,
Prosecuting Attorney,Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
11
 