NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000397
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 14-1-6236)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant M.N. (Father) appeals from a
 
"Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody"
 
entered on May 6, 2016, and a "Decision and Order Following
 September 21, 2015 Trial" entered on November 30, 2015, in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).
1
 The family
 
court dissolved the marriage of Father and Plaintiff-Appellee
 M.N. (Mother), awarded sole legal and physical custody of the
 
parties' child (minor child) to Mother, and ordered a timesharing
 
schedule in which minor child is with Mother for four days/nights
 
a week and with Father three days/nights a week.
 
On appeal, Father contends that the family court erred
 
by: (1) awarding Mother sole legal custody of minor child because
 Mother engaged in patent and wilful misuse of the protection from
 
1
 The Honorable Dyan M. Medeiros presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
abuse process under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 586 and
 
engaged in repeated conduct that established that she is unable
 
to cooperate with Father concerning minor child; and (2) refusing
 to consider the impact of child support upon the parties' post-
divorce abilities to support their households in granting
 Mother's requested timesharing schedule, and instead should have
 granted the parties an equal number of days over two week
 periods.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant legal authorities, we resolve Father's points of error
 as follows, and we affirm.
 
(1) Legal Custody. Father contends that the family
 
court erred in awarding Mother sole legal custody of minor child
 because Mother wilfully misused the protection from abuse process
 and her conduct demonstrated that she is unable to cooperate with
 Father concerning minor child. In his argument, Father
 challenges the family court's findings of fact (FOFs) 17(b),
 
17(d), 17(f), 17(h), 21, 23, 25, 26, and ultimately, challenges
 
conclusions of law (COLs) 9 and 10 which relate to the family
 
court's award of sole legal and physical custody of minor child
 
to Mother.
2
 
2 The FOFs and COLs that Father challenges are as follows: 
II. FINDINGS OF FACT.
 
. . . . 
17. In considering the factors enumerated in HRS §571­
46(b), the Court finds as follows: 
. . . .
 
b. The parents are not able to cooperate in
developing and implementing a plan to meet [minor
child's] ongoing needs.
 
. . . . 
d. Based on the testimony of the parties
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2(...continued)
regarding pre-school for [minor child], Wife
appears to be better able to take steps to meet
[minor child's] educational needs. 
. . . .
 
f. Husband's arguments regarding custody and
timesharing indicated that he has a harder time
separating [minor child's] needs from his needs.
Specifically, Husband's arguments didn't address why
his positions were in [minor child's] best interest,
they simply assumed that what he wanted was in [minor
child's] best interest.
 
. . . .
 
h. Although the Court is concerned about
the timing of Wife's filing of her Ex Parte
Petitions for Temporary Restraining Orders in
2014, Husband didn't establish by clear and
convincing evidence that Wife misused the
protection from abuse process nor did he
establish by clear and convincing evidence that
Wife would be unable to cooperate successfully
with Husband in the future regarding [minor
child]. The Court therefore doesn't find that
Wife misused the protection from abuse process. 
. . . . 
21. Based on the testimony and demeanor of the parties
at trial, Husband remains hostile towards Wife and is unable
to co-parent with Wife. 
. . . . 
23. This inability indicates that decisions for [minor
child] will not be made in a timely manner if the parties
share joint legal custody. 
. . . . 
25. If the parties had not been in trial, the Court
believes that Husband would not have agreed that [minor
child] could attend [the selected] pre-school. The Court
 believes that Husband would have continued to ignore the
need to communicate with Wife regarding this issue and would
have further delayed a decision on this issue. 
26. Husband's anger at Wife interferes with his
ability to take actions or make decisions on [minor child's]
behalf if taking those actions or making those decisions
requires him to communicate and interact with Wife. 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that in custody 
proceedings, "the paramount consideration . . . is the best 
interests of the child." Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai 'i 144, 156, 44 
P.3d 1085, 1097 (2002) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). HRS § 571-46(b) (Supp. 2016) provides a list of factors the family court is to examine in determining the best interest of the child. Here, the family court concluded that it was in the best interest of minor child to award sole legal and physical custody to Mother under the factors provided in HRS § 571-46(b), while maintaining the timesharing arrangement which has been in place since December 2013. 
With regard to FOFs 17(b), 17(f), 21, and 26, the 
family court considered the testimony and demeanor of the parties and determined, inter alia, that Father remains hostile towards Mother. Further, with regard to FOFs 17(d), 23, and 25, the family court weighed the parties' conflicting testimony relating to pre-school enrollment for minor child. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. Jenkins, 93 
Hawai
'i 87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000) (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Given the record and the parties' testimony, we see no basis to disturb the family court's evaluation of credibility and weighing of the evidence. In re 
Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001). 
With regard to FOF 17(h), Father contends that Mother
 
2(...continued)
 
III. CONCLUSIONS OF LAW.
 
. . . . 
9. It is in [minor child's] best interest for Wife to
be awarded sole legal custody of [minor child]. 
10. It is in [minor child's] best interest for Wife to
be awarded sole physical custody of [minor child]. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
improperly filed two petitions for temporary restraining orders
 
(TROs) against him that wilfully sought to deny Father's
 
scheduled time with minor child during the holidays. The
 
petitions, filed on December 24, 2014, and December 29, 2014,
 were based on alleged events going back to 2011. The petitions
 were denied and Father claims Mother wilfully misused the process
 in HRS Chapter 586, and that the family court improperly failed
 to consider this factor in determining the best interest of minor
 child, as set forth in HRS § 571-46(b)(16).
 
Mother, in turn, asserts she did not raise the
 
allegations of Father's abuse for improper reasons. Rather, she
 testified that the TRO petitions were a culmination of her
 repeated attempts to seek help because of Father's behavior. 
Mother maintains that she was "desperate for intervention."
 Further, Mother testified that she filed the petitions after
 speaking with a doctor, who asked Mother if she had a "safety
 plan." 
In FOF 17(h), the family court found that, although it
 
was concerned about the timing of Mother's TRO petitions,
 "Husband didn't establish by clear and convincing evidence that
 Wife misused the protection from abuse process nor did he
 establish by clear and convincing evidence that Wife would be
 unable to cooperate successfully with Husband in the future
 regarding [minor child]." 
HRS § 571-46(b)(16) states that:
 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest
of the child under this section, the court shall consider,
but not be limited to, the following:
 
. . . .
 
(16)	 A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protection
from abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a
tactical advantage in any proceeding involving
the custody determination of a minor. Such
 
wilful misuse may be considered only if it is
established by clear and convincing evidence,
and if it is further found by clear and
convincing evidence that in the particular
family circumstance the wilful misuse tends to
show that, in the future, the parent who engaged
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the wilful misuse will not be able to
 
cooperate successfully with the other parent in
their shared responsibilities for the child. 
The court shall articulate findings of fact
whenever relying upon this factor as part of its
determination of the best interests of the
 child. For the purposes of this section, when
taken alone, the voluntary dismissal of a
petition for protection from abuse shall not be
treated as prima facie evidence that a wilful
misuse of the protection from abuse process has
occurred.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Clear and convincing evidence is that "degree of proof
 
which will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief
 
or conviction as to the allegations sought to be established, and
 requires the existence of a fact be highly probable." Masaki v.
 
Gen. Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 15, 780 P.2d 566, 574 (1989)
 (citations omitted). Under HRS § 571-46(b)(16), before the
 family court could consider misuse of the HRS Chapter 586 process
 in determining the best interests of minor child, it had to be
 established by clear and convincing evidence that Mother wilfully
 misused the Chapter 586 process and that the wilful misuse shows
 that in the future Mother "will not be able to cooperate
 successfully with" Father in their shared responsibilities for
 minor child.
 
The record demonstrates that Mother filed two TROs
 
based on the alleged incidents that occurred between 2011 and
 2014. However, she testified that she had been trying to seek
 assistance through her employer and that given her consultation
 with a doctor decided she needed to file the TROs.  Given
 
Mother's explanation for filing the petitions and the record, we
 
cannot say that the family court erred in determining that Father
 failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that Mother
 wilfully misused the Chapter 586 process or that any wilful
 misuse showed that Mother would not be able to cooperate in the
 future with Father regarding minor child. 
In sum, the family court did not clearly err in its
 
FOFs 17(b), 17(d), 17(f), 17(h), 21, 23, 25, and 26. Given these
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
findings, the unchallenged findings,3
 and the record, the family
court did not abuse its discretion regarding COLs 9 and 10.
(2) Child Support Payment. Father contends that, in
 
granting Mother's requested timesharing schedule, the family
 
court erred by refusing to consider the impact of child support
 upon the parties' post-divorce abilities to support their
 households. Father argues the family court should have granted
 the parties equal timesharing over two week periods, which would
 have removed or minimized the need for child support. Father
 challenges the family court's COLs 8 and 11: 
8. The payment of child support is not an appropriate
factor for the Court's consideration regarding what is in
the child's best interest for purposes of awarding custody
and timesharing under HRS §571-46.
 
. . . . 
11. It is in [minor child's] best interest for the
timesharing schedule to remain the same. The parties'
regular timesharing schedule shall continue as follows: In
Week #1, [minor child] shall be with Wife from Sunday
morning through Thursday morning when Wife drops [minor
child] off at pre-school/daycare/school and [minor child]
shall be with Husband from after pre-school/daycare/school
on Thursday until Sunday morning at 9:30 a.m. when he drops
[minor child] off to Wife at the [designated location]. In
Week #2, [minor child] shall be with Wife from Sunday
morning at 9:30 a.m. through Wednesday morning when Wife
drops [minor child] off at pre-school/daycare/school, [minor
child] shall be with Husband from after pre­school/daycare/school on Wednesday until Saturday at 12:30
p.m. when he drops [minor child] off to Wife at the
[designated location], and [minor child] shall be with Wife
from Saturday at 12:30 p.m. until Sunday morning when Week
#1 begins. 
  
To the extent Father simply sought to reduce his child
 
support payments, his argument lacks merit. However, Father
 
appears to argue that his having to pay child support somehow
 affected the best interest of minor child. In determining the
 best interest of the child, HRS § 571-46(b) permits the
 consideration of other factors beyond those enumerated in the
 statute. In short, HRS § 571-46(b) allows for other factors to
 
3
 For instance, Father does not challenge FOF 27, which states in part
that "Wife makes more of an effort to communicate and co-parent with Husband
and investigates issues (such as pre-school for [minor child]) that affect
[minor child] and shares what she learns with Husband."
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be considered, but does not mandate it. It was thus within the
 
family court's discretion to consider Father's argument about how
 timesharing impacted child support, and in turn, how the child
 support allegedly impacted the best interest of minor child. 
Nonetheless, even if the family court had exercised its
 discretion to consider Father's argument regarding this factor,
 Father failed to demonstrate any impact on the ultimate issue,
 i.e. the best interest of minor child.
4 Thus, the family court
 
did not err in its ruling as to the timesharing schedule. 
   
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Decree
 
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" entered on
 May 6, 2016, and the "Decision and Order Following September 21,
 2015 Trial" entered on November 30, 2015, in the Family Court of
 the First Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Rebecca A. Copeland,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Steven J. Kim,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
4 Father does not contest the family court's FOFs 7 and 8, which state
that the timesharing arrangement was agreed to by the parties following their
separation in December 2013, that minor child has thus been living with thisschedule since [minor child] was 22 months old, and that minor child is "doingwell with the current schedule, that [minor child] knows [minor child's]schedule, and that [minor child] knows which parent [minor child] is to bewith on which days." We are bound by findings of fact not challenged onappeal. Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004). 
8
 