NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-18-0000009
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
QUINN A. SHARP, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(WAI'ANAE DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DTA-17-00927
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i  (the State) 
appeals from the December 8, 2017 Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law, and Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant's Motion to Suppress SFST and Statements for Violations of Article 1, section 7 and 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
(Suppression Order), which was entered by the Wai' anae Division 
of the District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).
1 
The State raises one point of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred in concluding that any statements made by Defendant-Appellee Quinn A. Sharp (Sharp) 
1
 The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after exiting his vehicle and in response to questions posed by
 
Honolulu Police Officer Kenneth Fontes (Fontes) are suppressed
 
and cannot be used by the State against Sharp as substantive
 
proof against Sharp.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the brief
 
submitted on appeal,2 and having given due consideration to the
 
arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant
 statutory and case law, we resolve the State's point of error as
 follows:
 
In Conclusion of Law 4 of the Suppression Order, the
 
District Court concluded that, because Sharp was not informed of
 his right to remain silent and because Sharp did not verbally or
 in writing waive his right to remain silent, any statements Sharp
 made after exiting his vehicle and in response to Officer
 Fontes's questions would be suppressed, except for impeachment
 purposes if Sharp were to testify at trial. The State argues
 that the District Court erred in doing so. We agree.
 
As set forth in the District Court's Findings of Fact
 
(FOFs) in the Suppression Order, Sharp was pulled over after
 
Honolulu Police Corporal Connie Rivera (Corporal Rivera) observed
 Sharp's vehicle traveling at what appeared to be a high rate of
 
speed, nearly hitting a center median, and swerving approximately
 two feet over the broken white line separating the lanes of
 traffic for more than ten feet. Corporal Rivera paced the
 vehicle and observed that it was over the speed limit before
 activating her blue lights and siren. Sharp was the driver and
 
2
 Sharp did not submit an answering brief.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
only occupant. Corporal Rivera observed that Sharp had red and
 
glassy eyes and that his breath had an odor of alcohol; Corporal
 Rivera felt that she had probable cause to arrest Sharp. She did
 not advise Sharp of his right to remain silent.
 
Officer Fontes arrived shortly after the traffic stop
 
and, at Corporal Rivera's request, conducted a standardized field
 sobriety test (SFST).  Before doing so, while Sharp was still
 
seated in the car, Officer Fontes also asked Sharp where he had
 
been coming from; during this conversation, Officer Fontes
 observed that Sharp had red, glassy, and watery eyes, as well as
 an odor of alcohol. Officer Fontes then asked Sharp if he was
 willing to participate in an SFST. Sharp agreed to participate
 and voluntarily exited his vehicle. Per Officer Fontes, at that
 point, Sharp was not free to leave once he exited his vehicle to
 participate in the SFST. After Sharp exited the vehicle, Officer
 Fontes asked Sharp six medical rule-out questions; Sharp answered
 no to all of them. During the SFST, Officer Fontes asked Sharp
 if he understood each instruction; Sharp answered yes each time. 
Thereafter, Officer Fontes asked Sharp if wanted to participate
 in a preliminary alcohol screening test (PAS) and the officer
 
reviewed a written consent form with Sharp; Sharp chose to take
 
the test and indicated his consent on the form. There is nothing
 in the record to indicate any other questions were asked and
 answered. After completing the test, Sharp was arrested for
 Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant. 
Officer Fontes testified that he would have arrested Sharp even
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if he had not taken the SFST based on the totality of the
 
circumstances and the officers' observations.
 
According to both officers, the total time from the
 
stop to the arrest was about fifteen minutes.
 
It appears from the FOFs, and it is undisputed on
 
appeal, that Sharp was pulled over pursuant to a valid traffic
 stop after Corporal Rivera observed him speeding and swerving.
 
A defendant is not in custody for purposes of Miranda
 
v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966) merely because he or she has been pulled over pursuant to a valid traffic stop. State v. 
Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 370, 376, 56 P.3d 138, 144 (2002); State v 
Kuba, 68 Haw. 184, 188-89, 706 P.2d 1305, 1309-10 (1985). Here, Sharp was not in custody merely by virtue of being pulled over during a traffic stop. The questions posed to Sharp appear to have been incident to the SFST, which Sharp agreed to participate in. Sharp was detained for a brief period of time in order for the police to conduct a valid traffic investigation stemming from observed traffic violations and then further observations made upon contact with Sharp, which prompted the police to ask Sharp to participate in the SFST. Accordingly, we conclude that Sharp was not subjected to custodial interrogation; therefore, he was not required to be advised of his rights under Miranda based on the circumstances presented here. 
Further, Sharp consented to participating in the SFST. 
Sharp was not ordered to exit his vehicle. Sharp was not under
 arrest. It appears that the only questions posed to Sharp were
 incident to the administration of the SFST. Under the totality
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the circumstances, we conclude that Sharp was not in custody 
based on the time, place, and length of the interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of the police at the time of the questioning, and because he consented to participate in the SFST. See State v. Kazanas, 138 Hawai' i 23, 35-36, 375 
P.3d 1261, 1273-74 (2016). 
In order for a defendant's statements to be admitted 
into evidence, it need not be shown that the defendant was advised of his or her rights if the defendant's statements are not the product of custodial interrogation. Kaleohano, 99 
Hawai'i at 377-78, 56 P.3d at 145-46. As stated above, Sharp was 
not in custody and, thus, he was not subjected to custodial interrogation which required advisement of his Miranda rights. Therefore, his statements to Officer Fontes were admissible.
3 
For these reasons, to the extent that the District
 
Court suppressed Sharp's statements made after he exited his
 vehicle, the December 8, 2017 Suppression Order is vacated in 
3
 As the District Court also concluded, admission of Sharp's
performance on the SFST did not violate his right against self-incrimination.
The right against self-incrimination is not necessarily implicated whenever a
person suspected of criminal activity is compelled in some way to cooperate in
developing evidence which may be used against him or her. State v. Wyatt, 67
 
Haw. 293, 302, 687 P.2d 544, 551 (1984).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
part. This case is remanded to the District Court for further
 
proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 30, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
6
 