NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000078
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KENTARU KRISTOPHER STONE, also known as KENTARO K. STONE,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 16-1-0543)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Kentaru Kristopher Stone also known
as Kentaru K. Stone (Stone) appeals from the January 18, 2017
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence.   After a jury trial, the Circuit Court
convicted Stone of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243  (2014). 21
1The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided.
2HRS § 712-1243 provides, in relevant part, "(1) A person commits
the offense of promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree if the person
knowingly possesses any dangerous drug in any amount."
HRS § 712-1240 (2014) provides, "'Dangerous drugs' means any
substance or immediate precursor defined or specified as a 'Schedule I
substance' or a 'Schedule II substance' by chapter 329, or a substance
specified in section 329-18(c)(14), except marijuana or marijuana
concentrate."
HRS § 329-16 (2010) provides, in relevant parts:
Schedule II 
. . . .
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Stone was sentenced to five years of incarceration.
On appeal, Stone contends the Circuit Court erred by
denying his motion for a new trial due to discovery of new
evidence after trial and/or because a State witness gave false
testimony at trial.
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve
Stone's appeal as follows and affirm.  
Stone contends the Circuit Court abused its discretion
by denying his motion for a new trial.  On appeal, Stone makes
two arguments in support of his motion for new trial.  First, the
lack of Found Property reports regarding the various
identification, bank, and member cards (identification cards)
found at the scene was not established until after trial, and
thus represented new evidence.  Second, Officer Douglas Korenic
(Officer Korenic), gave false testimony by stating that he had
filed such Found Property reports.
A motion for new trial based on newly discovered
evidence will be granted only if all of the following
requirements have been satisfied:  (1) the evidence has been
discovered after trial; (2) such evidence could not have
been discovered before or at trial through the exercise of
due diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the issues
and not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of
impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature as
would probably change the result of a later trial.
State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 267–68, 588 P.2d 438, 445 (1978),
overruled on other grounds by Raines v. State, 79 Hawai #i 219,
900 P.2d 1286 (1995), and State v. Eberly, 107 Hawai
#i 239, 112
P.3d 725 (2005).  These requirements must be affirmatively
demonstrated by the appellant.  Id.
2(...continued)
(e) Stimulants.  Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation which contains any quantity of the following
substances having a danger or probable danger associated
with a stimulant effect on the central nervous system:
. . . .
(2) Any substance which contains any quantity of
methamphetamine, including its salts, isomers,
and salts of isomers[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Stone asserts that "[t]he evidence that Officer Korenic
had NOT submitted any Found Property reports regarding the
various cards on the picnic table top was confirmed by the
prosecution AFTER the trial had concluded."  The lack of the
Found Property reports Officer Korenic testified to having
prepared was documented at trial.  A recess was taken and the six
reports referenced by number on the front page of his report were
retrieved from the police department and Officer Korenic
acknowledged that they were unrelated to this case.  No other
Found Property report numbers were referenced in Officer
Korenic's report for this offense and he eventually admitted that
he may have "made a mistake" by testifying he submitted reports
regarding the identification cards.  Thus, the lack of Found
Property reports was discovered during trial and that further,
post-trial efforts to search for these records were unsuccessful
does not change this fact.
Second, it appears that the defense could have
discovered this lack before or at trial through the exercise of
due diligence.  Id.  Stone contends:
Nothing in the discovery received by defense counsel,
particularly Officer Korenic's report, hinted that he would
testify that:  (1) the various ID and other cards on the
picnic table did NOT belong to Stone; (2) Officer Korenic
filed "found property" reports for the various cards that
did not belong to Stone; (3) there were several "found
property" reports because there were numerous items
recovered; (4) he "verified ownership" of the items; and
(5)
 the owners later picked up their cards. 
The essential claim is discovery provided to Stone was incomplete
in a way that caused his counsel to form the erroneous argument
that all the identification cards belonged to Stone.  However,
this claim is not supported by the record.  In State's Exhibit
16, the identification cards of at least two persons are clearly
visible in the photograph.  Of the three identification cards in
the photo, one shows a dark skinned male with dark hair and the
other shows a light skinned male or female with light hair. 
Stone was clearly aware of the existence of the photo prior to
trial as he highlighted it to the jury in his opening statement.  3
3Officer Korenic detailed in his report, his efforts to identify
Stone, who had refused to cooperate in this regard.  That the identification
(continued...)
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Thus, the key claim--that Stone could not have expected testimony
that identification cards from multiple persons that were present
on the picnic table did not belong to Stone--is without merit.  
Third, Stone's assertion that Officer Korenic's
discovery of the identification cards was inextricably
intertwined with his discovery of the methamphetamine packet is
not supported by the record.  The sole role of these items was
that they were on the table along with others in Stone's lap when
Officer Korenic approached Stone.  Although defense counsel
maintained at trial that these items belonged to Stone, no
evidence was presented to that effect.   Beyond this assertion,
Stone fails to argue any other purpose for the evidence besides
impeachment and fails to establish an exculpatory connection
between the impeachment evidence and the offense or that the
impeachment evidence undermined critical inculpatory evidence. 
State v. Dural, 141 Hawai #i 501, 413 P.3d 405, CAAP-13-0003694,
2018 WL 1063886, at *13-14 (App. Feb. 27, 2018) (mem.).  4
Fourth, we also agree with the Circuit Court's
assessment that this evidence was not likely to have changed the
verdict.  McNulty, at 268, 588 P.2d 445.  Whether Found Property
reports were prepared for the identification cards was at best
marginally relevant to the facts of this case and did not
establish any of the elements of the offense charged. 
Therefore, we reject newly discovered evidence as a
basis for Stone's motion for a new trial.
Stone also argues that he is entitled to a new trial
because Officer Korenic gave false testimony by stating that he
had filed Found Property reports.
A new trial motion based on false testimony given by a
State witness must be granted where:
3(...continued)
cards were not mentioned in Officer Korenic's reports at all was consistent
with his testimony that they did not belong to Stone.  
4Even if one were to consider that Stone's refusal to identify
himself--by word or by reference to these identification cards--led to Officer
Korenic telling Stone that he would be physically arrested rather than be
cited for a violation, which in turn led to Stone revealing the
methamphetamine packet, the existence of these identification cards was not
material to the elements of his drug charge. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1) [the court] is reasonably satisfied that the testimony
at trial of a material prosecution witness is false;
(2) defendant and his agents did not discover the falseness
of the testimony until after the trial; (3) the late
discovery is not due to a lack of due diligence by defendant
or his agent; and (4) the false testimony is not harmless
because there is a reasonable possibility that it
contributed to the conviction.
State v. Teves, 5 Haw. App. 90, 96, 679 P.2d 136, 141 (1984). 
The test requires an affirmative showing by the appellant.  Id.
at 96, 679 P.2d at 140–41.  
As the only witness to Stone's possession of the
methamphetamine, Officer Korenic was a material prosecution
witness.  False testimony is defined as "[t]estimony that is not
true[,]" and is broader than perjury because it lacks a state of
mind element. See Black's Law Dictionary 1704 (11th ed. 2019). 
Here, Officer Korenic testified to the existence of Found
Property reports, which were not referenced in his reports.  
Other than Officer Korenic's testimony, there was no evidence
that these reports existed.  Thus, Stone has demonstrated that a
material prosecution witness provided false testimony. 
The falsity of the testimony was discovered during
trial.  During a mid-trial recess, after Officer Korenic
testified he had submitted Found Property reports for the
identification cards, the prosecution caused a search for the
Related Reports identified on the face sheet of Officer Korenic's
Incident Report after Officer Korenic asserted reports were
missing.  The Related Reports listed on the front page of Officer
Korenic's Incident Report, were determined to have nothing to do
with Stone's case.  Stone cross-examined Officer Korenic on the
fact that his written reports did not corroborate his assertion
that Found Property reports were submitted for the identification
cards found at the scene and that the only Found Property report
mentioned in Officer Korenic's Incident Report was for an iPhone. 
Thus, this requirement was not met because the fact that the
testimony was false was discovered at trial.  That the State
conducted a further search and still found no reports does not
change this conclusion. 
Even if the false testimony had not been discovered at
trial, any failure of the defense to discover the false testimony
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
may be due to a lack of diligence.  Although defense counsel
seemed to be surprised by the lack of the subject Found Property
reports, discovery provided to the defense clearly showed
identification cards belonging to different people were found at
the scene, and the Incident Report identified Related Reports, 
numbers of which no copies were provided.  Had the defense
requested discovery of those missing reports it would have
discovered no Found Property reports regarding the identification
cards were created, or at least noted, and would have been in a
position to better challenge Officer Korenic's testimony that
Found Property reports for the identification cards existed.
Finally, there was no reasonable possibility that the
false testimony contributed to the conviction because Stone was
able to fully cross-examine Officer Korenic on the absence of the
reports.  Officer Korenic's false testimony provided an avenue
for attacking his credibility that otherwise would not have been
open to Stone.  In closing argument, Stone thoroughly attacked
Officer Korenic's testimony and the lack of reports supporting
the existence of other persons' identification cards.5
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by
denying Stone's motion for new trial.
For the foregoing reasons, the January 18, 2017
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court
of the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai #i, November 27, 2019.
On the briefs:
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5For the first time on appeal, Stone also asserts that the evidence
of other persons' identification cards was prejudicial evidence of other
crimes under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) that should have been
excluded under HRE Rule 403.  "As a general rule, if a party does not raise an
argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal;
this rule applies in both criminal and civil cases."  State v. Moses, 102
Hawai#i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003).
6