  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000025
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANTHONY MARK ALBERT, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0118)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Anthony Mark Albert (Albert) 
appeals from the Judgment, Guilty Conviction and Sentence 
(Judgment) entered on November 16, 2016, in the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) indicted 
Albert on two counts of criminal solicitation to commit murder, 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-510 (2014), 
and 707-701(1)(d) (2014). Count I was dismissed prior to trial. 
Following a trial by jury, Albert was convicted on Count II and sentenced to a maximum term of twenty years of imprisonment. 
1
 The Honorable Judge Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Albert raises five points of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) admitting into 
evidence other crimes, acts, and/or wrongs that were in violation of Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b); (2) not allowing 
Albert "to elicit testimony regarding the arrest of Charlie Ah 
Yun (Ah Yun) which was probative evidence of Ah Yun's interest, 
bias, motive, to 'turn State's witness' and seek lenience in his 
own case by using [Albert's] matter;" (3) denying Albert's motion for judgment of acquittal because no reasonable jury could have convicted him of criminal solicitation to commit murder because police solicited and enticed him to commit the crime; (4)denying his motion for a new trial because the cumulative error from the court's evidentiary rulings caused a miscarriage of justice requiring a new trial; and (5) imposing a sentence for a class A felony as the offense of criminal solicitation to commit murder should have been classified as a class C felony based on Hawai' i 
Supreme Court precedent and the rule of lenity. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Albert's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Albert argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
admitting evidence at trial regarding Albert's payment of $5,500
 to two individuals, one of whom was Ah Yun, prior to contact with
 law enforcement, as that conduct was uncharged conduct and
 evidence of prior bad acts. Albert states that the danger of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unfair prejudice from the evidence substantially outweighed its
 
probative value and, therefore, it should have been excluded. 
Albert identifies two instances in which he claims
 
"prior bad acts" evidence was admitted at trial in error. In the
 first instance, the following exchange occurred during the
 State's examination of Detective Roel Gapusan (Detective
 
Gapusan):
 
[State]	 And [was] there any specific information
as to when [the murder for hire] is
supposed to happen or any information that
said that it was going to happen soon so
you guys wanted to initiate the operation
right away?
 
[Detective Gapusan] Well, there was - - there [were]
concerns that he had already tried before.
So we –
 
[Defense Counsel] Objection, Your Honor.  Move to 
strike.
 
[The Court] Yeah.  Objection sustained. You're to
 
disregard the officer's response. Next
 question.
 
In the second instance, the State asked Detective
 
Gapusan what Albert had discussed with him after he was patted
 
down, and Detective Gapusan responded that Albert told him that
 "he paid two guys earlier $5,500 to . . . do the job, but they
 didn't follow through." Albert objected on the basis that the
 statement to which the detective was referring "wasn't recorded"
 on the tape. Counsel clarified that Albert's objection was that
 "those statements weren't made on the tape," referring to the
 police recording made of the interactions between Albert and law
 enforcement. This was Albert's only objection to this testimony,
 and was overruled because Albert would have the opportunity to
 cross-examine Detective Gapusan.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Albert argues on appeal that the challenged evidence
 
should have been excluded under State v. Pinero, 70 Haw. 509, 778
 
P.2d 704 (1989). It appears, however, that this case is cited
 for the basic proposition that, under HRE Rule 404(b), evidence
 
of the defendant's other crimes, wrongs, and acts are
 
inadmissable to prove the defendant's character or that he likely
 acted in conformance with that character. Id. at 517-18, 778
 
P.2d at 710-11. HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in part:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not
admissible to prove the character of a person in order
to show action in conformity therewith. It may,
however, be admissible where such evidence is
probative of another fact that is of consequence to
the determination of the action, such as proof of
motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of
mistake or accident. 
Therefore, under this rule, the purpose for which
 
evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is offered is critical
 
to determine whether that evidence may be admitted at trial. 
This court has explained: 
Under HRE Rule 404(b), 'other bad act' evidence is
admissible when: 1) it is relevant to any fact of
consequence other than the defendant's propensity to
commit the crime charged; and 2) its probative value
is not substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice.
 
State v. Steger, 114 Hawai' i 162, 172, 158 P.3d 280, 290 (App. 
2006) (citing State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31–32, 828 P.2d 1266, 
1270 (1992)). 
Regarding the first challenged instance of the
 
admission of the bad act evidence, an objection was made by
 Albert and sustained by the Circuit Court. The Circuit Court
 instructed the jury to disregard the answer. Generally, where
 the court sustains an objection, the offending statement by the
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witness is struck, and the jury is instructed to disregard the 
statement, the harm or prejudice resulting therefrom is cured. See State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai' i 493, 519, 193 P.3d 409, 435 
(2008) ("Short of insurmountable prejudice, 'any harm or prejudice resulting to the defendant can be cured by the court's instructions to the jury,' because 'it will be presumed that the jury adhered to the court's instructions'") (citation omitted). 
Regarding the second instance, Albert did not object. 
In addition, there were other instances at trial in which the evidence that Albert previously paid two individuals to kill Mike Chu (Chu) was admitted at trial without objection, including the 
DVD exhibit that recorded the entire conversation between 
Detective Gapusan and Albert, which includes Albert's statements regarding the previous payments. Albert's questioning of Officer 
Tanuvasa elicited the same testimony regarding Albert's previous 
payments to two other individuals for the murder, and Albert did not move to strike the answer. Therefore, even if the Circuit Court were inclined to deny the admission of this evidence, Albert's failure to properly object to the admission of the evidence at other times at trial would have required the Circuit Court to interject sua sponte. Such a claim of error on appeal is generally waived even if the evidence was objected to at trial on other grounds. See State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai' i 206, 224­
25, 297 P.3d 1062, 1080-81 (2013); State v. Crisostomo, 94 Hawai'i 282, 290, 12 P.3d 873, 881 (2000) ("A hearsay objection 
not raised or properly preserved in the trial court will not be 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered on appeal. This is true even where the testimony is
 
objected to on other grounds.") (citations omitted). 
Moreover, we conclude that Albert's contention is 
without merit. One of the permitted uses of evidence of prior bad acts is where the evidence is probative of the defendant's intent. See HRE Rule 404(b). The Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
explained that intent "refers to the state of mind with which an act is done or omitted." State v. Fetelee, 117 Hawai' i 53, 83, 
175 P.3d 709, 739 (2008) (citation omitted). "Proof of the required mental element of the offenses charged, i.e., intent, is admissible because it does not require an inference as to the character of the accused or as to his conduct." Id. (citation 
omitted). However, in order to be admissible, the prior bad act "must be similar to the offense charged." Id. at 84, 175 P.3d at 
740 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The primary issue at trial was Albert's intent with
 
regard to his interactions with law enforcement. Albert was
 charged with criminal solicitation to commit murder. HRS § 705­510 provides: 
§ 705-510 Criminal solicitation.  (1) A person
is guilty of criminal solicitation if, with the intent
to promote or facilitate the commission of a crime,
the person commands, encourages, or requests another
person to engage in conduct or cause the result
specified by the definition of an offense or to engage
in conduct which would be sufficient to establish
 complicity in the specified conduct or result.
 
(2) It is immaterial under subsection (1) that the
defendant fails to communicate with the person the defendant
solicits if the defendant's conduct was designed to effect
such communication.
 
(Emphasis added). The State charged Albert with soliciting the
 
commission of first-degree murder, a violation of HRS § 707­
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
701(1)(d),2 which required the State to prove that Albert
 
intended to promote or facilitate "the death of . . . [a] person
 
by a hired killer[.]" Therefore, it was necessary that the State
 prove that Albert intended to cause the death of Albert's ex­wife's boyfriend, Chu, in his interactions with Detective
 Gapusan. 
The prior bad acts referred to at trial, the previous
 
payment by Albert of money to two individuals for the purpose of
 causing Chu's death, is very similar to the offense charged and
 was  alleged to be part of Albert's ongoing scheme to arrange
 Chu's murder. Albert, testifying in his own defense, admitted to
 paying the two men, but claimed that even though he made the
 payments, he was coerced into doing so and he did not actually
 intend to cause Chu's death. Albert testified that he was merely
 playing along, that he was manipulated by a scheme created by Ah
 Yun, and that he did not actually intend for Chu to be murdered.
 
Evidence that Albert told Detective Gapusan that he had already
 
tried to pay two individuals for the purpose of murdering Chu,
 but they had failed to follow through, is relevant to Albert's
 intent in his interactions with undercover law enforcement. See,
 
e.g., U.S. v. Foster, 344 F.3d 799, 801–02 (8th Cir. 2003)
 
2
 HRS § 707-701(1) states, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-701 Murder in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of murder in the first degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of:
 
. . . .
 
(d) 	A person by a hired killer, in which event both
the person hired and the person responsible for
hiring the killer shall be punished under this
section[.]
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(concluding that the defendant's defense, which closely resembled
 
a "mere presence" defense, placed his state of mind into question
 and supported the admission of his prior drug trafficking
 conviction to prove his knowledge and intent regarding the
 charged drug offense). Albert's statements to Detective Gapusan
 regarding the previous payments, which contradicted Albert's
 testimony at trial, were relevant to Albert's intent and,
 therefore, the evidence was not admitted solely to show Albert's
 character and that he acted in conformity with that character.
3
 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
err in the admission of the challenged evidence.
 
(2) Albert argues that the Circuit Court erred in not
 
allowing him to elicit testimony regarding the alleged arrest of
 Ah Yun, which was probative of Ah Yun's interest, bias, and
 motive. Ah Yun did not testify at trial. The following exchange
 occurred at trial during Albert's questioning of Detective
 Gapusan:
 
[Albert] All right. Did –- did Officer Tanuvasa inform you
of a recent arrest of Mr. Ah Yun?
 [State] Objection again. Arrest of whom?
 [Albert] Arrest of Mr. Ah Yun.
[State] Okay. Objection. Not relevant. Prejudicial.
[Court] It's not relevant. Sustained. 
3
 Albert does not argue that the probative value of the evidence was
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. See Steger, 114 
Hawai'i at 172-73, 158 P.3d at 290-91. 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Albert cites HRE Rule 609.1(a)4 and argues that the 
Confrontation Clause in the Sixth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution requires the admission of this evidence. As explained recently by the Hawai' i Supreme Court: 
An accused's right to demonstrate the bias or motive of
prosecution witnesses is protected by the sixth amendment to
the United States Constitution, which guarantees an accused,
inter alia , the right to be confronted with the witnesses
against him. Indeed, the main and essential purpose of
confrontation is to secure for the opponent the opportunity
of cross-examination . . . [and] the exposure of a witness'
motivation in testifying is a proper and important function
of the constitutionally protected right of cross
examination. Additionally, HRE Rule 609.1(a) (1993)
provides that the credibility of a witness may be attacked
by evidence of bias, interest, or motive. This court has
 
established that bias, interest, or motive is always
relevant  under HRE Rule 609.1.
 
State v. Acacio, 140 Hawai' i 92, 98-99, 398 P.3d 681, 687-88 
(2017) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis
 
added). Thus, the Confrontation Clause and HRE Rule 609.1 only
 address the right to attack the "credibility of a witness" at
 trial by evidence of bias, interest, or motive. See id.; HRE
 
Rule 609.1(a). 
The cases cited by Albert all pertain to the
 
Confrontation Clause and the right of a defendant to cross-
examine a witness regarding his or her bias, interest, motive, or
 reliability. See, e.g., State v. Sabog, 108 Hawai' i 102, 109, 
117 P.3d 834, 841 (App. 2005) (addressing defendant's claim he
 
4
 HRE Rule 609.1 states:
 
Rule 609.1 Evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
(a) General rule. The credibility of a witness may be
attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
 
(b) Extrinsic evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
Extrinsic evidence of a witness' bias, interest, or motive
is not admissible unless, on cross-examination, the matter
is brought to the attention of the witness and the witness
is afforded an opportunity to explain or deny the matter.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
should have been allowed to cross-examine witness regarding
 
pending felony charges); Wilson v. U.S., 232 U.S. 563, 568 (1914)
 (addressing whether evidence of witness's recent morphine use was
 admissible as evidence regarding her reliability as a witness);
 Doe v. State, 487 P.2d 47, 58 (Alaska 1971) (addressing whether
 defendant should have been allowed to question the witness
 regarding his use of LSD and whether it was affecting him at the
 time of the events to which he was testifying at trial). 
Ah Yun did not testify at trial. Rather, he supplied
 
law enforcement with the tip indicating that Albert had sought
 and was still seeking an individual to murder Chu. None of the
 authorities cited by Albert support his claim that either HRE
 Rule 609.1 or the Confrontation Clause required the Circuit Court
 to admit the evidence attacking Ah Yun's credibility, and we find
 none. 
Therefore, we reject Albert's argument that the Circuit
 
Court erred when it refused to admit the statement into evidence.
 
(3) Albert argues that no reasonable jury could have
 
convicted him "as the police solicited [Albert] and enticed him
 to commit the charge for which he was accused; [Albert] was not
 predisposed to commit the sole remaining charge [of criminal
 solicitation to commit murder]." Therefore, according to Albert,
 the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion for judgment of
 acquittal.
 
HRS § 702-237 (2014) makes "entrapment" an affirmative
 
defense to any prosecution and states, in relevant part:
 
§ 702-237 Entrapment.  (1) In any prosecution, it is
an affirmative defense that the defendant engaged in the
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prohibited conduct or caused the prohibited result because
the defendant was induced or encouraged to do so by a law
enforcement officer, or by a person acting in cooperation
with a law enforcement officer, who, for the purpose of
obtaining evidence of the commission of an offense . . .:
 
. . . .
 
(b) 	Employed methods of persuasion or inducement
which created a substantial risk that the
 offense would be committed by persons other than
those who are ready to commit it.
 
As the Hawai' i Supreme Court has explained: 
In enacting HRS § 702-237, the legislature adopted the
approach of the Model Penal Code which endorsed theobjective test of the entrapment defense. Under theobjective test as we discussed in regard to the due processdefense, the focus of inquiry is not on the predispositionof the defendant to commit the crime charged, but rather ison the conduct of the law enforcement officials.
 
State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 192-93, 830 P.2d 492, 499 (1992)
 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Therefore, the
 dispositive question is whether the actions of the police
 conducting the undercover operation were "so extreme that it
 created a substantial risk that persons not ready to commit the
 offense alleged would be persuaded or induced to commit it." Id.
 
at 193, 830 P.2d at 499 (citation and internal quotation marks
 omitted); see also Commentary to HRS § 702-237. 
Albert argues the evidence showed that law enforcement
 
initiated the contacts with him and deliberately entrapped him
 "even though there was no current activity to solicit someone to
 kill Chu" and they "set up the whole alleged crime and recorded
 the alleged crime." Albert does not identify any specific
 actions that he claims were so extreme as to constitute
 entrapment. The evidence showed that police acted on the tip of
 an informant that Albert had previously sought out someone to
 hire to kill Chu and was still actively seeking to have that end
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accomplished. Police contacted Albert, posing as individuals
 
secured by Ah Yun to perform the murder on Albert's behalf. 
Albert met with an undercover officer and explained to him that
 he wanted Chu murdered and helped formulate a plan for the
 murder.
 
"Allegations of entrapment require more than that the
 
police provide an opportunity for commission of a crime. A mere
 solicitation of criminal activity by the police is not a
 sufficient inducement." State v. Tookes, 67 Haw. 608, 614, 699
 
P.2d 983, 987 (1985) (citations omitted). We conclude that there
 is no substantial evidence in the record to support an entrapment
 defense and, accordingly, that the Circuit Court did not err in
 denying Albert's motion for judgment of acquittal on this basis.
 
(4) Albert argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying his motion for a new trial because the cumulative evidentiary rulings caused a miscarriage of justice requiring a new trial. Because we have concluded that Albert's evidentiary points are each without merit, it is unnecessary to address their alleged cumulative effect. See State v. Samuel, 74 Haw. 141, 
159, 838 P.2d 1374, 1383 (1992) (unnecessary to address cumulative effect of alleged errors where individually the errors are insubstantial); State v. Mark, 120 Hawai' i 499, 518, 210 P.3d 
22, 41 (App. 2009) (same). 
(5) Albert argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
imposing a sentence for a class A felony because criminal
 solicitation to commit murder should be classified as a class C
 felony. HRS § 705-512 (2014) establishes the grading, for
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentencing purposes, of criminal solicitation and states: 
"Criminal solicitation is an offense one class or grade, as the case may be, less than the offense solicited; provided that criminal solicitation to commit murder in any degree is a class A felony." (Emphasis added). We conclude that the statute is clear and unambiguous that criminal solicitation to commit murder in any degree is a class A felony. Thus, the rule of lenity is not applicable here. See State v. Kalani, 108 Hawai' i 279, 288, 118 
P.3d 1222, 1231 (2005). 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 16,
 
2016 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 12, 2018. 
On the briefs: Shawn A. Luiz,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13
 