NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000024
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON FKA THE BANK OF NEW YORK
 
AS TRUSTEE FOR THE CERTIFICATEHOLDERS OF CWABS, INC.,
ASSET BACKED CERTIFICATES SERIES 2005-AB1,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RUSSELL BATANGAN RUMBAWA and FELICIDAD TABALBAG CORPUZ,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
HAWAII KAI MARINA COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, INC.
and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-50, JANE DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-2419)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Russell Batangan Rumbawa
 
(Rumbawa) and Felicidad Tabalbag Corpuz (together, Appellants)
 
appeal from the (1) "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All
 Parties and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed April
 3, 2014"; (2) "Judgment"; and (3) "Notice of Entry of Judgment,"
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
all entered on December 15, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Appellants contend the circuit court: (1)
 
"abused its discretion when it effectively held that [Plaintiff-
Appellee Bank of New York Mellon fka the Bank of New York as
 Trustee for the Certificateholders of CWABS, Inc., Asset Backed
 Certificates, Series 2005-AB1 (BNYM)] did not need to prove
 
standing as the real party in interest and that it could,
 
therefore, judicially foreclose on the subject property"; and (2)
 "incorrectly granted [BNYM's] Motion for Summary Judgment."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Appellants' appeal is without merit.
I. Standing
A. Chain of Title/Assignment of Loan
 
2
Appellants  assert that BNYM did not establish that it
had standing to pursue the foreclosure action because BNYM did not establish a direct chain of title to the Note and Mortgage. "Typically, borrowers do not have standing to challenge the validity of an assignment of its loans because they are not parties to the agreement . . . ." 
U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n v. 
Salvacion
, 134 Hawai 'i 170, 175, 338 P.3d 1185, 1190 (App. 2014). 
"Hawai 'i courts may recognize exceptions when a challenge would 
deem the assignment void, not voidable." Id. Appellants do not 
contend that the assignment of the mortgage was void. 
Courts have rejected the argument that before a party
 
may foreclose on a property, "it must first prove the validity of
 
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
2
 We note at the outset that Appellants' opening brief does not conform
to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), which requires a
section containing a "concise statement of the points of error set forth in
separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall state: (i) the alleged errorcommitted by the court or agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged erroroccurred; and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected to orthe manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of thecourt or agency." Appellants' opening brief fails to comply with subsections(ii) and (iii) of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). Appellants' counsel is warned that
future failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28 will result in sanctions. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
every transfer in the chain of title." Deutsche Bank Trust Co.
 
v. Beesley, 2012 WL 5383555, at *4 (D. Haw. 2012); see also Paik-
Apau v. Deutsche Bank Nat. Trust Co., 2012 WL 6569289 at *4 (D.
 Haw. 2012). "Instead, the court looks to whether a lender
 seeking to foreclose or defending a prior foreclosure was, at the
 time it sought to foreclose, the holder of the note and mortgage
 it seeks to foreclose." Bateman v. Countrywide Home Loans, 2012
 
WL 5593228 *3 (D. Haw. 2012); see also Beesley, 2012 WL 5383555
 at *4.
 
"In order to enforce a note and mortgage under Hawaii
 
law, a creditor must be 'a person entitled to enforce' the note. 
One person entitled to enforce an instrument is a 'holder' of the
 instrument. A 'holder' is the 'person in possession of a
 negotiable instrument.'" In re Tyrell, 528 B.R. 790, 794 (Bankr.
 
D. Haw. 2015) (footnote omitted) (citing Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
3
(HRS) § 490:3-301 (2008 Repl.)  and HRS § 490:1-201 (2008
4
Repl.) ; see U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, No. CAAP-14-0001134, *2
3
 HRS § 490:3-301 provides:
 
§490:3-301 Person entitled to enforce instrument. 
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i) the
holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of
the instrument who has the rights of a holder, or (iii) a
person not in possession of the instrument who is entitled
to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 or
490:3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce
the instrument even though the person is not the owner of
the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the
instrument.
4
 HRS § 490:1-201 provides, in relevant part:
 
§490:1-201 General definitions.
 
. . . .
 "Holder" means:
 (1)	 The person in possession of a negotiable
instrument that is payable either to bearer or
to an identified person that is the person in
possession;
 
(2)	 The person in possession of a negotiable
tangible document of title if the goods are
deliverable either to bearer or to the order of
 the person in possession; or
 
(3)	 The person in control of a negotiable electronic
document of title.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(App. Jan. 12, 2016) (SDO) (concluding that where the lender was
 
the holder of the note the lender could establish that the note
 was payable to the lender under HRS § 490:1-201 and HRS 
§ 490:3-301).
 
A lender is not required to prove the validity of every
 
transfer in the chain of title before it may foreclose on a
 property. BNYM was required only to produce evidence that it was
 entitled to enforce the Note. To establish that it was entitled
 to enforce the Note, BNYM attached a declaration from Julia
 Susick (Susick), an authorized representative for BNYM, to its
 
Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ). Susick's declaration stated
 
that BNYM "directly or through an agent, has possession of the
 
promissory note. The promissory note has been duly endorsed. 
[BNYM] is the assignee of the security instrument for the
 referenced loan. A true and correct copy of the Note is attached
 as Exhibit 'A.'" BNYM attached the Assignment of Mortgage (AOM)
 
assigning BNYM "[t]ogether with the note or notes therein
 
described or referred to, the money due and to become due thereon
 with interest, and all rights accrued or to accrue under said
 Mortgage." BNYM also attached the Corrective AOM to establish
 that the AOM was intended to be assigned to BNYM. BNYM produced
 sufficient evidence not only to establish that it was the
 "holder" of the Note and that the Note was payable to BNYM, such
 that it was entitled to enforce the Note under HRS § 490:3-301,
 but also a direct chain of title from the original lender. 
Appellants' argument that BNYM did not have standing to pursue
 foreclosure because it could not establish a direct chain of
 title is without merit. 
B. Robo-Signing
 
Appellants argue that BNYM could not establish that it
 
had standing because the Note and Mortgage were "robo-signed"
 documents. Appellants' "conclusory assertions of robo-signing
 fail[ed] to state a plausible claim." U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n v.
 
Benoist, No. CAAP-14-0001176, *4 (App. Nov. 12, 2015) (SDO); see
 also Mattos, SDO at *2-3 (rejecting the argument that assignments
 of mortgages were invalid because the signer and notary were
 robo-signers). The use of "robo-signers" in the AOM and
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Corrective AOM did not affect BNYM's standing to foreclose on the
 
mortgaged property.
C. Compliance with Pooling and Servicing Agreement and Trust
Agreement
 
Appellants also argue that BNYM lacked standing to
 
foreclose because "[t]he purported assignment of mortgage is a
 direct violation of the Pooling and Servicing Agreement [(PSA)]."
 
Relatedly, Appellants argue that the Corrective AOM "was executed
 
in direct violation of the Trust Agreement."
 
Again we note that "[t]ypically, borrowers do not have 
standing to challenge the validity of an assignment of its loans because they are not parties to the agreement and because noncompliance with a trust's governing document is irrelevant to the assignee's standing to foreclose." Salvacion, 134 Hawai
'i at 
175, 338 P.3d at 1190; see Mattos, SDO at *3; Benoist, SDO at *4­5; Wells Fargo Bank v. Hensley, No. CAAP-12-0000089, *3 (App. March 28, 2013) (SDO). Like the borrowers in the cited cases, 
Appellants do not contend that they are parties to either the PSA 
or the Trust Agreement. Appellants do not have standing to challenge BNYM's compliance with the PSA or Trust Agreement.
D. Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. (MERS) 
Appellants' final argument regarding BNYM's standing is
 
that "MERS is just a tracking system and has no rights to convey
 the Mortgage." Appellants' arguments are "inconsistent with the
 plain language of the mortgage, which expressly establishes that
 MERS is the mortgagee under the security instrument and permits
 MERS to take action on the lender's behalf." Wells Fargo Bank,
 
N.A. v. Yamamoto, No. CAAP-11-0000728, *1 (App. Dec. 11, 2012)
 (SDO).
 
Under the terms of the Mortgage, "MERS is a separate
 
corporation that is acting solely as a nominee for [the original
 lender] and [the original lender's] successors and assigns. MERS
 is the mortgagee under this Security Instrument." The Mortgage
 grants MERS the right "to exercise any or all of those interests,
 including, but not limited to, the right to foreclose and sell
 the Property; and to take any action required of [original
 lender] including, but not limited to, releasing and canceling
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this Security Instrument." We have held that mortgage with
 
nearly identical language have empowered MERS to take any action,
 including assigning the loan. See Yamamoto, SDO at *1. 
Appellant's argument that MERS had no right to convey the
 mortgage is without merit.
II. Summary Judgment
A. Standing
 
Appellants reiterate their standing arguments to 
contend that there were genuine issues of material fact as to the validity of the assignments of the Note and Mortgage, and that the circuit court erred in granting BNYM's MSJ. However, for the reasons noted above, Appellants fail to establish any genuine issues of material fact. See Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 56(c) ("The judgment sought shall be rendered 
forthwith if the pleadings, depositions, answers to 
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law."). Therefore, the circuit court did not err in granting summary judgment.
B. Compliance with HRCP Rule 56
 
Appellants contend the Declaration of Indebtedness
 
submitted by Susick "was not a sworn statement or narration of
 facts" as required HRCP Rule 56(e).
5 Furthermore, Appellants
 
5 HRCP Rule 56(e) provides:
 
Rule 56. SUMMARY JUDGMENT.
 
. . . .
 
(e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
required. Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made
on personal knowledge, shall set forth facts as would be
admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that
the affiant is competent to testify to matters stated
therein. Sworn or certified copies of all papers or parts
thereof referred to in an affidavit shall be attached
 thereto or served therewith. The court may permit
affidavits to be supplemented or opposed by depositions,
answers to interrogatories, or further affidavits. When a
 motion for summary judgment is made and supported as
provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest upon
the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's
pleading, but the adverse party's response, by affidavits or
as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific
(continued...)
 
6
  
_____________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argue the exhibits attached to Susick's declaration were not
 
signed or certified by the custodian of records for BNYM.
 
Rules of the Circuit Court (RCCH) Rule 7(g) explicitly
 
provides: 
Rule 7. FORMS OF MOTIONS.
 
(g) Declaration in Lieu of Affidavit. In lieu of an
 
affidavit, an unsworn declaration may be made by a person,
in writing, subscribed as true under penalty of law, and
dated, in substantially the following form:
 
I, (name of person), do declare under
penalty of law that the foregoing is true and
correct.
 
Dated:
 
Signature 
Susick signed the declaration and declared, "under
 
penalty of law that the following is true and correct." Susick's
 
declaration stated that the information provided in the
 declaration was based on the business records of Bank of America,
 N.A. (BANA), servicing agent for the loan. Susick declared that
 
she had personal knowledge of BANA's procedures for creating the
 
business records. The documents referenced in Susick's
 declaration were declared to be "true and correct" copies and
 attached as exhibits to the declaration. Susick's declaration
 and sworn copies of documents attached as exhibits were therefore
 sufficient under RCCH Rule 7(g) and HRCP Rule 56(e). Appellants'
 argument that BNYM's declarations and exhibits were not in
 compliance with HRCP 56(e) is without merit.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) December 15, 2014
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order Granting Plaintiff's
 Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for
 Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure, Filed April 3, 2014"; (2)
 December 15, 2014 "Judgment"; and (3) December 15, 2014 "Notice
 
5(...continued)
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. 
If
 
the adverse party does not so respond, summary judgment, if
appropriate, shall be entered against the adverse party. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Entry of Judgment," all entered in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 4, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Melodie Aduja
(Aduja & Aduja)for Defendants-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Andrew J. Lautenbach (Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 