NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0005374
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
KUHIO EBBTIDE DEVELOPMENT, INC.,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CHARLES MORSE BARKER, III and JANICE MURDOCH,
Defendants-Appellants
and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10;
AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-3056-12)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
Defendants-Appellants Charles Morse Barker III (Barker)
and Janice Murdock (Murdock) (collectively, Defendants),
appearing pro se, appeal from the "Final Judgment Re: Order
Granting Plaintiff's Second Motion for Summary Judgment and Final
Judgment Against All Defendants" (Judgment).  The Judgment was
entered in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Kuhio Ebbtide Development, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.
2Inc. (KEDI) and against Defendants, and it was filed in the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1 on January 8,
2014.  The Judgment was issued pursuant to the Circuit Court's
"Order Granting Plaintiff's Second Motion for Summary Judgment
and Final Judgment Against All Defendants" (Summary Judgment
Order) filed on October 25, 2013.  As explained below, we affirm
the Circuit Court's Judgment.
I.
KEDI is a Hawai #i corporation that operates the Kuhio
Ebbtide Hotel, Inc., a cooperative housing project.  KEDI is the
lessor for the apartment unit at issue in this case pursuant to a
Proprietary Lease agreement.  Pursuant to an "Assignment of
Proprietary Lease and Share of Stock," Defendants acquired, as
joint tenants, an interest in the apartment unit and one share of
stock in KEDI.  Defendants also became obligated to timely pay
rents and assessments on the apartment unit.
Defendants failed to make timely payments as required,
and KEDI sent a demand letter dated August 31, 2011, to Barker,
seeking $9,086.82 in unpaid maintenance fees, late fees, and
attorneys' fees and costs.  Barker subsequently proposed a
payment plan in which he would pay the current fees as they came
due and cure the default at a rate of $50 per month.  KEDI did
not accept the payment plan and did not cash the checks sent by
Barker pursuant to his proposal.  On December 13, 2011, KEDI
filed its Complaint against Defendants for declaratory relief and
breach of contract.  The Circuit Court granted KEDI's second
motion for summary judgment and entered its Summary Judgment
Order and the Judgment.
II.
On appeal, Defendants contend that the Circuit Court
erred in granting KEDI's second motion for summary judgment
because the Circuit Court: (1) failed to require KEDI to accept
Defendants' proposed payment plan; (2) failed to recognize thatNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3KEDI's Proprietary Lease was never recorded and thus is
unenforceable; (3) "failed to recognize violation of unlawful
constructive eviction"; (4) failed to recognize Murdock's
bankruptcy discharge and the bankruptcy termination of Murdock's
lease or the transfer of Murdock's interest in the apartment unit
in entering a money judgment against her; (5) failed to address
the dwelling ownership rights of Barker; (6) failed to apply the
standards for granting summary judgment; and (7) failed to
address their defamation of character claim.
We resolve the issues raised by Defendants on appeal as
follows:
1. The Circuit Court did not err in failing to
require KEDI to accept Defendants' proposed payment plan. 
Defendants assert that KEDI was required to accept their proposed
payment plan pursuant to Section "667-T" of Act 48 of the 2011
Hawai#i Session Laws, 2011 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48, § 4 at 94,
which was subsequently codified as Hawai #i Revised Statutes (HRS)
§ 667-21.6 (Supp. 2011).  However, HRS § 667-21.6 applies when a
unit owners' association organized under HRS § 514B-102 or prior
condominium property regime statues is pursuing a non-judicial
foreclosure.  KEDI is not subject to HRS § 667-21.6 because it is
not a unit owners' association organized under HRS § 514B-102 or
prior condominium property regime statutes, but rather is a
cooperative housing project organized under HRS Chapters 421I and
414.  In addition, KEDI was not pursuing a non-judicial
foreclosure, but had filed a lawsuit asserting claims for
declaratory relief and breach of contract.  Accordingly, KEDI was
not subject to the payment plan requirements imposed by HRS §
667-21.6.
2. The Circuit Court did not err in failing to find
that the Proprietary Lease was unenforceable because it was not
recorded.  In support of their contention, Defendants cite HRS 
§ 502-83 (2006) and HRS § 501-121 (2006).  Neither provision
supports Defendants' claim that the Propriety Lease was
unenforceable because it was not recorded.  HRS § 502-83 requiresNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2To the extent that Defendants argue that the Circuit Court erred in
entering summary judgment against them because the "master lease" for the
entire project was not recorded, their argument also fails.  Defendants do not
explain how the purported non-recording of the master lease would serve to
excuse their obligation to timely pay rents and assessments on the apartment
unit.
3We reject other claims which Defendants raise for the first time on
appeal or which they did not raise in their opening brief. 
4recordation of real estate conveyances to protect subsequent good
faith purchasers who have no actual notice of the conveyance. 
Defendants had actual notice of the Proprietary Lease and thus
cannot rely on HRS § 502-83 for protection.  HRS § 501-121
requires leases of registered Land Court property to be
registered.  The Proprietary Lease is not a lease of registered
Land Court property and thus HRS § 501-121 is inapplicable.2
3. Defendants did not raise a claim of unlawful
constructive eviction in opposition to KEDI's second motion for
summary judgment.  They are not entitled to raise this claim in
asserting that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment on appeal.  See State v. Moses, 102 Hawai #i 449, 456, 77
P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if a party does not
raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have
been waived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal and
civil cases."); Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v.
Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai# i 97, 107-08, 58 P.3d 608, 618-19
(2002) ("Legal issues not raised in the trial court are
ordinarily deemed waived on appeal. . . . When reviewing a
summary judgment, an appellate court's consideration of the
record is limited to those materials that were considered by the
trial court in ruling on the motion.").3
4.  The Circuit Court did not err in rejecting
Defendants' claim that Murdock's bankruptcy discharge, the
alleged bankruptcy termination of Murdock's lease, or the alleged
transfer of Murdock's interest in the apartment unit prevented
the award of a money judgment against Murdock.  Murdock filed for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection on August 10, 2011, and sheNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5received a Chapter 7 discharge on November 17, 2011.  However,
Murdock's bankruptcy discharge did not discharge her post-
petition debts, see 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(16), and KEDI did not
seek, and was not awarded, damages for pre-petition fees owed by
Murdock.
Defendants' claim that Murdock's interest in the
apartment unit was terminated because it was "deemed rejected" by
the bankruptcy trustee pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 365(d)(1) is
without merit.  A proprietary lease, such as the one at issue in
this case, is not subject to the provisions of 11 U.S.C. § 365. 
See In re Swift, 496 B.R. 89, 104 (Bankr. E.D.N.Y. 2013) ("A
proprietary lease in a cooperative corporation 'is not a 'true'
lease under section 365.'"  Therefore, the proprietary lease [is]
not rejected [if the bankruptcy trustee fails to assume it within
60 days of the order for relief]." (internal citation omitted)). 
Defendants' reliance on 11 U.S.C. § 365(d) is misplaced.
Murdock's alleged transfer of her interest in the
apartment unit to Barker on December 1, 2011, did not raise a
genuine issue of material fact.  In Defendants' answer to the
Complaint, which was filed after Murdock's purported transfer of
her interest in the apartment, Murdock admitted that she owned
the apartment unit along with Barker.  In addition, any transfer
of Murdock's interest in the apartment unit required KEDI's
consent.  KEDI asserted that it did not consent to Murdock's
transfer of her interest, and Defendants did not produce evidence
showing a valid transfer. 
5. Defendants' claim that the Circuit Court failed to
address the dwelling ownership rights of Barker is without merit.
Barker's rights to and interest in the apartment unit were
subject to termination for nonpayment of required fees and
assessments.  The Circuit Court considered and addressed Barker's
ownership rights in ruling on KEDI's second motion for summary
judgment.         
6. Defendants' claim that the Circuit Court failed to
apply the standards for granting summary judgment is withoutNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4We note that the record indicates that Defendants declined to
participate in mediation because it would have been too expensive. 
5By offering to enter into a payment plan in response to KEDI's demand
letter, Barker admitted that there were delinquent amounts owed.
6merit.  In addition to the other arguments that we have rejected,
Defendants contend that the Circuit Court erred in granting
summary judgment without requiring mediation pursuant to HRS 
§ 421I-9 (Supp. 2015).  The Circuit Court determined that
mediation was not required under HRS § 421I-9, as the dispute
between KEDI and Defendants concerned Defendants' non-payment of
maintenance fees and KEDI's remedies for such default.  We
conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary
judgment without requiring mediation under the circumstances of
this case.4 
Defendants also contend that purported inaccuracies in
the delinquent amounts they owed precluded summary judgment.5 
However, KEDI supported its second motion for summary judgment
with an accounting of the delinquent amounts owed by Defendants. 
Although Defendants made conclusory statements alleging
inaccuracy, they did not produce any specific evidence to
challenge KEDI's accounting.  Defendants' conclusory allegations
did not establish the existence of a genuine issue of material
fact.  See Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(f) (2000).
7.  The Circuit Court did not err in failing to address
Defendants' defamation claim.  Defendants filed a defamation
claim in their counterclaim against KEDI.  However, KEDI's second
motion for summary judgment sought summary judgment on KEDI's
Complaint and did not seek summary judgment on Defendants'
defamation counterclaim.  In addition, the Circuit Court's
Judgment from which Defendants appeal did not enter judgment on
Defendants' defamation counterclaim.  Thus, Defendants' argument
regarding their defamation claim is without merit.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7III.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
Judgment.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 16, 2016.
On the briefs:
Charles Barker III
Janice Murdoch
Defendants-Appellants Pro Se Chief Judge
R. Laree McGuire
Jamila E. Jarmon
(Porter McGuire Kiakona & Chow, LLP)
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge