 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000426
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
HELEN E. PAGLINAWAN, INDIVIDUALLY AND AS THE
TRUSTEE OF THE HELEN E. PAGLINAWAN,
A REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL S.C. ROMPEL AND KARLA LIMA ROMPEL,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1RC10-1-9873)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Michael S.C. Rompel and Karla
 
Lima Rompel (Rompels), appeal from the Judgment for Possession
 
and Writ of Possession, entered April 14, 2011, in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit1
 (district court) in favor of
Plaintiff-Appellee Helen E. Paglinawan (Paglinawan), Individually
 and as the Trustee of the Helen E. Paglinawan Trust, A Revocable
 
Living Trust, dated June 9, 2005.
 
On appeal, the Rompels contend that the district court
 
erred by:
 
1
 The Honorable Hilary B. Gangnes presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1) issuing a Judgment for Possession and Writ of
 
Possession in favor of Paglinawan;
 
2) failing to consider their affirmative defenses and
 
counterclaims at trial;
 
3) erroneously allowing Paglinawan's amended pleadings
 
to conform to evidence presented at trial over their objection;
 
4) erroneously concluding that the Rompels owed late
 
fees;
 
5) refusing to consider their defense of retaliatory
 
eviction; and
 
6) awarding Paglinawan attorney's fees pursuant to
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 666-14 (1993) and costs pursuant
 
to HRS § 607-9 (1993).
 
I .
 
On appeal, the Rompels do not challenge the district
 
court's findings and conclusions that the Rompels became month­to-month tenants, that Paglinawan gave the Rompels a 45-day
 
termination notice on September 16, 2010, and that the Rompels
 
did not vacate the rental property (Property) owned by Paglinawan
 
45 days after receipt of the notice. At trial, the Rompels
 
claimed the defense of retaliatory eviction. However, the
 
district court found the Rompels operated a pizza business on the
 
Property, in violation of the terms of the Residential Lease
 
Agreement (Lease). Accordingly, the district court did not err
 
in holding that Paglinawan was still entitled to possession of
 
the Property pursuant to HRS § 521-74(b)(1) (2006 Repl.).
 
The Rompels challenge the district court's decision to
 
allow amendments to Paglinawan's pleadings (as it related to
 
breaches of the Lease) to conform to the evidence over their
 
objection. In Paglinawan's First Amended Complaint, she alleged
 
that the Rompels "became a month-to-month tenant after their
 
Lease expired on July 14, 2010," that the Rompels were notified
 
on September 16, 2010 that their Lease would be terminated on
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
November 1, 2010, and that the Rompels refused to vacate and
 
continued to reside on the Property. No conformance to the
 
pleadings was necessary for Paglinawan's claim that the Lease had
 
been terminated after a 45-day notice was provided and that the
 
Rompels failed to vacate the Property. Assuming arguendo, that
 
the district court erred by allowing the pleadings to conform to
 
evidence in support of Palignawan's other grounds for summary
 
possession, it was harmless error.
 
The Rompels contend the district court erred by
 
concluding they were obligated to pay late fees under the Lease. 
Paglinawan claimed the Rompels' failure to pay late fees as a
 
basis for asserting that the Rompels breached the Lease. 
However, as noted above, Paglinawan also claimed that the Lease
 
expired and the Rompels refused to vacate the Property. Thus,
 
even if the district court erred by finding that the Rompels were
 
obligated to pay late fees and that it could be a basis to award
 
Paglinawan possession of the Property, it was harmless error
 
because another valid ground existed to issue the Judgment for
 
Possession and Writ of Possession.
 
The Rompels contend the district court erred by 
refusing to consider their affirmative defenses and counterclaims 
which deprived them of a fair trial. Citing CR Dispatch Serv., 
Inc. v. Dove Auto, Inc., 86 Hawaif i 149, 154, 948 P.2d 570, 575 
(App. 1997), the Rompels claim the district court should have decided all of their counterclaims before issuing a writ of 
possession. 
The Rompels interpretation of CR Disptach is
 
inaccurate. In CR Dispatch, this court held that "[O]nly
 
defenses which would directly affect the right of possession as a
 
tenant or preclude a landlord from recovering possession are
 
allowed." Id. at 153, 948 P.2d at 574. "The court has the
 
discretion in a summary possession case to sever the issue of a
 determination of the landlord's right to summary possession from
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other issues." KNG Corp. v. Kim , 107 Hawaif i 73, 79 n.10, 110 
P.3d 397, 403 n.10 (2005). In this case, the district court held 
that only the issue of possession would be heard and that all 
other claims and counterclaims relating to damages would be 
addressed in a separate proceeding. Therefore, the district 
court was only required to hear the Rompels' defenses or 
counterclaims that would directly affect their possession of the 
Property or preclude Paglinawan from recovering possession. 
The Rompels did not file an answer to Paglinawan's 
Complaint for Summary Possession or the First Amended Complaint 
for Summary Possession. It appears on appeal that the Rompels 
relied on the causes of action stated in their First Amended 
Counterclaim as "defenses" to summary possession. In their First 
Amended Counterclaim, the Rompels claimed Breach of Lease and 
Option, Breach of Covenant of Quiet Enjoyment, Fraud, Fraudulent 
Concealment, Innocent Misrepresentation, Violation of HRS § 521­
42 (habitability), Violation of HRS § 521-44(b) (security 
deposit), Violation of HRS § 521-43 (designation of licensed real 
estate agent), Violation of HRS § 521-74(a) (retaliatory 
eviction), Violation of HRS § 521-63 (habitability), Negligence, 
Strict Liability, Assumpsit, Injunctive Relief, and Punitive 
Damages. 
Except for the Rompels' counterclaim for a Violation of 
HRS § 521-74(a) (retaliatory eviction), which the district court 
did consider, none of the other causes of action asserted in the 
First Amended Counterclaim were defenses to refusing to vacate 
the Property after termination of the Lease. The Rompels 
demanded damages, rescission, or cancellation of the Lease for 
each of the other causes of action. Even if the Rompels were 
granted damages, rescission, or cancellation of the Lease based 
on any of the other causes of action, the Rompels would not be 
entitled to possession of the Property. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lastly, the Rompels contend that the district court
 
repeatedly refused the Rompels' attempts to establish retaliatory
 
eviction under HRS § 521-74(a) (2006 Repl.) by ruling that their
 
questions were irrelevant. The Rompels argue that their evidence
 
would have shown that Paglinawan initiated a summary possession
 
proceeding as a pretext after the Rompels complained that repairs
 
were not made, that Paglinawan made an unsupported claim that the
 
Rompels owed late fees, and the City and County of Honolulu,
 
Department of Planning and Permitting suspected code violations
 
which resulted in three citations being issued to Paglinawan.
 
The Rompels did not specifically identify which
 
questions the district court precluded. Therefore, we are unable
 
to determine whether the Rompels' questions were improperly
 
excluded. However, even if their questions were improperly
 
excluded, it was harmless error.
 
HRS § 521-74 states in relevant part:
 
§521-74 Retaliatory evictions and rent
increases prohibited. (a) Notwithstanding that the
tenant has no written rental agreement or that it has
expired, so long as the tenant continues to tender the
usual rent to the landlord or proceeds to tender
receipts for rent lawfully withheld, no action or
proceeding to recover possession of the dwelling unit
may be maintained against the tenant, nor shall the
landlord otherwise cause the tenant to quit the
dwelling unit involuntarily, nor demand an increase in
rent from the tenant; nor decrease the services to
which the tenant has been entitled, after:
 
(1) 	The tenant has complained in good faith to
the department of health, landlord, building
department, office of consumer protection, or any
other governmental agency concerned with
landlord-tenant disputes of conditions in or
affecting the tenant's dwelling unit which
constitutes a violation of a health law or
 regulation or of any provision of this chapter; or
 
(2) 	The department of health or other
governmental agency has filed a notice or complaint
of a violation of a health law or regulation or any
provision of this chapter; or
 
(3) 	The tenant has in good faith requested
repairs under section 521-63 or 521-64.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the
landlord may recover possession of the dwelling unit
if:
 
(1) 	The tenant is committing waste, or a
nuisance, or is using the dwelling unit for an
illegal purpose or for other than living or dwelling
purposes in violation of the tenant's rental
agreement[.] 
HRS § 521-74(b) provides that notwithstanding HRS
 
§ 521-74(a), a landlord may recover possession of the property if
 
the tenant uses the property for a purpose other than living or
 
dwelling in violation of the rental agreement. Assuming that the
 
Rompels satisfied HRS § 521-74(a), the district court held that
 
Paglinawan was still entitled to possession under HRS § 521­
74(b)(1) because the Rompels used the Property for a pizza
 
business which was a purpose other than living or dwelling and in
 
violation of the terms of the Lease. The Rompels do not
 
challenge the district court's finding that a pizza business was
 
operated by the Rompels on the Property and that such conduct was
 
in violation of the Lease. Therefore, the district court did not
 
err by issuing a Judgment for Possession 
II.
 
The Rompels contend the district court erred by
 
awarding attorney's fees pursuant to HRS § 666-14 and the case
 did not involve nonpayment of rent.
 
The plain language of the statute and legislative
 
history does not support an award of attorney's fees under HRS §
 
666-14 unless a writ of possession is issued based upon
 
nonpayment of rent. 
HRS § 666-14 states:
 
§666-14 Writ stayed how, in proceedings for
nonpayment of rent.  The issuing of the writ of
possession shall be stayed in the case of a proceeding
for the nonpayment of rent, if the person owing the
rent, before the writ is actually issued, pays the
rent due and interest thereon at the rate of eight per
cent a year and all costs and charges of the
proceedings, and all expenses incurred by plaintiff,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
including a reasonable fee for the plaintiff's
attorney.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The district court stated in its Memorandum of Decision
 
Regarding Trial For Summary Possession that "[d]efendant's
 
argument that they should have been allowed to present all of
 
their witnesses and evidence during the possession trial fail[ed]
 
to acknowledge that because the basis of plaintiffs' possession
 
action was not a monetary claim for unpaid rent, there was no
 
claim of defendants that could act as a 'set-off' to plaintiffs'
 
possession action." The finding by the district court that
 
Paglinawan's claim was not related to nonpayment of rent
 
foreclosed application of HRS § 666-14 as a basis to award
 
attorney's fees. Therefore, HRS § 666-14 is not applicable to
 
this case and the district court erred by awarding attorney's
 
fees to Paglinawan on that basis.
 
III.
 
The district court awarded Paglinawan costs based on
 
HRS § 607-9. The Rompels argue that HRS § 607-9 does not
 authorize an award of costs. Rather, the Rompels claim that
 
District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 54(d)
 
authorizes an award of costs to the prevailing party and that it
 
was premature to award costs to Paglinawan as the prevailing
 
party because she did not obtain a final judgment.
 
HRS § 607-9 states:
 
§607-9 Cost charges exclusive; disbursements.
 
No other costs of court shall be charged in any court
in addition to those prescribed in this chapter in any
suit, action, or other proceeding, except as otherwise
provided by law.
 
All actual disbursements, including but not
limited to, intrastate travel expenses for witnesses
and counsel, expenses for deposition transcript
originals and copies, and other incidental expenses,
including copying costs, intrastate long distance
telephone charges, and postage, sworn to by an
attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable by the
court, may be allowed in taxation of costs. In
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determining whether and what costs should be taxed,
the court may consider the equities of the situation.
 
The plain language of HRS § 607-9 does not authorize an
 
award of costs, it merely states which costs are taxable. 
Rather, DCRCP Rule 54(d) authorizes the district court to award
 
costs to the prevailing party. DCRCP Rule 54(d) states:
 
(d) Costs.  Except when express provision
therefor is made either in a statute or in these
 
rules, costs shall be allowed as of course to the
prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs[.]
 
The district court had the discretion to separate the 
issue of summary possession from other claims and counterclaims. 
However, such a procedure does not create two separate actions 
for purposes of determining a prevailing party. A judgment for 
possession is immediately appealable under the Forgay doctrine. 
Ciesla v. Reddish, 78 Hawaif i 18, 20, 889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995). 
"The Forgay doctrine is an exception to the finality requirement for appeals and it allows an appellant to immediately appeal a 
judgment for execution upon property, even if all claims of the 
parties have not been finally resolved." Id. 
The court in Rapozo v. Better Hearing of Hawaif i, LLC, 
120 Hawaif i 257, 261, 204 P.3d 476, 480 (2009) stated: 
The "prevailing party" is the party that
prevails on the main disputed issues of a case.
Fought & Co. v. Steel Eng'g & Erection, Inc., 87Hawaifi 37, 52-53, 951 P.2d 487, 502-03 (1998). For 
the purposes of awarding costs and attorney fees, "[a]party need not 'sustain his entire claim' in order tobe a 'prevailing party[.]'" Id. at 52, 951 P.2d at502. The court must "identify the principal issues
raised by the pleadings and proof in a particular
case, and then determine, on balance, which party
prevailed on the issues." Id. at 53, 951 P.2d at 503.
 
Paglinawan was the prevailing party on the issue of
 
possession of the Property. However, none of Paglinawan's other
 
claims nor the Rompels' counterclaims were adjudicated at the
 
time costs were awarded. Therefore, it was premature to award
 
Paglinawan costs as the prevailing party to the entire action. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
The Judgment for Possession and the Writ of Possession
 
both entered April 14, 2011 in the District Court of the First
 
Circuit are affirmed. The June 21, 2011 Declaration Regarding
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs awarding attorney's fees and costs,
 
also entered in the District Court of the First Circuit, is
 
vacated and this case is remanded for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, March 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Peter J. Lenhart 
and Kevin P.H. Sumida Ward F.N. Fujimoto(Kevin Sumida & Associates)for Defendants-Appellants. 
Presiding Judge 
Scott C. Arakaki Allison M. Fujita(Badger Arakaki)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
9
 