NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000638
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KILANI DEREGO, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
MICHAEL ROBLES, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-1469)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Kilani Derego (Derego) and co-defendant
 
Michael Robles (Robles) with second-degree murder for
 intentionally or knowingly causing the death of Charlys Tang
 (Tang).
1 Tang was a taxicab driver who died from injuries he
 
1Derego and Robles were charged with violating Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-701.5 (2014) and 706-656 (Supp.
2010), which provide in relevant part:
 
§707-701.5. Murder in the second degree. (1) .
 
. . [A] person commits the offense of murder in the
second degree if the person intentionally or knowingly
causes the death of another person.
 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for
which the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sustained during an assault. After Robles was arrested, Robles
 
made statements to the police, telling them that he and Derego
 had taken a taxicab; when the taxicab stopped, Derego and the
 taxicab driver had gotten into an argument; Derego assaulted the
 driver, knocking him to the ground; Robles grabbed Derego but
 also kicked the driver a few times; and Derego repeatedly punched
 and kicked the driver while he was on the ground.
 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
2
 
severed the defendants and ordered separate trials. Robles went
 to trial first. At his jury-waived bench trial, Robles testified
 that he played a minor role in the assault on Tang, but that
 Derego initiated the assault and was primarily responsible for
 Tang's injuries. The Circuit Court found Robles guilty of the
 lesser included offense of manslaughter.
 
At Derego's trial, the State called Robles as a
 
witness. Robles answered some questions and acknowledged that he
 had made statements to the police and had testified at his trial. 
Robles, however, refused to answer questions about events
 relating to the alleged murder or his statements to the police
 about such events. Robles instead asserted the Fifth Amendment
 privilege against self-incrimination and refused to answer
 questions about these matters, even though the Circuit Court
 
1(...continued)
as provided in section 706-656.
 
§706-656. Terms of imprisonment for first and
second degree murder and attempted first and second
degree murder.
 
. . . .
 
(2) . . . [P]ersons convicted of second degree
murder and attempted second degree murder shall be
sentenced to life imprisonment with possibility of
parole. The minimum length of imprisonment shall be
determined by the Hawaii paroling authority[.] 
2The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
advised Robles that he had no right to assert the privilege and
 
instructed him to answer the questions. The Circuit Court
 permitted the State to introduce statements Robles had made to
 the police that described Derego as the person responsible for
 causing Tang's death. The jury found Derego guilty as charged of
 second-degree murder. 
On appeal, Derego contends that: (1) the Circuit 
Court's admission of Robles' statements to the police, which implicated Derego in the murder of Tang, violated Derego's constitutional right to confront the witnesses against him because Derego was unable to cross-examine Robles about the subject matter of Robles' statements to the police; (2) Derego's trial counsel provided ineffective assistance in failing to seek a jury instruction on the unreliability of eyewitness testimony; and (3) the Circuit Court's failure to advise Derego of his right not to testify pursuant to Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 
900 P.2d 1293 (1995), constituted harmful error. 
As explained below, we need not address Derego's 
constitutional confrontation claim because we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in admitting Robles' hearsay statements to the police incriminating Derego under the Hawai
'i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE). We vacate Derego's conviction and remand the case for a new trial. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Derego and Robles both resided at a therapeutic group
 
home run by Hale Kipa (Hale Kipa facility) for individuals who
 were seventeen to eighteen years old.
3 Jumanne Washington, a
 
Hale Kipa facility lead counselor, testified that Derego and
 Robles were very good friends and described Derego as being a
 "leader" and Robles as a "follower." On Friday, April 30, 2010,
 
3Hale Kipa was described at trial as a "private nonprofit
social services organization" which operates therapeutic group
homes.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Robles left the Hale Kipa facility at about 7:00 a.m. on OTR or
 
"Out-To Return," which is an overnight or weekend pass allowing
 facility residents to stay with their families. Robles also left
 the facility that day.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Vinson Hao (Hao) testified that in the afternoon on
 
April 30, 2010, he took the bus with Derego, Robles, and another
 
male to Waik iki, but later separated from the group. Hao's
 
mother picked Hao up in Waik iki at about 10:50 or 10:55 p.m. 
Before Hao was picked up by his mother, he saw Derego and Robles
 walking in Waik
iki.
 
City bus driver Philip Butay (Butay), on his last run
 
before finishing work at about 1:50 a.m. on May 1, 2010, was
 driving in Waik
iki on Kuhio Avenue. At the bus stop across from
 
Big Kahuna Restaurant, a boy, whom Butay later identified as
 Derego, placed his foot on the first step of the bus and asked
 Butay if Butay was going to Waipahu. Butay informed the boy that
 Butay's bus did not go to Waipahu and that the boy needed to
 catch the Route 42 bus. During this encounter, Butay had a clear
 and unobstructed view of the boy for "[m]aybe about five, ten,
 fifteen seconds." Butay described the boy as between seventeen
 and twenty years old, "dark," with short hair, and weighing
 between 135 to 150 pounds. A second boy, whom Butay later
 identified as Robles, was standing on the sidewalk. Butay
 described the second boy as bigger (145 to 160 pounds), slightly
 older, and with a lighter complection than the first boy, and
 also with short hair. The second boy called out something like,
 "Let's go. He doesn't go to Waipahu" and began walking westward
 on K
uhio Avenue.
 
As Butay drove from the bus stop, he saw the first boy
 
waving the second boy into a taxicab. Butay saw the first boy
 sit in the back seat behind the driver and the second boy sit on
 the passenger side. Butay thought to himself that "wow" taking a
 taxi to Waipahu from Waik
iki would be expensive. The next
 
morning, Butay told his wife about the incident with the two
 boys. Because Butay and his wife were frugal, he knew his wife
 would not agree with paying $50 to $60 for a taxi ride to
 Waipahu.
 
In the early morning on May 1, 2010, Craig Mansfield
 
(Mansfield) saw three people standing in front of a taxicab in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the parking lot of the Waipahu Times Supermarket. Mansfield
 
stopped and went to the corner of a building to smoke a
 cigarette. When he finished his cigarette, he saw people running
 whom he believed were the people he had seen earlier by the
 taxicab. As he passed near the taxicab, he saw a man lying on
 the ground with blood all around his head. Mansfield yelled out
 to a man and woman at a nearby gas station to call 911. 
Mansfield tried to rouse the man lying on the ground, but the man
 was unresponsive.
 
At about 1:55 a.m. on May 1, 2010, Honolulu Police
 
Department (HPD) Officer Thomas DePonte (Officer DePonte) drove
 into the parking lot of the Waipahu Times Supermarket. People at
 the scene informed Officer DePonte that "there was a guy laying
 on the ground and two people [had] fled from the cab." Officer
 DePonte saw a man, later identified as Tang, lying on the ground
 about twenty feet from a white four-door Crown Victoria taxicab,
 which had its engine running, lights on, and driver's door ajar. 
Tang was lying face up, in a pool of blood around his head, with
 blood coming from his ears, and a large lump on his forehead. 
Tang was breathing, but was gurgling and mumbling unintelligibly. 
Tang was taken by ambulance to Queen's Medical Center, and the
 taxicab was towed to the main police station.
 
Tang was declared brain-dead by a doctor at Queen's
 
Medical Center at 2:38 a.m. on May 1, 2010. An autopsy preformed
 on Tang revealed that he sustained fractures of the back and left
 side of his skull, facial bone, and orbital plates. The fracture
 of the back of his skull was "[a] very forceful injury" caused by
 his head striking a flat surface like the ground or by a blunt
 instrument striking the back of his head. The fracture to the
 left side of his skull was consistent with Tang being kicked in
 the head while on the ground. The fractures to his facial bone
 and orbital plates were blunt force injuries caused by a blunt
 instrument or a kick. Tang had bruising to the left side of his
 face, to his chest, to both sides of his abdomen, internally
 around his left kidney, which was torn and bleeding, and to his
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right and left thighs. The bruising was caused by blunt force
 
trauma, such as kicks or punches. Tang had no defensive wounds
 on his hands or feet. The forensic pathologist who testified at
 trial opined that Tang's numerous fractures were caused by
 multiple blows and that the cause of death was injury to the head
 and brain -- "cranial cerebral injuries due to blunt force trauma
 to the head."
 
A taxicab "trip log" was found in Tang's taxicab. The
 
last entry in the trip log showed that Tang picked up two
 passengers at 1:16 a.m. at "Seaside" with the beginning mileage
 for that pickup recorded as 47,166.
4 The difference between the
 
beginning mileage on the trip log and the ending mileage shown on
 the taxicab's odometer was 17 miles, approximately the distance
 between Waik
iki and the Waipahu Times Supermarket.
 
DNA swabs were taken from Tang and the taxicab. An HPD
 
criminologist conducted DNA testing of the swabs. Swabs taken
 from the interior door handle of the left rear passenger door of
 the taxicab was consistent with a mixture of three or more
 individuals, and Derego could not be excluded as a possible
 contributor to this mixture.
 
On May 3, 2010, after learning of news reports that a
 
taxi driver had been beaten in Waipahu, Butay (the City bus
 driver) called the police. Butay went to the main police station
 where a graphic artist, based on Butay's description, drew
 composite sketches of the two boys Butay had seen in the early
 morning on May 1, 2010, who wanted to go to Waipahu. While at
 the police station, Butay also saw a taxicab, which he was "99
 percent sure" was the taxicab that the boys had taken.
 
In the evening on May 3, 2010, while watching the news,
 
Eydie McNicoll (McNicoll), who worked as a site supervisor/case
 manager at the Hale Kipa facility, saw the composite sketches
 prepared by the HPD graphic artist. McNicoll thought the
 
4Seaside Avenue is a street in Waik iki that intersects with
 
Kuhio Avenue. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sketches resembled Derego and Robles. The following morning,
 
McNicoll learned that Derego and Robles had left the facility
 without authorization, so she called the police to report them as
 runaways. She also mentioned to the police that the composite
 sketches resembled Derego and Robles. 
On May 6, 2010, Robles was arrested in Waik
iki. Robles
 
was with Derego at that time. On May 7, 2010, HPD Detective
 Gregory McCormick (Detective McCormick) conducted two recorded
 interviews with Robles. On that day, Detective McCormick had
 Butay come to the police station and showed Butay two different
 photographic lineups. In one lineup, Butay identified the
 photograph of Derego as the boy who put his foot on the bus and
 asked Butay if Butay was going to Waipahu. In the other lineup,
 Butay identified the photograph of Robles as the boy on the
 sidewalk. For each of the photographic lineups, Butay wrote that
 the boys "looked like" the boys he had seen in the early morning
 on May 1, 2010. Butay testified that he was positive that he had
 selected the photographs of the two boys he had encountered.
 
At about 11:20 p.m. on May 7, 2010, Derego was arrested
 
in Waik
iki. Derego was processed and photographed after his
 
arrest. Evidence Specialist Jasmina Eliza (Eliza) photographed
 Derego on May 8, 2010. The photographs Eliza took showed that
 Derego had red marks on the knuckles of his right hand, his right
 wrist and palm, left and right forearms, above his right eyebrow,
 around his left eye, and on the inside of his left calf. Eliza
 also photographed Derego's feet and observed that Derego's right
 foot appeared to be swollen. While Derego was being
 photographed, Detective McCormick noticed injuries on Derego's
 right hand and the top of his right foot. 
On May 8, 2010, Detective McCormick met with Derego.
 
When Detective McCormick informed Derego that he had been
 arrested for the murder of a taxi driver in Waipahu in the early
 morning hours of May 1st, Derego blurted out, "Honest to God
 you've got the wrong guy. I was staying at my father's at that
 time . . . and I've never even been in a taxi before."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A.
 
Robles made several statements to the police on May 7,
 
2010, the day after his arrest. Robles first gave a recorded
 
statement to Detective McCormick in which Robles stated that he
 was at the Hale Kipa facility all night on April 30, 2010,
 through the morning of May 1, 2010, and thus had not been in
 Waik
iki or Waipahu during that time. He indicated that he had no
 
knowledge of an incident involving a taxicab driver.
 
B.
 
Robles then spoke to HPD Detective Allan Kuaana
 
(Detective Kuaana). Robles initially told Detective Kuaana that
 he was at the Hale Kipa facility from the evening on April 30,
 2010, through the morning of May 1, 2010, that he was not in
 Waik
iki or Waipahu during that time, and that he was not present
 
and did not observe an incident involving a taxicab driver in
 Waipahu. Robles, however, subsequently admitted to Detective
 Kuaana that he had been with Derego in Waik
iki during the night
 
in question; that they tried to catch a bus to Waipahu; that they
 instead caught a taxicab to Waipahu; that when they arrived in
 Waipahu, Derego and the taxicab driver argued over the fare; that
 Derego punched the driver; that Robles tried to stop Derego, but
 Robles also tried to kick the driver; that Derego broke free from
 Robles and attacked the driver with punches, causing the driver
 to fall to the ground and cover his head; that Derego continued
 to kick and punch the driver while the driver was on the ground;
 and that when Derego and Robles left the scene, the driver was
 "all bust up[.]"
 
C.
 
Robles then provided a second recorded statement to
 
Detective McCormick. Robles stated that he snuck out of the Hale
 Kipa facility in the evening on April 30, 2010, and met Derego in
 Waik
iki. While on K uhio Avenue, Derego talked to a bus driver
 
and asked if the bus went to Waipahu, but the driver said they
 needed to catch a different bus. Derego got a taxi and told
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Robles to get in. Derego sat behind the driver and Robles sat on
 
the passenger side. When the taxicab stopped, Derego and the
 driver began arguing, and everyone got out. Derego threw the
 first punch, hitting the driver in the face. The driver hit the
 ground "[a]nd then [they] just started whacking [the driver]." 
Derego kept "whacking the driver" with his fist and leg, so
 Robles tried to grab Derego. While grabbing Derego, Robles
 kicked the driver, who was attempting to stand up, to keep the
 driver away from them. Derego broke away from Robles and
 continued to assault the driver, and Robles stood back and "let
 [Derego] do what he had to do." Robles admitted that he kicked
 the driver more than once and that he could have kicked the
 driver in the head. Derego told Robles, "let's go," and they ran
 from the scene. When Robles last saw the driver, he looked
 "pretty fucked up." 
D.
 
At Robles' bench trial, Robles testified in his own
 
defense. Robles had grown up and gone to elementary school with
 Derego on the Big Island. After not seeing each other for about
 five years, they reunited when they were both assigned to the
 Hale Kipa facility. Derego was a good friend of Robles. Derego
 was interested in martial arts. His specialty was Muay Thai
 kick-boxing, and he and Robles also practiced mixed martial arts
 together at the Hale Kipa facility. 
Robles testified that on April 30, 2010, after 11:00
 
p.m., he snuck out of the Hale Kipa facility and met Derego in
 Waik
iki. They both drank alcohol, and Robles also smoked
 
marijuana. At around 12:45 a.m., Derego said he wanted to go to
 Waipahu, so they walked to a bus stop on K
uhio Avenue. When the
 
bus arrived, Derego put his foot on the first step and asked the
 bus driver if the bus was going to Waipahu. The bus driver said
 no. Derego then got into a taxicab and waved to Robles to join
 him. While in the taxicab, Derego told Robles to get out and run
 when the cab stopped.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Robles testified that Derego and the driver began
 
arguing over where Derego and Robles would be dropped off, and
 
the driver stopped the cab. Robles got out and then ran. When
 he turned back, he saw Derego and the driver scuffling, so Robles
 went back to the cab. Robles saw Derego punch the driver in the
 face, causing the driver to fall. Derego repeatedly punched and
 kicked the driver who was holding on to Derego's leg. Robles
 tried to grab Derego, and Robles twice kicked the driver hard in
 the shoulder to make him let go of Derego's leg. Robles also
 kicked the driver, possibly in the face, to keep the driver away
 when the driver tried to grab Robles' shorts. Derego pushed
 Robles out of the way and kept "whacking" the driver, causing the
 driver's head to bounce off the concrete, and the driver "stopped
 defending himself." Derego, however, continued to assault the
 driver. Robles grabbed Derego, but Derego broke free, went back
 to the driver, and kicked the driver in the face. Derego and
 Robles then ran away.
 
III.
 
The State called Robles as a witness during Derego's
 
trial. After answering a few preliminary questions about his
 background, Robles was asked to identify Derego, whereupon he
 stated:
 
Oh, with all due respect to the court and to the jury and
the judge I would like to say that everything that I said in
the statement and everything that I said in my trial were
all a bunch of lies. And that I understand that everything
that I said -- and I will be charged for perjury. I
 understand that, Your Honor, and I'm sorry for wasting the
Court's time. And that's all I got to say. And I will
 plead the 5th to any questions that you guys may ask of me
for today.
 
The Circuit Court called a recess, then ruled that Robles did not
 
have a legal basis for asserting a Fifth Amendment right to
 remain silent in light of his prior trial and conviction. The
 Circuit Court continued the trial to give the parties the
 opportunity to submit briefs on how the examination of Robles
 should proceed and on the admissibility of Robles' prior
 statements. Both parties submitted briefs on these issue.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When trial resumed four days later, Robles testified
 
that he had given two recorded statements to Detective McCormick
 
and that the transcripts marked as exhibits by the State were
 accurate transcriptions of these recorded statements. Robles
 also testified that he had made statements to Detective Kuaana
 and had voluntarily testified under oath at his own trial. 
Robles identified Derego in court and stated that they
 
had first met at Hilo Elementary school, were good friends, and
 had not seen each other for five or six years before being
 reunited in 2010, when they were both assigned to the Hale Kipa
 facility. Robles testified that Derego talked about training in
 Muay Thai kick-boxing; that Derego was "good at" Muay Thai kick-
boxing; that they talked about mixed martial arts; and that they
 had sparred and trained in mixed martial arts. 
Robles stated that he left the Hale Kipa facility
 
before 8:00 a.m. on April 30, 2010, and returned that evening. 
Robles, however, refused to answer, pleading "the Fifth," when
 asked by the prosecutor if he again left the Hale Kipa facility
 after 10:00 p.m. on April 30, 2010. The prosecutor then asked
 Robles a series of questions, with the prosecutor at times
 quoting from Robles' testimony at his trial, about events that
 purportedly led to Robles and Derego meeting later that night in
 Waik
iki. Derego's objections were overruled by the Circuit
 
Court. The Circuit Court advised Robles that he did not have the
 right to assert the Fifth Amendment and instructed Robles to
 answer the questions, but Robles persisted in his refusal.
 The Circuit Court held a bench conference and directed the State
 to question Robles about his prior statements to the police
 before asking questions about Robles' testimony at his trial.
 
State resumed its examination by asking Robles
 
questions about his initial statements to Detective Kuaana, in
 which he denied being present or observing any altercation with a
 taxi driver in Waipahu. Robles admitted that this was what he
 told Detective Kuaana. When asked about the substance of his
 subsequent statements to Detective Kuaana, in which he recounted
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
details of the events surrounding the fatal assault on the taxi
 
driver, Robles refused to answer. Over Derego's objection, the
 State asked Robles a series of questions about the substance of
 these subsequent statements to Detective Kuaana, including
 questions regarding events that preceded the assault, the
 assault, and Derego's alleged role in the assault. Despite the
 Circuit Court's instructing Robles to answer these questions,
 Robles refused to answer, asserting the Fifth Amendment. The
 State then similarly asked Robles, over Derego's objection, a
 series of questions regarding the substance of Robles' second
 recorded statement to Detective McCormick, including questions
 about Robles' statements that incriminated Derego. Robles again
 refused to answer these questions, pleading the Fifth Amendment,
 despite the Circuit Court's instructing him to answer.
 
On cross-examination, Robles refused to answer
 
questions posed by Derego's counsel. Derego's cross-examination
 consisted of the following:
 
Q. Good morning, Mr. Robles.
 
A. Good morning.
 
Q. I have some questions for you. When you spoke to
the police after your arrest, you basically lied to the
police, right?
 
A. I don't think I can answer any questions from that
side either, due to the fact that my attorney advised me to
plead the Fifth to the questions.
 
THE COURT: Excuse me, counsel. 
Mr. Robles, your lawyer cannot advise you to take the
Fifth, because I have already ruled and informed him you do
not have a right to assert the Fifth in these circumstances,
and I'm instructing you to answer the question.
 
Q. (By [Derego's counsel]:) If I keep asking you
questions, are you going to keep asserting the Fifth?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Isn't it true that you lied under oath about this
whole thing?
 
A. I plead the Fifth.
 
Q. Isn't it true that [Derego] wasn't there?
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. I plead the Fifth.
 
Q. You went on trial for the killing of Charlys Tang,
right?
 
A. I did.
 
Q. Right here in this very room, right?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you blamed [Derego] to save your own skin,
right?
 
A. I plead the Fifth.
 
. . . .
 
Q. (By [Derego's counsel]:) Mr. Robles, just so
we're clear, if I ask you further questions, are you going
answer those questions?
 
A. No.
 
[Derego's counsel]: I have no further questions.
 
The Circuit Court later ruled that it would permit the
 
State to introduce Robles' statements to Detective Kuaana and
 
Detective McCormick as prior inconsistent statements pursuant to
 HRE Rules 802.1 and 613(b) (1993). The recorded statements to
 Detective McCormick were introduced as exhibits. The statements
 to Detective Kuaana were introduced through the testimony of the
 Detective Kuaana. The Circuit Court ultimately ruled it would
 not permit the State to introduce Robles' testimony from his
 prior trial.
5
 
IV.
 
The State called Derego's father (Father) who testified
 
that Derego had not stayed with Father on the night in question 
5The Circuit Court analyzed Robles' testimony at his trial
under HRE Rule 804(b)(1) (1993), the hearsay exception for former
testimony. The Circuit Court ruled that Robles' former testimony
did not satisfy this exception because the State's motive and
interest in cross-examining Robles at Robles' trial was not
similar to the interest and motive of Derego to cross-examine
Robles. The Circuit Court also declined to admit Robles'
 testimony at his prior trial as a prior inconsistent statement,
ruling that it may be cumulative of Robles' statements to the
police, which the Circuit Court had permitted the State to
introduce.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
-- April 30-May 1, 2010. Derego told Father that he was at
 
Schofield Barracks that night.
 
V.
 
The defense presented an alibi defense. Derego's
 
girlfriend, Angelena Riverrain (Riverrain), testified that Derego
 came to her home in the morning of April 30, 2010, and they went
 to the Schofield Barracks apartment of Mahealani Cluck (Cluck)
 and her boyfriend, Reasuon Walls (Walls), arriving at about 7:00
 p.m. Riverrain stated that Derego stayed with her at the
 
apartment until they got up the next morning at 9:00 a.m. Cluck
 and Walls provided similar testimony.
 
Derego testified that in applying for an OTR weekend
 
pass from the Hale Kipa facility, he falsely told the staff at
 the facility that he would be spending the weekend with his
 father. On the morning of April 30, 2010, he went to Ala Moana
 and met with Riverrain, Robles, and others. In the afternoon, he
 and Riverrain caught the bus to Riverrain's residence in Wahiaw
a,
 
while Robles and the others said they were going to Waik iki. 
That was the last time he saw Robles that day. At about 6:30
 p.m., he and Riverrain were picked up by Cluck and Walls, and
 they all went to Cluck and Walls' apartment on Schofield
 Barracks. Derego stayed overnight at the apartment and woke up
 the next morning at about 9:30. Derego denied leaving the
 apartment that night to go to Waik
iki or Waipahu, seeing Robles
 
that night, riding in Tang's taxi, assaulting Tang, or having any
 idea who killed Tang.
 
Derego returned to the Hale Kipa facility on May 2,
 
2010. He subsequently ran away from the Hale Kipa facility and
 was living on the streets when he was arrested on May 7, 2010.
 
VI.
 
The jury found Derego guilty as charged of second-
degree murder. The Circuit Court sentenced Derego to life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole to be served
 concurrently with any other terms being served. The Circuit
 entered its Judgment on June 20, 2012, and an Amended Judgment on
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
August 6, 2012.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Derego argues that Robles' assertion of the Fifth 
Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and refusal to 
answer questions prevented him from cross-examining Robles about the substance of his prior statements to the police. Derego therefore argues that the admission of Robles' prior statements to the police describing Derego as the main perpetrator of the assault on Tang violated Derego's constitutional right to confront the witness against him. The State, citing State v. Delos Santos, 124 Hawai
'i 130, 238 P.3d 162 (2010), responds that 
the fact that Robles appeared at trial and testified was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the confrontation clause. We need not address Derego's constitutional confrontation clause claim because we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in admitting Robles' hearsay statements incriminating Derego under the Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence. 
A.
 
At the outset, we note that the type of hearsay at
 
issue in this case -- a confession by an accomplice to the police
 which incriminates the defendant -- has long been viewed with
 "special suspicion" and as "presumptively unreliable." Lee v.
 
Illinois, 476 U.S. 530, 539, 541 (1986). In Lilly v. Virginia,
 527 U.S. 116 (1999), the United States Supreme Court referred to
 this type of hearsay as "inherently unreliable" and stated that
 "we have over the years 'spoken with one voice in declaring
 presumptively unreliable accomplices' confessions that
 incriminate defendants.'" Lilly, 527 U.S. at 131 (plurality
 
opinion) (quoting Lee, 476 U.S. at 541) (discussing the hearsay
 exception for statements against penal interest). "[E]ven when
 an alleged accomplice testifies, his confession that
 'incriminate[s] himself together with defendant . . . ought to be
 received with suspicion, and with the very greatest care and
 caution, and ought not to be passed upon by the jury under the
 same rules governing other and apparently credible witnesses.'" 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Id. 	(brackets and ellipsis points in original) (quoting Crawford
 
v. United States, 212 U.S. 183, 204 (1909)). 
"[W]hen one person accuses another of a crime under
circumstances in which the declarant stands to gain by
inculpating another, the accusation is presumptively suspect
and must be subjected to the scrutiny of cross-examination."
This is so because
 
"the truthfinding function of the Confrontation
Clause is uniquely threatened when an accomplice's
confession is sought to be introduced against a
criminal defendant without the benefit of
 cross-examination. . . . 'Due to his strong motivation
to implicate the defendant and to exonerate himself, a
codefendant's statements about what the defendant said
 or did are less credible than ordinary hearsay
evidence.'"
 
Id. at 132 (ellipsis points in original) (emphasis added)
 
(citations and brackets omitted).
 
B.
 
The State argues that the Circuit Court properly
 
admitted Robles' hearsay statements to the police that
 incriminated Derego under the hearsay exception for inconsistent
 statements set forth in HRE Rule 802.1(1). We disagree.
 
HRE Rule 802.1(1) provides as follows:
 
Rule 802.1. Hearsay exception; prior statements by
witnesses. The following statements previously made by
witnesses who testify at the trial or hearing are not
excluded by the hearsay rule:
 
(1)	 Inconsistent statement. The declarant is
 
subject to cross-examination concerning the
subject matter of the declarant's statement, the
statement is inconsistent with the declarant's
 testimony, the statement is offered in
6
compliance with rule 613(b),[ ] and the
statement was:
 
(A)	 Given under oath subject to the penalty of
 
6HRE Rule 613(b) (1993) provides:
 
(b) Extrinsic evidence of prior inconsistent
statement of witness. Extrinsic evidence of a prior
inconsistent statement by a witness is not admissible
unless, on direct or cross-examination, (1) the
circumstances of the statement have been brought to the
attention of the witness, and (2) the witness has been
asked whether the witness made the statement.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
perjury at a trial, hearing, or other
proceeding, or in a deposition; or
 
(B)	 Reduced to writing and signed or otherwise
adopted or approved by the declarant; or
 
(C)	 Recorded in substantially verbatim fashion
by stenographic, mechanical, electrical,
or other means contemporaneously with the
making of the statement[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) The commentary to HRE Rule 802.1 provides in relevant part:
 
The trustworthiness of statements defined in paragraph
(1)(A), (B), and (C) is further assured by the requirement
that the witness-declarant be "subject to cross-examination
concerning the subject matter of the statement." The
 situation envisioned is one where the witness has testified
 about an event and his prior written statement also
describes that event but is inconsistent with his testimony.
Since the witness can be cross-examined about the event and
 the statement, the trier of fact is free to credit his
present testimony or his prior statement in determining
where the truth lies. Because the witness is subject to
cross-examination, the substantive use of his prior
inconsistent statements does not infringe the sixth
amendment confrontation rights of accused in criminal cases,
see California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149 (1970).
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Here, the requirement of HRE Rule 802.1(1) that "[t]he
 
declarant is subject to cross-examination concerning the subject
 
matter of the declarant's statement" was not satisfied. Because
 Robles asserted the Fifth Amendment privilege and refused to
 answer questions about the alleged murder and his prior
 statements incriminating Derego, Robles was not subject to cross-
examination about the subject matter of his prior statements. 
See United States v. Torrez-Ortega, 184 F.3d 1128, 1131-32 (10th
 Cir. 1999) (holding that a witness who asserted an illegitimate
 claim of Fifth Amendment privilege and refused to answer
 questions was not subject to cross-examination about his prior
 statement within the meaning of federal rule of evidence similar
 to HRE Rule 802.1(1)); Porth v. State, 868 P.2d 236, 242 (Wyo.
 1994) (holding that a witness who asserted the Fifth Amendment
 privilege and refused to answer questions was not subject to
 cross-examination under Wyoming evidence rule similar to HRE Rule
 802.1). Moreover, the situation envision by the commentary to
 HRE Rule 802.1 -- where the witness testifies about the event and
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his or her prior statement, and the ability to cross-examine the
 
witness about the event and the prior statement provides the
 trier of fact with a basis for determining where the truth lies 
-- was not present in this case. 
In State v. Canady, 80 Hawai
'i 469, 911 P.2d 104 (App. 
1996), this court held that: 
HRE Rule 802.1(1) requires, as a guarantee of the
trustworthiness of a prior inconsistent statement, that the
witness be subject to cross-examination about the subject
matter of the prior statement, that is, that the witness be
capable of testifying substantively about the event,
allowing the trier of fact to meaningfully compare the prior
version of the event with the version recounted at trial
 before the statement would be admissible as substantive
 evidence of the matters stated therein.
 
Canady, 80 Hawai 'i at 480-81, 911 P.2d at 115-16 (emphasis added) 
(footnote omitted). Because Robles refused to answer questions 
about events related to and surrounding Tang's murder, he did not testify substantively about these events at Derego's trial. Robles' refusal to answer questions about these events precluded Derego from cross-examining Robles about Robles' version of the events and left the jury without an adequate basis to assess the trustworthiness of the Robles' prior statements to the police. We conclude that Robles' prior statements to the police incriminating Derego were not admissible under HRE Rule 802.1(1) and that the Circuit Court erred in admitting these statements as substantive evidence pursuant to that rule. 
C.
 
We also reject the State's claim that Robles' prior
 
statements to the police incriminating Derego were admissible as
 statements against Robles' penal interest under HRE Rule
 804(b)(3) (1993). As noted, a confession by an accomplice to the
 police that incriminates the defendant, which the prosecution
 seeks to introduce at trial, is viewed with "special suspicion"
 and as "presumptively unreliable." Lee, 476 U.S. at 539, 541;
 
see Lilly, 527 U.S. at 130-33. The law is clear that although
 the self-inculpatory portions of a declarant's statement may be
 against his or her penal interest, the non-self-inculpatory
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
portions do not qualify as a statement against penal interest. 
Williamson v. United States, 512 U.S. 594, 599-601 (1994)
 (construing Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) Rule 804(b)(3), on
 which HRE Rule 804(b)(3) is modeled, and holding that "[FRE Rule
 804(b)(3)] does not allow admission of non-self-inculpatory
 statements, even if they are made within a broader narrative that
 is generally self-inculpatory"). We conclude that the portions
 of Robles' statements to the police that described Derego as the
 main perpetrator of the assault on Tang and the person
 responsible for causing Tang's death did not qualify as
 statements against Robles' penal interest under HRE Rule
 804(b)(3). 
D.
 
Hearsay is not admissible at trial unless it qualifies
 
as an exception to the rule against hearsay. See HRE Rule 802
 
(1993). Robles' prior statements to the police incriminating
 Derego were hearsay because they were statements "other than one
 made by the declarant while testifying at trial . . ., offered in
 evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." HRE Rule
 801 (Supp. 2014). Because Robles' prior statements to the police
 incriminating Derego did not fall within an exception to the rule
 against hearsay, the Circuit Court erred in admitting these
 statements.
 
We conclude, and that State does not dispute, that the 
Circuit Court's error in admitting Robles' prior statements to the police incriminating Derego was not harmless, in that "there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State v. Balisbisana, 83 
Hawai
'i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). We note that aside from arguing that the error in admitting these statements was not harmless, Derego does not explicitly challenge the sufficiency of the evidence without them. 
In any event, we conclude that when viewed in the light
 
most favorable to the prosecution, without considering Robles'
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prior statements to the police incriminating Derego, there was
 
sufficient evidence to support Derego's conviction. The evidence
 showed that Derego and Robles caught a taxicab driven by Tang in
 Waik
iki to go to Waipahu; that this was Tang's last fare before
 
his death; that Tang, Derego, and Robles were the three
 individuals a witness saw standing outside Tang's taxicab in the
 parking lot of the Waipahu Times Supermarket; that a short time
 later, Tang was found severely beaten on the ground with fatal
 injuries; that Derego and Robles were the individuals the witness
 saw running from the scene just prior to discovering Tang's body;
 that Tang's injuries were consistent with being kicked and
 punched; that when arrested several days later, Derego had
 apparent "red marks," abrasions, and/or swelling to the knuckles
 of his right hand and his right foot; that Derego was proficient
 in marital arts, including Muay Thai kick-boxing; that Derego and
 Robles were close friends, with Derego described as a leader and
 Robles as a follower; that shortly after Tang's murder, Derego
 ran away from the Hale Kipa facility; and that after his arrest,
 Derego made false exculpatory statements to the police regarding
 his whereabouts at the time of the murder and whether he had ever
 been in a taxicab, demonstrating his consciousness of guilt. We
 conclude that aside from Robles' prior statements to the police
 incriminating Derego, there was substantial evidence to support
 Derego's conviction, and therefore, Derego is subject to retrial. 
Accordingly, based on the Circuit Court's error in
 
admitting Robles' prior statements to the police incriminating
 Derego, we vacate Derego's conviction and remand the case for a
 new trial. 
II.
 
In light of our decision to vacate Derego's conviction 
based on the error in admitting of Robles' hearsay statements incriminating Derego, we need not address Derego's claim that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to seek a jury instruction on the unreliability of eyewitness testimony. On remand, the Circuit Court should apply the Hawai
'i Supreme 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's decision in State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai 'i 302, 277 P.3d 
1207 (2012), with respect to instructing the jury on eyewitness 
testimony. 
Based on State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai 'i 292, 12 P.3d 1233 
(2000), we conclude that the Circuit Court's failure to advise Derego of his right not to testify pursuant to Tachibana did not constitute harmful error. Lewis, 94 Hawai
'i at 295, 12 P.3d at 
1236 (holding that the colloquy requirement to advise a defendant that he or she has a right not to testify imposed by Tachibana "is required only 'in cases in which the defendant does not testify'"). Derego chose to testify in his own defense. He provides no basis for believing that his lawyer failed to properly advise him of his right not to testify or that his decision to testify was anything other than voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made. See id. at 296, 12 P.3d at 
1237.
7 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Amended Judgment, and we remand the case for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 2, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Kevin O’Grady
(Law Office of KevinO’Grady, LLC)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7On remand, the Circuit Court should advise Derego in
accordance with State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai 'i 361, 341 P.3d 567
(2014). 
23
 