   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
NO. CAAP-20-0000736 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF CH 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. FC-S No. 19-00064) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Father appeals from the Order 
Terminating Parental Rights (
Termination Order), entered November 
13, 2020, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family 
Court
).1 In the Termination Order, Father's parental rights to 
his child (Child) were terminated and a permanent plan with the 
goal of adoption was approved. On December 30, 2020, the Family 
Court entered Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs and 
COLs) regarding the Termination Order. 
1 The Honorable Jessi L.K. Hall presided.  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
On appeal, Father challenges FOFs 98, 105,2 106, 108, 
and 110-113,3 and contends that (1) there was not clear and 
convincing evidence that "it was not reasonably foreseeable" that 
Father "would become willing and able to provide a safe family 
home within a reasonable period of time;" (2) Petitioner-Appellee 
State of Hawai# i, Department of Human Services (DHS) "did not 
exert reasonable nor active efforts to reunify Father with 
[Child];" and (3) the Permanent Plan (
Permanent Plan) "was not in 
[Child's] best interest." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve Father's contentions as follows, and affirm. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS
) ยง 587A-33(a) (2018) 
governs the termination of parental rights and provides in relevant part as follows: 
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing,
the court shall determine whether there exists clear 
and convincing evidence that: 
(1) A child's parent whose rights are
subject to termination is not presently willing andable to provide the parent's child with a safe familyhome, even with the assistance of a service plan; 
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that
the child's parent whose rights are subject totermination will become willing and able to providethe child with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan, within a reasonableperiod of time, which shall not exceed two years fromthe child's date of entry into foster care; [and] 
2 Father did not present argument to support his challenge to FOF
105, and we do not address it. FOF 105 stated: "Father is not presentlywilling and able to provide the Minor with a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan." 
3 FOF 110 does not make a factual finding but merely introduces FOFs
111-113, stating that the Family Court "makes the following findings regardingthe Permanent Plan dated January 28, 2020." FOF 110 is not clearly erroneous. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
(3) The proposed permanent plan is in the
best interests of the child. 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in making 
its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless 
there is a manifest abuse of discretion." In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 
183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001) (citations, quotation marks, and ellipsis omitted). 
[T]he family court's determinations . . . with
respect to (1) whether a child's parent is willing and
able to provide a safe family home for the child and(2) whether it is reasonably foreseeable that achild's parent will become willing and able to providea safe family home within a reasonable period of timepresent mixed questions of law and fact; thus,inasmuch as the family court's determinations in thisregard are dependant upon the facts and circumstancesof each case, they are reviewed on appeal under theclearly erroneous standard. Likewise, the familycourt's determination of what is or is not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clearerror. 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway
in its examination of the reports concerning a child'scare, custody, and welfare, and its conclusions inthis regard, if supported by the record and notclearly erroneous, must stand on appeal. 
Id. at 190, 20 P.3d at 623 (citations, quotation marks, and 
brackets omitted). 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal
under the clearly erroneous standard. A FOF is 
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lackssubstantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)despite substantial evidence in support of thefinding, the appellate court is nonetheless left witha definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enablea person of reasonable caution to support aconclusion. 
Id. (citations, quotation marks, and ellipsis omitted). 
Unchallenged findings of fact are binding on appeal. In re Doe, 
99 Hawai# i 522, 538, 57 P.3d 447, 463 (2002). 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
(1) Father primarily contends that FOF 106 was not 
supported by clear and convincing evidence. FOF 106 states: "It 
is not reasonably foreseeable that Father will become willing and 
able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a 
service plan, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 
two (2) years from the Minor's date of entry into foster care on 
March 13, 2019." In his argument that there was no substantial 
evidence in the record that he was not willing and able to 
provide Child a safe family home within a reasonable time period, 
Father specifically claims that: DHS and the Guardian ad Litem 
(GAL) were looking to move towards "family supervision" with 
Father, but they "changed their tune" when Father relocated to 
Louisiana; and there was "no substantial evidence in the record" 
that Father "posed a risk of harm" to Child. 
This contention is without merit. The record reflects 
substantial evidence that it was not reasonably foreseeable that 
Father would become willing and able to provide Child a safe 
family home and to do so within a reasonable period of time. See 
Doe, 95 Hawai# i at 189, 20 P.3d at 622. The following evidence 
supported the Family Court's conclusion: 
the October 23, 2019 
Closing Report from the service provider, indicates that Father voluntarily terminated services upon relocating to the mainland 
in October 2019, and prior to relocating, Father attended only 
eight of fifteen visits with Child and six of twelve outreach 
sessions; the DHS Social Worker testified at trial that Father 
permanently relocated to Louisiana without first notifying DHS, 
while Child remained in Hawai# i, see
 FOFs 82, 99-100; Father 
declined the DHS Social Worker's February 14, 2020 offer to refer services and a courtesy social worker in Louisiana, and he did 
not request another referral until September 2020, see FOF 85; 
Father "stipulated to participate in each of the court ordered 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
service plans," FOF 61, but he failed to complete his services 
and visits as set forth in the service plans, see FOFs 73-76, 80, 
89-90; Father failed to call or appear for any virtual visits 
with Child in October 2020; and Father did not submit paperwork 
for his home in Louisiana under the Interstate Compact on the 
Placement of Children (ICPC), but instead indicated his 
preference was for Child's paternal grandmother (Grandmother) in 
Alabama to adopt Child, see FOFs 16c, 103, 104. 
As to Father's claim that there was no substantial 
evidence in the record that he "posed a risk of harm" to Child, 
the Family Court found that "[o]n May 16, 2019, Father stipulated 
to the adjudication of the harms alleged in the Petition," see 
FOF 36; and Father did not move to reconsider the May 16, 2019 
Orders Concerning Child Protective Act, which stated that "there 
is an adequate basis to sustain the [P]etition in that [Child's] 
physical or psychological health or welfare has been harmed or is 
subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions" of Father. 
Thus, there was substantial evidence in the record 
supporting the Family Court's conclusion that Father would not be 
willing and able to provide Child a safe family home within a 
reasonable time period, even with the assistance of a service 
plan. FOF 106 is not clearly erroneous, and Father's first 
contention is without merit. See Doe, 95 Hawai# i at 189, 20 P.3d 
at 622. 
(2) Father next contends that he was not given a 
reasonable opportunity to reunify with Child because DHS did not make reasonable or active efforts to do so, and that DHS failed 
to "identify necessary, appropriate, and reasonable services to 
address the identified safety issues/problems and failed to make 
appropriate and timely referrals for these services." Father 
challenges FOFs 98 and 108, which state: 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
  98. Under the circumstances present in this case,
Father was given every reasonable opportunity to effectuate
positive changes to provide a safe family home and toreunify with the Minor. However, Father knowingly andvoluntarily relocated to Louisiana while the Minor remainedin Hawai #i. 
. . . . 
108. Father's representation that the DHS did not
make reasonable efforts to reunify him with the Minor is notsupported by the credible evidence in the record. 
Father argues that DHS failed to make reasonable efforts to 
reunify him with Child after he permanently relocated to 
Louisiana, specifically, that DHS failed to refer Father to 
services after he relocated to Louisiana in October 2019, until 
he raised the issue at the February 12, 2020 hearing; and that 
DHS made no referrals from October 2019 to November 2020. 
FOFs 98 and 108 are supported by the DHS Social 
Worker's testimony that she referred Father to services while he 
resided in Hawai# i, but Father failed to complete them because he 
moved to the mainland; Father permanently relocated without notifying DHS, see FOFs 82 and 99-100; and she contacted Father 
on February 14, 2020, offering a referral for services and a 
courtesy social worker in Louisiana, but Father declined and did 
not request another referral until September 2020, see FOF 88. 
FOF 108 is not clearly erroneous. 
The record reflects that DHS made reasonable efforts to 
contact Father and to refer him for services after he relocated, 
but Father either failed to respond or expressly declined a 
referral offer, see FOFs 82, 84-88, 100, which Father does not 
dispute on appeal: 
82. Father permanently relocated to the state of
Louisiana in late October 2019 without first informing
the DHS. 
. . . . 
6     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
84. On October 18, 2019, [DHS Social Worker]
telephoned Father after learning from the PACT service
provider that Father had stopped participating inservices because he either had moved or was planningto move to the mainland. Father did not answer the phone, [DHS Social Worker] left a message, and Fatherdid not return her phone call. 
85. On February 14, 2020, [DHS Social Worker]
telephoned Father and was able to reach him. [DHS
Social Worker] offered to contact the social servicesdepartment in New Orleans, Louisiana, but Fatherdeclined. Father told [DHS Social Worker] that heknew the consequences of not completing the familyservice plan. 
86. On March 10, 2020, [DHS Social Worker]
telephoned Father to discuss the permanent plan,Father did not answer the phone, and [DHS SocialWorker] left a message. 
87. Father testified that he never spoke to [DHS
Social Worker] about engaging in services while inLouisiana and denied telling her that he did not wanta courtesy worker. Father's testimony on these points
was not credible.[
4] 
88. Father did not request to be referred to
services or for a courtesy social worker [from thetime he left Hawai #i] until September 2020.
. . . . 
100.
 Father did not contact the DHS after he 
left the State of Hawai #i. Rather, it was [DHS Social
Worker] who initiated contact with Father. Without notice DHS was unable to timely transfer services. 
(Emphases added.) Father's argument in this regard is without 
merit. 
Father also argues that COVID-19 "affected Father's 
ability to travel" to participate at the trial, and he was denied 
his due process right to a fair trial when he was "den[ied] 
assistance . . . to allow him to appear in-person for trial." 
4 "[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." State v. Gella, 92
Hawai #i 135, 142, 988 P.2d 200, 207 (1999). 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 Father presents no legal authority for his contention that DHS 
should pay travel expenses for a parent who voluntarily left the 
jurisdiction to appear for trial, nor does he present any 
argument showing that he was denied an opportunity to be heard or 
to present testimony and other evidence at trial. See Hawai# i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7); Taomae v. 
Lingle, 108 Hawai# i 245, 257, 118 P.3d 1188, 1200 (2005) 
(declining to address the appellant's due process argument as it 
did not "contain any reasoning, supported by citations to case 
law or authority to constitute a discernible argument"). 
Regardless, the record reflects that Father attended and 
testified at the trial via Webex, and the Family Court found that 
Father's counsel "competently" and "zealously represented Father" 
at the trial. See FOF 6. 
Father's contention in this regard is 
without merit. 
(3) Father's last contention is that terminating his 
parental rights and supporting a permanent plan for adoption was not in Child's best interests because "[c]hildren deserve a 
meaningful opportunity to be reunited with their parents in a 
safe family home," and DHS failed to give Father that opportunity 
when it stopped its reasonable efforts to reunify Father and 
Child and failed to complete an ICPC on Grandmother's home, which 
"would have aided in reunification for Father." Father 
challenges FOFs 111-113 which state: 
111. The goal of the Permanent Plan is permanent
custody of the Minor with eventual adoption as it is in the
best interest of the Minor, given the Minor's young age, theMinor's need for permanency, and the statutory presumptionin favor of children being promptly and permanently placedwith responsible and competent substitute parents andfamilies in safe and secure homes; the presumption beinggiven greater weight the younger the Minor's age upon thedate of entry into foster care. In this case, the Minor was11 days old on March 13, 2019, her date of entry into fostercare. 
8    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
112. The Minor's GAL stated her agreement that the
Permanent Plan dated January 28, 2020 with the ultimate goal
of adoption is in the Minor's best interest. 
113. [DHS social worker] testified and the Court finds
that the Permanent Plan dated January 28, 2020, with theultimate goal of adoption is in the Minor's best interest. 
FOF 111 comes directly from the language of the 
Permanent Plan and HRS Chapter 587A. Specifically, the Permanent 
Plan identifies a goal of termination of parental rights5 and 
adoption by Grandmother, with adoption by Foster Parents as an alternative, and HRS ยง 587A-33(a)(3) requires the Family Court 
to: 
(A) Presume that it is in the best interests of
the child to be promptly and permanently placed with
responsible and competent substitute parents andfamily in a safe and secure home; and 
(B) Give greater weight to the presumption that
the permanent plan is in the child's best interest,the younger the child is upon the child's date ofentry into foster care . . . . 
Thus, FOF 111 is not clearly erroneous. 
FOF 112 is supported by the GAL's argument at trial 
that termination of parental rights and adoption is in Child's 
best interests, specifically: that "it's presumed to be in the 
best interest of the child to be promptly and permanently placed 
with responsible and competent substitute parents and family in a 
safe and secure home," and Child "has that" with Foster Parents; 
that greater weight should be given to this presumption of the 
best interest of the child being promptly and permanently placed 
in a responsible and competent home "when a child is younger upon 
the date of the child's entry into foster care," and that Child 
has been with Foster Parents since shortly after her birth; and 
5 HRS ยง 587A-4 (2018) defines "Permanent custody" as "the legal
status created by order of the court after the termination of parental rights
as set forth in this chapter." 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
that the Family Court should grant the motion to terminate 
parental rights. FOF 113 is supported by the DHS Social Worker's 
testimony that DHS's position is that the Permanent Plan is in 
Child's best interest. Thus, FOFs 112 and 113 are not clearly 
erroneous. 
The record reflects that DHS and the Family Court 
provided Father a meaningful opportunity to reunite with Child; 
however, he failed to demonstrate that he could provide a safe 
family home. See FOF 6. The Family Court found that the ICPC 
for placement with Grandmother was denied due to Grandmother's decision not to complete the ICPC process. See FOF 103. 
Therefore, the record does not support Father's assertion that placement with Grandmother would have aided in reunification, 
where placement with Grandmother was never approved. 
Moreover, the DHS Social Worker testified that she 
believed the Permanent Plan was in Child's best interest, and the 
Permanent Plan's goal of adoption is consistent with statutory 
presumptions in HRS ยง 587A-33(a)(3)(A) and (B), which, 
respectively, "[p]resume that it is in the best interests of the 
child to be promptly and permanently placed with responsible and 
competent substitute parents and family in a safe and secure 
home" and "[g]ive greater weight to the presumption that the 
permanent plan is in the child's best interest, the younger the 
child is upon the child's date of entry into foster care." 
(Emphases added.) Given that Child entered into foster care when 
she was eleven days old, the presumption that adoption is in her 
best interest had greater weight under the statute. Thus, 
substantial evidence in the record supports the Family Court's 
determination that the permanent plan for adoption was in Child's 
best interest. Thus, Father's contention is without merit. See 
Doe, 95 Hawai# i at 189, 20 P.3d at 622. 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Finally, we note that Father briefly asserts that FOFs 
91 through 97 are in error, but he provides no particular 
argument as to these findings. Based on our review of the 
record, these findings are not clearly erroneous. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the November 13, 
2020 Order Terminating Parental Rights entered in the Family 
Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 17, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
11 Crystal M. Asanofor Father-Appellant 
Abigail S. Dunn ApanaJulio C. Herrera Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-Appellee 