 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000387
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY,
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
MS-M, Respondent-Appellant, and
BS, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 08-1-0116)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant MS-M ("Mother") appeals from the
 
February 22, 2010 "Order on February 3, 2010 Hearing"
 
("February 22, 2010 Order"); the October 18, 2010 "Order on
 September 29, 2010 Hearing" ("Custody Order"); and the
 January 19, 2011 "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 Granting Respondent['s] Motion for Post-Decree Relief Filed
 August 27, 2010; Order" ("Relocation Order"), each entered in the
 Family Court of the Second Circuit ("Family Court").
1
 
On appeal, Mother argues that (A) the February 22, 2010 
Order erroneously "depriv[ed] . . . Mother of custody without notice or opportunity to be heard"; (B) the Family Court erroneously granted Respondent-Appellee BS's ("Father") motion to reconsider absent specific grounds under Hawai' i Family Court 
1
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
Rules ("HFCR") 60(b);  (C) the Family Court "fail[ed] to make
sufficient findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to
 
[HFCR] Rule 52(a)" regarding custodial rights, visitation, and
 Father's "rebut[tal of] the presumption against awarding custody
 to [him] after he was found guilty of committing family violence
 against . . . Mother"; and (D) regarding the Relocation Order,
 the Family Court (1) erroneously found that "Father had
 established a material change of circumstances in support of his
 application for leave to relocate"; (2) erroneously entered
 Findings of Fact 12, 23, and 24; and (3) failed to act in the
 parties' daughter's ("Daughter") best interests in awarding
 custody of Daughter to Father and permitting him to relocate to
 Minnesota.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's appeal as follows:
 
A. Jurisdiction
 
Mother argues that the Family Court violated her
 
constitutional due process rights by depriving her of custody of
 
Daughter "without notice or opportunity to be heard" via the
 February 22, 2010 Order, which temporarily awarded joint legal
 and sole physical custody of Daughter to Father while Mother was
 undergoing and recovering from surgery. 
Separately, Mother
 
argues that there were insufficient grounds for the Family Court
 to entertain Father's motion for reconsideration, which the
 Family Court eventually granted, leading to the Family Court's
 Custody Order awarding sole legal and physical custody of
 Daughter to Father. Mother also argues that the Family Court
 neglected to issue findings of fact ("FOF") and conclusions of
 law in conjunction with its award of custody to Father. However,
 this court is without jurisdiction or discretion to consider
 
2
 Mother mistakenly refers to HFCR Rule 60(b), rather than HFCR Rule
59(e), although she argues the point using law relevant to HFCR Rule 59(e).
This oversight does not impede her appeal.
 
2
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
these arguments because Mother did not timely appeal from the
 
Custody Order. 
Mother did not file her notice of appeal until May 9, 
2011, well after the time to appeal the Custody Order and its preliminary orders had lapsed. See Haw. R. App. P. 4(a). While 
Mother timely appealed from the Relocation Order, the orders preceding it were not preliminary rulings upon which the Relocation Order was predicated, nor did they collectively lead to the Relocation Order. It was the Custody Order, not the Relocation Order, that was the capstone of the earlier custody proceedings. Cf. Riethbrock v. Lange, 128 Hawai' i 1, 17-18, 282 
P.3d 543, 559-60 (2012) ("'[P]reliminary' [means] 'coming before' and usually 'leading up to the main part of something.'" (quoting B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 1299 (9th ed. 2009)) (original brackets 
omitted)). The Relocation Order arose solely from, and resolved nothing other than, Father's August 27, 2010 Motion for Post-Decree Relief ("Motion to Relocate"), whereby Father sought permission to relocate to Minnesota with Daughter. 
Therefore, this Court lacks jurisdiction to consider
 
Mother's appeal from either the February 22, 2010 Order or the
 Custody Order.
 
B. Material change in circumstances
 
In order to prevail on a motion to modify a custody or 
visitation order, as a threshold matter, the moving party must 
demonstrate that there has been a material change in circumstances since that prior order. See In re Guardianship of 
Doe, 93 Hawai' i 374, 388, 4 P.3d 508, 522 (App. 2000); Nadeau v. 
Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993) (holding that the statutory provision requiring demonstration of a material change in circumstances before a custody order can be modified requires a similar showing to modify a visitation order). The purpose of requiring a showing of a material change in such cases is to prevent relitigation of matters already decided.
3 See Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. App. 501, 505–06, 653 P.2d 
3
 Mother does not contend that the Custody Order addressed the issue
of a proposed out-of-state relocation by the custodial parent.
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1167, 1170 (1982); 24A Am. Jur. 2d Divorce and Separation § 707
 
(2008).
 
At the time the Family Court heard Father's Motion to 
Relocate, Father already had sole legal and physical custody of Daughter, thus he was not seeking to modify custody. However, the potential for distant relocation implicated the Family Court's established visitation plan, and Father's motion explicitly addressed this issue in his proposed modified visitation plan. Thus, understanding Father's motion as, in part, a motion to alter visitation, it was Father's burden to demonstrate that there had been a material change in circumstances. In re Guardianship of Doe, 93 Hawai' i at 388, 4 
P.3d at 522. 
Permitting the court to consider the impact of 
custodial-parent relocation is advantageous. First, to hold otherwise, where a parent who originally knew of a superior out­of-state opportunity to significantly promote her welfare and that of her children but was disinclined to avail herself of it at that time, would be to thereafter bar that parent from so benefitting her children. Such a bar would be incongruent with the legislature's and courts' regard for the best interests of the child as paramount. See H
AW. REV. STAT. § 571-46.  Second, 
other courts have recognized a parent's right to travel, and that it can be impermissibly burdened by restrictions on relocation. See Tetreault v. Tetreault, 99 Hawai' i 352, 356-58 n.8, 55 P.3d 
845, 849-51 n.8 (App. 2002) (citing other jurisdictions). Regardless of the force of that right in Hawai' i vis-à-vis the 
best interests of the child, permitting the court to consider a relocation request avoids the potential summary negation of that right.
4 Third, ironically, Mother's position would preclude her 
and other parents from doing what may otherwise be done in many jurisdictions; that is, to seek a change in custody premised on 
4
 That assumes, as Mother appears to, that the result of concluding
that there had been no material change in circumstances would be to prohibit
the proposed relocation. Whether that is so, here or generally, is unclear;
at a minimum, it may depend on the terms of a divorce decree or, in this case,
any existing custody order. See, supra, note 3.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the benefits of maintaining, rather than breaking, the ties and
 
relationships that one's child has established locally.
 
Hawai'i is geographically remote. It is a virtual 
certainty that a custodial parent's out-of-state relocation will impact, at a minimum, established visitation orders. The fact of such relocation is a material change of circumstances sufficient to warrant the court's reexamination of existing custody and visitation orders. It is most consistent with the relevant Hawai'i statutes and court decisions, and most respectful of 
parental rights, to also regard the desire to relocate as similarly sufficient. 
For these reasons, absent a divorce decree or custody
 
order provision addressing the issue, a custodial parent's out­of-state relocation constitutes a material change in
 circumstances sufficient to permit consideration by the Family
 Court of the proposed relocation's effect on the child's best
 interests as reflected in existing custody or visitation orders. 
The Family Court did not err in holding that Father's desire to
 relocate with Daughter to Minnesota was a material change in
 circumstances. 
C. FOF 12, 23, and 24
5
 
Mother contends that the Family Court erroneously
 
found, in FOF 12, "no evidence to indicate that [Father] or
 anyone in his family has attempted to block or thwart [Mother's]
 relationship with [Daughter]." She recites instances where the
 Family Court granted Father temporary custody until Mother was
 medically cleared to care for Daughter, Father was granted sole
 discretion regarding visitation over a roughly five-week period
 and he permitted only supervised visitation with Mother, and,
 over a six-month period, Mother missed thirty-one days of
 visitation. 
Mother's examples fail to prove her point. Where
 
Father exercised discretion by limiting visitation, he did so
 
5
 Mother does not challenge any other FOF. Therefore, the remaining
findings are binding on this court. See Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 63,
85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
properly and in accord with the reason for the court's vesting of
 
discretion — Mother's ability to care for Daughter was suspect in
 light of medical conditions that rendered her unable to appear in
 court. Regarding the missed days of visitation, Mother appears
 to leave it to inference that it was somehow Father's fault that
 she missed these days. Indeed, in her testimony at the
 relocation hearing, contrary to Father's testimony, she
 maintained that her daughter was not given to her on the days in
 question. However, the Family Court found her testimony, unlike
 Father's, to be not credible. Moreover, Mother does not cite to
 any instances where Father defied any court orders regarding
 custody or visitation. Therefore, FOF 12 was not clearly
 erroneous. 
Mother contends that the Family Court, in FOF 23 and 
24, improperly considered testimony that was "based wholly on hearsay and the self-serving testimony of . . . Father" regarding his contact with the fathers of Mother's two sons and their desire to facilitate a relationship between all three siblings. However, Mother failed to object to this testimony at the relocation hearing, and, therefore, we decline to consider it here. See State v. Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i 282, 290, 12 P.3d 873, 
881 (2000) ("A hearsay objection not raised or properly preserved in the trial court will not be considered on appeal."). Mother's contention that Father's testimony was self-serving also fails, as "an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]" Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai' i 86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App. 
2008). Father's testimony, and the Family Court's unchallenged determination that it was credible, constitute substantial evidence to support FOF 23 and 24. 
Furthermore, Mother fails to demonstrate how any of 
these findings affected the Family Court's determination that relocation was in Daughter's best interests. Therefore, even if there were error, it is deemed harmless. See Torres v. Torres, 
100 Hawai' i 397, 412–13, 60 P.3d 798, 813–14 (2002). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Best interests of the child
 
Mother argues that the Court erred by failing to act in
 
Daughter's best interests when it permitted Father to relocate
 
with Daughter despite the deep bond between Mother and Daughter
 and the difficulties relocation would impose on Mother's ability
 to maintain that relationship. However, the Family Court
 concluded that, in light of several statutory factors that it
 specified and its factual findings, Daughter's relocation with
 Father to Minnesota was in her best interests. 
Given the substantial evidence and unchallenged
 
findings supporting that conclusion, we agree. The Family Court
 found that: Father's employment opportunities and economic
 situation would be significantly improved by relocating, thereby
 promoting "[Daughter's] long-term best interest [by] provid[ing]
 stability and security in her daily life"; there were comparable,
 but less expensive, schools and daycare in Minnesota; "[Daughter]
 has a better chance of developing and maintaining a relationship
 with her two older half[-]brothers if she relocates to the
 mainland" and that "[d]eveloping this relationship would be in
 [her] best interest"; and that Mother was needlessly and
 repeatedly calling the police to intervene with child exchanges
 to the detriment of Daughter's well-being. The Family Court also
 expressed concern that Mother's behavior, as reflected in an
 incident where she approached Father unannounced while he had
 custody of Daughter and began screaming at him, may "continue
 into the future, and . . . ultimately . . . cause psychological
 harm to [Daughter]." Finally, the Family Court found that Mother
 had missed thirty-one days of visitation over a six-month period,
 and that Father was the more stable and consistent of the two
 parents, he was capable of providing for Daughter's daily needs,
 and that he intended to continue facilitating Daughter's
 relationship with Mother. 
On these facts, the Family Court's finding that 
Daughter's relocation with Father was in her best interests was not clearly erroneous. See, e.g., Tetreault, 99 Hawai' i 352, 55 
P.3d 845 (upholding a grant of permission to the primary caregiver to relocate to another state where the intended 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
community had excellent schools, good job opportunities, and low
 
crime rates, and was family-friendly and unpolluted).
 
Therefore, we affirm the January 19, 2011 Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law Granting Respondent [Father's] Motion
 for Post-Decree Relief Filed August 27, 2010; Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 20, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Barbra A. Kavanaugh
(admitted Pro Hac Vice), andGary Victor Dubin,Frederick J. Arensmeyer, andLila C.A. King,(Dubin Law Offices)for Respondent-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Elizabeth C. Melehan 
for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
8
 