NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000658
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JASON HESTER, as individual and as Successor Overseer,
The Office of the Overseer and His Successor, Over/For The
Popular Assembly of Revitalize, a Gospel of Believers,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee
v.
 
LEONARD GEORGE HOROWITZ and THE ROYAL BLOODLINE OF DAVID,
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellants
and
 
JACQUELINE LINDENBACH HOROWITZ,
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Appellee,
and
 
PHILIP MAISE, Intervenor-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE
ENTITIES and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05-1-196K)
 
ORDER DISMISSING APPEAL FOR LACK OF APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Upon review of the record, it appears that we lack
 
appellate jurisdiction over Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/
 
Appellants Leonard George Horowitz's (Leonard Horowitz) and the
 Royal Bloodline of David's (Royal Bloodline of David) appeal from
 the Honorable Ronald Ibarra's June 19, 2015 Fourth Amended Final 
Judgment (Fourth Amended Judgment) because the Fourth Amended
 Judgment does not satisfy the requirements for an appealable
 judgment under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-1(a) (1993 &
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Supp. 2015), Rule 58 of the Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP), and the holding in Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & 
Wright, 76 Hawai 'i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
HRS § 641-1(a) authorizes appeals to the Hawai 'i 
Intermediate Court of Appeals from final judgments, orders, or decrees. Appeals under HRS § 641-1 "shall be taken in the manner . . . provided by the rules of the court." HRS § 641-1(c). HRCP Rule 58 requires that "[e]very judgment shall be set forth on a separate document." Based on this requirement under HRCP Rule 58, the Supreme Court of Hawai
'i in Jenkins held that "[a]n 
appeal may be taken . . . only after the orders have been reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been entered in favor of and against the appropriate parties pursuant to HRCP [Rule] 58[.]" Jenkins, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). "Thus, 
based on Jenkins and HRCP Rule 58, an order is not appealable, even if it resolves all claims against the parties, until it has been reduced to a separate judgment." Carlisle v. One (1) Boat, 
119 Hawai
'i 245, 254, 195 P.3d 1177, 1186 (2008); Bailey v. 
DuVauchelle, 135 Hawai 'i 482, 489, 353 P.3d 1024, 1031 (2015). 
Furthermore, 
if a judgment purports to be the final judgment in a case
involving multiple claims or multiple parties, the judgment
(a) must specifically identify the party or parties for and
against whom the judgment is entered, and (b) must (i)
identify the claims for which it is entered, and
(ii)
 dismiss any claims not specifically identified [.]
 
Jenkins, 76 Hawai 'i at 119, 869 P.2d at 1338 (emphasis added). 
"[A]n appeal from any judgment will be dismissed as
 
premature if the judgment does not, on its face, either resolve
 
all claims against all parties or contain the finding necessary
 for certification under HRCP [Rule] 54(b)." Id. (original
 
-2­ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
emphasis).
 
In the instant case:
 
1. The Fourth Amended Judgment does not
 
resolve all claims against all parties. While the
 
Fourth Amended Judgment addresses many of the
 claims raised, it does not address all of the
 claims, and it does not dismiss the claims not
 specifically identified; and 
2. The Fourth Amended Judgment also does
 
not contains the finding necessary for
 certification under HRCP Rule 54(b), which is
 required to appeal a "judgment as to one or more
 but fewer than all of the claims or parties."
 
Instead, the Fourth Amended Judgment only resolves some of the
 multiple claims in this case as to some of the multiple parties. 
The instant case involves the following parties:
 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant Jason Hester, as Successor
 Overseer the Office Overseer, a corporate Sole and Its Successor
 Over and for the Popular Assembly to Revitalize, a Gospel of
 Believers (Hester);
1
 Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs Leonard
Horowitz, Jacqueline Lindenbach Horowitz (Jacqueline Horowitz),
 and the Royal Bloodline of David (collectively "Defendants"); and
 Intervenor-Appellee Philip B. Maise (Maise). 
The parties alleged various claims through four
 
separate documents: (1) Hester's June 15, 2005 "Complaint for
 
1
 On August 31, 2009, the Circuit Court substituted Hester for the
original plaintiff in the action, Cecil Loran Lee (Lee), who passed away
during the course of the proceedings. [JROA doc. 34 at 798]. For the sake of
 clarity and simplicity, we refer solely to Hester in our discussion as though
he had been the plaintiff throughout the course of the proceedings. 
-3­   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Foreclosure" (Hester's Complaint) [JROA doc. 32 at 67], (2) 
Defendants' July 6, 2006 "Defendants Counterclaims" (Defendants' 
Counterclaims), (3) Maise's October 27, 2005 "Complaint in Intervention" (Intervention Complaint) [JROA doc. 32 at 381], and 
(4) Hester's July 25, 2007 "Counterclaim/Cross Claim Against
 
Intervenor Maise" (Hester's Counterclaim Against Maise) [JROA
 
doc. 32 at 1115]
.
 
The Fourth Amended Judgment does not enter judgment on
 
or dismiss all of these claims as to all of the parties. In
 
particular, the Fourth Amended Judgment does not enter judgment
 on or dismiss any of the multiple claims raised in: 
1.	 Maise's Intervention Complaint against Hester and
 Leonard Horowitz, Jacqueline Horowitz, and the
 Royal Bloodline of David; and
 
2. Hester's Counterclaim Against Maise.
 
In addition, the Fourth Amendment Judgment does not specifically
 adjudicate any claims raised against Jacqueline Horowitz with
 respect to Hester's Complaint.
2
 
2 We note that in a footnote, the Fourth Amended Judgment states that
while Jacqueline Horowitz was named in the caption of Hester's Complaint, no
claims were alleged against her in Hester's Complaint. We conclude that this
 statement is wrong. Hester's Complaint identifies Jacqueline Horowitz as a
defendant in the caption and Hester's Complaint sought relief against the
"Defendants"; Hester's Complaint was served upon Jacqueline Horowitz;
Jacqueline Horowitz appeared in the action through counsel and filed a
counterclaim; prior judgments entered by the Circuit Court entered judgment in
favor of Hester and against Jacqueline Horowitz on claims raised in Hester's
Complaint; Jacqueline Horowitz was subjected to a trial on claims raised in
Hester's Complaint; and the Circuit Court issued Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law which granted Hester equitable relief against Jacqueline
Horowitz based on claims raised in Hester's Complaint. Thus, we conclude that
Hester's Complaint raised claims against Jacqueline Horowitz and that the
Circuit Court must resolve such claims in its judgment in order to issue a
final judgment with respect to all claims and all parties. If the Circuit
 Court determines that any claims pertaining to Jacqueline Horowitz (or any
other party) not specifically identified in the judgment should be dismissed,
it should include in its judgment the statement that all other claims raised
by any of the parties are dismissed.
 
(continued...)
 
-4­NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Fourth Amended Judgment does not adjudicate all 
claims against all parties in this case; nor does it find no just 
reason for delay in the entry of judgment as to one or more but fewer than all claims or parties pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b), a finding that is necessary to afford this court jurisdiction if the judgment fails to adjudicate all claims against all parties in the case. The Fourth Amendment Judgment also does not contain a statement dismissing all other claims not specifically identified, in accordance with the guidance provided in the Jenkins decision on how to enter a final appealable judgment as to all claims and all parties. Instead, the Fourth Amended Judgment concludes with the statement: "This final judgment disposes of all claims, counterclaims and cross-claims raised by any and all parties in this action. There are no remaining claims or parties to be addressed in this action." However, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that such language is insufficient 
to establish an appealable judgment. In Jenkins, the supreme court held: 
A statement that declares "there are no other outstanding
claims" is not a judgment. If the circuit court intends
 that claims other than those listed in the judgment language
should be dismissed, it must say so: for example,
"Defendant Y's counterclaim is dismissed," or "Judgment upon
Defendant Y's counterclaim is entered in favor of
 Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant Z," or "
all other claims,
counterclaims, and cross-claims are dismissed."
 
Jenkins, 76 Hawai 'i at 119-20 n.4, 869 P.2d at 1338-39 n.4 
(emphases added). 
2(...continued)
We also note that the Fourth Amended Judgment in Paragraph I.b. entered
judgment in favor of Hester on the claim for breach of contract/covenant for
failure to keep property insurance, but that Paragraph I.b. did not reference
any relief provided on that claim. We assume that the relief provided was
requiring Defendants to carry insurance set forth in Paragraph I.f. The
 Circuit Court, however, may wish to clarify the relief provided on this claim. 
-5­NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under Jenkins, for a judgment that purports to be a 
final judgment to be appealable, "the judgment (a) must 
specifically identify the party or parties for and against whom the judgment is entered, and (b) must (i) identify the claims for which it is entered, and (ii) dismiss any claims not specifically identified[.] Jenkins, 76 Hawai
'i at 119, 869 P.2d at 1338 
(emphasis added). 
Because the Fourth Amended Judgment neither resolves
 
all claims against all parties nor contains the finding necessary
 for certification under HRCP Rule 54(b), the Fourth Amended
 Judgment fails to satisfy the requirements for an appealable
 final judgment under HRS § 641-1(a), HRCP Rule 58, and the
 holding in Jenkins. Based on the holding in Jenkins, we are
 required to dismiss this appeal. Absent an appealable final
 judgment, the appeal by Leonard Horowitz and the Royal Bloodline
 of David is premature, and we lack appellate jurisdiction. 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED appellate court case number CAAP­
15-0000658 is dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 20, 2016. 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
-6­