 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000502
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FORD MOTOR CREDIT COMPANY, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LUDWIG BAKER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1465)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ludwig Baker ("Baker") purchased a
 
new Ford F-350 Pickup Truck through a credit sales contract with
 
the dealer. 
According to Baker, the truck was defective and a
 
"lemon"; within the first year of purchase, he had to take the
 truck back to the dealer for repairs on four separate occasions. 
After a fifth repair attempt proved unsuccessful, Baker
 "surrendered" the truck by returning it to the dealer. Baker was
 current on his payments when he surrendered the truck, but
 thereafter stopped making payments.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Ford Motor Credit Company (Ford)
 
subsequently filed a complaint against Baker in the District
 Court of the Second Circuit (District Court),
1
 seeking recovery
of payments due under the credit sales contract. Baker denied the allegations of the complaint and filed a counterclaim against Ford, asserting a claim under Hawai
'i's "Lemon Law," Hawaii 
1The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided over the proceedings
relevant this appeal. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 481I. The District Court granted
 
Ford's motion for summary judgment on Ford's complaint and also
 granted Ford's motion to dismiss Baker's counterclaim. 
Baker, appearing pro se, appeals from the Judgment in
 
the total amount of $22,389.44 entered against him by the
 District Court. On appeal, Baker argues that the District Court
 erred in: (1) granting Ford's motion for summary judgment on its
 complaint; (2) granting Ford's motion to dismiss Baker's
 counterclaim; and (3) denying Baker's motion for leave to amend
 his counterclaim.
 
As explained below, we conclude that although Baker's 
affirmative claim based on Hawai
'i's Lemon Law was time barred, 
Baker was entitled to raise the dealer's alleged breach of warranty for selling him a defective truck as a defense to Ford's action to collect amounts due under the credit sales contract. We affirm the District Court's dismissal of Baker's counterclaim that was based on the Lemon Law because the counterclaim was barred by the Lemon Law's statute of limitations. We vacate the District Court's grant of summary judgment on Ford's complaint because there are genuine issues of material fact regarding Baker's breach of warranty defense. We also direct the District Court to reconsider its denial of Baker's motion to amend his counterclaim to add non-Lemmon Law claims in light of our decision to vacate its grant of summary judgment on Ford's complaint. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 A.
 
On January 2, 2006, Baker purchased a new Ford F-350
 
Pickup Truck from Valley Isle Motors Ltd. (Valley Isle Motors)
 through a credit sales contract. The purchase price of the
 truck, including general excise tax, was $47,942.79. Pursuant to
 the credit sales contract, Baker agreed to pay a total of
 $67,254.96, consisting of a $4,800 down payment plus 72 monthly 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
payments of $867.43, with the first monthly payment due on
 
February 16, 2006. The credit sales contract was assigned to
 
Ford.
 
B.
 
In opposition to Ford's motion for summary judgment on
 
its complaint, Baker submitted evidence through declarations in
 his affidavit and exhibits of the following. According to Baker,
 during the first year of ownership, he had to take the truck back
 to Valley Isle Motors four times due to cranking and starting
 problems, which prevented the truck from functioning properly in
 accordance with the manufacturer's express warranty. On his
 fourth repair visit, Baker informed Valley Isle Motors' employee
 Peter Darlington (Darlington) that the truck was a "Lemon," but
 Darlington told Baker that he did not qualify for the "Lemon
 Law." On his fifth repair visit, Baker hand-delivered to
 Darlington a letter dated January 30, 2007, written to Ford Motor
 Company.
2 In the letter, Baker described the problems he had
 
experienced with the truck and stated: "I want my case reviewed
 for Arbitration as at this point I feel only a new vehicle could
 restore my confidence in Ford trucks."
 
On May 5, 2008, Baker "self-surrendered" the truck to
 
Valley Isle Motors "because [Baker] no longer wished to make
 payments on the defective 'Lemon' vehicle[.]" Vehicle servicing
 receipts from Valley Isle Motors reflect that Baker's truck had
 been towed in for repairs on May 11, 2006, June 8, 2006, July 17,
 2006, and January 30, 2007, after failing to start; brought in on
 October 17, 2006, due to difficulty starting; and brought in on
 May 2, 2008, for a rattling noise in the engine. When Baker
 
"self-surrendered" the truck on May 5, 2008, Valley Isle Motors 
Service Manager Aaron Serrao gave him a hand-written note which
 stated that Valley Isle Motors would not charge "storage for
 [Baker's] vehicle while going thru arbitration." At the time
 
2Baker asserted that he mailed this letter to the address for Ford Motor
 
Company contained in the "Lemon Law Handout" he had received, but that this
address was "fictitious" and the letter was returned to him. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Baker returned the truck to Valley Isle Motors, he was current on
 
his payments. The truck was subsequently auctioned, but Baker
 "continued to be billed" for payments due under the credit sales
 contract.
 
C.
 
On May 27, 2009, Ford filed a complaint against Baker
 
alleging that it was the current holder/owner of the credit sales
 contract and that Baker was in default under the credit sales
 contract. Ford sought judgment in the principal amount of
 $21,759.15. This is the amount Ford claimed Baker owed after the
 proceeds from auctioning the truck were subtracted from the
 $38,730.20 balance owed under the credit sales contract. Ford
 obtained multiple extensions to serve its complaint, which was
 not served on Baker until October 2011, over two years after the
 complaint was filed. Baker appeared pro se in District Court in
 response to the complaint and a denial of the complaint was
 entered.
 
On November 9, 2011, Baker filed a counterclaim against
 
Ford, asserting a claim under the Lemon Law, HRS Chapter 481I,
 and citing Lemon Law remedies, including "(1) Provision of a
 replacement motor vehicle; or (2) Acceptance of the motor vehicle
 from the consumer, refund of the full purchase price, and all
 collateral and incidental charges." The counterclaim sought
 judgment in the amount of $19,950.89, the equivalent of 23
 monthly payments under the credit sales contract.
 
On February 3, 2012, Ford filed a motion for summary
 
judgment on its complaint against Baker. On February 23, 2012,
 Ford filed a motion to dismiss Baker's counterclaim on grounds
 which included that the counterclaim was barred by the Lemon
 Law's statute of limitations.
 
Baker filed an opposition to Ford's motion for summary
 
judgment, arguing that the motion should be denied because there
 were genuine issues of material fact to be decided at trial. As
 noted, Baker submitted his affidavit and exhibits which described
 the alleged defects and the numerous problems he experienced with
 
4
         
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the truck. Baker also asserted that the truck qualified as a
 
"[l]emon" under the Lemon Law. In opposing Ford's motion to
 dismiss his counterclaim, Baker asserted that he was a victim of
 fraud and that his actions constituted substantial performance of
 the Lemon Law's requirements. 
On March 9, 2012, Baker filed a motion for leave to
 
file a first amended counterclaim to assert counts alleging
 fraud, deceptive business practices, intentional infliction of
 emotional distress, and "tortious interference." 
On March 12, 2012, the District Court held a hearing on
 
Ford's motions (1) for summary judgment on its complaint and (2)
 to dismiss Baker's counterclaim.
3 The District Court advised the
 
parties that it had reviewed the written pleadings that had been
 filed and asked if they had "anything new to add other than
 what's already been submitted in writing?" The District Court
 also advised Baker that it would listen to anything new that he
 wanted to add to his written argument, but that it "has to be
 new[.]" Baker responded that "[t]here's nothing new at this
 time." The District Court orally granted Ford's motion for
 summary judgment on its complaint, and it also granted Ford's
 motion to dismiss Baker's counterclaim. 
On April 2, 2012, the District Court denied Baker's
 
motion for leave to file a first amended counterclaim. On April
 
18, 2012, the District Court filed its written order granting
 
Ford's motions (1) for summary judgment on its complaint and (2)
 to dismiss Baker's counterclaim. On that same date, the District
 
Court entered its Judgment in the total amount of $22,389.44 in
 
favor of Ford and against Baker. Baker filed motions for
 reconsideration of the District Court's decisions to grant Ford's
 motion for summary judgment and Ford's motion to dismiss Baker's
 
3On March 5, 2012, a week before the hearing, Baker filed a motion
seeking a 90 day continuance of the hearing in order to obtain counsel. The
 
District Court denied Baker's ex parte motion to shorten time for a hearing on
his motion for continuance, and it declined to consider Baker's motion for
 
continuance at the March 12, 2012, hearing. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counterclaim. The District Court determined that Baker's filing
 
of his notice of appeal divested it of jurisdiction to consider
 Baker's motions and took no further action on the motions. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
We first address Baker's argument that the District 
Court erred in dismissing his counterclaim. The counterclaim filed by Baker was based on Hawai
'i's Lemon Law. However, the 
undisputed facts establish that Baker's counterclaim was not filed within the limitations period set forth in the Lemon Law. Because Baker's counterclaim was barred by the Lemon Law's statute of limitations, the District Court did not err in dismissing the counterclaim. 
HRS § 481I-3(j) (2008), which establishes the
 
limitations period for Lemon Law claims, provides that "[a]ny
 action brought under this section must be initiated within one
 year following expiration of the lemon law rights period." The
 phrase "lemon law rights period," in turn, is defined as: "the
 term of the manufacturer's express warranty, the period ending
 two years after the date of the original delivery of a motor
 vehicle to a consumer, or the first 24,000 miles of operation,
 whichever occurs first." HRS § 481I-2 (2008).
 
Ford established and Baker agreed that the truck was
 
delivered to Baker in January 2006. The record shows that
 Baker's counterclaim was not filed until November 9, 2011.
4 Ford
 
demonstrated that Baker did not bring an action on his Lemon Law
 claim "within one year following expiration of the lemon law
 rights period." HRS § 481I-3(j). We conclude that the District
 Court properly dismissed Baker's counterclaim because it was
 barred by the statute of limitations.
 
4Baker also acknowledges that he did not pursue arbitration of his Lemon
Law claim under the State Certified Arbitration Program. See HRS 
§ 481I-3(i) (2008). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Although Baker's affirmative Lemon Law claim was time
 
barred, we conclude that Baker was entitled to raise Valley Isle
 
Motors' alleged breach of warranty for selling him a defective
 truck as a defense to Ford's action to collect amounts due under
 the credit sales contract. The Lemon Law provides that
 "[n]othing in this chapter shall in any way limit or expand the
 rights or remedies which are otherwise available to a consumer
 under any other law." HRS § 481I-1 (2008). Thus, Baker's
 inability to assert a Lemon Law claim did not prevent him from
 asserting other defenses to Ford's collection action.
 
Baker was entitled to assert any defense against Ford
 
that he could have asserted against Valley Isle Motors, the
 original creditor-seller under the credit sales contract with
 Baker. Although the print of the copy of the credit sales
 contract in the record is extremely small and difficult to read,
 the credit sales contract appears to state that any holder of the
 credit sales contract "is subject to all claims and defenses
 which the debtor could assert against the seller[.]" In
 addition, HRS § 476-19(c) (2008) provides, in relevant part: "No
 rights of action or defense arising out of a credit sale which
 the buyer has against the seller shall be cut off by
 assignment[.]" HRS § 476-19(d) (2008) further provides: "When an
 assignee asserts the assignee's rights against a buyer, the buyer
 may assert any available defense against the assignee as if the
 assignee were the seller."
 
Baker was entitled to assert as a defense to Ford's
 
collection action that due to the numerous defects in the truck,
 Valley Isle Motors had breached express or implied warranties. 
See HRS §§ 490:2-313, :2-314, :2-315 (2008); Chrysler Credit
 Corp. v. Copley, 428 S.E.2d 313, 315-16 (W. Va. 1993) (holding
 that a car buyer could assert that the car was defective as a
 defense to a suit by an assignee of the credit sales contract to
 collect the balance owed); Mercedes-Benz Credit Corp. v. Lotito,
 703 A.2d 288, 292-94 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1997) (holding
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that a car lessee may raise a claim of breach of warranty due to
 
defects in the car as a defense in an action to collect payments
 owed on the car lease). Baker's affidavit and the exhibits he
 submitted in opposition to Ford's motion for summary judgment
 were sufficient to raise genuine issues of material fact
 concerning whether the truck he purchased from Valley Isle Motors
 was defective and whether Valley Isle Motors had breached
 expressed or implied warranties. Accordingly, we conclude that
 the District Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of
 Ford on its complaint. We therefore vacate the District Court's
 Judgment to the extent that it entered judgment in the amount of
 $22,389.44 in favor of Ford on Ford's complaint.
5
 
III.
 
The record does not disclose the District Court's basis
 
for denying Baker's motion for leave to amend his counterclaim. 
The District Court denied this motion after it had already orally
 granted Ford's motions (1) for summary judgment on its complaint
 and (2) to dismiss Baker's Lemon Law counterclaim. We vacate the
 District Court's denial of Baker's motion for leave to amend his
 counterclaim so that it can consider the motion in light of our
 decision to vacate the District Court's grant of summary judgment
 in favor of Ford on Ford's complaint. We express no view on how
 the District Court should rule in reconsidering Baker's motion
 for leave to amend his counterclaim.
 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we: (1) vacate the Judgment to
 
the extent that it entered judgment in favor of Ford on Ford's
 complaint; (2) affirm the Judgment to the extent that it entered
 judgment in favor of Ford on Baker's counterclaim, which was
 
5Baker argues that the District Court erred in denying his motion to
continue the hearing on Ford's motions for summary judgment and to dismiss
Baker's counterclaim and in only allowing him to make new arguments not
already raised in his pleadings at the hearing. Because we are vacating the
District Court's grant of summary judgment on Ford's complaint, Baker's
arguments are moot as they relate to Ford's motion for summary judgment. We
 conclude that Baker's arguments lack merit as they relate to Ford's motion to
dismiss Baker's counterclaim. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
based on Hawai 'i's Lemon Law; (3) vacate the District Court's 
denial of Baker's motion for leave to amend his counterclaim; and
 
(4) remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Ludwig Baker
Defendant-AppellantPro Se 
Chief Judge
 
Marvin S.C. Dang
Jason M. Oliver
 (Law Offices of 
Marvin S.C. Dang, LLLC)
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
9
 