FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
ERIC J. MINTON and RICHARD M. STANLEY,
Plaintiffs/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
v.
 
SIDNEY A. QUINTAL, JOHN C. FUHRMANN, and CITY AND COUNTY OF
HONOLULU, Defendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10 and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000032
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-2354)

 
MARCH 10, 2016
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Defendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees Sidney A.

 
Quintal, John C. Fuhrmann, and the City and County of Honolulu
 
(collectively, C&C) appeal and Plaintiffs/Appellees/Cross-
Appellants Eric J. Minton (Minton) and Richard M. Stanley
 
(Stanley) cross-appeal from the "Final Judgment and Order
 
Determining Damages" entered on December 23, 2014 in the Circuit
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, C&C contends the circuit court erred in
 
calculating the amount of damages it awarded, and challenges the
 
circuit court's (1) use of the "Worst Case" scenario to measure
 Minton and Stanley's damages; (2) reliance on Minton and
 Stanley's supplementary declarations; and (3) the denial of C&C's
 March 12, 2014 "Motion to Conduct Trial, Conduct Further
 Discovery, and Receive Further Evidence on Issue of Damages" 
(Motion to Conduct Further Discovery and Trial).
 
On cross-appeal, Minton and Stanley contend the circuit 
court erred in (1) "determining the scope of the remand from the [Hawai
'i] Supreme Court"; (2) "denying foreseeable non-pecuniary 
damages"; and (3) striking parts of the declarations by Stanley and Minton. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This case comes before us after remand from the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court to the circuit court "for a determination of the amount of damages to be awarded against [C&C]." Minton v. 
Quintal, 131 Hawai
'i 167, 192, 317 P.3d 1, 26 (2013).2 The 
supreme court concluded that Minton and Stanley "established the elements of their claim of tortious interference with prospective business advantage, including the existence of damages." Id. 
On March 12, 2014, following the supreme court's
 
decision, C&C filed a Motion to Conduct Further Discovery and
 Trial. The circuit court held a hearing on this motion on April
 4, 2014. On April 24, 2013, the circuit court issued its "Order
 Granting in Part and Denying in Part [C&C's Motion to Conduct
 Further Discovery and Trial] Filed March 12, 2014."
 
On May 2, 2014, C&C filed a memorandum summarizing the
 
testimony presented to the trial court during the initial trial
 in 2010. On May 5, 2014, C&C filed supplemental exhibits, which
 included reports from economist Thomas A. Loudat, PhD (Dr.
 
1 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
2 A thorough factual and procedural background of this case may be found
in Minton, 131 Hawai' i at 170-82, 317 P.3d at 4-16. 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Loudat) on the updated estimates of the projected earnings of
 
Minton and Stanley.3 On May 6, 2014, Minton and Stanley
 
submitted their own memorandum summarizing the testimony from the
 
2010 trial.
 
On June 23, 2014, Minton and Stanley each submitted
 
"supplementary declarations" to the circuit court (Supplemental
Declarations). On June 30 2014, C&C submitted objections to the
 
Supplemental Declarations. The circuit court held a hearing on
 
the admission of the Supplemental Declarations on July 3, 2014,
 at which it struck portions of both Minton and Stanley's
 Supplemental Declarations.
 
On July 7 and 8, 2014, the circuit court conducted an
 
evidentiary hearing receiving testimony from Stanley, Minton, and
 Dr. Loudat.
 
On October 15, 2014, the circuit court entered its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Determining
 Damages (2014 FOFs/COLs). The circuit court awarded $556,156 to
 
Minton and $194,483 to Stanley. The circuit court denied non­
economic damages to Minton and Stanley, citing the limited scope
 of the supreme court's remand.
 
C&C submitted their notice of appeal on January 16,
 
2015. Minton and Stanley submitted their notice of cross-appeal
 on January 29, 2015.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Findings of Fact (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law (COLs)
 
[An appellate] court reviews the trial court's FOFs
under the clearly erroneous standard. Ueoka v. Szymanski, 
107 Hawai' i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 899 (2005) (citations
omitted). 
An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to
support the finding, the appellate court is left with
the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the
entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. An
 FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding. We have
 defined substantial evidence as credible evidence
 which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion.
 
3 C&C submitted revised versions of the reports on May 28, 2014.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004) 
(quoting Beneficial Hawai# i, Inc. v. Kida,  96 Hawai# i 289,
305, 30 P.3d 895, 911 (2001)).
Bhakta v. Cty. of Maui, 109 Hawai# i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953
(2005) (brackets in original omitted).
We review the trial court's conclusions of law de novo under
the right/wrong standard.  Under this standard, we examine
the facts and answer the question without being required to
give any weight to the trial court's answer to it.  Thus, a
conclusion of law is not binding upon the appellate court
and is freely reviewable for its correctness.
Minton, 131 Hawaii at 184, 317 P.3d at 18 (quoting Brown v.
Thompson, 91 Hawai #i 1, 8, 979 P.2d 586, 593 (1999)).  "[A] COL
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's conclusions
are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual
case."  Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of
Hawai#i, 106 Hawai# i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (internal
quotation marks omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105
Hawai#i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004)).#
B.  Admissibility of Evidence 
"As a general rule, [an appellate] court reviews
evidentiary rulings for abuse of discretion."  Sierra Club v.
Dep't of Transp. of State of Hawai #i, 120 Hawai# i 181, 197, 202
P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (citing Kealoha v. Cty. of Hawai #i, 74
Haw. 308, 319, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993)).  "However, when there
can only be one correct answer to the admissibility question, or
when reviewing questions of relevance under [Hawaii Rules of
Evidence ( HRE) Rules 401 (1993) and 402 (1993)], [an appellate]
court applies the right/wrong standard of review."  Sierra Club,
120 Hawai #i at 197, 202 P.3d at 1242 (citing Kamaka v. Goodsill
Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai #i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103
(2008)).
C.  Motion to Conduct Further Discovery and Trial
"We review a trial court's ruling limiting the scope of
discovery under the abuse of discretion standard."  Fisher v.
Grove Farm Co., 123 Hawai #i 82, 94, 230 P.3d 382, 394 (App. 2009)
(reviewing a motion to compel discovery) (citing State v.
Fukusaku , 85 Hawai# i 462, 477-78, 946 P.2d 32, 47-48 (1997)).  AnFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly
 
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles
 of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
 litigant." 
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co. , 74 Haw.
 
85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
III. DISCUSSION

 
A. Economic Damages
1. Motion to Conduct Further Discovery and Trial
 
C&C challenges the circuit court's denial of C&C's
 
Motion to Conduct Further Discovery and Trial. C&C argues that
 in denying the motion, "the circuit court prevented [C&C] from
 rebutting the self-serving testimony of [Minton and
 Stanley] . . . ."
 
On remand, the circuit court allowed C&C to conduct
 
further discovery on issues that had arisen since the 2010
 trial.
4 C&C was given the opportunity to cross-examine Minton,
 
Stanley, and Dr. Loudat at the evidentiary hearing. C&C does notcite any rule or other authority that would require the circuit
 court to allow additional discovery upon remand from an appellatecourt on the issue of damages. C&C has failed to demonstrate
 that the circuit court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 disregarded rules or principles of law to its substantial
 

 

 
4 The circuit court denied most of C&C's requests for additional
discovery, but allowed further discovery on a few issues. C&C requested to
depose Minton and Stanley "on the issue of mitigation of damages and to
ascertain to what extent they have rehabilitated themselves professionally."
The circuit court granted the request, but limited the depositions "to
occurrences that have taken place since the 2010 trial." C&C also requested
"discovery on whether [Minton and Stanley] refused to and continue to refuse
to work, despite an opportunity to do so." The circuit court denied "except
for occurrences after the 2010 trial." C&C requested that they be allowed to
"consult experts to testify on the issue of mitigation of damages and the
extent to which [Minton and Stanley] should have rehabilitated their careers."
The circuit court denied "except for [Dr. Loudat] and limited to post-2010
trial." C&C requested an additional deposition of Dr. Loudat "concerning the
meaning of his expert reports and the extent to which [Minton and Stanley]
should have rehabilitated their career." The circuit court granted, "only in
that Dr. Loudat shall prepare new reports which shall be presented to the
Court and all parties no later than May 2, 2014. Depositions shall be limited
to matters that are new or different from Dr. Loudat's March 2010 reports[.]"
Finally, on C&C's request to "[o]btain and admit into evidence updates of Dr.
Loudat's reports and/or figures[,]" the circuit court granted and repeated its
limitations that "[d]epositions shall be limited to matters that are new or
different from Dr. Loudat's March 2010 reports[.]"
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detriment. See Amfac, 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d at 26.
 
2. "Worst Case" Scenario
 
C&C argues that the circuit court erred in adopting the
 
"Worst Case (actual) earnings" analysis provided by Dr. Loudat
 
for Minton and Stanley's damages awards.
 
a. Minton
 
Dr. Loudat's report generated multiple estimates of
 
projected earnings. First, Dr. Loudat identified two models to
 estimate Minton's earnings as if he had not been banned from
 working at city-owned facilities. The "Mr. Minton Specified"
 model was based on the assumption that Minton's "earnings but for
 the incident would have changed through 2014 according to
 Honolulu entertainment sector job changes that have actually
 occurred and Mr. Minton's historic average annual earnings
 increase." Dr. Loudat noted that the "Mr. Minton Specified"
 analysis took into consideration Minton's social security
 retirement payments "at a level exceeding his current level due
 to assumed higher estimated earnings." In comparison, the
 "Social Security Work Slowdown" model used the same projected
 values as the "Mr. Minton Specified" model (i.e. based on
 Honolulu entertainment sector job changes and Minton's historic
 average annual earnings increase) from the date of the incident
 until Minton turned sixty-six and became eligible for social
 security benefits. This model uses Minton's actual earnings,
 which were at the time of the report equal to his social security
 retirement benefits.
 
Second, Dr. Loudat provided two scenarios tracking
 
Minton's earnings after 2007, taking into consideration that
 Minton had been banned from working at city-owned facilities. 
The "Worst Case" scenario estimates Minton's earnings based on
 what he actually earned, and are "reduced forward in time after
 2013 such that they become $0 at age 77."
5 The "Best Case"
 
scenario estimates Minton's earnings as if Minton had performed
 
5 Dr. Loudat reported that "[Minton's] post-incident earnings since the
incident of 2007 have averaged only 12% of his earnings in 2007. Currently
his earnings are approximately 18% of his 2007 earnings."
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to normative expectations–-that is, "commencing in 2008, year 1
 
after the incident year of 2007, Mr. Minton's earnings should

 
have been 69% of estimated no incident increasing to 83% of no
 incident by 2013, or in five years, then continuing to increase
 at the same rate from 2013 until they are equal to the no
 incident earnings level."
6
 
Dr. Loudat then provided four estimates of the
 
difference in Minton's salary due to his employment termination. 
Dr. Loudat began with one of the first set of models estimating
 Minton's salary had he not been banned from working at a city-
owned facility, and subtracting from the first model one of the
 models from the second set estimating Minton's salary after he
 had been banned by C&C. The projections range from $54,000 to
 $556,000.
 
In its 2014 FOFs/COLs, the circuit court held:
 
3. The court's damage award for [Minton's] claim of
tortious interference with prospective business advantage,
is based on the 5/5/2014 updated report by economist [Dr.
Loudat's,] testimony before this court on 7/7/2014, and
testimony from [Minton].
 
4. The court finds and concludes that the "Mr. Minton
 
Specified" analysis is appropriate.
 
5. The court finds and concludes that the "Worst Case
 
(actual) earnings" analysis is appropriate.
 
6. On the tortious interference with prospective
business advantage claim, the court awards [Minton]
$556,156.00 as the total award.
 
C&C challenges the circuit court's use of the "Worst
 
6 Dr. Loudat's report stated:
 
Normative data related to job loss due to circumstances
similar to [Minton's] (i.e. wrongful termination) indicates
the following.
 
The average year 1 earnings loss due to a job loss
equals approximately 31%. [Minton's] was 88%.
 
The average earnings loss 5 years after a job loss
equals 17%. [Minton's] was 85% exceeding not only the
normative average but also the highest earnings loss
measured in the studies of 50%.
 
[Minton's] post-2007 earnings performance was
significantly less than normative expectations. 
(Bullet points omitted.)
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Case" model. C&C's argument is essentially that Minton failed to 
mitigate his damages, and that the circuit court should have picked the estimate of damages based on the average employee whose employment had been terminated in the relevant sector. Assuming, without deciding, that Minton was under a duty to mitigate his damages, C&C fails to provide evidence that Minton did not mitigate his damages. C&C alleges, without support, that "there should not have been much difficulty [for Minton] in securing recommendations for work in Las Vegas." Instead of pointing to evidence that Minton failed to apply to or accept positions in his relevant field, C&C points only to evidence that Minton did worse than Dr. Loudat's projected normative estimate of how a person in Minton's position should have performed subsequent to being banned by C&C from working at city-owned facilities. On this argument, C&C fails to demonstrate either that the circuit court's conclusion is not supported by substantial evidence or that we should otherwise be left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. See Bhakta, 109 Hawai
'i at 208, 124 P.3d at 953. 
Furthermore, C&C posits that the "Worst Case" scenario
 
was inconsistent with Dr. Loudat's recommendation that the "Best
 Case" scenario "more closely fit [Dr. Loudat's] economic
 prediction or economic expertise to a reasonable degree of
 probability . . . ." C&C's argument is, in essence, that the
 circuit court erred because it did not adopt Dr. Loudat's
 recommended estimation of Minton's economic damages.
 
C&C also challenges Minton's credibility. "[A]n
 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon
 credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[.]" 
Amfac, 74 Haw. at 117, 839 P.2d at 28 (internal quotation marks
 omitted) (quoting Nani Koolau Co. v. K & M Constr., Inc., 5 Haw.
 App. 137, 140, 681 P.2d 580, 584 (1984)).
 
C&C argues that "[t]he circuit court was wrong in
 
concluding that [Minton and Stanley] never were reinstated from
 their suspension or ban from the Neal Blaisdell Center and
 Waikiki Shell," but the circuit court did not make such a
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finding, whether implicit or explicit.
 
Additionally, C&C argues, "by choosing the 'Worst Case'
 
scenario, the circuit court necessarily adopted [Minton and
 
Stanley's] erroneous arguments that it was [C&C], and not the
 Promoters and/or the Union who were instrumental in 'hiring hall'
 practices[.]" This argument is without merit. The circuit court
 did not make such a finding.
b. Stanley
 
Dr. Loudat also generated multiple estimates of
 
Stanley's projected earnings. The first set of projected
 earnings models measured Stanley's earnings had he not been
 banned from working at city-owned facilities. The "Mr. Stanley
 Average" model took into account Stanley's average earnings, and
 estimated how it would "have changed through 2014 according to
 the Honolulu [Consumer Price Index] and Honolulu entertainment
 sector job changes."
7 The "Mr. Stanley Earnings Trend" model
 
estimated Stanley's earnings "according to their long-term linear
 trend, which . . . decrease[d] at an average annual rate of
 $643."
8
 
The second set of projected earnings models took into
 
consideration that Stanley had been banned from working at city-
owned facilities in 2007. Under the "Worst Case" scenario,
 "[Stanley's] earnings after 2007 are those that actually
 occurred, which are reduced forward in time after 2013 such that
 they become $0 at age 77." Under the "Best Case" scenario,
 "[Stanley] would have performed equivalent to normative
 expectations. This means that commencing in 2008, year 1 after
 the incident year of 2007, [Stanley's] [earnings] would have been
 69% of estimated no incident increasing to 83% of no incident by
 
7 Dr. Loudat's report states, "[Stanley's] pre-incident earnings for
inflation shows average annual earnings inclusive of unemployment of
approximately $44,000. These are 2014-dollar amounts. [Stanley's]
fluctuations above and below this average were unrelated to changes in the
Honolulu entertainment sector. Rather, they were specific to [Stanley]."
 
8 Dr. Loudat reports that "[Stanley's] earnings working in the Honolulu
entertainment sector from 1990 through 2007 had ups and downs but overall
decreased at an average annual rate of $$643 [sic]."
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2013, or in five years."
 
The circuit in its 2014 FOFs/COLs held:
 
7. The court's damage award for [Stanley's] claim of
tortious interference with prospective business advantage,
is based on Dr. Loudat's 5/6/2014 updated report, Dr.
Loudat's testimony before this court on 7/7/2014, and
testimony from [Stanley].
 
8. The court finds and concludes that the "Trend
 
earnings" analysis is appropriate.
 
9. The court finds and concludes that the "Worst Case
 
(actual) earnings" analysis is appropriate.
 
10. On the tortious interference with prospective
business advantage claim, the court awards [Stanley]
$194,483.00 as the total award.
 
C&C challenges the circuit court's decision to use the
 
"Worst Case" scenario to measure Stanley's projected earnings
 
after he had been banned from working at city-owned facilities. 
C&C's sole argument specific to Stanley's award of damages is
 that Stanley performed better after his employment was terminated
 than the normative projection, according to Dr. Loudat's report.
9
 
Like C&C's challenge to the circuit court's award of damages for
 Minton, C&C merely disagrees with the circuit court's choice in
 earnings projection, and does not provide a basis for us to
 determine that the circuit court's determination was either
 unsupported by substantial evidence or that we should otherwise
 be left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has
 been made. See Bhakta, 109 Hawai
'i at 208, 124 P.3d at 953. 
9 Dr. Loudat's updated reported stated, 
Normative data related to job loss due to circumstances
similar to [Stanley's] (i.e. wrongful termination) indicates
the following.
 
The average year 1 earnings loss due to a job loss
equals approximately 31%. [Stanley's] was 29%.
 
The average earnings loss 5 years after a job loss
equals 17%. [Stanley's] was 0% due to his shoulder
injury but currently is approximately 14%.
 
[Stanley's] post-2007 earnings performance comports
with normative expectations.
 
(Bullet points omitted.)
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. Non-economic Damages
1. Scope of Remand
 
Minton and Stanley challenge the circuit court's
 
determination that an award of non-economic damages10 would be
 
outside of the scope of the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's remand. In 
its 2014 FOFs/COLs, the circuit court stated:
 
11. This court will not award non-economic damages
because the Hawai' i Supreme Court limited the remand to
economic damages. See Minton, 131 Hawai' i at 192 (holding
that "[C&C's] interference impaired [Minton's and Stanley's]
economic relationships with the third party producers andcaused actual damages to [Minton and Stanley] in the form oflost employment and wages. Thus, [Minton and Stanley]established legal causation and the existence of actualdamages." 
12. The [Hawai' i] Supreme Court's explicit
instruction on remand was, because [Minton and Stanley]"established the elements of their claim of tortious interference with prospective business advantage, includingthe existence of damages, we therefore remand to the circuitcourt for a determination of the amount of damages to beawarded against the City." Id. 
13. The [Hawai' i] Supreme Court clearly referenced
economic damages throughout its opinion. Non-economic damages were never mentioned by the Court. 
(Emphases, parenthetical, brackets and ellipsis omitted.) Minton
 
and Stanley argue, "the passage from the [supreme court] decision
 that the [circuit court] relied on and quoted [in] its decision
 does not support the notion that the [supreme court] intended to
 rule out non-pecuniary damages." Minton and Stanley assert, "It
 is very well-established that damages for emotional distress and
 loss of enjoyment are available to victims of interference with
 prospective business relations."
 
C&C argues in response that the circuit court was
 
correct in limiting the scope of remand to lost employment and
 wages. C&C relies primarily on the supreme court's conclusion:
 
Finally, the [C&C's] interference impaired [Minton's
and Stanley's] economic relationships with the third party
producers and caused actual damages to [Minton and Stanley]
in the form of lost employment and wages, as demonstrated by
Dr. Loudat's testimony. Thus, [Minton and Stanley]
 
10 Under Hawaii Revised Statutes § 663-8.5(a) (1993), "[n]oneconomic
damages which are recoverable in tort actions include damages for pain and
suffering, mental anguish, disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of
consortium, and all other non-pecuniary losses or claims."
 
11
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
established legal causation and the existence of actual
damages.
 
Minton, 131 Hawai 'i at 192, 317 P.3d at 26. 
Our reading of the supreme court's decision, however, 
does not limit remand on the issue of damages to "lost employment 
and wages." In remanding the case to the circuit court, the supreme court stated, "[W]e conclude that [Minton and Stanley] established the elements of their claim of tortious interference with prospective business advantage, including the existence of damages. We therefore remand to the circuit court for a determination of the amount of damages to be awarded against [C&C]." Minton
, 131 Hawai 'i at 192, 317 P.3d at 26. The 
language quoted by C&C to justify the limitation of the circuit court's scope of remand was related to the supreme court's analysis of the fifth element of the tort of interference with 
prospective business advantage,11 and was not meant to limit the 
scope of remand. The element "actual damages" does not bear on type or extent of the remedy available to a plaintiff. The supreme court remanded the case to the circuit court on the issue of damages, so that the circuit court could determine what type of remedy Minton and Stanley were entitled to. The circuit court's conclusion that the supreme court limited its remand to economic damages is wrong. See Minton, 131 Hawai
'i at 184, 317 
P.3d at 18. 
11 The supreme court enumerated the elements of the tort of intentional
interference with prospective business advantage:
 
(1) the existence of a valid business
relationship or a prospective advantage or
expectancy sufficiently definite, specific, and
capable of acceptance in the sense that there is
a reasonable probability of it maturing into a
future economic benefit to the plaintiff; (2)
knowledge of the relationship, advantage, or
expectancy by the defendant; (3) a purposeful
intent to interfere with the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; (4) legal causation
between the act of interference and the
 impairment of the relationship, advantage, or
expectancy; and (5) actual damages.
 
Minton, 131 Hawai' i at 191, 317 P.3d at 25 (quoting Hawaii Med.
Ass'n v. Hawaii Med. Serv. Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai' i 77, 116, 148
P.3d 1179, 1218 (2006).
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Damages Available for the Tort of Interference with
Prospective Business Advantage
 
The circuit court's erroneous conclusion that non­
economic damages were outside the scope of the supreme court's
 
remand would be harmless error if non-economic damages are, as a
 matter of law, unavailable for the tort of interference with
 prospective business advantage. Therefore, we evaluate whether
 non-economic damages are available for such a claim, and hold
 that non-economic damages that are the common and predictable
 consequence of the interference are available to a plaintiff
 asserting interference with prospective business advantage.
 
In their complaint, Minton and Stanley sought, among
 
other remedies, general damages, special damages, and punitive
 damages. On appeal, Minton and Stanley argue that the circuit
 court should have considered damages resulting from Minton's and
 Stanley's emotional distress. Specifically, Minton and Stanley
 suggest that the circuit court should have considered "damages
 for emotional distress, humiliation, loss of congeniality and
 respect of co-workers and union members, mental stress owing to
 becoming impoverished due to loss of income over a long time,
 loss of enjoyment attending concerts and, in [Stanley's] case,
 having lost his union seniority[.]"
 
Minton and Stanley's position is that Hawai
'i courts 
should adopt Restatement (Second) of Torts §774A (1979) (Restatement), which states: 
(1) One who is liable to another for interference with a
contract or prospective contractual relation is liable for
damages for
 (a) the pecuniary loss of the benefits of the contract or
the prospective relation;
 (b) consequential losses for which the interference is a
legal cause; and 
(c) emotional distress or actual harm to reputation, if
they are reasonably to be expected to result from the
interference.
 
C&C argues that aside from the supreme court's remand
 
language, non-economic damages should not be available for the
 
tort of interference with prospective business advantage. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because Minton and Stanley rely primarily on the Restatement, C&C 
cite to Meridian Mortg., Inc. v. First Hawaiian Bank, 109 Hawai 'i 
35, 122 P.3d 1133 (App. 2005) for the proposition that Hawai 'i 
courts are hesitant to adopt the Restatement in tort cases. In Meridian, C&C points out, this court declined to adopt the Restatement's position on the tort of interference with contractual relations, and §§ 766 and 767 of the Restatement in particular. Meridian, 109 Hawai
'i at 43-44, 122 P.3d at 1141-42. 
A year after this court decided Meridian, however, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court published its decision in Hawaii Medical Ass'n v. Hawaii Medical Service Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai
'i 77, 148 P.3d 1179 
(2006) in which the supreme court used Restatement § 766B to enumerate the elements of the intentional tort of interference with prospective business advantage. Hawaii Medical Ass'n, 113 
Hawai
'i at 116, 148 P.3d at 1218 (citing Robert's Hawaii School 
Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., Inc., 91 Hawai 'i 224, 258, 
982 P.2d 853, 887 (1999) (basing in part its statement of the elements of the "tort of intentional or tortious interference with prospective business advantage" on Restatement § 766B)). 
C&C also cites California law to oppose recovery of
 
non-economic damages for interference with prospective business
 advantage. In Di Loreto v. Shumake, 45 Cal. Rptr. 2d 22 (Cal.
 Ct. App. 1995), a California Court of Appeal held, "emotional
 distress damages are not routinely recoverable for interference
 with prospective economic advantage or with contractual
 relations. Such damages are recoverable for such torts, if at
 all, in cases where the circumstances of the tortious act make it
 objectively reasonable that serious emotional distress will be
 suffered." Id. at 24. The California court did not
 
categorically bar emotional distress damages for tortious
 interference with prospective business advantage cases. It did
 hold, however, that the plaintiff had failed to establish
 "extreme and outrageous" conduct, as required under California
 law to warrant emotional distress damages. Id. at 26-27. 
California's approach to damages for tortious interference with
 prospective business advantage is useful only to the extent that
 
14
 Id. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it emphasizes the element of "extreme and outrageous" conduct in
 
establishing emotional distress damages.
 
As Minton and Stanley point out, the Oregon Supreme
 
Court considered a similar question to the one before us in
 
Mooney v. Johnson Cattle Co.,  634 P.2d 1333 (Or. 1981), whether
 
there is a right to damages for mental suffering in a tort action
 for inducing breach of contract. Id. at 1334. The Oregon
 
Supreme Court stated,
 
The interest in one's occupation . . . often goes beyond the
merely economic interest in regular wages or in an
advantageous price to include such [non-economic] values as
personal associations, love of a place, and pride in one's
work that add up to one's sense of identity.
 
We think, therefore, that recovery of damages beyond
pecuniary loss from interference with a contract does not
depend only on the presence of intentional interference for
an improper objective or by wrongful means, along with
causation. Damages for [non-economic] injury depend also on
what kind of contractual arrangement is disrupted by
defendant and how the claimed injury relates to that kind of
arrangement. The mental distress, injured reputation, or
other consequential harm not only must have occurred, and
have resulted from defendant's interference, it also must
have been an injury of a kind that should have been expected
as a common and predictable accompaniment of disrupting the
type of relationship with which the defendant interfered.
 
Id. at 1337-38 (citations omitted). The Oregon Supreme Court
 
explicitly rejected the argument that the only type of
 
recoverable damages in commercial dealings are those resulting
 from the parties' pecuniary interests. Id. at 1338. Instead,
 
the Oregon Supreme Court emphasized its requirement that a
 plaintiff show that non-pecuniary damages "are common and
 predictable consequences of [interference with employment] in the
 type of business setting involved." at 1338. The court
 
noted that the rule it espoused was not entirely consistent with
 the Restatement's position, explaining, 
[t]o recover either for emotional distress or for harm to
reputation in an action for interference with contractual
relations, injury of that kind must be a common and
predictable result of disrupting the type of relationship or
transaction involved rather than a result "reasonably to be
expected" in the particular situation[.]
 
Id. at 1338. The Oregon Supreme Court elaborated, 
Even when serious anxiety and frustration are typical
and predictable effects of disruptive interference in a
business setting, however, damages are confined to those
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
effects. Recovery extends only to the mental or emotional
distress involved in dealing with the disruption itself. By
this test, the stress of finding another buyer or source of
supply, of restoring confidence in the future performance of
the business, or in case of more fatal interference, of
selling or liquidating the enterprise could give rise to
damages; distress at personal consequences such as a
sacrificed vacation, financial stringency, or family
stresses would not.
 
Id. at 1338-39.12
 We agree with Oregon's approach to awarding non­
economic damages to plaintiffs asserting claims for intentional
 
interference with a prospective business advantage. In the
 instant case, the circuit court erroneously limited testimony
 upon remand from the Hawai
'i Supreme Court to "general, non­
economic damages" and struck portions of Minton's and Stanley's
 Supplemental Declarations that were relevant to their alleged
 non-economic damages. We remand to the circuit court with
 instructions to consider evidence relating to whether Minton and
 Stanley suffered non-economic damages that were the "common and
 predictable consequences" of C&C's interference in these
 circumstances.
 
3. Admissibility of Minton's and Stanley's Declarations
 
Both parties contest the use of the Minton and
 
Stanley's Supplemental Declarations and other testimony.
 
C&C argues that the circuit court should have excluded
 
Minton and Stanley's Supplemental Declarations altogether because
 the circuit court had already made findings of fact and
 
12 Other jurisdictions have allowed recovery for emotional distress in
claims for interference with prospective business advantage, or comparable
commercial tort claims. See Nesler v. Fisher and Co., 452 N.W.2d 191, 199-200
(Iowa 1990) ("There was sufficient evidence, even without medical testimony,
from which a jury could conclude that [plaintiff] suffered severe emotional
distress from the interference, and we hold that it was a proper element of
damage, despite the defendants' protestation that such an element of damage
should not be allowed in a commercial interference case."); Trimble v. City
and Cty. of Denver, 697 P.2d 716, 730 (Colo. 1985) (en banc) ("[Plaintiff] is
entitled to mental suffering damages resulting from the torts of fraudulent
inducement and intentional interference [with contractual relations.]"); see
also Maloney v. Home and Inv. Ctr., Inc., 994 P.2d 1124, 1137 (Mont. 2000)
("That compensable emotional distress would arise from the tortious
interference with the [plaintiffs'] rights to the property in question should
have been clearly foreseeable by any person professionally involved with such
transactions."); Hewitt v. Pitkin Cty. Bank and Trust Co., 931 P.2d 456, 459
(Colo. App. 1995) ("An outrageous conduct claim may lie in a commercial
setting.").
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusions of law based on Minton and Stanley's testimony at the 
2010 trial, and because non-economic damages were irrelevant to the circuit court's determination. However, in the FOFs/COLs dated October 28, 2010, the circuit court made only one COL related to damages: "20. [Minton and Stanley's] claim for damages, both economic and non-economic, fail as they have not proven said claims by the requisite legal standard." The supreme court overruled the circuit court's conclusion regarding Minton and Stanley's entitlement to damages under their intentional interference with prospective business advantage claim. Minton, 
131 Hawai
'i at 192-93, 317 P.3d at 26-27. Therefore, C&C's 
arguments for excluding the Supplemental Declarations made by Minton and Stanley are without merit. 
C&C also argues that Minton and Stanley's Supplemental
 
Declarations were "superfluous and prejudicial" because Dr.
 Loudat's economic report incorporates information from interviews
 with Minton and Stanley. Although C&C fails to cite to a
 specific rule, they presumably challenge the admissibility of the
 testimony of Minton and Stanley under HRE Rule 403 (1993).
13 C&C
 
has failed to demonstrate that the probative value of Minton and
 Stanley's declarations was substantially outweighed by the danger
 of unfair prejudice, or by considerations of undue delay, waste
 of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. See
 
HRE Rule 403. Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion in admitting the Supplementary Declarations.
 
Minton and Stanley contend that the circuit court erred
 
in striking portions of their Supplemental Declarations. The
 circuit court struck paragraphs three through fourteen of
 Stanley's Supplemental Declaration on the grounds that "these do
 not appear to be proper supplementation within the very narrow
 
13 HRE Rule 403 provides:
 
Rule 403 Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of
prejudice, confusion, or waste of time. Although relevant,
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence. 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
grounds that [the circuit court] had specified." Minton and
 
Stanley provide no support for this contention. Therefore, we
 hold that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 striking paragraphs three through fourteen of Stanley's
 Supplemental Declaration.
 
The circuit court also struck paragraphs eight and
 
eighteen through twenty-four of Minton's Supplemental
 Declaration. Minton and Stanley make no discernable argument for
 the inclusion of these paragraphs. Therefore, we hold that the
 circuit court did not abuse its discretion in striking paragraphs
 eight and eighteen though twenty-four of Minton's Supplemental
 Declaration. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Final Judgment and Order Determining
 
Damages" entered on December 23, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit is vacated in part and affirmed in part and this
 case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings
 consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Matthew S.K. Pyun, Jr.
John P. Moran
 Nicolette Winter
 (with them on the reply brief)
Deputies Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
for Defendants/Appellants/
Cross-Appellees.
 
Charles S. Lotsof
 
for Plaintiffs/Appellees/
Cross-Appellants.
 
18
 