   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000696
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSHUA WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0626)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this appeal, Defendant-Appellant Joshua Williams
 
(Williams) appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(Judgment), filed March 14, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit (circuit court).
1
 
The jury found Williams guilty of: Count 1, Murder in
 
the Second Degree of Jamil Khan (Khan), in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5 (2014) and HRS § 706-656 (1993
 and Supp. 2013); Count 2, Commercial Promotion of Marijuana in
 the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1249.4(1)(c) (2014);
 Count 3, Arson in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 708­8252(1)(b) (2014); Count 4, Unauthorized Control of Propelled
 Vehicle, in violation of HRS § 708-836 (2014); and Count 6,
 Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329­
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
43.5(a) (2010). The jury found Williams not guilty of Count 5,
 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of
 HRS § 712-1243 (2014). 
On appeal, Williams contends the circuit court erred
 
when it: (1) denied Williams' Motion in Limine requesting to
 exclude all evidence of post-mortem dismemberment from the trial
 on liability and limit that evidence to the trial on enhanced
 sentencing and (2) barred the use of the terms "jihadi," "9/11,"
 and "paranoid" when describing the victim's violent character and
 unnecessarily sustained objections regarding testimony of Khan's
 violent character. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. Evidence of Dismemberment
 
Williams contends that the circuit court erred in 
denying his Motion in Limine Number Two to Preclude Evidence of Post-Mortem Dismemberment and Disposal (Motion). Williams contends that, pursuant to State v. Janto, 92 Hawai
'i 19, 986 
P.2d 306 (1999), evidence of dismemberment should have been presented only during the bifurcated trial for enhanced sentencing pursuant to HRS § 706-657 (Supp. 2013).
2 Williams 
further contends that evidence of dismemberment was not 
2
 HRS § 706-657 provides in pertinent part:
 
§706-657 Enhanced sentence for second degree
murder. The court may sentence a person who has been
convicted of murder in the second degree to life
imprisonment without possibility of parole under
section 706-656 if the court finds that the murder was
 especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel, manifesting
exceptional depravity or that the person was
previously convicted of the offense of murder in the
first degree or murder in the second degree in this
State or was previously convicted in another
jurisdiction of an offense that would constitute
murder in the first degree or murder in the second
degree in this State. As used in this section, the
phrase "especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel,
manifesting exceptional depravity" means a
conscienceless or pitiless crime which is
unnecessarily torturous to a victim and "previously
convicted" means a sentence imposed at the same time
or a sentence previously imposed which has not been
set aside, reversed, or vacated.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appropriate for the adjudicative portion of the trial because it
 
does not prove an element of Murder in the Second Degree, in
 
3
violation of HRS § 707-701.5(1),  and even if relevant, the
dismemberment evidence was prejudicial, improper character
 evidence, and/or cumulative. 
Under Janto, when the prosecution seeks an enhanced 
sentence pursuant to HRS 706-657, it must be alleged in the complaint and bifurcated proceedings are required. 92 Hawai
'i at 
33-34, 986 P.2d at 320-21. "[T]he jury must first return a verdict of guilty of the offense of murder. Thereafter, an evidentiary hearing before the jury will be required, in which the prosecution and defense will be allowed to present evidence and testimony regarding whether the murder was 'especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel.'” Id. at 34, 986 P.2d at 321. In 
this case, the circuit court bifurcated the adjudicative and enhanced sentencing proceedings, but Williams contends that Janto further supports the proposition that the evidence of dismemberment should have been admitted only during the enhanced sentencing portion of the trial, and not during the adjudicative portion of the trial relative to whether Williams was guilty of murder. We do not agree. Although Janto set out the requirement for the bifurcated proceedings, it does not preclude admission during the adjudicative portion of the trial of evidence relevant to whether the defendant is guilty of murder. 
The circuit court ruled that dismemberment was relevant
 
to the murder charge and appropriate evidence in the adjudicative
 portion of the trial because it shows Williams' state of mind
 akin to flight or disposing of the evidence. The court also
 determined that the evidence of dismemberment was relevant
 because it explained why the State did not produce Khan's body. 
Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 401 provides: 
"'Relevant evidence' means evidence having any tendency to make 
3
 HRS § 707-701.5(1) provides in pertinent part: "[A] person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person."
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." A trial court's determination of whether evidence is relevant under HRE Rule 401 is reviewed under the right/wrong standard. State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai
'i 
90, 102, 237 P.3d 1156, 1168 (2010). 
In addressing the question of whether post-mortem
 
dismemberment is relevant to proving murder, other states have
 answered the question in the affirmative. For example, in
 Schexnider v. State, 943 S.W.2d 194 (Tex. App. 1997), the
 defendant murdered then robbed the victim and "subsequently
 dismembered the corpse and disposed of the body parts in
 different locations." Id. at 201. The court concluded that the
 
"jury could rationally infer that [the defendant] did such acts
 in order to conceal his crime." Id. In addition, the
 
defendant's "conduct goes to the element of intent and is
 
4
admissible under Rule 404(b)[  ] as an exception to the principle
that extraneous offenses are not to be admitted for the purpose
 of proving the character of the defendant in order to show that
 he acted in conformity therewith." 
Id.
 at 202. Finally, the
 
court concluded that the defendant's "conduct in dismembering the
 body is also indicative of a consciousness of guilt[,]" that
 "[d]ismemberment of a person's body after killing him is hardly
 the action of an innocent accused," and that "evidence of such is
 probative of guilt." Id.; see also Mason v. Lockhart, 881 F.2d
 
573, 575 (8th Cir. 1989) (stating, in a case where the defendant
 confessed to shooting the victim but claimed self-defense, that
 "[t]he calculated behavior of the accused after the killing,"
 which included dismemberment of the victim's body, is pertinent
 to whether premeditation and deliberate action existed); State v.
 Sokolowski, 522 S.E.2d 65, 71-72 (N.C. 1999); State v. Helmer,
 545 N.W.2d 471, 478 (S.D. 1996) (stating the defendant's actions
 
4
 Texas Rules of Evidence Rule 404(b) is substantially similar to
Hawai'i Rules of Evidence, Rule 404(b). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after the murder, including dismemberment, "do not support a
 
theory that the killing was the result of provocation or due to
 heat of passion").
 
In this case, Williams ultimately confessed that he and
 
Michael Connolly killed Khan, but claimed that it was in self-
defense after being threatened by Khan over a period of time. In
 our view, the evidence of dismemberment speaks directly to
 Williams' state of mind and is evidence that contradicts
 Williams' claim of self-defense. It also shows why the State did
 not have a body to support the claim of murder. Therefore, the
 circuit court was not wrong in deciding that the evidence of the
 dismemberment was relevant to the State's case of proving the
 murder of decedent Khan.
 
Williams further contends that evidence of 
dismemberment was inadmissible under HRE Rule 404(b), that the probative value of dismemberment was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice under HRE Rule 403, and that the evidence relating to dismemberment was cumulative. With regard to the argument that the evidence was cumulative, Williams fails to set forth in his opening brief where this issue was preserved in the record, and thus that argument is waived. Hawaii Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). As to the rest of Williams' arguments, "other crimes" evidence under HRE Rule 404(b) "is admissible when it is 1) relevant and 2) more probative than prejudicial." Behrendt, 124 Hawai
'i at 102, 237 
P.3d at 1168. We review the question of relevance under the right/wrong standard, and we review questions regarding HRE Rule 403 balancing for abuse of discretion. Id. 
The evidence of dismemberment was not precluded by HRE
 
Rule 404(b). Under HRE Rule 404(b), evidence of "other crimes,
 wrongs, or acts" may be admissible "where such evidence is
 probative of another fact that is of consequence to the
 determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
 opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
 modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident." (Emphasis
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
added). As set forth above, the evidence of dismemberment was
 
probative of Williams' intent. Moreover, as the State argues in
 its answering brief, there was evidence in the record that
 Williams planned the murder and the dismemberment evidence is
 relevant to that issue as well.
 
HRE Rule 403 provides that although evidence is
 
relevant, it "may be excluded if its probative value is
 substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
 confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
 considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
 presentation of cumulative evidence." With regard to the HRE
 Rule 403 balancing, we recognize the potential prejudice
 resulting from the evidence of dismemberment. However, given the
 circumstances in this case, it was within the discretion of the
 circuit court to determine that the probative value of the
 evidence was not substantially outweighed by any prejudice. As
 noted previously, the dismemberment evidence was clearly
 relevant. Especially where Williams claimed that Khan was killed
 in self-defense, the dismemberment evidence was highly probative
 to the question of whether Williams' theory of defense was
 credible. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion with
 regard to the HRE Rule 403 balancing.
II. Evidence of Khan's Violent Character
 
Williams next contends the circuit court erred in
 
excluding certain evidence of Khan's violent character, which was
 
necessary to show that Khan was the first aggressor.
A. Picture of 9/11
 
Williams contends that the court erred when it excluded
 
a picture of 9/11 from being displayed during Williams' opening
 statement. The circuit court found that under HRE Rule 403, the
 picture should be excluded because the picture was inflammatory
 and had little probative value. 
The picture was not central and did not have high
 
importance to Williams' case. In addition, the circuit court did
 not exclude all evidence associated with Khan's feelings towards
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9/11 or how his personality progressively changed after 9/11. 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the
 picture because the minimal probative value the picture would
 offer was outweighed by the prejudicial effect on the jury.
B. Prohibition of the word "paranoid"
 
Williams contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
precluded either party from using the term "paranoid" to describe
 Khan. The circuit court did not completely preclude use of the
 term "paranoid." After the State objected to the use of
 "paranoid" when describing Khan, there was at least one instance
 when Williams asked a question containing the word "paranoid" and
 the circuit court allowed the witness to answer over the State's
 objection. Subsequently, the circuit court limited the use of
 the word paranoid because the court stated that it was
 potentially misleading and did not necessarily equate to having
 an aggressive character. Even after the court's ruling on the
 use of "paranoid," at least one witness described Khan as
 paranoid and no objection was made. 
Under HRE Rule 403 balancing, we cannot say that the
 
circuit court abused its discretion in limiting the use of the
 word "paranoid." That is, based on the record, the circuit court
 acted within its discretion in determining that the probative
 value of evidence that Khan was "paranoid" was outweighed by the
 danger of misleading the jury because being paranoid did not
 necessarily mean Khan had an aggressive or violent character.
C. Prohibition of the word "jihadi"
 
Williams contends the circuit court erred when it
 
prohibited the use of the word "jihadi."
5 The circuit court did
 
not completely prohibit the use of the word jihadi or its
 derivative, but based on arguments by the State, did limit its
 use. The circuit court stated that Williams could pursue the
 idea of "militant Islamic thought." However, the circuit court
 limited the use of the term "jihadism" except as part of
 
5
 The circuit court limited the use of the word jihadi and its
derivatives such as "jihadism" or "jihadist."
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Williams' confession that was played for the jury and, during
 
voir dire in the event the word came out, to ask "is there
 anything about that and what it connotes to you?" The circuit
 court precluded Williams from referencing the fact that the AK-47
 is the weapon of choice for the jihadist. Williams was not
 precluded, however, from introducing evidence that Khan
 frequently carried an AK-47. 
The circuit court sustained an objection to the
 
following question asked of witness Sharone Villa: "Did [Khan]
 ever discuss with you his desire to go to Pakistan and to be
 trained as a Jihadist or to go there and to fight?" The court,
 however, allowed the questions: "Did [Khan] ever discuss his
 going to Pakistan with you?"; and "Did [Khan] ever discuss with
 you any of his interests in militant Islam?". 
Although the term jihadi or jihadist may have had some
 
relevance in showing that Khan had a violent character, it also
 could be confusing to the issues in this case and also be
 misleading to the jury. Based on the examples above, although
 the court limited the use of the term jihadi and its derivatives,
 the court allowed other questions relating to Khan's violent
 character that were similar but excluded the specific term. 
Under HRE Rule 403 balancing, the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion when it determined that the prejudicial effect of the
 term jihadi outweighed its probative value.
D. Right to Confrontation
 
Williams contends that the circuit court violated his 
right to confrontation under Article I, Section 14 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution and the Sixth Amendment of the United States 
6
Constitution  when it did not allow Williams to use the terms
"paranoid," and "jihad," when questioning witnesses. 
As noted
 
6
 Article 1, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution and the Sixth 
Amendment of the United States Constitution provide that in all criminal
prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to be confronted with thewitnesses against the accused. Haw. Const. art. I, § 14; U.S. Const. amend.VI. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
above with regard to the prohibition of the terms "paranoid," and 
"jihad," the circuit court allowed questioning regarding Khan's violent character, it simply limited these specific terms. Therefore, the circuit court did not deny Williams his right to confrontation because Williams had other avenues of questioning the witnesses about Khan's violent character. See State v. 
Kassebeer, 118 Hawai
'i 493, 514, 193 P.3d 409, 430 (2008) 
(stating the defendant was not denied his right of confrontation because the defendant had alternative means of cross-examining the witness).
E.	 Khan's missing persons police report
 
Williams contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
excluded evidence of an internal police report labeling Khan as
 armed and dangerous. The court found that the missing person
 report contained a general police classification based on hearsay
 and would not be admitted. The court stated the report did not
 add value to Williams' case especially in light of the fact that
 Williams was allowed to admit a lot of other evidence supporting
 the fact that Khan carried a gun. We conclude the circuit court
 did not abuse its discretion when it found that the police report
 had minimal probative value and thus excluded it from evidence.
F.	 Testimony of witnesses regarding Khan's violent
character
 
Williams contends the circuit court erred when it
 
excluded the testimony of Jacob Estoesta (Estoesta) that Khan
 
planned to blow up the Federal Building and the circuit court
 courthouse. The circuit court, however, allowed Estoesta to
 testify that Khan planned to use his explosives to blow up a
 building. The court excluded the specific building that Khan
 planned to blow up based on both relevance and hearsay. Based on
 our review of the record, the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion when it excluded Estoesta's testimony that Khan wanted
 to specifically blow up the Federal Building and the circuit
 court courthouse.
 
Williams also contends that the circuit court erred
 
when it did not allow Scott Gordon (Gordon) to testify about
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
homemade explosive devices, paranoid behavior, Khan's mental
 
state, and whether Gordon was asked by the FBI about Khan wanting
 to make Williams and Michael Connely martyrs to jihadi causes. 
In fact, Gordon did testify that Khan showed Gordon a homemade
 hand grenade and Gordon also testified that Khan showed him notes
 for making a hand grenade. Gordon also testified that he spoke
 to the FBI, although further questions about Gordon's cooperation
 with the FBI were not allowed.
 
Contrary to Williams' contention, the court allowed
 
Gordon to testify about Khan's mental state and paranoid
 behavior. The court sustained an objection to the question: 
"Did [Khan] behave in a paranoid fashion?" However, the court
 allowed Gordon to describe Khan as having "[h]is mind state of
 being paranoid" and justify his description by testifying that
 Khan carried a gun and Khan thought people were monitoring him. 
Overall, Williams' contentions that the circuit court abused its
 discretion in excluding parts of Gordon's testimony are without
 merit.
 
Williams also contends that the circuit court erred
 
when it barred testimony from Bastian Goelz (Goelz), Officer
 Derrick Kiyotoki, Officer Ken Higa, and Tai Khan (Tai) about why
 the FBI was involved in investigating Khan's disappearance. 
Williams does not cite to the record showing specifically where
 the testimony was barred and upon review of the transcripts it
 does not appear that Williams' contention has merit. 
Beginning with Goelz, during cross-examination,
 
Williams never asked Goelz why the FBI was involved in the
 investigation. The questions were limited to the fact that Goelz
 was not forthcoming with the information he knew about Khan's
 disappearance. Next, when Williams asked Officer Kiyotoki if the
 FBI was present during the execution of a search warrant for
 Williams' house, the court sustained an objection based on
 relevance and that was the only question asked of Officer
 Kiyotoki regarding the FBI's involvement in Khan's disappearance. 
Additionally, Officer Higa testified that he knew the FBI was
 investigating the case, but Officer Higa did not speak to the FBI
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or know what they did with the case. Finally, regarding Tai
 
(Khan's father), the circuit court permitted Williams to ask Tai
 about the FBI's involvement and Tai revealed that he initially
 called the FBI after Khan was missing for several days in the
 hope that they could help locate Khan. Williams was also
 permitted to ask Tai about what he told the FBI regarding Khan's
 political beliefs and Tai responded that he could not remember,
 but that he possibly discussed his son's radicalization. Based
 on the questioning and testimony given by each of these
 witnesses, Williams' contention that the circuit court abused its
 discretion in barring testimony regarding the FBI's involvement
 in Khan's case is without merit. 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence, filed March 14, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 5, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser, and
Myles S. Breiner,for Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 