  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000396 27-MAR-2025 08:41 AM Dkt. 71 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000396 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
KEEP THE NORTH SHORE COUNTRY, a nonprofit corporation,
and KAHUKU COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, a nonprofit corporation
Plaintiffs-Appellants-Appellants,
v. 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS, City and County of Honolulu;
DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING,
City and County of Honolulu, NA PUA MAKANI POWER PARTNERS,
a limited liability company, Defendants-Appellees-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CCV-20-0001574) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting C.J., and Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
This appeal stems from a dispute involving a renewable 
wind energy project located in Kahuku, O# ahu (the 
Project
). 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Keep the North Shore Country (KNSC) and 
Kahuku Community Association (KCA) (together, Appellants) appeal 
from the Summary Disposition Order Affirming Agency Decision 
(SDO) and the Judgment, both entered on June 30, 2021, by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit.1/ The Judgment was entered in 
favor of Defendants-Appellees Zoning Board of Appeals, City and 
County of Honolulu (ZBA); Director of the Department of Planning 
and Permitting (DPP), City and County of Honolulu (Director); and 
Na Pua Makani Power Partners (NPM), the developer of the Project. 
The SDO affirmed the ZBA's November 12, 2020 Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order (FOFs/COLs/Order), 
which dismissed Appellants' appeal petitions (Appeal Petitions) 
1/ The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenging the Director's approvals of certain permits, waiver, 
and modifications (Approvals) related to the Project. 
In this secondary appeal, Appellants contend that the 
Circuit Court erred by: (1) "affirming the ZBA's dismissal of Appellants' contested case proceeding in violation of [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] chapter 91"; (2) "affirming the ZBA's 
COLs []3, 10-13, 15, 20-21, 29-30, which concluded the Director's 
rules, as applied to the processing of the Director's Approvals, did not violate Appellants' right to procedural due process"; (3) affirming the ZBA's COLs 26-28, which "conclu[ded] that the governmental burden to provide any notice to Appellants and those similarly situated would be so great as to outweigh procedural protections for Appellants' property rights"; and (4) "concluding Appellants waived challenges to the ZBA's COL []2" based on application of Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b) rather than Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
72(g). 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Appellants' contentions as follows, and affirm. 
I. Background 
The following background is drawn primarily from the 
FOFs in the ZBA's FOFs/COLs/Order.
2/ 
1. . . . [T]he Project . . . is comprised of eight
turbines, all of which have already been erected on site.3/ 
The Project is located on two separate parcels of land
leased by NPM and are referred to as Subproject A andSubproject B. Of the eight turbines, Turbine Nos. 1 through4 are located in Subproject A, and Turbine Nos. 6 through 9are located in Subproject B. 
2. On or about November 29, 2016, NPM submitted a
Conditional Use Permit ("CUP") Minor and Waiver PermitApplication for . . . Subproject A . . . ("Subproject A CUPApplication"). 
2/ Appellants have not challenged the FOFs, which are therefore
binding on appeal. See Poe v. Haw. Labor Rels. Bd., 97 Hawai #i 528, 536, 40
P.3d 930, 938 (2002) (ruling that an agency's unchallenged findings arebinding on appeal). 
3/ In their opening briefs, the Director and NPM assert that the
Project is now fully built and operational. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. On January 20, 2017, the Director, without holding
a public hearing, issued Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
Law, and Decision and Order approving NPM's Subproject A CUPApplication . . . , subject to various conditions. NPM was issued CUP No. 2016/CUP-69 ("Subproject A CUP") and ZoningWaiver No. 2016/W-63 ("Subproject A Zoning Waiver"). 
4. Pursuant to [DPP] Rules of Practice and Procedure
("DPP Rules") § 6-2, the Director mailed notice of herdecision on the Subproject A CUP and Subproject A ZoningWaiver on January 20, 2017 to [NPM's] consultant. 
5. No appeal was filed with the ZBA regarding the
Subproject A CUP or Subproject A Zoning Waiver on or beforeFebruary 21, 2017. 
6. On May 8, 2019, NPM submitted a written request
for minor modification of the Subproject A CUP and ZoningWaiver ("Subproject A CUP Minor Modifications Request") tomodify the location and height of the four previously-approved wind turbines. 
7. On June 7, 2019, the Director approved NPM's
Subproject A CUP Minor Modifications Request, which wereissued as Minor Modification Nos. 2019/MOD-34 and 201 9/MOD-35 (collectively, "Minor Modifications to Subproject ACUP"). 
8. Pursuant to DPP Rules § 6-2, the Director mailed
notice of her decision on the Minor Modifications to Subproject A CUP on June 7, 2019 to [NPM's] consultant. 
9. No appeal was filed with the ZBA regarding the
Minor Modifications to Subproject A CUP on or before July 8,2019. 
10. On or about August 26, 2016, NPM submitted a
Conditional Use Permit (Minor) Application for . . .Subproject B . . . ("Subproject B CUP Application"). 
11. On October 27, 2016, the Director, without
holding a public hearing, issued Findings of Fact,Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order approving NPM'sSubproject B CUP Application . . . , subject to variousconditions. NPM was issued CUP No. 2016/CUP-49 ("SubprojectB CUP"). 
12. Pursuant to DPP Rules § 6-2, the Director mailed
notice of her decision on the Subproject B CUP onOctober 27, 2016 to [NPM's] consultant. 
13. No appeal was filed with the ZBA regarding the
Subproject B CUP on or before November 28, 2016. 
14. On May 8, 2019, NPM submitted a written request
for minor modification of the Subproject B CUP ("SubprojectB CUP Minor Modification Request"). 
15. On June 7, 2019, the Director approved NPM's
Subproject B CUP Minor Modification Request, which wasdesignated as Minor Modification No. 2019/MOD-36 ("MinorModification to Subproject B CUP"). 
16. Pursuant to DPP Rules § 6-2, the Director mailed
notice of her decision on the Minor Modification to Subproject B CUP on June 7,2019 to [NPM's] consultant. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
17. No appeal was filed with the ZBA regarding the
Minor Modification to Subproject B CUP on or before July 8,
2019. 
18. The Subproject A CUP, the Subproject A Zoning
Waiver, and the Minor Modifications to Subproject A CUP, andthe Subproject B CUP and Minor Modification to Subproject BCUP (collectively, the "DPP Approvals") have been at alltimes and continue to be available for review by the publicat the DPP in its official files and record. 
19. Both KNSC and KCA were consulted parties with
respect to the NPM Project's Environmental Impact Statement("EIS") process under HRS Chapter 343, during which time theAppellants provided input and comments regarding theenvironmental impacts of the NPM Project to the Hawaii Boardof Land and Natural Resources ("BLNR"), the agencyresponsible for NPM's EIS. 
20. The NPM Project's Final Environmental Impact
Statement, dated June 2016 ("2016 FEIS"), was accepted byBLNR. 
21. KNSC's President Gil Riviere and KCA submitted 
comments on the Project's EIS that were included in the 2016FEIS. 
22. The comments and responses in Appendix M to the
2016 FEIS comprise 707 pages, consisting of approximately1,612 letters, petitions, emails, and/or signatures receivedduring the EIS process conducted by BLNR, both for andagainst the Project. 
23. The 2016 FEIS was included with the NPM's 
Project's Subproject A and Subproject B CUP Applications. 
24. In September of 2015, prior to the submission of
any of the applications for the DPP Approvals and prior tothe Director's decisions to approve each of the DPPApprovals, KCA specifically identified the NPM Project andsought to amend the City and County of Honolulu's windturbine ordinance to require CUP major permits. 
25. Before KNSC filed the KNSC Appeal Petition, the
DPP did not receive any direct communications from KNSCregarding any opposition to the NPM Project or objections tothe DPP Approvals, and KNSC did not participate in anymeetings with the Director or DPP regarding the DPPApprovals. 
26. Appellants do not allege they requested under DPP
Rules § 6-2 to receive from the Director notice of theDirector's actions regarding any of the DPP Approvals or theNPM Project. 
27. Appellants do not allege that before the KCA
Application/Appeal Petition they submitted to DPP anyopposition to the NPM Project or objections to the DPPApprovals. 
28. The Director never received a request from KCA
under DPP Rules § 6-2 to receive notice of the Director'sactions regarding any of the DPP Approvals or the NPMProject. 
29. The Director is not personally aware of any
public comments that were made to DPP regarding the 
4  
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
applications for the DPP Approvals and the Director did not
impose any conditions in the DPP Approvals based on publiccomments that were made to DPP concerning the same. 
(Footnote added.) 
On December 23, 2019, KNSC filed its Appeal Petition 
challenging the Approvals. NPM and KCA filed applications to 
intervene in the proceeding on January 15, 2020, and February 7, 2020, respectively. The ZBA granted NPM's application and granted KCA's application in part, by treating KCA's application as a new appeal petition and then consolidating the KNSC and KCA appeals. The Director and NPM then filed motions to dismiss the consolidated appeals. 
Following briefing and a hearing, the ZBA granted the 
motions to dismiss, and on November 12, 2020, adopted the FOFs/COLs/Order. The ZBA concluded that Appellants' Appeal Petitions were untimely as to each of the DPP Approvals, pursuant to ZBA Rules § 22-2 and Honolulu Land Use Ordinance (LUO) § 21-
1.40, quoted infra. The ZBA also weighed the three due process 
factors applied in In re Application of Maui Electric Co. (MECO), 141 Hawai# i 249, 265, 408 P.3d 1, 17 (2017), and determined that 
the procedures followed by DPP in this case complied with constitutional due process requirements. 
On November 24, 2020, Appellants appealed the ZBA's 
FOFs/COLs/Order to the Circuit Court. Following briefing and a hearing, the Circuit Court entered the SDO and the Judgment, affirming the FOFs/COLs/Order. 
II. Discussion 
Appellants do not structure the argument section of 
their opening brief to track their points of error, and do not explain why each of the challenged COLs is wrong. See HRAP Rule 
28(b)(7). Rather, Appellants make the primary argument that the ZBA's dismissal of their Appeal Petition as untimely denied them a contested case proceeding to review the Director's actions, thereby violating their property and due process rights.
4/ 
4/ In their first point of error, Appellants characterize the
dismissal of their Appeal Petition as the dismissal of a contested case
proceeding. See supra. In the argument section of their brief, however,
Appellants assert that the dismissal of their Appeal Petition "violated 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that "as a matter of 
constitutional due process, an agency hearing is . . . required 
where the issuance of a permit implicating an applicant's property rights adversely affects the constitutionally protected rights of other interested persons who have followed the agency's rules governing participation in contested cases." MECO, 141 
Hawai#i at 265, 408 P.3d at 17 (original emphasis omitted) 
(quoting Pele Def. Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 77 Hawai# i 
64, 68, 881 P.2d 1210, 1214 (1994)). "In other words, the court in 
Pele Defense Fund concluded that when the requirements of 
standing were met 
and the agency's rules were followed, an agency 
hearing was required when the challenged State action 'adversely affects the constitutionally protected rights' of others." Id. 
(emphasis added) (quoting 77 Hawai# i at 68, 881 P.2d at 1214). 
The supreme court has also held that "an appeal of a CUP issuance must take place within thirty days of the mailing or service of the director's decision, pursuant to LUO § 21-1.40 and as provided for in ZBA Rules § 22—2." Citizens Against Reckless 
Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of City and Cnty. of Honolulu (CARD), 114 Hawai# i 184, 196, 159 P.3d 143, 155 (2007). 
Here, the ZBA concluded that the Appeal Petitions were 
untimely under ZBA Rules § 22-2 and LUO § 21-1.40. Given that KNSC and KCA filed their Appeal Petitions on December 23, 2019, and February 7, 2020, respectively, the ZBA reasoned as follows: 
1. DPP Rules § 6-2 governs notices of the Director's
decisions, and states: 
The director shall mail the written decision to the 
applicant and, upon request, shall give notice of thedecision to other interested persons. The decision shall be available for review by the public at thedepartment of planning and permitting. 
2. DPP Rule § 6-2 and the posting of the Director's
decisions in DPP's publicly available files provides
constructive notice of the Director's decisions to members of the public. 
3. DPP Rules § 6-2 also provides the public with a
reasonable opportunity to request and obtain individualnotice of the Director's decision. 
Appellants' property rights by denying Appellants a contested case proceedingto review the Director's actions." (Emphasis added.) 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
5. LUO § 21-1.40 provides that "[a]ppeals from the
actions of the director in the administration of the 
provisions of the LUO shall be to the zoning board ofappeals as provided by Section 6—1516 of the charter.Appeals shall be filed within 30 days of the mailing orservice of the director's decision." 
6. ZBA Rules § 22-2 provides: 
§ 22-2 Mandatory appeal filing deadline. (a) Awritten petition appealing an action of the directormust be received at the department of land utilizationwithin 30 days of the date of mailing or personalservice of the director's written decision; exceptthat in the case of an appeal relating to theadministration of the subdivision ordinance, thepetition must be received within 15 days after receiptof the notice of the action. 
(b) If the appeal is not timely filed, it shall be
dismissed by the board upon the board's own motion orthe motion of any party to the proceeding. 
7. ZBA Rules § 22-7 provides: 
Waiver or suspension of rules. The board may waive or
suspend any procedure in chapter 22 for good cause,except that the mandatory appeal filing deadline andany other provisions mandated by law, shall not bewaived. 
8. ZBA Rules § 22-2 and 22-7 "establish a mandatory,
exclusive, and short thirty-day period within which a
director's action can be appealed to the ZBA; once thethirty-day period has passed, the director's action becomesfinal and binding." Hoku Lele, LLC v. City and Cnty. of
Honolulu, 129 Hawaii 164, 168, 296 P.3d 1072, 1076 (App.2013). 
9. "It is undisputed that an appeal of a CUP issuance
must take place within thirty days of the mailing or serviceof the director's decision, pursuant to LUO § 21-1.40 and asprovided for in ZBA Rules § 22—2." [CARD], 114 [Hawai i # at]
196, 159 P.3d [at] 155 . . . . 
10. The mandatory appeal deadline established under
ZBA Rules § 22-2 for the Subproject A CUP and Subproject AZoning Waiver was February 21, 2017. 
11. The mandatory appeal deadline established under
ZBA Rules § 22-2 for the Minor Modifications to Subproject ACUP was July 8, 2019. 
12. The mandatory appeal deadline established under
ZBA Rules § 22-2 for the Subproject B CUP was November 28,2016. 
13. The mandatory appeal deadline established under
ZBA Rules § 22-2 for the Minor Modification to Subproject BCUP was July 8, 2019. 
14. The LUO did not require that the Director hold a
public hearing with respect to any of the DPP Approvals. 
15. Based upon the record in this case, the written 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
memoranda of counsel, and the arguments presented at the
hearing, the ZBA concludes that KCA's and KNSC's AppealPetitions must be dismissed, pursuant to ZBA Rules § 22-2and LUO § 21-1.40, because both KNSC's and KCA's AppealPetitions were untimely filed with respect to each of theDPP Approvals. 
Appellants do not contest COLs 5 through 9 and 14. Nor 
do they dispute the FOFs that support COLs 10 through 13 and 15. 
Rather, Appellants argue that the application of ZBA Rules § 22-2 and LUO § 21-1.40 in these circumstances, where Appellants did not receive actual, affirmative notice of the Approvals from the Director, violates their due process rights. This argument, in turn, relies primarily on the supreme court's ruling in Unite Here! Local 5 v. Department of Planning & Permitting (PACREP
), 
145 Hawai#i 453, 454 P.3d 394 (2019), which Appellants contend 
the ZBA misread. 
In 
PACREP, the court held that Local 5's due process 
rights were violated when the DPP Director, without affirmative notice to Local 5, removed permit conditions ensuring that any conversion of hotel units in a condo-hotel project would comply with LUO requirements, when Local 5 had actively participated in the public hearing process for the permit and had advocated for the conditions. Id. at 467, 454 P.3d at 408. Specifically, the 
court stated: 
In these particular circumstances, we disagree that Local
5's failure to formally request notice under DPP Rules § 6.2forecloses its right to challenge the Director's September 6Letter [to the permit applicant removing the conditions].Where the record demonstrates that the interested partyadvocated for certain conditions in a permit, the permit wasapproved with those conditions, and the permitting authorityknew the importance of the conditions to the interestedparty, that interested party is entitled to heightenedprocedural protections regarding later decisions to modifythat permit. 
Id. at 467, 454 P.3d at 408. 
The ZBA concluded in COL 20 that "PACREP does not 
support the Appellants' request for an exception to the mandatory 
appeal filing deadlines under ZBA Rules § 22-2 and LUO § 21—1.40 . . . ." The ZBA reasoned that here, unlike in PACREP, "the Director was not provided notice of the Appellants' interest in this case"; "[n]either of the Appellants participated in public hearings or proceedings leading up to the Director's 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
consideration of the underlying DPP Approvals"; and "neither 
Appellant advocated for conditions that were placed into the DPP Approvals and later removed without notice to their proponents." The Circuit Court reached the same conclusion based on similar reasoning. 
Appellants argue that the PACREP ruling applies in 
these circumstances, because: (1) Appellants "actively engaged [the] [P]roject [by] participati[ng] in numerous community meetings, agency hearings, city council initiatives, and providing comments as part of the environmental review process under [HRS] chapter 343"; and (2) the Director "should have known Appellants were interested persons for whom notice was due in regard to the . . . [P]roject[,]" by "having reviewed the environmental review disclosure documents, which listed Appellants as consulted parties and commentators . . . ." Appellants also point out that they could not have participated in a public hearing on the Approvals because there were no such hearings. 
We are not persuaded that Appellants have shown the 
"unique" and "particular circumstances" that gave rise to the "heightened procedural protections" afforded in PACREP
. 145 
Hawai#i at 467, 454 P.3d at 408. COLs 21 and 25 state: 
21. The Director did not have actual notice of the 
Appellants' interest in the DPP Approvals or their
objections to the Director's actions before the filing oftheir Appeal Petitions. 
. . . . 
25. The Director did not receive any direct
communications or actual notice from the Appellantsregarding the Appellants' objections to the DPP Approvals. 
Appellants contest COL 21, but they do not dispute the FOFS that 
support it, see FOFs 25-29, quoted supra, and their argument regarding what the Director "should have known" based on Appellants' participation in various non-DPP public meetings and processes, including the EIS process, relies in essence on a constructive notice theory. In that regard, Appellants have not established "unique" circumstances, as evidenced by FOF 22, which is undisputed and which found that "[t]he comments and responses 
9   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
in appendix M to the 2016 [Final Environmental Impact Statement] 
comprise 707 pages, consisting of approximately 1,612 letters, petitions, emails and/or signatures received during the EIS process conducted by BLNR, both for and against the Project." It is certainly true that Appellants could not have participated in public hearings prior to the Approvals that never occurred, but they do not contend they were foreclosed from communicating directly with the Director regarding their objections to the Project.
5/ Additionally, Appellants do not explain why they were 
not on constructive notice of the Approvals based on "the posting of the Director's decisions in DPP's publicly available files," pursuant to DPP Rules § 6-2.
6/ 
Absent the unique circumstances in PACREP, DPP Rules 
§ 6-2 governed notice of the Director's decisions to Appellants. Under DPP Rules § 6-2 (quoted supra), the Director was required, upon Appellants' request, to give them notice of the Director's written decisions on permit applications related to the Project. Appellants do not dispute they knew such permits were required for the Project to commence,
7/ and do not contend they requested 
notice of the Director's related decisions. On this record, we conclude that DPP Rules § 6-2 provided Appellants a reasonable opportunity to request and obtain actual, individual notice of the Director's decisions regarding the Project. In addition, Appellants were properly charged with constructive notice of the Director's decisions in DPP's publicly available files. We agree with the Circuit Court that in these circumstances, the 
5/ Appellants also do not dispute COL 14, which concluded that "[t]he
LUO did not require that the Director hold a public hearing with respect to
the DPP Approvals." 
6/ COL 2 states that "DPP Rule[s] § 6-2 and the posting of the
Director's decisions in DPP's publicly available files provides constructivenotice of the Director's decisions to members of the public." Appellantscontend they did not waive any challenge to COL 2, but they do not provide anydiscernible argument as to why it is wrong. 
7/ Indeed, it is undisputed that "in September of 2015, . . . KCA
specifically identified the . . . Project and sought to amend the City andCounty of Honolulu's wind turbine ordinance to require CUP major[, rather thanminor,] permits." The evidence before the ZBA showed that KCA believed construction of the Project would start in early 2016, and was aware that CUPminor permits required for the Project to commence did not involve publichearings. 
10  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirements of due process were satisfied by Appellants' 
"opportunity to contest the Director's actions by filing an appeal before the mandatory appeal deadline as established by the [LUO] and ZBA Rules." 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err in affirming 
the ZBA's dismissal of Appellants' Appeal Petitions. We further conclude that the ZBA's COLs 3, 10-13, 15, 20-21, 26, and 30 are not wrong or, as applicable, clearly erroneous.
8/ Appellants have 
waived any challenge to COL 2 by not presenting any discernible argument in their opening brief as to why it is wrong. See supra 
note 6. 
III. Conclusion 
For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the Summary 
Disposition Order Affirming Agency Decision and the Judgment, both entered on June 30, 2021, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 27, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
Lance D. Collins and /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Bianca K. Isaki Acting Chief Judge 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants-
Appellants. 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Brad T. Saito, Associate Judge 
Deputy Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu,for Defendant-Appellee- /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Appellee Director of the Associate Judge 
Department of Planning andPermitting 
Jodi S. Yamamoto,
Jesse J.T. Smith, andBradley S. Dixon(Yamamoto Caliboso, a LimitedLiability Law Company)for Defendant-Appellee-Appellee Na Pua Makani PowerPartners, LLC 
8/ In light of our conclusion that the requirements of due process
were satisfied by Appellants' opportunity to file a timely appeal, we need notreach their challenge to COLs 27-29. 
11 