NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-11-0000152 AND CAAP-11-0000593
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TUIPUAPUA MOANANU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-2129)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Tuipuapua Moananu (Moananu) appeals
 
from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on
 
February 16, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(circuit court).1
 
On November 15, 2007, Moananu was charged with two
 
counts of Robbery in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-840(1)(b)(ii) (Supp. 2011) and one
 
count of Impersonating a Police Officer in the First Degree in
 
violation of HRS ยง 710-1016.6 (1993). On November 15, 2010, a
 
sentencing hearing was held wherein the defense counsel moved for
 
a continuance to allow for the submission of detailed information
 
regarding Moananu's cooperation with law enforcement authorities. 
The State stipulated to Moananu's previous cooperation with law
 
enforcement and the circuit court denied the motion for the
 
continuance.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 16, 2011, an amended judgment was entered
 
which found Moananu guilty of all three counts and sentenced him
 
to twenty-year terms of incarceration for the two robbery counts,
 
with a mandatory minimum term of thirteen years and four months
 
as a repeat offender, to run consecutively. The circuit court
 
also sentenced Moananu to a five-year term of incarceration for
 
impersonating a police officer, with a mandatory minimum term of
 
three years and four months as a repeat offender, to run
 
concurrently with the incarceration for the robbery counts.
 
On appeal, Moananu challenges the judgment and sentence
 
on the grounds that the circuit court abused its discretion in
 
(1) admitting evidence of prior bad acts pursuant to Hawai' i 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b); (2) denying his motion to continue the November 15, 2010 sentencing hearing to allow 
evidence of his cooperation with law enforcement authorities; and 
(3) granting the State's motion for consecutive sentences.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Moananu's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Moananu first argues that the circuit court 
"abused its discretion, disregarding principles of law, in making 
its ruling to admit evidence of his prior bad acts, on July 2, 
2010 during the course [of] trial, without conducting the 
required HRE Rule 404(b) analysis." "The burden of establishing 
abuse of discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is 
required to establish it." State v. Hinton, 120 Hawai' i 265, 
273, 204 P.3d 484, 492 (2009) (quoting State v. Wong, 97 Hawai' i 
512, 517, 40 P.3d 915, 919 (2002)). 
Moananu maintains that the circuit court erred in
 
rejecting his proffer of the testimony of two witnesses and the
 
transcript of another witness regarding a November 2006 incident
 
(the November 2006 evidence) for the limited purpose of
 
credibility and concluding instead that this November 2006
 
evidence called his identification as the perpetrator of the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
crime into question, which in turn, opened the door for the
 
introduction of prior bad acts evidence. Moananu also argues
 
that the court "fail[ed] to conduct any analysis prior to ruling
 
that Defendant's prior convictions would be admitted."
 
Although the circuit court engaged in a general HRE 
Rule 404(b) balancing discussion, it was not required to make a 
HRE Rule 404(b) ruling in this case because, prior to presenting 
this previously discussed November 2006 evidence, Moananu himself 
testified on direct examination that he did not commit the crimes 
in question--thereby placing his identity at issue--and that he 
had prior convictions for robbery and impersonating a police 
officer thereby introducing evidence of his prior bad acts. 
Generally, invited errors are not a basis for relief. State v. 
Jones, 96 Hawai' i 161, 166, 29 P.3d 351, 356 (2001). 
Moananu claims that he testified regarding these prior
 
bad acts "based on the trial court's 404(b) ruling." However,
 our review of the record reveals that, while the circuit court
 
engaged in an extensive discussion with Moananu on the subject of
 
his plans to present the November 2006 evidence, Moananu informed
 
the circuit court that he had decided not to present the November
 
2006 evidence but had not yet determined either whether he was
 
going to testify or the contents of his potential testimony. The
 
circuit court explained its view of the HRE 404(b) balancing
 
analysis but did not rule, calling a recess to allow Moananu the
 
opportunity to discuss the matter further with his counsel. 
When the parties returned in the afternoon, Moananu informed the
 
court of his decision to testify and to present the November 2006
 
evidence, but he did not tell the circuit court that he intended
 
to deny that he was the perpetrator of the crimes charged or that
 
he intended to testify about his prior convictions for robbery
 
and impersonating an officer. As such, Moananu gave the circuit
 
court no opportunity to conduct an HRE 404(b) balancing before
 
presenting his testimony. Moananu cannot now complain about the
 
circuit court's decision when he failed to give the circuit court
 
the opportunity to consider the evidence he decided to present
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and to conduct an HRE Rule 404(b) analysis before he actually
 
presented his testimony.
 
The circuit court issued a limiting instruction 
immediately after Moananu's prior bad acts testimony, forbidding 
the jury from considering the same in determining his guilt or 
innocence or inferring from the evidence that Moananu was a 
person of bad character. The jury is presumed to have heeded 
this limiting instruction and Moananu does not point to anything 
in the record that overcomes this presumption. State v. Webster, 
94 Hawai' i 241, 248, 11 P.3d 466, 473 (2000) ("A jury is presumed 
to follow the court's instructions."). Additionally, Moananu 
cannot show that he was precluded from presenting all of his 
evidence. After his testimony, despite his earlier 
representations that he would not present the November 2006 
evidence because of the circuit court's purported ruling, Moananu 
presented this evidence through the submissions of transcript 
testimony and the presentation of two witnesses. These two 
witnesses were not responsible for making identity an issue--
Moananu already had placed both his challenge to identity and his 
prior bad acts before the jury through his own testimony. 
(2) Moananu's second point of error on appeal is that
 
the circuit court abused its discretion in denying Moananu's
 
motion to continue his sentencing hearing. "A motion for
 
continuance is addressed to the sound discretion of the trial
 
court, and the court's ruling will not be disturbed on appeal
 
absent a showing of abuse of that discretion." State v. Lee, 9
 
Haw. App. 600, 603, 856 P.2d 1279, 1281 (1993).
 
There was no abuse here. Monanu failed to give the
 
circuit court specifics regarding the information he intended to
 present or explain why he needed additional time to obtain this
 
information. The State stipulated, for the purposes of that
 
sentencing proceeding, that Moananu had assisted law enforcement
 
in the past and the circuit court agreed to take this information
 
into consideration.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moananu also argued that more time "would be helpful"
 
in resolving "difficulty in communication" regarding "Rule 40"
 
and would "enable us to make an adequate presentation" but did
 
not provide any details. The circuit court observed that "Rule
 
40 is a post-conviction remedy" and found it not appropriate
 
material for sentencing.
 
The circuit court was also aware of Moananu's
 
willingness to delay proceedings, based on his previous attempt
 
to be determined unfit to proceed, which resulted in the experts
 
concluding that Moananu was "malingering."
 
Given these factors, Moananu's assertion that the 
circuit court "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice," State v. 
Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i 282, 287, 12 P.3d 873, 878 (2000) 
(internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted), in 
declining to give Moananu more time is unsupported by the record 
and the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying the 
motion to continue. 
(3) Moananu's third point of error is that the circuit
 
court abused its discretion by imposing consecutive sentences, 
unfairly punishing him for exercising his right to a jury trial. 
Moananu bases this argument on the fact that the circuit court
 
had, prior to trial, stated that it would bind itself to the
 
prosecution's offer of a plea agreement wherein Moananu would
 
receive a maximum term of ten years, if Moananu accepted the
 
offer.
 
However, it is clear that the circuit court had ample
 
grounds upon which to base its sentence. The circuit court's
 
stated reasons, both at sentencing and in its written decision
 
and uncontested on appeal, included the seriousness of the
 
instant offenses, Moananu's extensive criminal history that
 
demonstrated repeated acts of theft from others using firearms,
 
his violations of parole while under threat of maximum sentences,
 
and the physicians' determination that he was malingering after
 
the circuit court allowed a continuance of the proceedings
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because he decided to assert that he suffered from a physical or
 
mental disease, disorder or defect excluding penal
 
responsibility.
 
There was no evidence that the circuit court considered
 
Moananu's exercise of his right to a jury trial or refused to
 
consider Moananu's cooperation in imposing sentence.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the February 16, 2011 Amended
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 2, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael J. Park,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 