NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000884 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
RUSSEL EDWARD COLE, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
WAIKOLOA VILLAGE ASSOCIATION; JOHN DOES 1-10;
JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS
1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10 and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-293K) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Russel Edward Cole (Cole) appeals 
from the "Judgment on Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and 
Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed August 6, 2015" (Foreclosure Judgement), entered pursuant to the 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed August 6, 2015" (Order 
Granting Summary Judgment), both filed on November 14, 2017, in 
favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (Wells Fargo
Bank) in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).
1 
1 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cole also challenges the circuit court's "Order Denying Russel 
Edward Cole's Motion to Dismiss and/or for Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Complaint" (Order Denying Motion to Dismiss) entered 
on January 12, 2017. 
On appeal, Cole contends that the circuit court erred 
by (1) entering its Order Denying Motion to Dismiss and granting 
Wells Fargo Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment because this foreclosure action had already been dismissed on the merits in a previous identical action, and therefore is precluded by the doctrine of res judicata, and (2) granting Wells Fargo Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment because: (i) there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Wells Fargo Bank gave adequate notice to Cole of the alleged default; (ii) Wells Fargo Bank failed to produce admissible or properly authenticated evidence in support of its Motion for Summary Judgment, and; (iii) Wells Fargo Bank failed to meet its burden of demonstrating that it was the holder of the subject promissory note at the time the Complaint was filed, and therefore lacked standing to foreclose. 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the 
Foreclosure Judgment and remand for further proceedings. 
(1) We first note that the instant foreclosure action 
is not barred by the doctrine of 
res judicita. On appeal, Cole 
contends that the circuit court's "Order of Dismissal"  of a 
prior foreclosure action initiated by Wells Fargo Bank in Civil 2
2 The circuit court's Order of Dismissal was entered pursuant to Rules
of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai #i (RCCH ) Rule 28 for want of
service. RCCH Rule 28 provides: 
Rule 28. Dismissal for want of service.
 A diligent effort to effect service shall be made in all
actions. An action or claim may be dismissed sua sponte
with written notice to the parties if no service is madewithin 6 months after the action or claim has been filed. Such dismissal may be set aside and the action or claimreinstated by order of the court for good cause shown uponmotion duly filed not later than ten (10) days from the dateof the order of dismissal. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No. 13-1-00529K, which involved the same parties and subject 
property, amounted to a final adjudication on the merits as to Wells Fargo Bank's claims against Cole, and thus precluded the instant law suit under the doctrine of res judicata. However, res judicata does not apply here because the instant foreclosure action is based on Cole's alleged default different than was alleged in the prior action.
3 Accordingly, the circuit court did 
not err in its Order Denying Motion to Dismiss because the claim at issue in the prior action was not identical to the claim in the instant foreclosure action. Cf. E. Sav. Bank, FSB v. 
Esteban, 129 Hawai# i 154, 159, 296 P.3d 1062, 1067 (2013) 
(explaining that a "party asserting claim preclusion has the burden of establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on the merits, (2) both parties are the same or in privity with the parties in the original suit, and (3) the claim decided in the original suit is identical with the one presented in the action in question")) (emphasis added) (citation omitted). 
(2) We next address Cole's contention that the circuit 
court erred in granting summary judgment because Wells Fargo Bank failed to establish its standing to prosecute the instant foreclosure action.  The Hawai
#i Supreme Court's holdings in 
Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 390 P.3d 
1248 (2017), U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i 26, 398 P.3d 4
3 The Order of Dismissal of the prior foreclosure action, submitted by
Cole in support of his Motion to Dismiss, was entered by the circuit court on
July 7, 2014. In its Complaint in the instant foreclosure action, Wells FargoBank attaches default and acceleration letters dated September 9, 2014, twomonths after the circuit court entered its Order of Dismissal in the prioraction. The letters indicate that Cole's loan was in default, and providesthe total delinquency amount accumulated as of September 9, 2014. 
4 We note that Cole did not waive his challenge on appeal as to Wells
Fargo Bank's papers regarding its right to enforce the Note and Mortgage atthe time the Complaint was filed, specifically with regards to the MouaCertification, as asserted by Wells Fargo Bank. As noted by Cole in his ReplyBrief, Cole raised the issue of Wells Fargo Bank's failure to submitadmissible, authenticated evidence demonstrating its standing on multipleoccasions to the circuit court. Although Cole may not have specificallyobjected to the Moua Certification, an appellate court "has the independentobligation to address whether Appellants have standing to bring these claims."McDermott v. Ige, 135 
Hawai #i 275, 283, 349 P.3d 382, 390 (2015) (citation
omitted). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
615 (2017) and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 
37, 414 P.3d 89 (2018) are dipositive as to this issue. 
As explained in Reyes-Toledo, a foreclosing plaintiff 
must establish entitlement to enforce a subject note and its 
standing to foreclose on the mortgaged property at the commencement of the suit. 139 
Hawai# i at 368, 390 P.3d at 1255. 
In its Complaint filed August 6, 2015, Wells Fargo Bank stated that it "is now the holder of the Note and is entitled to enforce it pursuant to HRS ยง 490:3-301." Attached to the Complaint was, inter alia, Exhibit 1, a redacted copy of a promissory note (Note) which indicates a promise to repay the lender Carnegie 
Mortgage LLC, a Limited Liability Company (Carnegie Mortgage). 
Attached to the Note was a single page "Allonge to Note" 
(Allonge), which is specially endorsed by Carnegie Mortgage to 
Wells Fargo Bank, and which also contains an endorsement stamp in 
blank by Wells Fargo Bank. Given the blank endorsement, the Note may be negotiated by transfer of possession. Id. at 370, 390 P.3d at 1257. 
In support of its Motion for Summary Judgment, Wells 
Fargo Bank attached a "Declaration of Indebtedness" (Tipton 
Declaration), executed on January 26, 2016, by Vanna D. Tipton 
(Tipton).  The Tipton Declaration attests, inter alia, that 
Tipton is "employed by Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.[,]" that "[a]s Vice 
President Loan Documentation, I access [Wells Fargo Bank's] mortgage servicing business records on a daily basis[,]" and that a "true and accurate copy of the Note as it is imaged in [Wells Fargo Bank's] system of record is attached hereto as Exhibit A." Tipton's declaration also attests that "Wells Fargo Bank, NA is 
in possession of the Promissory Note AND The Promissory Note 
includes an Allonge indorsed in blank." (emphasis added). Tipton's declaration, executed more than five months after the Complaint was filed, does not establish Wells Fargo Bank's standing at the time the action was commenced. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wells Fargo Bank also relies on a "Certification of 
Possession of Original Promissory Note" (Moua Certification), 
executed on July 24, 2015 by Lidphay Lee Moua (Moua), who attests 
to being "Vice President Loan Documentation" of "Wells Fargo 
Bank, N.A." Moua asserts in the certification that "I have personally reviewed the original promissory note ("Note") at 1000 BLUE GENTIAN ROAD SUITE 300, EAGAN, MINNESOTA on 07/24/2015 AT 1:27 PM. The Note was dated DECEMBER 3, 2010 and executed by RUSSEL EDWARD COLE. A true and correct copy of the Promissory Note is attached as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference[]" and that "WELLS FARGO BANK, NA has possession of the Note. Except for when retrieved from the custodian, the original Note is kept by the custodian at 1015 10
TH AVE SE "DOCK B" 
MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55414 by WELLS FARGO BANK, NA." Also attached to the Moua Certification is a copy of the Note and Allonge. Thus, Wells Fargo Bank asserts that it was in possession of the blank endorsed Note at the commencement of the instant foreclosure action. 
However, under Mattos and Behrendt, the Moua 
Certification fails to satisfy the requirements for admitting the Note and Allonge under the Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
803(b)(6)  business records exception. Moua does not attest to 
5
5 HRE Rule 803(b)6) provides: 
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarant
immaterial . The following are not excluded by the hearsay
rule, even though the declarant is available as a witness: 
. . . . 
(b) Other exceptions. 
. . . . 
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity. A 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, inany form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, ordiagnoses, made in the course of a regularly conductedactivity, at or near the time of the acts, events,conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, as shown by thetestimony of the custodian or other qualified witness,or by certification that complies with rule 902(11) ora statute permitting certification, unless the sources
of information or other circumstances indicate lack of 
trustworthiness. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being the custodian of the Note and Allonge, and thus must be a 
"qualified witness" to establish the requirements of admissibility. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 30-32, 398 P.3d at 619-21; 
Behrendt, 142 
Hawai# i at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98. As such, Moua 
"must have enough familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business that created the record to explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of business." Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97. 
Moua does not attest to being familiar with the record-
keeping system of the business that created the Note or Allonge. Moua also does not attest that the Note and Allonge attached to the Moua Certification were incorporated into Wells Fargo Bank's records and kept in the normal course of business, or that Wells Fargo Bank relies on the accuracy of the contents of the documents, or circumstances that otherwise indicate trustworthiness of the documents.  Moreover, the Moua 
Certification only refers to the "original promissory note" and not the Allonge that Wells Fargo Bank asserts was used to endorse the Note. 
Accordingly, Moua was not a qualified witness with 
respect to the Note and Allonge attached to the Moua Certification and Wells Fargo Bank did not provide the foundation to admit the Note and Allonge under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
Cole, as we must for purposes of a summary judgment ruling, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Wells Fargo Bank had standing when this foreclosure action commenced. Pursuant to Reyes-Toledo, the circuit court erred in granting Wells Fargo Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment. Accordingly, we need not reach Cole's other points on appeal. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Judgment on 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed August 6, 2015" entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on November 14, 2017, 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is vacated. This case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 29, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin,
Katherine S. Belford,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Edmund K. Saffery,Lauren K. Chun,
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn& Stifel)
and Associate Judge 
Steven T. Iwamura,Robert M. Ehrhorn, Jr.Ken Ohara,Steven K. Idemoto,
(Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice & Nervell)
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7 