NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000413
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JANAE D. VICTOR, Individually and as Prochein Ami of
SINJIN VICTOR, a Minor, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
MICHAEL C. KOGA, DOREEN F. KOGA,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
LYLE M. NONAKA and DOE ONE through DOE TEN, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2122)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Janae D. Victor ("Janae"),
 
Individually and as Prochein Ami of her minor son ("Minor"),
 
(collectively, the "Victors") appeal from the February 23, 2010
 Order Granting Defendants Michael C. Koga and Doreen F. Koga's
 Motion to Dismiss Complaint for Failure to State a Claim And/Or
 Motion for Summary Judgment,
1/ entered in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit ("Circuit Court").2/
  
This appeal arises out of two incidents of sexual
 
assault committed by Defendant Lyle M. Nonaka ("Nonaka") against
 Minor at the home of Defendants-Appellees Michael C. Koga and
 
1/
 A Judgment relating to the Order Granting Defendants Michael C.
Koga and Doreen F. Koga's Motion to Dismiss Complaint for Failure to State a
Claim And/Or Motion for Summary Judgment was filed on February 23, 2010 and
attached to the Notice of Appeal filed by the Victors. 
2/
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Doreen F. Koga ("Doreen") (collectively, the "Kogas"), where
 
Nonaka also resided. The Victors raise a single point of error,
 contending that the Circuit Court improperly granted summary
 judgment on the issue of whether the Kogas were on notice as to
 Nonaka's propensity to commit sexual assault given "the strong
 physical evidence of [Nonaka's] deviant sexual behavior.
3/ In
 
support, the Victors advance various arguments, which we
 summarize as follows: (1) that the Kogas, as homeowners, had a
 special relationship toward Minor, who was an invitee under
 Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A(3); (2) that the Kogas had
 notice that Nonaka posed an unreasonable risk of harm to Minor;
 (3) that Minor, as a minor, belonged to a protected "identifiable
 class of plaintiffs," thereby imposing a duty on the Kogas toward
 Minor; (4) that the Kogas had "particular foreseeability" or
 "special knowledge" that Nonaka posed a risk of foreseeable harm
 toward Minor; and (5) that the Kogas had a duty to protect Janae
 from emotional distress.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve the Victors' appeal as follows:
 
I. Background
 
Nonaka is Doreen's younger brother. He lived, at the 
time, in the downstairs portion of the Kogas' home in Aiea, 
Hawai
'i (the "Property"). In 2007, on two separate occasions, 
Nonaka sexually assaulted Minor, a fourteen-year-old boy, whom Nonaka had invited into his portion of the Kogas' residence. The Kogas did not know Minor or that Nonaka had invited Minor to the house. Nonaka pled guilty to multiple counts of sexual assault in a separate criminal case. 
3/
 The Victors' point of error is insufficient in numerous respects
under Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure ("HRAP") Rule 28(b)(4) and bears no
evident relation to the argument section as required in HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
While "[p]oints not presented in accordance with this section will bedisregarded," HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(D), we proceed in recognition of ourappellate courts' long-standing commitment to allowing parties their day in
court, to the extent that we can understand their claims. See Marvin v. 
Pflueger, 127 Hawai' i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the instant case, the Victors' complaint stated four
 
counts against the Kogas, each of which alleged a duty on the
 
part of the Kogas to Minor or Janae, and a subsequent breach of
 that duty. The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor
 of the Kogas on all of the counts against them.
4/ The court
 
explained that it was unable to find a legal duty owed by the
 Kogas to the Victors, that there was no special relationship
 between the Kogas and either Nonaka or Minor, that there was no
 notice to the Kogas that Nonaka had any dangerous propensities,
 and that the incidents were not foreseeable to the Kogas. 
II. Discussion
 
A. Special relationship
 
The Victors argue that because the Kogas were owners, 
possessors, or occupiers of land or property, and because Minor was an invitee or licensee on the Property, a special relationship existed such that the Kogas were required to use ordinary care to protect Minor. The Victors rely on Atahan v. Muramoto, 91 Hawai
'i 345, 984 P.2d 104 (App. 1999), overruled on 
other grounds by Lansdell v. Cnty. of Kauai, 110 Hawai 'i 189, 130 
P.3d 1054 (2006), for the proposition that "[l]andowners and occupiers of land have a duty of ordinary care to invitees and licensees." 
Atahan, however, concerns landowners who make land or 
water areas available to the public, and addresses for which type of "invitees" such a landowner may have liability. Atahan, 91 
Hawai
'i at 351–53, 984 P.2d at 110-12. Nothing in the record, 
however, indicates that the Kogas held the Property open to the public. See also Cuba v. Fernandez, 71 Haw. 627, 633, 801 P.2d 
1208, 1211 (1990) ("[T]o hold one's land open to the public requires some affirmative action signaling that entry is desired rather than simply disregarded."); R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS 
§ 332 cmt. b (1965) ("[A]n invitation is conduct which justifies others in believing that the possessor desires them to enter the 
4/
 Although the Kogas' motion was styled alternatively as a motion to
dismiss or for summary judgment, the Kogas attached declarations that the
Circuit Court considered. Thus, we treat the motion as one for summary
judgment.
 
3
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
land.").
 
In sum, the fact that the Kogas owned the Property and
 
that Nonaka invited Minor to enter the Property does not create a
 
special relationship between the Kogas and Minor for the purpose
 of establishing premises liability. R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS
 
§ 314A (1965).
 
B. Notice that Nonaka posed an unreasonable risk of harm
 The Victors argue that the "overwhelming physical
 
evidence gave the [Kogas] notice that Nonaka posed an
 unreasonable risk of harm of sexually assaulting [Minor], a
 minor." The Victors recite the list of pornographic and other
 sex-related materials found in Nonaka's downstairs living area
 and assert that, according to the police officer who collected
 the evidence, the condition of Nonaka's living space "was similar
 to that of other home searches of sexual assault perpetrators."
 The Victors contend that "the Kogas had notice that Nonaka was a
 safety risk on their property because of the physical evidence .
 . . and because that common area or living room was messy,
 cluttered and scary." 
The Victors cite to four cases from other jurisdictions
 
to support the contention that summary judgment was inappropriate
 when "attention and discussion were given to the behavior, past
 or present, of the perpetrator of the sexual abuse which then
 gave rise to the notice requirement": Bjerke v. Johnson, 742
 N.W.2d 660, 668 (Minn. 2007), J.S. v. R.T.H., 714 A.2d 924, 929
 (N.J. 1998), Doe v. Franklin, 930 S.W.2d 921, 928 (Tex. Ct. App.
 1996), and Gritzner v. Michael R., 598 N.W.2d 282, 287-88 (Wis.
 Ct. App. 1999) aff'd in part, rev'd in part, and remanded, 611
 N.W.2d 906 (Wis. 2000).
 
The facts of the instant case, however, render each of
 
the out-of-state cases distinguishable in important respects. As
 the Kogas did not know who Minor was or that he was present in
 the home until after the incidents occurred, foreseeability can
 not be established through evidence of unusual and intimate
 behavior between the perpetrator and victim over a period of
 years. Cf. Bjerke, supra (finding the creation of a special
 
relationship through the defendant's daily care of the minor
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
victim over the course of four years).
 
In response to the Kogas' declarations that they had no
 
notice of any criminal propensity by Nonaka, the Victors point to
 
the evidence of pornographic and other sex-related materials in
 Nonaka's living area. However, none of the out-of-state cases
 suggest that possession of such material create a duty upon third
 parties. The Victors also fail to present any evidence that the
 sex-related material were out in the open, that the Kogas saw
 them, or that the materials, if seen, would indicate that Nonaka
 was a pedophile. The Kogas' unchallenged declarations establish
 that they did not know of nor had reason to suspect that there
 were any prior criminal incidents by Nonaka or that he would, in
 the future, commit any such crime. Cf. J.S., supra, (finding a
 
special relationship where the wife conceded that she knew or
 should have known of her husband's propensities and that she knew
 that the victims were visiting her home nearly every day and that
 they spent a considerable amount of time there alone with her
 defendant husband); Franklin, supra (finding foreseeability when
 grand-daughter reported to her defendant-grandmother that she had
 been molested by her grandfather, and, in response, the
 defendant-grandmother chastised her and told her to "[n]ever say
 anything like that again").
 
Finally, the Victors do not rebut the Kogas'
 
declarations that they did not voluntarily assume supervision of
 Minor, did not supervise or take custody of Nonaka, and did not
 have knowledge of any propensity or prior incidents by Nonaka. 
Cf. Gritzner, supra (finding mother's boyfriend liable for
 negligent supervision of mother's ten-year-old son who sexually
 molested a four-year-old neighbor girl visiting the home when the
 boyfriend was aware that mother's son had previously engaged in
 inappropriate sexual acts with other children, including his own
 half-sister, and where boyfriend assumed custody and control of
 the neighbor girl, allowing her to come to the home to play with
 mother's son). In sum, the Victors fail to rebut the Kogas'
 declarations or demonstrate that a genuine issue of material fact
 exists as to whether the Kogas had notice that Nonaka posed an
 unreasonable risk of harm to Minor. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Foreseeability; state policy
 
The Victors argue that Minor was "a foreseeable
 
plaintiff, as he belonged to an 'identifiable class of
 plaintiffs' for which the Hawaii legislature and Hawaii law
 enforcement have tried to protect." In support, the Victors cite
 to J.S., which described New Jersey as having a "strong policy .
 . . to protect children from sexual abuse and to require
 reporting of suspected child abuse." J.S., 714 A.2d at 930
 
(quoting J.S. v. R.T.H., 693 A.2d 1191, 1194 (N.J. Super. Ct.
 App. Div. 1997)). 
The Victors argue that Hawai
'i has a similar policy, 
and lists as examples the Hawai 'i Attorney General's Hawaii 
Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force, and reporting requirements under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") Chapters 350 and 846E. The Victors contend that these examples gave notice to the Kogas of their duty to protect Minor, "because the State of Hawaii has sought to protect minor children from hazards and dangers of sexual abuse, and [Minor] falls within that identifiable class of plaintiffs." 
The Victors' argument is unpersuasive. The facts of
 
J.S. are distinguishable and it takes more than a well-
intentioned state policy to create a duty on the part of people,
 or a class of people, not identified in the policy. Accordingly,
 the mere existence of the task force and statutory reporting
 requirements does not create a duty or notice on the part of the
 Kogas, or that Minor was a foreseeable plaintiff. 
D. Particular foreseeability based on co-occupancy
 The Victors argue that the Kogas, as "co-occupants and
 
longtime roommates" with Nonaka, had "particular foreseeability"
 or "special knowledge" that he posed a risk of foreseeable harm.
 In support, the Victors again refer to J.S., 714 A.2d at 929-30,
 for the proposition that "[o]ften time[s] the sexual abuse of a
 child is committed secretly and behind close[d] doors, and the
 wife may be the only person with special knowledge of the
 husband's sexually abusive behavior or potential for sexual
 assault." 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The fact that the Kogas did not know Minor and did not
 
know that he was in the home distinguishes the instant case from
 
J.S., where the wife conceded that she knew or should have known
 of her husband's propensities, and that she knew that the victims
 were visiting at her home nearly every day and that they spent
 considerable amounts of time there alone with her husband. See
 
id. at 936. Accordingly, the Kogas did not have "particular
 foreseeability" or "special knowledge" that Nonaka posed a risk
 of foreseeable harm.
 
E. Emotional distress
 The Victors refer to Kaho
'ohanohano v. Dep't of Human 
Servs., 117 Hawai 'i 262, 308, 178 P.3d 538, 584 (2008) and Doe 
Parents No. 1 v. Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai 'i 34, 69, 58 P.3d 545, 
580 (2002) in contending that it was foreseeable that "Janae would suffer emotional distress upon the Kogas' breach of duty to protect her son from a sexual predator." Those cases, however, are inapposite here. 
In Kaho
'ohanohano, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that 
the legislature, through the plain language of HRS Chapter 587 ("Chapter 587"), read in conjunction with its purpose, created a duty on the part of the Department of Human Services to children specifically identified to the department as being the subject of suspected abuse. 117 Hawai
'i at 290-91, 178 P.3d at 566-67. 
Similarly, in Doe Parents, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that 
the Hawai 'i Department of Education ("DOE"), had a statutory duty 
to protect children. The court noted that "the state required that children attend school and, thereby, deprived them of the protection from reasonably foreseeable harm that their parents normally provide." Doe Parents, 100 Hawai
'i at 79-80, 58 P.3d at 
590-91. The court found that the DOE thus "shares a 'special relationship'—i.e., a quasi-parental or in loco parentis custodial relationship—with its students, which obligates the DOE to exert reasonable care in ensuring each student's safety and welfare, as would a reasonably prudent parent." Id. at 80, 58 
P.3d at 591. Therefore, the court held that the DOE's duty ran to the student's parents as well as the student because it was foreseeable that the parents would suffer emotional distress 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
should harm come to their child as a consequence of the DOE's
 
breach. Id.
 
The Victors do not explain how Chapter 587 or HRS
 
§ 298–9 apply to the Kogas, who never met Minor, had no custodial
 relationship over him, and were unaware that he was in their
 home. Therefore, the Kogas did not have a duty of care to Janae,
 nor could they foresee her emotional distress. 
III. Conclusion
 
Therefore, we affirm the February 23, 2010 Order
 
Granting Defendants Michael C. Koga and Doreen F. Koga's Motion
 
to Dismiss Complaint for Failure to State a Claim And/Or Motion
 for Summary Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 10, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Joyce J. Uehara and
Dan S. Ikehara for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Randall Y.S. Chung and
Milton S. Tani (Chung & Ikehara)
for Michael C. Koga
and Doreen F. Koga,
Defendants-Appellees. 
8
 