NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000395
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
REY CEON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0472)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Rey Ceon (Ceon) appeals from the
 
April 20, 2016 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1 A jury found Ceon guilty of three (3) counts of Sexual
 
Assault in the Third Degree (SA3), all violations of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-732(1)(c) (2014).
2 For each count,
 
1	 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2 In Count 1, Ceon was charged with Sexual Assault in the First
Degree, but the jury found him guilty of the lesser included offense of Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree. HRS § 707-732(1) provides, in relevant part:
 
Sexual assault in the third degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of sexual assault in the third degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(c)	 The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
with a person who is at least fourteen years old
but less than sixteen years old or causes the
minor to have sexual contact with the person;
provided that:
 
(i) 	The person is not less than five years
older than the minor; and
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ceon was sentenced to five (5) years of probation with special
 
conditions, including one (1) year of imprisonment, all terms to
 run concurrently.
 
On appeal, Ceon contends the Circuit Court erred in
 
instructing the jury in three respects, by: (1) improperly
 commenting on the evidence; (2) failing to give the definition of
 the "knowingly" state of mind; and (3) failing to instruct the
 jury with accurate, adequate, and correct instructions on the
 knowing state of mind as applied to the elements.
 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
 raised and arguments made by the parties, we resolve Ceon's point
 of error as follows and affirm.
 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively
appears from the record as a whole that the error was not
prejudicial. [However,] error is not to be viewed in
isolation and considered purely in the abstract. It must be
examined in the light of the entire proceedings and given
the effect which the whole record shows it to be entitled.
 In that context, the real question becomes whether there is
 
2(...continued)
 
(ii) 	The person is not legally married to the
minor;
 
HRS § 702-206 (2014), provides, in relevant part:
 
Definitions of states of mind.
 
. . . .
 (2)	 "Knowingly."
 
(a) 	A person acts knowingly with respect to his
conduct when he is aware that his conduct is of
 that nature.
 
(b) 	A person acts knowingly with respect to
attendant circumstances when he is aware that
 such circumstances exist.
 
HRS § 707-700 (2014) (modified 2016), then extant, provides in
relevant part:
 
"Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts
of "sexual penetration", of the sexual or other intimate
parts of another, or of the sexual or other intimate parts
of the actor by another, whether directly or through the
clothing or other material intended to cover the sexual or
other intimate parts.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a reasonable possibility that error may have contributed to
conviction. If there is such a reasonable possibility in a
criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which it
may have been based must be set aside.
 
State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai 'i 289, 292-93, 119 P.3d 597, 600-01 
(2005) (citations and brackets omitted, block format altered) 
quoted with approval in State v. Bovee, SCWC-14-0001047, 2017 WL 2189750, sl. op. at 14 (May 18, 2017). 
Ceon contends that the Circuit Court improperly
 
commented on the evidence in its instructions to the jury. The
 third and fourth elements of each charged count and the lesser
 included offense instructions for sexual assault in the third
 degree provided that "the prosecution must prove beyond a
 reasonable doubt . . . 3. That the Defendant was not less than
 five years older than [the complainant] at that time, and he was
 aware of that fact; and 4. That the Defendant was not legally
 married to [the complainant] at that time, and he was aware of
 that fact." Ceon argues that, although he stipulated to his age
 during the charged period, he did not stipulate to these elements
 as facts and therefore these instructions constituted improper
 comments on the evidence in violation of Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 (HRE) Rule 1102.
3 We disagree.
 
First, as the jury was also instructed, a single word
 
or phrase in an instruction cannot be taken in isolation. In any
 event, the instructions' language does not lend itself to Ceon's
 suggested reading. Logically, the jury would have to decide
 whether the prosecution proved the element--the age differential
 or marital status, respectively--before it decided whether Ceon
 had the requisite intent with regard to that element. That being
 the case, the jury would necessarily have already determined that
 the age differential or the marital status was a fact before it
 decided whether Ceon "was aware of that fact."
 
Second, instructions must be read as a whole. The
 
jurors were told more than once, in other instructions, that they
 were the exclusive judges of the facts. When read together, the
 
3
 HRE Rule 1102 provides, in pertinent part, that, "[t]he court
shall instruct the jury regarding the law applicable to the facts of the case,
but shall not comment upon the evidence."
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instructions conveyed that it was the jury whose responsibility
 
it was to determine what facts had been proved.
 
Finally, the evidence in support of these elements was 
uncontradicted. Ceon stipulated to his age at the time of the offense and, while not stipulated to, Ceon did not dispute that he was more than five years the complainant's senior or that she was unmarried during the period in question. Therefore, we are confident that the alleged error could not have contributed to the convictions. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai
'i at 292-93, 119 P.3d at 
600-01. 
Next, we address Ceon's argument that the Circuit Court
 
was required to separately define the knowing state of mind for
 the jury and that its incorporation of the definition with the
 statement of the elements of the respective offenses was error. 
The knowing state of mind is defined as being aware that the
 actor's conduct is of that nature or that attendant circumstances
 exist. HRS § 702-206(2)(a) and (b). 
All the contested instructions ended the conduct
 
element by stating, after describing the conduct, "and he was
 aware that he was doing so at the time" thus making it clear what
 the jury must find Ceon was aware of. Contrary to Ceon's
 argument, a fair reading of the language of these instructions
 does not lend itself to the possible interpretation by the jury
 that it could find him guilty for "accidental contact with an
 intimate part."
 
Similarly, when used in the context of the attendant
 
circumstances elements, all the instructions stated that "he was
 aware of that fact," referring back to the attendant circumstance
 stated at the start of that element. This is consistent with the
 application of the state of mind to attendant circumstances, that
 the person be aware that they exist. HRS § 702-206(2)(b).
4
 
4
 For purposes of this appeal, we assume without deciding that the
knowing mental state applies to the attendant circumstance that the defendant
was not less than five years older than the complainant. The supreme courthas previously concluded that the knowing mental state applies to theattendant circumstance that the defendant was not legally married to thecomplainant. See State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 15, 928 P.2d 843, 857 (1996).
The supreme court has also concluded that there is no state of mindrequirement with respect to the attendant circumstance of the complainant's
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. 
Bovee, supra, is not to the contrary. There, the court was faced 
with a formulation of the element instruction that inaccurately stated that the offense was composed of only one element when it contained two, namely the conduct element of distribution of an object and the attendant circumstance that the object distributed was methamphetamine in any amount. As these two elements of the offense were blended into a single element, to which the state of mind language applied without differentiation, the supreme court held that the trial court did not clearly instruct jury that the state of mind applied to both elements. Here, it is undisputed that the SA3 offense has four elements and that the jury was instructed that it must decide that Ceon was aware of each element, except for the element of the complainant's age for which the supreme court has clearly held that no state of mind is required. See State v. Buch, 83 Hawai
'i 308, 316, 926 P.2d 599, 
607 (1996). 
As the elements instructions adequately conveyed the
 
state of mind appropriate to each element, we conclude it was
 unnecessary for a separate instruction on the definition of the
 knowing state of mind to have been given.
 
Based on the foregoing, the April 20, 2016 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 21, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
  
Donn Fudo,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4(...continued)
age. See State v. Buch
, 83 Hawai' i 308, 316, 926 P.2d 599, 607 (1996) ("[A]
defendant is strictly liable with respect to the attendant circumstance of the
victim's age in a sexual assault."). 
5
 