 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000035 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
SON KYONG AMII, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-19-0002613) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Son Kyong Amii (
Amii) appeals from 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on December 
27, 2019, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu 
Division (
District Court).1 
Amii was convicted of Attempted Assault in the Third 
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-
500(1)(b) (2014) and 707-712(1)(a) (2014),2 and Terroristic 
1  The Honorable Florence T. Nakakuni presided. 
2  HRS § 705-500(1) states in part: 
§705-500  Criminal attempt .  (1)  A person is
guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if the person: 
. . . . 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, 
(continued...) 2(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Threatening in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-
717(1) (2014).   3
On appeal, Amii contends there was insufficient 
evidence to convict her of Attempted Assault in the Third Degree,specifically that she did not commit a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to cause bodily injury  which 
constituted Assault in the Third Degree, and that the District Court made inconsistent findings.  Amii does not appeal her conviction for Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree. 
4 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Amii's point of error as follows: 
under the circumstances as the person
believes them to be, constitutes asubstantial step in a course of conductintended to culminate in the person'scommission of the crime. 
. . . . 
(3)  
Conduct shall not be considered a 
substantial step under this section unless it isstrongly corroborative of the defendant's criminalintent. 
HRS § 707-712(1)(a) states: 
§707-712  Assault in the third degree .  (1)  A 
person commits the offense of assault in the thirddegree if the person: 
(a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklesslycauses bodily injury to another person[.] 
3  HRS § 707-717(1) states: 
[§707-717]  Terroristic threatening in the 
second degree .  (1)  A person commits the offense of
terroristic threatening in the second degree if theperson commits terroristic threatening other than asprovided in section 707-716. 
4  "Bodily injury" means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of
physical condition.  HRS § 707-700 (2014). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When the evidence adduced at trial is considered in the 
strongest light for the prosecution, State v. Matavale, 115 
Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007), there is 
substantial evidence to support Amii's conviction for Attempted Assault in the Third Degree, in other words showing she intentionally engaged in conduct constituting a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the commission of Assault in the Third Degree.  Further, the District Court did not make inconsistent findings. 
Amii inaccurately portrays the District Court's 
findings, and we further reject her contention that by throwing a potted plant at the complaining witness and striking the bottom right corner of a screen door, the proper inference was that Amii intended to commit property damage and not Assault in the Third Degree.  The District Court stated the complaining witness's screen door was closed when the pot Amii threw hit it and "it ended up in the corner of the screen door because [the complaining witness] had closed that screen door and had retreated."  However, the District Court previously noted the complaining witness had peeked out of the door to look outside, saw Amii charge her with a pot and throw it at her.  
During her direct testimony, the complaining witness 
testified that she had already called the police when she peeked outside and opened her screen door, when at that moment Amii charged at her, was swearing and threatening her, took a big plant that was near her door and that Amii "was trying to throw the plant right into me."  The complaining witness demonstrated that Amii threw the potted plant at her using both hands cocked over Amii's right shoulder and then making a forward motion.  The 
complaining witness further testified: "So when [Amii] threw the 
plant, actually I closed the door.  It's a screen door.  And I 
jumped out of the door.  I was still on the phone with the police.  Plant landed in the corner outside of my door." 
The District Court found the complaining witness 
credible.  The District Court also noted, inter alia, the 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaining witness's testimony that Amii told her "I'll kill 
you," that Amii had used swear words and acted aggressively toward the complaining witness, that Amii had made eye contact with the complaining witness and threw the plant aiming at the 
complaining witness.  The District Court stated: "To me that 
actual act of picking up -- of throwing the pot in the direction 
of –- after locking eyes with [the complaining witness] constituted that attempt." 
As noted, in reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence 
for conviction, we consider the evidence in the strongest light for the prosecution.  Further, "given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, we have consistently held that . . . proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the [defendant's conduct] is sufficient."  State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai# i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (brackets in 
original).  "Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct, and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances."  Id. (citation omitted). 
From Amii's acts, conduct, and the inferences fairly 
drawn from all the circumstances, Amii intended to cause bodily injury to the complaining witness by throwing a potted plant at the complaining witness from a close distance.  The potted plant weighed approximately four pounds, which could cause bodily injury if it had made contact with the complaining witness.  The complaining witness stated Amii made eye contact with her prior to throwing the pot, aimed for her, and was not attempting to hit anything else.  Thus, even though the potted plant did not make contact with the complaining witness, there is sufficient evidence to support a finding that Amii intended to cause bodily injury to the complaining witness by throwing the potted plant at her under the circumstances of this case.  Amii's picking up of the potted plant and throwing it at the complaining witness was strongly corroborative of her intent to commit Assault in the 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third Degree. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on December 27, 2019, in  
the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is 
affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 9, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge William H. Jameson, Jr.Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5 