 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000009
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RONWILL, INC., by and through agent
JL REALTY, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MARY LOU PALMER, dba DESIGN FOR LIVING, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC11-1-10857)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Counterclaimant-Appellant Mary Lou Palmer,
 
aka Mary Lou Doescher, dba Design for Living (
Palmer), appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on December 6, 2012, in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).1
 
On appeal, Palmer contends the District Court (1) erred
 
by granting Plaintiff-Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee Ronwill,
 Inc.'s (Ronwill's) Motion for Protective Order, filed on
 
September 28, 2012, (2) erred by denying his motion to exclude
 
testimony of Keith Lee (Lee) because he acted as both an agent
 
and attorney for Ronwill and invoked the attorney-client
 
privilege during his deposition when asked about discussions
 between himself and directors of Ronwill regarding alleged
 overcharging of rent to Palmer, (3) abused its discretion by
 
1
 The Honorable Hilary B. Gangnes presided over the Motion for
Protective Order and the Honorable Michael K. Tanigawa presided over the
trial.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limiting Palmer's testimony, (4) erred by finding that equitable
 
estoppel was not applicable to Ronwill's statute of limitation
 defense to Palmer's counterclaim, and (5) clearly erred in
 entering Findings of Fact (FOFs) 2, 7, 8, and 13.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Palmer's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Palmer filed a counterclaim for breach of contract
 
on the basis that she was overcharged rent because the original
 lease agreement stated that her space was 1190 square feet, but
 her space was actually 884 square feet. After conducting some
 discovery, Palmer sought additional discovery including documents
 from Ronwill related to Palmer and other tenants of the property
 since 1986, when she first entered into a lease agreement with
 Ronwill, admissions regarding Ronwill's representations to
 Palmer, Ronwill's communications with Palmer, and Ronwill's
 business dealings with Palmer and another tenant. It appears the
 additional discovery requested by Palmer was related to proving
 the size of the space she rented, and representations made to her
 regarding whether she would receive a credit for rent she
 allegedly overpaid due to her space being smaller than the
 description in the lease agreement. However, the District Court
 granted Ronwill's Motion for Protective Order and precluded
 further discovery by Palmer. 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the District Court erred
 
by precluding Palmer from conducting additional discovery, it was
 harmless error. The District Court found that it was not
 reasonable for Palmer "to have relied on representations that
 [Lum] would look into the matter, not to worry about it, and that
 some adjustment would be made." Thus, the District Court
 accepted Palmer's testimony that Ronwill's agent made
 representations to Palmer as she alleged, but rejected her claim
 that she was entitled to relief based on such representations. 
Therefore, additional discovery regarding those representations
 was not necessary. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The District Court ultimately concluded that equitable
 
estoppel did not bar Ronwill from asserting the statute of
 
limitations because Palmer's alleged reliance upon Ronwill's
 agent's vague representations was not reasonable and thus
 Palmer's claims based on alleged events more than six years prior
 to filing the counterclaim were barred by the statute of
 limitations. In addition, the District Court concluded in
 Conclusion of Law (COL) 8 that Palmer "also did not rely on the
 
vague representations to her detriment because her testimony that
 
she did not move because of the representations was not credible
 but her testimony that she did not move due to the disruptive
 impact a move would have on her business was credible." 
Accordingly, additional discovery relating to the size of her
 space would not have aided Palmer in establishing an overcharge
 or credit for the period barred by the statute of limitations.
 
Indeed, Palmer claimed that in 2003 she discovered that
 
the space she had been renting was smaller than specified in her
 lease agreement. However, Palmer continued under the same month
 to month lease until 2012, when Ronwill moved to evict her for
 failure to pay rent in full from 2009 to 2012. There is no
 dispute that by May 2008, Palmer had been notified by Ronwill's
 agent, James Ogawa (Ogawa), that her rent was for only 884 square
 
feet of space. Therefore, further discovery from Ronwill
 
concerning the size of the space or representations regarding a
 credit would not have aided Palmer in either defending against
 Ronwill's claim for unpaid rent from 2009 to 2012 for a space
 consisting of 884 square feet or establishing an overcharge or
 credit for the period not excluded by the statute of limitations
 because no Ronwill agent made any representations from 2008 to
 2012 about a credit. 
(2) The District Court did not err by denying Palmer's
 
Motion in Limine to exclude Lee as a witness. In Palmer's Motion
 in Limine which sought to strike Lee as a witness, Palmer argued
 that Lee should be prevented from testifying since he invoked the
 attorney-client privilege during his deposition and provided very
 little relevant information regarding historical information. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Palmer again claims that Lee should not have been
 
allowed to testify because he invoked the attorney-client
 privilege which prevented Palmer from discovering what he knew
 and the District Court relied upon his testimony in FOFs 36 and
 37. 
Naming a witness who that acted in a dual capacity as 
counsel and as an agent does not waive the attorney-client privilege. Anastasi v. Fidelity Nat. Title Ins. Co., 134 Hawai
'i 
400, 423, 341 P.3d 1200, 1223 (App. 2014) cert. granted, No. SCWC-30557, 2015 WL 3384471 (May 22, 2015). Communications primarily or predominately of a legal character are privileged while other communications and files are discoverable to the extent they are not protected. Id. Thus, Lee's invocation of 
the attorney-client privilege during his deposition does not justify exclusion of Lee at trial if he had other relevant non-privileged information. During Lee's deposition, Palmer inquired about Lee's communication with Palmer and his personal knowledge about the space Palmer rented. During trial, Palmer did not object to Lee's testimony regarding his communication with Palmer or his knowledge about Palmer's rented space. FOFs 36 and 37 summarize Lee's testimony regarding those two issues. In addition, Lee's testimony regarding his communication with Palmer and his knowledge about Palmer's space did not reveal any information for which he previously invoked the attorney-client privilege in his deposition. Thus, there was no ground to preclude Lee from testifying about those subjects. 
(3) We conclude that the District Court did not abuse
 
its discretion by limiting Palmer's testimony. Palmer argues
 that the District Court imposed an ending time of 3:30 p.m,
 imposed a two-hour time constraint to Palmer's case, and "cut
 out" critical parts of her testimony. Palmer also argues that
 she should have been "allowed to testify more than two hours and
 comeback on another day if needed."
 
The case was called on October 2, 2012 at approximately
 
8:49 a.m. After some preliminary matters, Ogawa was questioned. 
Lee was then called as Ronwill's second and final witness. Prior
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to the conclusion of Lee's direct examination, the District Court
 
noted that it was approaching 11:30. Ronwill's counsel stated
 that he had about ten more minutes of questioning and Palmer's
 counsel agreed to perform his cross-examination after lunch. 
Lee's cross-examination was conducted before the court took a
 recess at 11:42 a.m. When the case resumed at 1:12 p.m. Palmer
 was called as the first witness in her case. After some time,
 the District Court noted that it was 2:30 p.m. and inquired how
 much longer Palmer would testify.  Palmer's counsel stated that
 
he had another hour of questioning to which the District Court
 
responded that the time schedule was made clear in the morning. 
Palmer's counsel then stated it was not a problem but he had
 anticipated calling Palmer at 10:30 or 11:00 a.m. and did not
 know Ogawa would require extensive cross-examination. The
 District Court noted that Palmer's counsel gave no indication at
 the close of the morning session that he would have a problem
 finishing that day and did not accept that the inability to
 conclude trial was the result of Ogawa's cross-examination. The
 District Court stated that it expected the case to conclude that
 day. Palmer was then cross-examined and Palmer's counsel
 conducted a short re-direct examination. Palmer then called her
 second and final witness. 
Only after resting her case, Palmer's counsel
 
commented: "Well, Your Honor, let me just place on the record
 that I felt rushed and my client's case is prejudiced in the
 event that you do rule against us." Counsel then made an offer
 of proof as to what other testimony he would have elicited from
 Palmer. Counsel's feeling that he was rushed is not equivalent
 to the District Court curtailing or cutting short Palmer's
 testimony. Palmer's counsel ended his direct examination of
 Palmer by stating "Um, no further questions, Your Honor." After
 cross examination, Palmer's counsel then conducted re-direct
 examination. Palmer also called another witness before resting
 her case. At no time did Palmer's counsel request a continuance
 to conduct further examination of Palmer. There is nothing in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the record to support that the District Court ended Palmer's
 
testimony prematurely or precluded any of her testimony.
 
(4) The District Court did not err by finding that
 
equitable estoppel was inapplicable under the circumstances of
 this case. Palmer claims that Lum's representations regarding a
 credit for alleged overpayment of rent caused her to delay
 seeking damages for breach of the lease agreement and, thus,
 Palmer claims that Ronwill should not be able to invoke the
 statute of limitation as a defense against her counterclaim. 
In Vidinha v. Miyaki , 112 Hawai 'i 336, 342, 145 P.3d 
879, 885 (App. 2006), this court stated: 
It is well-settled that "'a defendant cannot avail 
[her or] himself of the bar of the statute oflimitations, if it appears that he [or she] has doneanything that would tend to lull the plaintiff intoinaction, and thereby permit the limitation prescribedby the statute to run against him [or her].'" Mauian 
Hotel, Inc. v. Maui Pineapple Co., 52 Haw. 563,570-71, 481 P.2d 310, 315 (1971) (quoting Hornblowerv. George Washington Univ., 31 App. D.C. 64, 75
(1908)). "One invoking equitable estoppel must show
that he or she has detrimentally relied on the
representation or conduct of the person sought to be
estopped, and that such reliance was reasonable."
Doherty v. Hartford Ins. Group, 58 Haw. 570, 573, 574
P.2d 132, 134-35 (1978) (citations omitted).
 
The District Court held that Lum's representations were
 
vague and that Palmer could not have reasonably relied upon them. 
The District Court did not clearly err in finding that the
 alleged representations by Lum were vague and not sufficiently
 definite to convey that Palmer would receive a specific amount of
 credit. In addition, there was no evidence that Palmer informed
 Ronwill that she might sue for damages or that she would have
 terminated her month-to-month lease if she did not receive a
 credit. Palmer contended that she detrimentally relied upon
 Lum's representations when deciding not to move her business, as
 evidenced by an Offer to Sublease at another location in 2004. 
However, Palmer also testified that she first considered moving
 in 2001, well before she discovered the discrepancy in the amount
 of space in 2003. Palmer also admitted that the disruption of
 moving would have impacted her business and was a factor in her
 decision not to move. Thus, Palmer failed to demonstrate that
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
she relied upon any representation to her detriment because she
 
had already contemplated moving prior to Lum's representations
 and the District Court concluded, in COL 8, that Palmer did not
 move her business because it would be disruptive and did not find
 Palmer's testimony that she relied on Lum's representations to be
 credible.
 
The District Court did not clearly err in finding that
 
Palmer's alleged reliance upon any representations by Lum was
 unreasonable. Palmer made consistent payment on the month to
 month lease from 2003 to 2008 and then sporadically from 2009 to
 2012. Both Palmer and Lum had stated that they wanted to resolve
 the issue by entering into a new lease, in writing. The 1993
 lease agreement also required that any changes to the terms be
 made in writing. Palmer also requested that any credit be
 memorialized in the new written lease agreement. However, there
 was no written modification to the agreement or new lease
 agreement between the parties. It was not reasonable that Palmer
 relied upon Lum's oral representations that a credit was
 forthcoming when she demanded a written acknowledgment or a new
 lease agreement that never materialized. Palmer waited nearly
 six years before asserting her claim for damages based upon
 failure to provide her a credit for overpaid rent and only then,
 as a counterclaim to Ronwill's complaint for damages and summary
 possession. 
(5) FOFs 2, 7, 8, and 13 are not clearly erroneous. 
Palmer argues that FOF 2 erroneously found that the lease clearly
 states that the space is 1190 square feet. However, FOF 2 simply
 states that in one part of the lease the space is described as
 1190 square feet, but in another part, where it mentions the
 monthly rent, it does not reference a rate per square foot or the
 size of the space. FOF 2 accurately reflects the content of
 Defendant's Exhibit F and, therefore, is not clearly erroneous.
 
FOF 7 is not clearly erroneous because it does not
 
infer, as Palmer contends, that the dispute is about 1234
 Kaumualii Street instead of 1236 Kaumualii Street. 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FOF 8 is not clearly erroneous because Defendant's
 
Exhibit M reflects that Lum did respond by letter to Palmer's
 
October 16, 2003 letter and stated that Palmer asked if he was
 threatening her, and Palmer's testimony characterized Lum's
 letter as "the first time that he had actually put in writing
 sort of his threats to us that he - - you know, his intimidation
 and his threats." 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the dates of death for
 
certain people are erroneous in FOF 13, the specific dates are
 not relevant, and, therefore, any such error is harmless error.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's December 6,
 
2012 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 24, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Jacob M. Merrill 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Keith A. Lee for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 