NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-15-0000886 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JF, Petitioner-Appellee,
v. 
LR, Respondent-Appellant,
and 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-P NO. 13-1-0757) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.) 
This appeal arises out of post-judgment proceedings for 
a paternity case between Respondent-Appellant LR (Mother) and 
Petitioner-Appellee JF (Father), where the main issue is custody over their biological child (Child). 
Mother appeals from: (1) 
the "Order Re Petitioner's Motion for Relief from Order or Judgment Filed November 20, 2014" (Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief), filed on June 1, 2015; and (2) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant [Mother's] Motion to Amend and Clarify the [Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief]" (Order Re: Mother's Motion to Amend and Clarify), filed on October 1, 2015, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).
1 
On appeal, Mother asserts the following points of 
1 The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
error: 
(1) the Family Court erred in making findings of fact 
(FOFs) 13, 20, 27, 40, 48, 49, and 50 in its March 24, 2016 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (March 24, 2016 FOF/COL); 
(2) the Family Court erred in making conclusions of law 
(COLs) 2, 3, and 20 in its March 24, 2016 FOF/COL; 
(3) the Family Court erred in concluding that there 
were "numerous instances where Mother failed to cooperate or did not cooperate fully in following court orders" and by making FOF/COL 1 in its June 1, 2015 Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief; 
(4) the Family Court failed to make adequate and 
sufficient FOFs in its March 24, 2016 FOF/COL regarding the existence or non-existence of child support arrears owed by Father; 
(5) the Family Court erred in its application of the 
"material change of circumstances" test to Father's November 2014 Motion for Relief After Judgment or Order and Declaration (Father's Motion for Relief); 
(6) the Family Court erred in its application of the 
"best interests of the child" test to Father's Motion for Relief; and 
(7) the Family Court erred in holding an evidentiary 
hearing on Father's Motion for Relief without requiring the parties to first submit to mediation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Mother's points of error as follows.
I. BACKGROUND 
On May 30, 2014, the Family Court entered its Decision 
and Order (May 2014 Order) which awarded Mother sole physical custody and Mother and Father joint legal custody. The order also imposed conditions on Mother to ensure that she would refrain from engaging in "gatekeeping" and obstructionist 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
behaviors. 
On November 20, 2014, Father sought sole physical and 
legal custody of Child through Father's Motion for Relief. On 
April 1, 2015, the Family Court held a hearing on Father's Motion for Relief. On June 1, 2015, the Family Court issued its Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief, finding that Mother's inability to facilitate Child's relationship with Father and to promptly and fully follow court orders constituted a material change of circumstances, and awarded sole physical and legal custody of Child to Father. 
On June 10, 2015, Mother filed "Defendant [Mother's] 
Motion to Amend and Clarify the Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief" (Mother's Motion to Amend and Clarify), in which she requested to amend and clarify the Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief as to (1) Mother's timesharing schedule with Child; (2) Mother's access to information about Child from service providers; and (3) whether mediation is still a condition. On October 1, 2015, the Family Court issued its Order Re: Mother's Motion to Amend and Clarify. After being notified of this appeal, the Family Court issued its March 24, 2016 FOF/COL with regard to its Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief and Order Re: Mother's Motion to Amend and Clarify.
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Findings of Fact 
A family court's findings of fact are reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. 
In re Doe, 101 Hawai# i 220, 
227, 65 P.3d 167, 174 (2003). 
Under this standard, a finding of 
fact will not be disturbed unless "(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." In re Doe, 101 Hawai# i at 227, 65 
P.3d at 174 (quoting State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai# i 383, 392, 894 
P.2d 80, 89 (1995)). "Substantial evidence" is defined as "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusion." In re Doe, 101 Hawai# i at 227, 65 P.3d at 174 
(quoting In re Jane Doe, 84 Hawai# i 41, 46, 928 P.2d 883, 888 
(1996)).
B. Conclusions of Law 
A family court's conclusions of law "are reviewed on 
appeal 
de novo
, under the right/wrong standard . . . [and] 
consequently, are 'not binding upon an appellate court and are 
freely reviewable for their correctness.'" Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting In re Doe, 95 
Hawai# i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001)). 
A conclusion of law 
"that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the court's conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai# i, 106 Hawai# i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (citation 
omitted); Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai# i 283, 288, 205 P.3d 
548, 553 (App. 2009).
C. Family Court Decisions Regarding What Constitutes a Child's
"Best Interests" 
"The trial court possesses broad discretion in making 
custody decisions and in its determination of what is in the best 
interests of the child." A.A. v. B.B., 139 
Hawai# i 102, 106, 384 
P.3d 878, 882 (2016) (citation omitted). We review the Family Court's determination that a custody arrangement is in a child's best interests under the abuse of discretion standard. 
In re Doe 
Children, 96 Hawai# i 272, 283, 30 P.3d 878, 889 (2001).
III. DISCUSSION 
A. FOFs 13, 20, 27, 40, 48, 49, and 50 in the March 24, 2016
FOF/COL 
Mother argues that FOF 132 was clearly erroneous 
because the record lacks substantial evidence to support the 
2 FOF 13 provides: 
13.   Father's  earlier  issues  with  substance  abuse  addiction 
and  his  eventual  successful  rehabilitation  were  raised  in  this 
trial.   The  evidence  showed  Father  maintained  his  sobriety  and  was
working  as  an  attorney  at  a  small  firm  in  Kailua,  and  was  in  a
stable  and  supportive  relationship  with  his  girlfriend. 
4   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
notion that Father had showed his "successful rehabilitation" at 
the time of the trial leading up to the May 2014 Order. Mother contends that "the road to recovery is a long one" and that successful rehabilitation "does not happen over the course of less than two years." This appeal is limited to the Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief and the Order Re: Mother's Motion to Amend and Clarify. FOF 13 discusses a substantive finding by the Family Court made with regard to the May 2014 Order, which is not a subject of this appeal. Consequently, we decline to address the asserted error. 
Mother argues that FOF 20
3 was clearly erroneous 
because Mother had offered to use Face Time because of her difficulties using Skype, but Father insisted that she use Skype. FOF 20 simply states the fact that in his motion for relief, Father alleged, among other things, that there was difficulty maintaining telephone and video conferencing contact between Child and Father on a regular basis. This FOF describes the allegations made in Father's Motion for Relief and does not make a substantive finding that the allegations were indeed true. We conclude that the Family Court did not err in FOF 20. 
Mother argues that FOF 27
4 was clearly erroneous 
because she had in fact "revealed" that she did not obtain medical insurance for Child or enroll him in therapy for counseling as early as August 10, 2014. In support of this 
3 FOF 20 provides: 
20.   O n  November  20,  2014,  Father  filed  [his  Motion  for
Relief],  alleging  that  Mother  had  failed  to  comply  with  material
terms  of  the  [May  2014]  Order  by  refusing  to  cooperate  with  Father
regarding  Child's  upcoming  Winter  Break  visitation,  among  other
things,  including  difficulty  maintaining  telephone  and  Face  Time
contact  with  Father  on  a  regular  basis  and  setting  up  information
and  photo  sharing  with  Father  as  previously  ordered. 
4 FOF 27 provides: 
27.   A mong  other  things,  Mother  revealed  for  the  first  time
[in  her  Memorandum  in  Opposition  to  Father's  Motion  for  Relief,
filed  on  March  31,  2015,]  that  she  did  not  obtain  medical  insurance
for  Child  and  did  not  enroll  him  in  therapy  for  counseling  since  she
left  the  State  of  Hawaii  on  August  2,  2014.   Further,  Mother  had
failed  to  notify  Father  of  this  lapse  in  coverage  and  therapy  for
Child. 
5           
           
          
           
         
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contention, Mother directs us to text messages between her and 
Father where she told Father that she had to make an election on Child's insurance that week, evidently showing that medical insurance had not been obtained as of that text message. Our review of the record reveals substantial evidence in support of FOF 27. Mother relocated to California with Child on August 2, 2014. Just over a week later, on August 10, 2014, Mother sent Father a text message stating, "you still have never provided any info on your insurance options for [Child]. I have to make an election this week and the cost will be shared by you." Although this text message serves to show that on that date, Father was or should have been on notice that Mother had yet to obtain medical insurance for Child, it also serves to show that Father could have expected that Mother would be making the election that week.
5 The record shows Father's multiple requests, after Mother 
and Child relocated to California, for Mother to send information regarding providers and the need to have Child attend therapy, which went unresolved. Based on our review of the record, Mother did not inform Father about Child's insurance coverage until her email on March 28, 2015, in which she lists various updates in Child's life, including a description of her unsuccessful efforts to obtain cost-sharing subsidies for health insurance and her final decision to purchase private insurance. There was substantial evidence that Mother failed to keep Father fully informed as to Child's lapse in coverage and therapy. 
Mother argues that FOF 40
6 was clearly erroneous 
because she had no such "continuing inability to act in a manner 
5 Pursuant to the May 2014 Order, Mother had the responsibility of
obtaining medical insurance for Child. The May 2014 Order specifically provided:
"In granting [Mother's] request to relocate to California, the Court ordersMother to obtain health insurance coverage for [Child] in California and dental,vision and prescription drug coverage if available through her employment." 
6 FOF 40 provides: 
40.   Over  the  course  of  these  proceedings,  particularly  during
and  at  the  close  of  the  May  2014  Trial  and  the  April  2015  Trial,  the
Court  remained  concerned  over  Mother's  continuing  inability  to  act
in  a  manner  that  would  serve  Child's  best  interests  and  facilitate 
Child's  relationship  with  Father. 
6  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that would serve Child's best interests and facilitate Child's 
relationship with Father." To support this, she points to her arguments discussed infra in Sections III.D-F: that she substantially complied with the order; that financial difficulties, due in part to Father's alleged owing of child support arrears, played a role in her delayed compliance; and that she did more than necessary to facilitate the relationship. As discussed further in Section III.F, we conclude that there was substantial evidence that Mother consistently acted in a manner that did not facilitate Child's relationship with Father and serve Child's best interests, and thus, that FOF 40 was not clearly erroneous. 
Mother argues that FOF 48
7 was clearly erroneous 
because she substantially complied with the May 2014 Order. She seems to argue that any noncompliance was reasonable in light of her good faith effort to comply despite the financial difficulties related to Father's alleged owing of child support arrears and Father's failure to facilitate her compliance with the order. The record contains substantial evidence that Mother did not comply with the conditions and requirements in the May 2014 Order. In fact, even Mother herself admits that she has not complied with the conditions. Accordingly, we conclude that FOF 48 is not clearly erroneous. 
In arguing that FOF 49
8 was clearly erroneous, Mother 
appears to assert that because the Family Court agreed with her on one issue regarding Father's handling of the Shutterfly 
7 FOF 48 provides: 
48.   Mother  did  not  comply  with  the  conditions  and
requirements  in  the  [May  2014]  Order. 
8 FOF 49 provides: 
49.   The  Court  disagreed  with  Mother's  arguments  that  those
failures  were  not  material,  that  Mother's  failures  were  the
understandable  or  excusable  result  of  misunderstanding  or  vagueness
in  the  [May  2014]  Order,  and  that  Child's  best  interests  would  be
best  served  by  allowing  Mother  to  retain  legal  and  physical  custody
of  Child. 
7         
             
                  
               
               
         
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
website,9 it should also have agreed with her contention that her 
noncompliance with the May 2014 Order was not material. We find 
no merit to this argument. Although the Family Court did indeed acknowledge and agree with Mother's concerns about Father's attorney having access to the photo and event sharing website, the Family Court never agreed with Mother that her noncompliance was not material. The purpose of setting up the website was to facilitate open communication and keep both parties updated as to events in Child's life. Her failure to use the website was just one of several material violations of the May 2014 Order. Mother also argues that FOF 49 was clearly erroneous because the Family Court did not make a determination that the Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief, which awarded custody of Child to Father, was in Child's best interests. This argument is also without merit. Taken in context, in COL 3, discussed further in Section III.B, the Family Court concluded that the Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief was in the best interests of Child, based on the evidence presented at the April 1, 2015 hearing. 
Mother argues that FOF 50
10 was clearly erroneous 
because she did not demonstrate any pattern of obstructing Father's relationship with Child, anger and resentment towards Father, and sharing of her negative feelings about Father to Child. She appears to argue that her reasons for her noncompliance with the May 2014 Order were also reasons to excuse any alleged obstruction of Father's relationship with Child. Our review of the record indicates that Mother continued to maintain an overall resentful attitude toward Father, did not perform simple tasks to facilitate the Child's relationship with Father, 
9 Specifically, in reference to the viewing permissions of the
Shutterfly page, the Family Court stated, "I think it's a little weird to have
your attorney on there, I do agree . . . I would take . . . [your attorney] offthere." It went on to explain "I'm not saying it's bad, I'm not saying it'sgood, but I can see from her perspective it would give me pause because then shegotta worry about everything she says . . . ." 
10 FOF 50 provides: 
50.   Mother  demonstrated  a  consistent  pattern  of  obstructing
Father's  relationship  with  Child,  anger  and  resentment  towards
Father,  and  sharing  her  negative  feelings  about  Father  with  Child. 
8   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and when she did make an effort, it was done reluctantly. There 
is substantial evidence to support the finding by the Family Court that Mother demonstrated a pattern of displaying obstructive behavior and negative feelings toward Father. Thus, we conclude that FOF 50 was not clearly erroneous. 
We conclude that the Family Court's FOFs challenged by 
Mother are grounded in substantial evidence, and therefore are not clearly erroneous.
B. COLs 2, 3, and 20 in the March 24, 2016 FOF/COL 
Mother argues that COL 2
11 in the March 24, 2016 
FOF/COL is erroneous because Father did not prove by a 
preponderance of significant evidence that there was a material change of circumstances. Mother argues that there was no justification for the change in custody arrangement where Mother made substantial, good faith efforts to comply with the May 2014 Order. Mother also argues that merely not complying with the conditions in the order did not amount to a material change of circumstances warranting a change in custody. As discussed infra in Section III.E, we disagree and conclude the Family Court did not err in COL 2. 
Mother also argues that COL 3
12 in the March 24, 2016 
FOF/COL is erroneous because Father did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that it was in Child's best interest for Father to have sole physical and legal custody. 
11 COL 2 provides: 
2.   By  the  credible  and  reliable  evidence  adduced  at  trial,
Father  proved  a  material  change  of  circumstance  by  a  preponderance
of  significant  evidence  sufficient  to  change  physical  and  legal
custody  from  Mother  to  Father.   Id.[;  see  also]  Carr  v[].  Buenger,
[No.  CAAP-11-0000545,  2014  WL  2440185,  at  *11  (Haw.  App.  May  30,
2014)  (Mem.  Op.)]  (A  high  level  of  conflict  between  parents  is
sufficient  to  constitute  a  material  change  of  circumstances). 
12 COL 3 provides: 
3.   After  the  Court  found  a  material  change  of  circumstance,
the  legal  issue  then  shifted  to  whether  it  was  in  Child's  best
interest  for  Father  to  have  sole  physical  and  legal  custody.   Egger[ 
v.  Egger],  112  Hawai #i  [ 312,]  318,  145  P.3d  [855,]  861[  (App.  2006)].
The  reliable  and  credible  testimony  adduced  at  trial  proved  that  it
was  Child's  best  interest  for  Father  to  have  sole  physical  and  legal
custody,  by  a  preponderance  of  the  evidence.   Id. 
9  
  
          
          
            
             
            
            
           
           
        
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother argues that the Family Court did not consider multiple 
relevant factors in determining the best interests of the child. As discussed infra in Section III.F, we disagree and conclude the Family Court did not err in COL 3. 
Mother argues that COL 20
13 was erroneous because the 
disputes in question were the result of good faith disagreements about how to arrange for Child's travel, and not the result of any "unreasonable refusal to cooperate." The record indicates that Mother was unresponsive to Father's requests to discuss and make arrangements for Child's travel during Christmas vacation.
14 
The record also indicates that through Father's Motion for Relief, the Family Court was required to resolve the dispute regarding Christmas break visitation because the parties were unable to come to an agreement in a timely manner. COL 20 is not erroneous. 
We conclude that the Family Court's COLs challenged by 
Mother are not erroneous. 
C. June 1, 2015 Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief 
In its June 1, 2015 Order Re: Father's Motion for 
Relief, the Family Court stated that Father filed his motion for 
relief "due to numerous instances where Mother failed to cooperate or did not cooperate fully in following court orders, including the scheduling of [Child's] Christmas visitation with Father . . . ." The Family Court also stated that "Mother's 
13 COL 20 provides: 
20.   Furthermore,  the  Court  has  already  had  to  resolve  one
dispute  between  the  parties  regarding  Christmas  visitation  for
Child.   In  this  dispute,  Mother  unreasonably  refused  to  cooperate
with  Father  with  arranging  visit,  including  timing,  travel,  cost,
and  logistics.   Adding  another  opportunity  for  such  a  dispute  to
arise  would,  at  this  juncture,  be  premature. 
14 Father sent Mother an email on October 12, 2014, detailing his
request and explaining the difference in price between flights scheduled for
December 21 and returning January 2 and flights scheduled for December 16 andreturning December 29. Father followed up the email with a text message onOctober 16, 2014, to which Mother responded briefly with a disagreement over whenChild's winter break technically began. Father sent Mother a text message twodays later asking Mother to respond to his request about making travelarrangements, to which Mother never responded. On November 26, 2014, Motherfinally responded to Father's counsel's email regarding Christmas vacationvisitation plans, stating that it was her first time seeing the email. 
10           
         
      
     
        
          
        
      
        
         
        
         
           
         
       
         
         
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consistent inability to facilitate [Child's] relationship with 
Father, and to promptly and fully follow court orders shall constitute a material change of circumstances." Mother argues that the Family Court clearly erred in making these rulings. 
The May 2014 Order provided, in relevant part: 
Mother's violation of the Parental Civility Rules, the
specific items set forth in [the May 2014 Order's provisionconcerning therapy for Child], and/or her engaging insignificant "gatekeeping activities" interfering in Father'srelationship and visitation with [Child] shall be considereda material change in circumstances, resulting in a change of[Child's] physical custody to Father upon his motion to theCourt. 
We interpret this provision as an explicit warning to Mother that 
a violation of the May 2014 Order's terms would have serious consequences. The Family Court noted in its March 24, 2016 FOF/COL  that it was concerned with the possibility that Mother 
would use Child in her anger directed at Father and thus incorporated certain terms in the May 2014 Order to address those concerns. Mother's subsequent actions, as discussed in Section III.F, proved the Family Court's concern and thus supported the rulings challenged by Mother.15
D. Child Support Arrears 
Mother next argues that the Family Court failed to make 
adequate FOFs regarding the existence or non-existence of Father's child support arrears. She asserts that the Family Court failed to weigh the existence (or non-existence) of child 
15 FOFs 14 and 16, which are uncontested, provide, in relevant part: 
14. Based on the testimony and evidence at trial,
however, the Court demonstrated concern over Mother's
"gatekeeping" and obstructionist behaviors, among otherthings. Specifically, the Court was concerned about Motherusing Child as a pawn in her dealings with Father asdemonstrated by her anger towards him for leaving theirrelationship, her resulting interference with the relationshipbetween Father and Child, her negative statements to Father'sgirlfriend in [sic] with Child present, and her propensity toshare her negative feelings about Father with Child, includingbut not limited to such statements that Father "ruined our lives." At the close of trial, the Court shared its concernswith the parties and counsel, and encouraged the parties towork together as co-parents for Child's best interests. 
16. To address the Court's concerns about Mother that 
it previously shared with the parties and their counsel, theCourt imposed certain conditions on Mother. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support arrears when it conducted its analyses of material change 
of circumstances and best interests of the child. 
Mother did not raise the issue of past due child 
support as a basis for her opposition against Father's Motion for Relief, nor did she raise it in her Motion to Amend and Clarify. The Family Court thus did not address this issue in its FOFs. Consequently, we decline to address this contention on appeal.
E. Material Change of Circumstances 
The May 2014 Order provided that violations of its 
provisions would constitute a material change of circumstances 
resulting in a change of Child's physical custody to Father. Mother contends that she made a good faith effort to substantially comply with the May 2014 Order and that Father did little to facilitate her compliance. Therefore, Mother argues, the Family Court clearly erred in modifying the custody arrangement established by the May 2014 Order because there was no material change of circumstances to justify doing so. 
In Waldecker v. O'Scanlon, 137 Hawai# i 460, 375 P.3d 
239 (2016), the Hawai# i Supreme Court overruled previous 
decisions of this court requiring a material change of circumstances for modification of a custody order. The supreme court held that: 
the requirement of a material change in circumstances is
inconsistent with [ Hawai #i Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 571–46.
Accordingly, we overrule Nadeau[ v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App.111, 861 P.2d 754 (1993),] and Hollaway[ v. Hollaway, 133Hawai #i 415, 329 P.3d 320 (App. 2014),] to the extent they
suggest that a material change in circumstances is requiredbefore the court can consider the best interests of the child in modifying a custody order. Rather than thattwo-step analysis, there is a single inquiry which focuses
on the best interests of the child. 
Waldecker, 137 Hawai# i at 470, 375 P.3d at 249. Thus, we reject 
Mother's argument that the Family Court erred in modifying the 
custody arrangement because Father failed to show a material change in circumstances.
F. Best Interests of the Child 
Mother contends that the Family Court did not properly 
consider all the factors relevant in an analysis of the best interests of the child, as enumerated in HRS § 571-46(b) (2014). 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Specifically, she argues that the Family Court should have 
considered the following: (1) that Mother had been the primary caregiver for most of Child's life; (2) Father's past drug or alcohol abuse and the risk of relapse; (3) that Child had been excelling in school in California, was involved in his community and extracurricular activities, and had close relationships with his cousins residing nearby in California; and (4) that Child may have been subjected to inappropriate touching from Father's girlfriend's son. Mother also contends that the Family Court ordered conditions that were "drastic, unnecessary and disproportionate." 
The Family Court made its decision to award physical 
custody to Father after holding a trial at which both parties were allowed to present evidence on the custody issues. The Family Court's ultimate custody decision was based on the evidence adduced at trial pertaining to Mother's noncompliance with the conditions of the May 2014 Order which were meant to serve the Child's best interests and facilitate Child's relationship with Father. For example, Mother failed to obtain medical insurance for Child in a timely manner, Mother showed little effort to set Skype up for video calls between Child and Father, Mother was frequently present or nearby Child during phone calls or video calls with Father, Mother did not update the Shutterfly website with pictures or events and even characterized the website as a "game" that the Family Court judge "bought[,]" and Mother was uncooperative in coordinating the Christmas break visitation. On this record, the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in reaching its custody decision.
G. Mediation 
Mother argues that the Family Court abused its 
discretion by not requiring the parties to submit to mediation as 
it had required in the May 2014 Order. The May 2014 Order required that "[t]he parties shall first mediate disputes before bringing them to Court and both parties shall mediate in good faith." In describing his efforts to resolve the issues in Father's Motion for Relief, Father stated: 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Before [Mother] left with [Child] to relocate to California,
[Father] participated in joint sesssions [sic] with [Mother]and [Child's] former therapist in Honolulu and sent numeroustexts and emails to [Mother] in an attempt to reachagreement on certain points of contention. Those efforts were unsuccessful. Since [Mother] relocated to California,[Father] attempted to continue those efforts via email andtext; again, those efforts have been unsuccessful.Mediation with [Mother], who lives in California, would beimpracticable and futile. 
In her memorandum in opposition to Father's Motion for Relief, 
Mother disagreed with Father's contention that mediation would have been impracticable and futile. She also indicated her willingness to mediate and pay fifty percent of the reasonable costs for mediation. The Family Court ultimately did not require the parties to mediate before entering its Order Re: Father's Motion for Relief. 
In its March 24, 2016 FOF/COL, the Family Court 
concluded that "at this point in these proceedings, attempting mediation may be impractical and/or futile. The parties should not be bound to engage in an exercise in futility before seeking appropriate relief through the Court . . . ." Mother asserts that the Family Court "prematurely inserted itself into a dispute because mediation might not have resolved the matter . . . ." Thus, she argues, the Family Court's handling of the matter amounted to an abuse of discretion. We disagree. 
There is considerable evidence in the record showing 
Mother's obstruction of Father's relationship with Child, her anger and resentment towards Father, and her failure to communicate effectively with Father. With such a high conflict relationship already existing, it was reasonable for the Family Court to conclude that any attempts at mediation between the parents would be impractical or futile. We conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion.
IV. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, the "Order Re Petitioner's 
Motion for Relief from Order or Judgment Filed November 20, 2014," filed on June 1, 2015, and the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant [Mother's] Motion to Amend and Clarify 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the 'Order Re: Petitioner's Motion for Relief from Order or 
Judgment Filed November 20, 2014,' Filed on June 1, 2015," filed on October 1, 2015, in the Family Court of the First Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 26, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew Mannisto 
for Respondent-Appellant. Chief Judge 
JF Pro Se, Petitioner-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15 