NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000693
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARY L. FARIA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 11-1-2373)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Mary L. Faria (Faria) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on July 5, 2012,
 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1
 
Faria was convicted of Abuse of Family or Household
 
Members, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709­
2
906(1) (Supp. 2011),  as a result of a physical altercation with
her husband, Kenneth Faria (Kenneth) on December 2, 2011.
 
1 The Honorable Fa‘auuga L. To< oto<o presided. 
2 HRS § 709-906(1) provided in pertinent part:
 
§709-906 Abuse of family or household members;
penalty.  (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly
or in concert, to physically abuse a family or household
member . . . .
 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former
spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a
child in common, parents, children, persons related by
consanguinity, and persons jointly residing or formerly
residing in the same dwelling unit.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Faria contends that the family court erred
 
by prohibiting her from introducing evidence of two prior
 
incidents involving Kenneth's aggressive behavior and a
 photograph of a hole in a door which Faria alleges was caused
 when Kenneth punched the door while angry at Faria (Subject
 Evidence). In excluding the Subject Evidence, the family court
 held that it was irrelevant and would confuse the issues. Faria
 argues that the Subject Evidence was admissible to support her
 defense that Kenneth was the first aggressor and that Faria acted
 in self-defense during the December 2, 2011 incident.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Faria's point of error as follows, vacate her conviction,
 and remand for a new trial.
 
In pre-trial proceedings in the family court, Faria
 
filed two notices indicating that she may seek to introduce
 evidence of Kenneth's history of violence. The evidence involved
 two separate incidents. In the first incident, Faria contends
 that on August 5, 2010, she and Kenneth were arguing and he went
 into her closet, took out all of her clothes, threw them on the
 porch, and some of the clothing was damaged. In the second
 incident, Faria contends that in September 2011, Kenneth learned
 that their son received an "F" on a report card, blamed Faria,
 and got so angry that he punched a hole in a door at their house. 
Faria also sought to introduce a photograph of the damaged door
 as an exhibit.
 
The State, in turn, filed a motion in limine seeking 
exclusion at trial of any evidence of Kenneth's prior bad acts or prior aggressive conduct, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) 404 and/or 403. 
After a hearing on the admissibility of the Subject
 
Evidence, the family court ruled that the Subject Evidence "will
 be irrelevant and would be confusing the jury as opposed to what
 really happened on the day in question which was December 2,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[2011]." The family court thus precluded the defense from
 
presenting any evidence about the prior incidents.
 
Given HRE Rule 404, Faria contends the family court
 
erred by precluding admission of the prior incidents.3 Faria
 
also relies on State v. Lui, 61 Haw. 328, 603 P.2d 151 (1979),
 State v. Basque, 66 Haw. 510, 666 P.2d 599 (1983), and State v.
 Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 738 P.2d 812 (1987). Given the
 circumstances in this case, and that determining the aggressor
 during the December 2, 2011 incident is a central issue, we agree
 with Faria.
 
Both parties testified that on the evening of the
 
December 2, 2011 incident, they had been drinking alcohol at two
 
3 HRE Rule 404 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 404 Character evidence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes.  (a) Character evidence
generally. Evidence of a person's character or a trait of a
person's character is not admissible for the purpose of
proving action in conformity therewith on a particular
occasion, except:
 
. . . .
 (2)	 Character of victim. Evidence of a pertinent trait of
character of the victim of the crime offered by an
accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the same, or
evidence of a character trait of peacefulness of the
victim offered by the prosecution in a homicide case
to rebut evidence that the victim was the first
 aggressor;
 
. . . .
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of
 
other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to
prove the character of a person in order to show
action in conformity therewith. It may, however, be
admissible where such evidence is probative of another
fact that is of consequence to the determination of
the action, such as proof of motive, opportunity,
intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus
operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be
offered under this subsection shall provide reasonable
notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the
court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of
the date, location, and general nature of any such
evidence it intends to introduce at trial.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bars and then got into an argument because Faria kissed two of
 
Kenneth's friends on the lips as they were leaving. After
 leaving the last bar, Kenneth was driving them home and their
 argument continued. However, their testimonies diverge at this
 point as to how the incident occurred and who was the aggressor.
 
Kenneth testified, inter alia, that he was explaining
 
to Faria that her kissing his friends was disrespectful to him
 and she put her hand in his face several times, as if to tell him
 to "[s]hut up." She then pushed his face and he stopped the car
 and asked her to exit. When Faria refused to get out, Kenneth
 tried to push her and she began flailing her arms and punched him
 in the face, mouth and nose. Kenneth claims he thereafter got
 out of the car and asked Faria to get out. Faria then moved over
 to the driver's seat, breaking the center console, and slowly
 drove about 20 yards down the street until she had to stop at a
 traffic signal. When Faria stopped, Kenneth opened the passenger
 door, reached into the vehicle, turned off the engine, and took
 the keys. Kenneth called 911 for assistance. On cross-
examination, Kenneth testified, inter alia, that he was angry
 because Faria was too friendly with his friends.
 
Faria testified, inter alia, that Kenneth was angry as
 
he talked to her about kissing his friends. She claims she was
 scared and thought the situation was blown out of proportion. As
 Kenneth was driving out of the parking lot, he stopped and told
 her to "[g]et the F out of the car." Kenneth pushed her
 violently to "[g]et the F out" and she claims he pushed her
 numerous times. Kenneth unlatched her seat belt and reached over
 to open her door from the inside. Faria claims she put her hands
 in Kenneth's face because she was trying to get him off of her,
 just back him up. She testified that she was "kind of flailing"
 trying to just get Kenneth off of her. Faria denies breaking the
 center console.
 
The State contends that Lui and Basque are inapplicable
 
because a prior bad act would not be relevant unless the violent
 or aggressive conduct involved offensive physical contact,
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
physical injury, or the immediate threat of such upon an 
individual. That is, if the complainant's prior "violent" or "aggressive" conduct was not committed upon an individual, such as the Subject Evidence in this case, the State argues that such conduct is not relevant to a claim of self-defense. The State also cites Estrada, in support of its argument that only prior bad acts involving violence and aggression are relevant to self-defense. The State argues that it is "unaware of any Hawai
'i 
case when the factual issue is, as between the defendant and the other person, who was the aggressor, where the appellate courts found the trial court abused its discretion in precluding the introduction of a prior bad act by the complainant and the violent or aggressive conduct did not involve offensive physical contact, physical injury, or the immediate threat of such upon an individual."
4 
HRE Rule 404 "operates to exclude generally evidence of 
a person's character 'for the purpose of proving that he acted in conformity therewith on a particular occasion.'" Rule 404, cmt. However, HRE Rule 404 expressly provides for certain exceptions to the general rule, including "[e]vidence of a pertinent trait of character of the victim of the crime offered by an accused[.]" HRE Rule 404(a)(2). Further, as noted in Basque, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court has "treated general character evidence and specific prior acts . . . the same for purposes of corroborating a defendant's self-defense claim as to who was the aggressor." 66 Haw. at 514, 666 P.2d at 602 (emphasis added). 
Despite the State's contentions that HRE Rule 404 does
 
not allow admission of prior bad acts that did not involve
 offensive physical contact, physical injury, or the immediate
 threat of such upon an individual, the rule does not indicate
 
4
 The State argues that this court may find that Faria's failure to
give proper notice of her intent to use HRE Rule 404 evidence is a sufficient
basis to uphold the family court's exclusion of such evidence. However, the
family court specifically overruled the State's objection as to timeliness of
notice as a ground to exclude the photograph. The State did not challenge the
family court's ruling on appeal.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such a limitation. Moreover, Estrada suggests otherwise. In 
Estrada, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that "prior bad acts 
which indicate a propensity for violence, aggression, or abuse of police powers" were relevant where the defendant claimed self-defense alleging that a police officer was the first aggressor. 69 Haw. at 215, 217, 738 P.2d at 821, 822 (emphasis added). 
The family court denied admission of the prior bad acts 
evidence because it "would be confusing the jury as opposed to
 what really happened on the day in question . . . ." HRE Rule
 403 provides that "[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded
 if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger
 of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
 jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
 needless presentation of cumulative evidence." Here, the prior
 bad acts evidence is clearly relevant. As asserted by the
 defense, these incidents suggest that Kenneth has a propensity
 for aggressive conduct toward Faria. Given the testimony in this
 case, the key issue is whether Faria or Kenneth was the aggressor
 on December 2, 2011. Only Faria and Kenneth testified at trial. 
Thus, the jury was required to determine which version of the
 facts to credit. Similar to Basque, there is a genuine factual
 dispute in this case whether Faria or Kenneth was the aggressor,
 and in this circumstance, the trial court generally should not
 prohibit a defendant from presenting evidence of a victim's prior
 aggressive acts for the purpose of determining who was the
 aggressor in the incident. See Basque, 66 Haw. at 514-15, 666
 
P.2d at 602-03. Without evidence of Kenneth's prior aggressive
 acts and the photograph, Faria was unable to fully support her
 defense. Further, we are convinced that admission of the Subject
 Evidence would not confuse the issue as to what happened on
 December 2, 2011. The prior bad acts Faria sought to admit had
 allegedly occurred in August 2010 and September 2011. The prior
 incidents were not so related in nature so as to be confused
 with, or to cause confusion about, the incident on December 2,
 2011. Given the circumstances in this case, we conclude that the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family court abused its discretion in excluding the prior bad
 
acts evidence at trial.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on July 5, 2012, in the Family Court of the
 First Circuit is vacated and the case is remanded for a new
 trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 6, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Page C. Kraker
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7

 