NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001060
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ERIC S. HAMASAKI, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 10-1-0097 (CR. NO. 10-1-0162))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Eric S. Hamasaki (Hamasaki)
 
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 
Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing, 
entered on October 26, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
On February 10, 2010, Hamasaki entered into a plea
 
agreement and pleaded no contest to three counts of Sexual
 Assault in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-732(1)(b) (2014) and two counts of Sexual
 Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation of HRS ยง 707-733(1)(b)
 (2014).
 
On September 3, 2010, Hamasaki filed a Motion to
 
Withdraw Guilty/No Contest Plea (Motion to Withdraw Plea) on the
 grounds that he was coerced by prior trial counsel to enter into
 the plea agreement and that his plea was not knowingly and
 intelligently made.
 
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
During a hearing on the Motion to Withdraw Plea,
 
Hamasaki claimed that he did not understand the plea "especially
 
in light of the fact that he didn't get to see discovery."
 
In denying Hamasaki's Motion to Withdraw Plea, the
 
Circuit Court found that there was "no credible evidence that the
 defendant's pleas were the product of coercion or any other
 improper conduct on the part of defense counsel. There's no
 evidence -- no credible evidence that the defendant was the
 victim of any ineffective assistance of counsel."
 
On September 9, 2010, Hamasaki was sentenced to five
 
years imprisonment for each count of Sexual Assault in the Third
 Degree and one year imprisonment for each count of Sexual Assault
 in the Fourth Degree, all sentences to run concurrently to each
 other but consecutive to a ten year indeterminate sentence
 Hamasaki was already serving in Cr. No. 07-1-0418.
 
On December 9, 2010, Hamasaki filed a Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody (Petition). Hamasaki claimed that his prior trial
 counsel coerced him into pleading to the charges, denied his
 right to contest the charges at trial, would not allow him to see
 any discovery, and told him that he would get concurrent
 sentences.
 
On October 26, 2012, the Circuit Court issued its 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing. The Circuit Court denied Hamasaki's Petition based on its ruling that the claims raised by Hamasaki had been previously ruled upon or were waived. See Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40(a)(3). 
On appeal, Hamasaki contends the Circuit Court erred by
 
denying his Petition because he received ineffective assistance
 of counsel when his counsel "never brought or showed Petitioner
 any evidence [such as] tapes, police reports, [and] video
 interviews" and told him that all sentences in all cases would
 run concurrently, with Hamasaki serving no more than ten years
 incarceration. Hamasaki also claims that he was denied the right
 to a fair trial and that his consecutive sentence is illegal
 under Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Hamasaki's points of error as follows:
 
The Circuit Court properly rejected Hamasaki's claim
 
that his prior trial counsel was ineffective for failing to show
 him the evidence produced in discovery because this claim had
 been previously ruled upon or was waived. The issue of whether
 prior counsel had disclosed discovery evidence to Hamasaki had
 previously been raised in the Motion to Withdraw Plea.
 
During a hearing on the Motion to Withdraw Plea,
 
Hamasaki's prior trial counsel stated that although he did not
 provide Hamasaki with his own copy of the discovery, he brought
 documents such as police reports with him when he met with
 Hamasaki to discuss the plea offer. Prior trial counsel stated
 that he received discovery, which included police reports, color
 photographs, a videotaped interview, and audiotapes, and he
 reviewed the discovery and the information the police had with
 Hamasaki prior to entering into the plea agreement. In denying
 the Motion to Withdraw Plea, the Circuit Court ruled that there
 was "no credible evidence that the defendant was the victim of
 any ineffective assistance of counsel."
 
The Circuit Court properly rejected Hamasaki's claim
 
that his prior trial counsel promised that his sentences in all
 cases would only be imposed concurrently because this claim had
 been previously ruled upon or was waived. This claim was raised
 by Hamasaki in his Motion to Withdraw Plea. In denying the
 motion, the Circuit Court considered the transcript of Hamasaki's
 change of plea hearing. During Hamasaki's change of plea
 hearing, Hamasaki stated that he would follow the plea agreement
 after the Circuit Court specifically stated, and his prior trial
 counsel agreed, that the State was free to request that the
 maximum five year sentence in this case be imposed consecutive to
 his sentence in Cr. No. 07-1-418 for a total of fifteen years.
 
Hamasaki provides no argument as to how his right to a
 
fair trial was violated. Hamasaki expressly waived his right to
 a trial as part of the no contest plea agreement he entered into
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on February 10, 2010. Hamasaki also confirmed that he was
 
waiving his right to a trial prior to the Circuit Court accepting
 he plea.
 
Apprendi does not apply to consecutive sentencing. 
Oregon v. Ice
, 555 U.S. 160, 170 (2009).
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief Without a Hearing, entered on October 26, 2012
 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 11, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Eric S. Hamasaki,

Petitioner-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Richard K. Minatoya,

Special Deputy Attorney
General,
for Respondent-Appellee. 
4
 