NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000071
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ZARA T.L. BARAWIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 14-1-0189K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Zara T.L. Barawis (Barawis) with abuse of a 
family or household member, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) (2014)
1. Barawis is the aunt of the 
complaining witness (CW), who was about eleven years old at the time of the charged incident. The CW's mother (Mother) had left the CW with the CW's grandmother (Grandmother) at Grandmother's residence before Mother went to work. Grandmother asked Barawis to watch the CW at Grandmother's residence while Grandmother went out on an errand. Barawis and the CW got into an argument, and Barawis allegedly physically abused the CW while Grandmother was 
1HRS § 709-906(1) provides, in relevant part, that "[i]t
shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to
physically abuse a family or household member . . . ." 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
away.
 
After a jury-waived bench trial, the Family Court of
 
the Third Circuit (Family Court)2 found Barawis guilty as
 
charged. The record indicates that in rendering its verdict, the
 
Family Court did not consider the justification defense under HRS
 § 703-309(1) (2014),
3 commonly referred to as the "parental
 
discipline defense," because the Family Court determined that
 this defense was inapplicable as a matter of law. The Family
 
2The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 
3HRS § 703-309(1) provides:
 
The use of force upon or toward the person of
another is justifiable under the following
circumstances:
 
(1) The actor is the parent, guardian, or other
person similarly responsible for the general
care and supervision of a minor, or a person
acting at the request of the parent,
guardian, or other responsible person, and:
 
(a) The force is employed with due regard
for the age and size of the minor and is
reasonably related to the purpose of
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
the minor, including the prevention or
punishment of the minor's misconduct;
provided that there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the
following types of force are not
justifiable for purposes of this
[paragraph]: throwing, kicking, burning,
biting, cutting, striking with a closed
fist, shaking a minor under three years
of age, interfering with breathing, or
threatening with a deadly weapon; and
 
(b) The force used does not intentionally,
knowingly, recklessly, or negligently
create a risk of causing substantial
bodily injury, disfigurement, extreme
pain or mental distress, or neurological
damage.
 
(Brackets in original.)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court sentenced Barawis to thirty days of imprisonment, with
 
twenty-eight days suspended,4 as a special condition of a two-
year term of probation.
 
On appeal, Barawis argues that: (1) the Family Court
 
erred in concluding that she failed to produce sufficient
 evidence to invoke the parental discipline defense; (2) the State
 failed to present sufficient evidence to negate her parental
 discipline defense; and (3) the Family Court erred in excluding
 certain evidence of household rules that she claims was relevant
 to her parental discipline defense. As explained below, we
 conclude that the Family Court erred in failing to consider the
 parental discipline defense; that there was sufficient evidence
 to negate the parental discipline defense if it had been
 considered by the Family Court; and that we need not address
 whether the Family Court erred in excluding certain evidence of
 household rules. We therefore vacate Barawis' conviction and
 remand the case for a new trial.
 
BACKGROUND
 
The charge in this case arises in circumstances that
 
are somewhat unusual. The following evidence was adduced at
 trial. 
Barawis and Mother are sisters. At one time, Barawis
 
and Mother apparently had a good relationship. However, their
 relationship soured about two years before the charged incident,
 which occurred in June 2014. Prior to their relationship turning
 bad, for a period of four or five years, when the CW was between
 four and nine years old, Barawis watched the CW quite often,
 "maybe couple times a week." In 2012, Mother and the CW lived
 with Barawis at Barawis' house "for about a year." The bad
 relationship between Mother and Barawis began because Barawis
 "kicked [Mother] out of [Barawis'] house." 
4For a first offense, a defendant convicted of abuse of a
family or household member is required to serve a minimum jail
sentence of forty-eight hours. HRS § 709-906(5)(a) (2014).
 
3
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Grandmother had "no idea" that Mother and Barawis were
 
not getting along. Prior to the charged incident, Mother never
 
told Grandmother that Mother did not want Barawis to watch the
 CW. The CW was eleven years old at the time of trial, and the
 charged incident occurred six months before trial.
 
I.
 
Mother testified that on June 20, 2014, she left the CW
 
at Grandmother's residence for Grandmother "to supervise" while
 Mother went to work. Barawis "took over" this responsibility
 when Grandmother left to run an errand. Mother did not ask
 
Barawis to watch the CW, and Mother was not aware that Barawis
 
would be supervising the CW. 
The CW testified that while Barawis was watching her,
 
Barawis started saying things about Mother, such as "[Mother] was
 a loser."  This made the CW angry, and the CW responded by
 
swearing at Barawis, calling Barawis "a dumb bitch," among other
 
things.  According to the CW, Barawis, in response, came over and
 
hit the CW two times with a fist on the top of the CW's head.
5
 
Barawis also took away the CW's cell phone, told the CW she did
 
not "deserve a phone," and broke the phone by "slamm[ing] it on
 the ground." Barawis had previously purchased the cell phone for
 the CW as a Christmas gift. The CW stated that her head hurt
 after Barawis hit her, and she had a bump on her head in the
 location where Barawis had struck her.
 
The CW ran to a bedroom and locked the door. When
 
Grandmother returned home, the CW used Grandmother's phone to
 call Mother and told Mother what had happened.  Mother picked up
 
the CW from Grandmother's residence, and Mother felt "a couple of
 
bumps" on the CW's head. Mother left the CW with Mother's
 sister-in-law and went back to work. After work, Mother took the
 CW to the police station to make a report of the incident. 
5On cross-examination, the CW admitted that she did not know
whether Barawis struck her with a closed fist or open hand
because she "covered [her] face" when Barawis came towards her. 
4
  
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the station, Officer Bruce Parayno felt the CW's head for
 
injuries, but "couldn't really feel anything."
 
II.
 
Barawis testified in her own defense. According to
 
Barawis, on the morning of the incident, Grandmother came to
 Barawis' house, and they drove separately to an automotive shop
 so that Barawis' car could be repaired. Grandmother had a baby
 with her,
6 whom Grandmother was apparently caring for that day. 
After the repairs to Barawis' car were completed, Grandmother and
 Barawis each drove to Grandmother's residence, arriving at about
 9:00 a.m. When they arrived at Grandmother's home, Grandmother
 was surprised to see that the CW was there. Grandmother wanted
 
to run an errand, so she asked Barawis to watch over the CW and
 
the baby. There was no other adult present at Grandmother's
 
residence at that time. 
Barawis testified that after Grandmother left, the CW
 
immediately began calling Barawis names. The CW said Barawis was
 
"evil" and told Barawis that she was "so ugly, and [she was] a
 dumb, fat, . . . [a] fat bitch." Barawis initially tried to
 
ignore the CW's taunts. However, when the CW continued calling
 
Barawis names, Barawis decided to take away the CW's cell phone,
 
which Barawis had previously bought for the CW. Barawis asked
 
the CW to give her the cell phone, but the CW refused. The CW
 
told Barawis that she had no right to take the phone and kept
 
calling Barawis names. The CW resisted Barawis' efforts to
 obtain the phone and kicked Barawis in the stomach as Barawis
 attempted to grab the phone. Eventually Barawis took the phone
 from the CW, but the CW grabbed the phone back and ran into a
 room. The CW tried to close the door, but Barawis was able to
 push the door open. The CW stuck her tongue at Barawis and ran
 out of the room. Barawis held the CW down, grabbed her hand, and
 tried to pry her fingers from the phone. As they struggled over
 
6Barawis stated that the baby was her brother's one-year-old
baby.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the phone, it went up in the air and fell to the floor, cracking
 
the phone's screen. The CW then began crying. 
Around that time, Grandmother returned home. Barawis
 
was "fed up already" with what had happened, so she left
 Grandmother's residence. Barawis denied punching the CW on the
 head during the incident. 
III.
 
The Family Court found Barawis guilty as charged. 
Among other things, the Family Court found that the CW's and
 Mother's testimony was credible with respect to the physical pain
 and injury Barawis caused to the CW by hitting the CW's head with
 a fist. The Family Court's findings further indicated that it
 determined that Barawis could not invoke the parental discipline
 defense as a matter of law. The Court stated:
 
The Court also finds that [Mother] . . . did not give
consent or permission for [Barawis] to exercise parental
discipline over [the CW], which is [Mother's] daughter.
[Mother] left her daughter with [Grandmother] while [Mother]
went to work. And the parental-discipline defense does not
apply.
 
The Family Court entered its Judgment on December 12,
 
2014, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Barawis argues that the Family Court erred in
 
concluding that she failed to produce sufficient evidence to
 
invoke the parental discipline defense under HRS § 703-309(1). 
We agree.
 
Under HRS § 703-309(1), the category of people who are
 
eligible to assert the parental discipline defense consists of
 "the parent, guardian, or other person similarly responsible for
 the general care and supervision of a minor, or a person acting
 at the request of the parent, guardian, or other responsible
 person." 
The record indicates, and we conclude, that the Family
 
Court determined that Barawis was not eligible to assert this
 
defense as a matter of law, and it therefore did not consider
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the force Barawis used was justifiable under this
 
defense.7
 
In determining that Barawis was not eligible to assert
 
the defense, the Family Court focused on whether Barawis was the
 CW's parent, or a person acting at the request of the parent. 
However, the defense also applies to a person (other than a
 parent or guardian) "similarly responsible for the general care
 and supervision of a minor, or a person acting at the request of
 the . . . other responsible person." HRS § 703-309(1). The
 undisputed evidence shows that Barawis was watching the CW at the
 request of Grandmother. Thus, the pivotal question in this case
 is whether there was sufficient evidence that Grandmother
 qualified as a "similarly responsible" person to require the
 Family Court, as the trier of fact, to consider the defense.
 
Under the statutory language, to qualify as a
 
"similarly responsible" person, the person would need to have
 parent-like responsibilities for the general care and supervision
 of the minor. Thus, someone who was only responsible for the
 care and supervision of a minor on a temporary or infrequent
 basis would not qualify as a similarly responsible person. In
 construing who qualifies as a similarly responsible person, we
 note that a different subsection of the same statute, HRS § 703­
7We reach this conclusion for the following reasons. The 
Family Court determined that the parental discipline defense was
inapplicable based solely on its finding that Mother had notgiven Barawis permission to exercise parental control over theCW. The Family Court did not make any findings relating towhether the force used by Barawis was justifiable, an issue thatone would expect the Family Court to address if it wasconsidering the defense. In addition, the Family Court precludeddefense counsel from asking the CW questions relating to rules ofbehavior that had been imposed on the CW. Such rules may havebeen relevant to whether the use of force was reasonable,especially where non-physical disciplinary alternatives hadpreviously been used for a rule violation. See State v. Tanielu, 
82 Hawai' i 373, 381, 922 P.2d 986, 994 (App. 1996). However, the
Family Court explained its decision to sustain the State'srelevance objection by stating that "[Barawis is] not theparent." 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
309(2) (2014), permits the reasonable use of force by a teacher
 
against a minor where believed necessary to maintain reasonable
 discipline.
8 Reading the two sections in pari materia,9 we
 
conclude that someone who routinely and regularly is responsible
 for the care and supervision of a minor, in a manner comparable
 to a teacher's responsibility for the care and supervision of a
 minor student, may qualify as a similarly responsible person
 under HRS § 703-309(1).
 
In this case, evidence was presented that Grandmother
 
routinely and regularly was responsible for the care and
 supervision of the CW. On the day of the charged incident,
 Mother dropped the CW off at Grandmother's residence to have
 Grandmother care for and supervise the CW while Mother went to
 work that day. However, the evidence showed that Mother did not
 give Grandmother advance notice that Mother was leaving the CW
 with Grandmother, as Grandmother was surprised to see the CW when
 Grandmother returned home after accompanying Barawis to the
 automotive shop. It can be inferred, from Mother's action in
 
8HRS § 703-309(2) provides:
 
The use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable under the following circumstances:
 
. . . .
 
(2) The actor is a principal, the principal's agent, a
teacher, or a person otherwise entrusted with the care or
supervision for a special purpose of a minor, and:
 
(a)	 The actor believes that the force used is necessary to
further that special purpose, including maintenance of
reasonable discipline in a school, class, other group,
or at activities supervised by the department of
education held on or off school property and that the
use of force is consistent with the welfare of the
 minor; and
 
(b)	 The degree of force, if it had been used by the parent
or guardian of the minor, would not be unjustifiable
under paragraph (1).
 
9HRS § 1-16 (2009) provides: "Laws in pari materia, or upon the same
subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each other. What is
 clear in one statute may be called in aid to explain what is doubtful in
another."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
leaving the CW with Grandmother and expecting Grandmother to care
 
for and supervise the CW for an entire work day without advance
 notice, that Grandmother's caring for and supervising the CW was
 a regular, routine, and understood practice such that no advance
 notice was necessary. 
Under Hawai' i precedents, a defendant is entitled to 
have the trier of fact consider a parental discipline defense "having any support in the evidence, no matter how weak, unsatisfactory or inconclusive" the evidence might be. State v. 
Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011). Here, we 
conclude that some evidence was presented that Grandmother may qualify as a similarly responsible person under HRS § 703-309(1) as well as evidence that the force employed by Barawis may have been justifiable. Accordingly, the Family Court, as trier of fact, was required to consider the parental discipline defense in rendering its verdict. We conclude that the Family Court erred in failing to consider the parental discipline defense and in ruling instead that the defense did not apply as a matter of law. For this reason, Barawis' conviction must be vacated. 
II.
 
Barawis argues that the State failed to present
 
sufficient evidence to negate her parental discipline defense. 
We disagree. When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 State, see State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117
 (1981), there was sufficient evidence to negate the parental
 discipline defense if it had been considered by the Family Court.
 
The State presented evidence that Barawis punched the
 
CW two times on the head with a fist, causing bumps to form on
 the CW's head. Viewing the trial evidence in the strongest light
 for the State, we conclude that a trier of fact could reasonably
 have concluded that Barawis' use of force was not "reasonably
 related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare"
 of the CW. See HRS § 703-309(1). Accordingly, the State
 
presented sufficient evidence to negate the parental discipline
 defense. Therefore, while we vacate Barawis' conviction based on
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Family Court's failure to consider the parental discipline
 
defense, we do not reverse the conviction and bar reprosecution,
 but remand the case for a new trial. 
III.
 
Barawis argues that the Family Court erred in excluding 
certain evidence of household rules that she claims was relevant to her parental discipline defense. We note that the existence of household rules, whether the CW had violated those rules, and what disciplinary attempts were previously made to enforce those rules could be relevant to whether the use of force was justifiable under HRS § 703-309(1). See Tanielu, 82 Hawai' i at 
381, 922 P.2d at 994. In this case, the defense did not make a proffer of what evidence it expected to elicit through its questions. Therefore, it is difficult to determine whether the Family Court erred in excluding the evidence. In any event, in light of our decision to vacate Barawis' conviction and remand the case for a new trial, we need not address this point of error. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Family Court's 
Judgment, and we remand the case for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 2, 2018. 
On the arguments: 
Teri M. Wright
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant 
David Blancett-Maddock 
Dale Yamada Ross (on the briefs)Deputy Prosecuting AttorneysCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
10
 