 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000808
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
AC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
AC, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, STATE OF HAWAI' I, Defendant. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 11-1-6307)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.
with Nakamura, C.J., dissenting separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant AC (Mother), appeals from the
 
"Order Re: Custody[,] Visitation[,] and Support Orders After
 
Voluntary Establishment of Paternity," (Order Re: Custody) filed
 
on August 23, 2012, in the Family Court of the First Circuit.1
 
The Order Re: Custody awarded Plaintiff-Appellee AC (Father),
 among other things, legal and physical custody of the couple's
 
Son and Daughter, subject to Mother's rights of reasonable
 
visitation. 
On appeal, Mother contends that the family court erred
 
by enforcing time limits at trial. Upon careful review of the
 
1
 The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record and the briefs submitted by the parties and having given
 
due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised
 
by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law,
 
we affirm the family court's Order Re: Custody.
 
On appeal, Mother asserts that the family court abused
 
its discretion when it restricted trial to three hours. Although
 
Mother acknowledges that the family court has the authority to
 
set reasonable time limits and control the litigation process,
 
she argues that she was prevented from presenting evidence of
 
family violence, which was "critical testimony bearing upon the
 
best interests of [Son] and [Daughter]." 
It is well-established that "courts have inherent 
equity, supervisory, and administrative powers as well as 
inherent power to control the litigation process before them." 
Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai' i 494, 507, 
880 P.2d 169, 182 (1994). The court has discretion to control the "mode and order of interrogating witnesses and presenting 
evidence" and to set reasonable time limits. Doe v. Doe, 98 
Hawai'i 144, 155, 44 P.3d 1085, 1096 (2002); Hawaii Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 611. 
Moreover, "the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set 
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). In 
addition, it is the province of the family court to rule on the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence. Id. 
In custody disputes, the court is guided in its 
decision-making by the principle of the "best interests of the 
child." Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai' i at 155, 44 P.3d at 1096. 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 571-46 (Supp. 2012), the presence of family violence bears upon the court's custody 
decision: 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In every proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as to
the custody of a child, a determination by the court that
family violence has been committed by a parent raises a
rebuttable presumption that it is detrimental to the child
and not in the best interest of the child to be placed in
sole custody, joint legal custody, or joint physical custody
with the perpetrator of family violence.
 
HRS ยง 571-46(a)(9).
 
At trial, Father testified on his own behalf,
 
presenting no other witnesses. Mother called five witnesses,
 
including herself. An additional five witnesses on her witness
 
list were not called. 
Three friends/acquaintances testified that Mother was a
 
good parent. Two of these witnesses also testified that Mother
 
sometimes had bruises on her body, but neither witness testified
 
as to the cause of the bruises. 
Mother also called the Custody Evaluator (CE), who had
 
submitted a 26-page custody investigation report and two
 
supplements to the family court. The report and one of the
 
supplemental reports contained extensive information about abuse
 
and family violence alleged by and between Husband, Mother, and
 
Mother's older son. In the report and on the stand, the CE
 
recommended, among other things, that Father be awarded sole
 
legal and physical custody of Son and Daughter, that Father and
 
children be allowed to relocate to the mainland, and that Mother
 
be allowed unsupervised visits. 
After having called four of her witnesses, Mother took
 
the stand approximately 25 minutes before trial was scheduled to
 
end. She testified that she believed Father was "very
 
emotionally and physically abusive," and testified that he hit
 
her. She then testified about her care of the children and how
 
they spent their days when they had lived with her. When the
 
family court announced that Mother's counsel had "two minutes
 
left," counsel orally moved for an extension of time. He claimed
 
that each remaining witness "had something to say about domestic
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violence." The court responded that it had reminded the parties
 
previously of the time constraints and that trial would end at
 
4:30, but if cross-examination ended early, Mother's counsel
 
could use the remaining time. Mother's counsel continued to
 
question Mother, but did not ask any questions about domestic
 
violence. Father's counsel cross-examined Mother, and at 4:30,
 
the family court announced that "[t]estimony is over." Mother's
 
counsel orally renewed his motion for an extension of time,
 
arguing that "[t]his trial involves complex issues." The court
 
denied the request. 
The family court noted that the testimony of Father,
 
Mother, and the CE were important, but that the other three
 
witnesses just took up time and provided no testimony regarding
 
the cause of the alleged bruises on Mother. The court also
 
questioned why the motion to extend time was not brought prior to
 
trial, when additional trial dates could have been scheduled. 
In the family court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions
 
of Law, the court found that Father and the CE were credible, but
 
that Mother was not credible. 
Mother argues that Doe v. Doe supports her argument 
that the family court abused its discretion by limiting her time 
at trial. In Doe v. Doe, the family court limited the custody 
trial to a half-day. Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai' i at 146, 44 P.3d at 
1087. At trial, the father and four of his witnesses testified. Id. at 147, 44 P.3d at 1088. The mother testified, but when her 
counsel prepared to call the next witness, the court stated that 
"time is up." Id. at 147, 44 P.3d at 1088. Closing arguments 
were presented and the court ruled in favor of the father, awarding him sole legal and physical custody of the child. Id. 
at 148, 44 P.3d at 1089. 
The mother filed a Hawai' i Family Court Rule (HFCR) 
Rule 59(a) motion for a new trial to take additional testimony 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from her four witnesses who had not testified due to the time
 
limits. Id. The witnesses' sworn affidavits indicated they had
 
direct personal knowledge of the father's abusive behavior. Id.
 
at 148, 151, 44 P.3d at 1089, 1092. The family court denied the
 
motion and the mother appealed. Id. at 150, 44 P.3d at 1091.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the family court 
erred when it denied the mother's motion for a new trial because 
the family court's "ruling resulted in the exclusion of testimony 
of witnesses bearing upon the issue of family violence and, 
inferentially, the best interest of Child." Id. at 155, 44 P.3d 
at 1096. The supreme court noted that "the testimony of Mother's witnesses would have been helpful to resolve the underlying issue 
of domestic violence raised by Mother[,]" and therefore, the 
family court abused its discretion by disregarding rules and 
principles of law when it denied the mother's HFCR Rule 59(a) 
motion. Id. at 156, 44 P.3d at 1097. 
Doe v. Doe is unlike the instant case. In the case
 
before us, Father testified but did not present any other
 
witnesses, whereas in Doe v. Doe, the majority of the time was
 
used in direct and cross-examination of the father's witnesses. 
Also, in this case, when the family court warned
 
Mother's counsel that time was running out, counsel did not
 
question Mother regarding any alleged violence, but instead,
 
asked about Son and Daughter's passports, whether Mother intended
 
to remain in the country, and other questions unrelated to the
 
issue of family violence. 
In a previous hearing regarding competing petitions for 
an order of protection, the family court had awarded a protective 
order for Father against Mother, effective until 2016. Pursuant 
to HRS ยง 571-46(a)(9), Mother bore the burden to overcome the 
rebuttable presumption that Son and Daughter should not be placed 
in her custody. Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai' i at 156, 44 P.3d at 1097. 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, when Mother's counsel requested to extend the
 
time for trial, he provided no offer of proof or specifics as to
 
the type of further testimony that would be expected of Mother or
 
the testimony of Mother's remaining witnesses, only that they had
 
"something to say about domestic violence." This is unlike in
 
Doe v. Doe, where the mother requested a new trial pursuant to
 
HFCR Rule 59(a), asserting that the witnesses who were not
 
allowed to testify had direct personal knowledge of the father's
 
abusive personality, and submitted affidavits from each of the
 
witnesses describing their proposed testimony which included
 
personal accounts of witnessing the father's assaultive behavior. 
To the contrary in this case, there was no indication that
 
Mother's remaining witnesses had personal knowledge of Father's
 
alleged assaultive behavior. Moreover, to the extent that Mother
 
wished to call Officer James Mauer (Officer Mauer) regarding the
 
lack of evidence supporting Husband's abuse allegations against
 
Mother's older son, the custody investigation report already
 
contained this information.2 The custody investigation report,
 
which was in evidence, also contained sections documenting
 interviews with Mother and Father and outlining their respective
 
concerns.
 
The family court has wide discretion in making its 
decisions and it is the court's province to rule on the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence. Fisher, 
111 Hawai' i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360. Under the circumstances 
presented in this case, the family court did not err when it 
2
 The custody investigation report discusses contact with Officer
Mauer, who investigated the abuse allegations against Mother's older son, that
the doctor who interviewed the parties' children concluded that there were too
many inconsistencies in their statements and that they may be repeating
stories they heard while in Father's care, that the Prosecutor's office had
declined to accept the case, and that the case was closed.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limited the time at trial and denied Mother's oral motion to
 
extend trial.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Re: Custody[,]
 
Visitation[,] and Support Orders After Voluntary Establishment of
 Paternity," filed on August 23, 2012, in the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
M. Cora Avinante 
Michael S. Gehrt (pro hac vice)(Dickstein Shapiro LLP)for Defendant-Appellant 
Associate Judge 
Michael A. Glenn for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
7
 