NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000513
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
LCP-MAUI, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AMANDA D. TUCKER AKA AMANDA DAWN TUCKER AKA

 
AMANDA D. TUCKER-MEUSE, Defendant-Appellant, and
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA; DIRECTOR OF TAXATION, STATE OF
HAWAII; VIC ZAPIEN; DUSTIN P. MEUSE; and
DOES 1 THROUGH 20, INCLUSIVE, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0462(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Amanda D. Tucker aka Amanda Dawn

 
Tucker aka Amanda D. Tucker-Meuse (Tucker) appeals from the
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting LCP-
Maui, LLC's (LCP-Maui) Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment and
 
for Decree of Foreclosure Filed June 17, 2013, filed January 29,
 
2014 (FOF, COL, and Order) in the Circuit Court of the Second
 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We discern Tucker's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in granting LCP-Maui's June
 
17, 2013 Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment and Interlocutory
 Decree of Foreclosure (Renewed MSJ) because the "material issue
 
of loan payment default" remained in dispute; 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in granting LCP-Maui's
 
Renewed MSJ because the issue of "whether LCP-Maui in fact owned
 
Dr. Tucker's mortgage loan and even had the right to foreclosure
 in the first place" remained in dispute;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred when it did not strike LCP­
Maui's Attorney Affirmation; and
 
(4) The Circuit Court abused its discretion when it
 
denied Tucker's request for a continuance. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Tucker's points of error as follows:
 
(1) In order to obtain a foreclosure decree, a party
 
seeking foreclosure must establish the following factors: (1)
 the existence of the agreement, (2) the terms of the agreement,
 (3) default under the terms of the agreement, and (4) notice of
 default was provided. Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw.
 
App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982). 
In support of its Renewed MSJ, LCP-Maui attached copies
 
of: (1) a promissory note (the First Note) by which Tucker
 
promised to pay the Bank of Lincolnwood (Lincolnwood)
 $3,115,000.00 plus interest; (2) a revolving credit note (the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second Note) by which Tucker promised to pay Lincolnwood
 
$720,000.00 plus interest; (3) the mortgages that Tucker executed
 
with Lincolnwood (Subject Mortgages); (4) the loan payment
 
history; (5) the June 22, 2009 letters from the FDIC as Receiver
 
for Lincolnwood that notified Tucker that she had defaulted on
 the First Note, Second Note, and Subject Mortgages; (6) the April
 24, 2013 Settlement and Release Agreement (Settlement Agreement)
 
entered into by LCP-Maui and the trustee appointed for Tucker's
 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy estate (Trustee), in which, in exchange for
 
monetary consideration paid to the Trustee, the parties
 
stipulated that "[Tucker] is in default under the terms of the
 Loan Documents and [LCP-Maui] is entitled to foreclose on the
 security interest created by the Loan Documents" and the Trustee
 "waive[d] any defenses, affirmative claims and/or counterclaims,
 rights for reconsideration and/or rights of appeal from any
 findings of facts, conclusions of laws, orders and judgments
 determining matters which Trustee acknowledges, agrees and
 stipulates to" in the Settlement Agreement; and (7) a declaration
 of the manager of LCP-Maui, Jacob Mutz (Mutz), which included
 
that "[Tucker] is in default from February 1, 2009, in payment of
 
amounts owed under the First Note and Second Note and Mortgages." 
Therefore, LCP-Maui established the existence and terms

 
of the First Note, Second Note and Subject Mortgages, that Tucker
 had defaulted under the terms of the First Note, Second Note and
 Subject Mortgages, and that Lincolnwood provided Tucker with
 notice of her default. As such, LCP-Maui has met its initial
 burden of production because it has satisfied the four
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Anderson factors. Thus, the burden shifted to Tucker to 
"demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." GECC Financial 
Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai
'i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 (1995) 
(citation omitted). 
Tucker argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting 
LCP-Maui's Renewed MSJ because the "material issue of loan payment default" remained in dispute, pointing to the deposition of Lincolnwood's President, Clyde Engle (Engle). It appears, 
however, that Engle's deposition was telephonic, Engle was not 
properly sworn as a witness, LCP-Maui timely objected, and Engle did not sign the witness certification at the end of the deposition transcript. The supreme court has recognized that "[d]ocuments that are plainly inadmissible in evidence and are unsworn, not properly sworn to, and/or uncertified cannot be considered upon a summary judgment motion." Pioneer Mill Co., 
Ltd v. Dow, 90 Hawai
'i 289, 297, 978 P.2d 727, 735 (1999); see 
also Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e). Thus, 
Tucker failed to provide admissible evidence in support of her argument that there was no default. We note that Tucker's fraud and unfair or deceptive acts or practices (UDAP) allegations were 
also based on unsworn statements made by Engle. 
Moreover, it is undisputed that, when Bank of
 
Lincolnwood failed, the FDIC took over the failed bank. Thus,
 
the federal common law doctrine of D'Oench Duhme, which arises
 from D'Oench Duhme & Co. v. FDIC, 315 U.S. 447 (1942), and its
 statutory counterpart, 12 U.S.C. § 1823(e), prohibit the
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
assertion of a claim or defense against the FDIC and its
 
successors-in-interest based on an alleged side agreement that is
 not, inter alia, in writing, approved by the bank's board of
 directors or loan committee, and reflected in the official books
 and records of the failed bank or thrift. See, e.g., Langley v.
 
FDIC, 484 U.S. 86, 91-92 (1987). Here, Tucker's claims of fraud
 and UDAP, which are based on an alleged unwritten agreement
 between Tucker and Engle, are not reflected in the records of the
 Bank of Lincolnwood and therefore are barred by this doctrine.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that Tucker's first point of
 
error is without merit. 
(2) Tucker argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting the Renewed MSJ because the issue of "whether LCP-Maui
 in fact owned Dr. Tucker's mortgage loan and even had the right
 to foreclosure in the first place" remained in dispute.
 
"A mortgagee must establish that it was assigned the 
mortgage and corresponding promissory note before it has the ability to foreclose." Bank of America N.A. v. Hill, No. CAAP­
13-0000035, 2015 WL 6739087 at *3 (Haw. App. Oct. 30, 2015) (mem.) (citing Citicorp Mortg., Inc., v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai
'i 
422, 434, 16 P.3d 827, 839 (App. 2000)). "In order to enforce a note and mortgage under Hawaii law, a creditor must be 'a person entitled to enforce' the note. One person entitled to enforce an instrument is a 'holder' of the instrument. A 'holder' is the 'person in possession of a negotiable instrument.'" U.S. Bank 
N.A. v. Mattos, 137 Hawai
'i 209, 211, 367 P.3d 703, 705 (App. 
2016) (citing In re Tyrell, 528 B.R. 790, 794 (Bankr. D. Haw. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
2015); see also HRS § 490:3-301 (2008)  and HRS § 490:1-201(b)
(2008).3
 
In the instant case, LCP-Maui was required to produce
 
evidence that it was entitled to enforce the First Note and
 Second Note. In support of its Renewed MSJ, LCP-Maui attached
 the declaration of Mutz, in which Mutz averred, inter alia, that
 "LCP is the current holder of a Promissory Note and a Revolving
 Credit Note, both dated December 14, 2006, evidencing debts owed
 by Borrower in the respective original principal amounts of
 $3,115,000.00 . . . and $720,000.00." Mutz further declared:
 
The Notes were originally payable to the Bank of
Lincolnwood. The First Note and Second Note have affixed to
 
them an Allonge made by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation as Receiver for Bank of Lincolnwood ("FDIC as
Receiver") indorsing the Notes to SFR, and an Allonge made
by SFR indorsing the Notes to LCP.
 
. . . . 
The Mortgages were originally executed in favor of the
Bank of Lincolnwood, and were subsequently assigned by FDIC,
 
2
 HRS § 490:3-301 provides: 
§490:3-301 Person entitled to enforce instrument.
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i) the
holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of
the instrument who has the rights of a holder, or (iii) a
person not in possession of the instrument who is entitled
to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 or
490:3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce
the instrument even though the person is not the owner of
the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the
instrument.
  
 
3
 HRS § 490:1-201(b) states in relevant part: 
"Holder" means: 
(1) The person in possession of a negotiable instrument that
is payable either to bearer or to an identified person that
is the person in possession; 
(2) The person in possession of a negotiable tangible
document of title if the goods are deliverable either to
bearer or to the order of the person in possession; or
 
(3) The person in control of a negotiable electronic
document of title. 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as Receiver, to SFR by eight separate Corporate Assignment
of Mortgage documents, all dated October 14, 2011, and
recorded in the State of Hawaii Bureau of Conveyances on
November 4, 2011.
 
The Mortgages thereafter were assigned by SFR to LCP
by eight separate Corporate Assignment of Mortgage
documents, all dated October 31, 2012, and recorded in the
State of Hawaii Bureau of Conveyances on January 18, 2013. 
LCP-Maui also submitted SFR Venture's Corporate 
Assignment of Mortgages and allonges with its Renewed MSJ. SFR 
Venture's Corporate Assignment of Mortgages were recorded on November 4, 2011, and reflected that FDIC as Receiver for Lincolnwood transferred its interest in the Subject Mortgages to SFR Venture. The allonges effected the transfers of the First and Second Note from Lincolnwood to SFR Venture. The allonges instructed "Pay to the Order of: 2010-2 SFR Venture, LLC, without recourse." As the allonges indicated that the First Note and Second Note were payable to SFR Venture, SFR Venture was the "holder" of the First and Second Note at the time the Complaint was filed. Mattos, 137 Hawai
'i at 212, 367 P.3d at 706. 
LCP-Maui also submitted the Corporate Assignment of
 
Mortgages and allonges in which SFR Venture transferred its
 interest in the Subject Mortgages to LCP-Maui. The allonges
 transferred the First and Second Note from SFR Venture to LCP-
Maui. The allonges instructed "PAY TO THE ORDER OF LCP-MAUI, LLC
 WITHOUT RECOURSE[.]" As the allonges indicated that the First
 
Note and Second Note were payable to LCP-Maui, LCP-Maui was the
 
"holder" of the First and Second Note at the time the Circuit
 Court granted the Renewed MSJ on December 18, 2013. Id.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that LCP-Maui met its burden
 
to demonstrate that it was the holder of the First Note and
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second Note, and thus was entitled to enforce the Notes. 
Tucker's reliance on an email from an FDIC official, which was
 corrected a few days later, was insufficient to create a genuine
 issue of material fact.
 
(3) Tucker argues that LCP-Maui's Attorney Affirmation
 
was defective, specifically that "[a]lthough LCP-Maui's counsel
 belatedly filed an 'Affirmation of Attorney,' it merely provided
 hearsay that that is what they were told by their client's
 representative, Jacob Mutz." 
Pursuant to HRS § 667-17 (Supp. 2015), "[a]ny attorney
 
who files on behalf of a mortgagee seeking to foreclose on a
 residential property under this part shall sign and submit an
 affirmation that the attorney has verified the accuracy of the
 documents submitted, under penalty of perjury and subject to
 applicable rules of professional conduct." The affirmation
 "shall be filed with the court at the time that the action is
 commenced[,]" and shall substantially follow the form provided in
 the statute. Id. 
In Bank of America, N.A. v. Lanzi, the appellant
 
challenged an attorney affirmation because it omitted the
 prefatory language of HRS § 667-17. No. CAAP-13-0002550, 2014 WL
 4648169 at *1 (Haw. App. Sept. 17, 2014) (SDO). This court
 determined that, "despite the absence of the prefatory
 language[,]" the Circuit Court did not err in finding that the
 attorney affirmation substantially conformed with the
 requirements of HRS § 667-17. Id. 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the instant case, Tucker presumably challenges LCP­
Maui's Attorney Affirmation filed June 14, 2013, which reads: 
STEPHANIE E.W. THOMPSON, pursuant to Hawaii Revised
Statutes § 667-17, and under the penalties of perjury,
affirms as follows: 
1. I am an attorney at law duly licensed to practice

in the State of Hawaii and am a senior associate attorney at
Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher, the attorneys of record for
LCP-MAUI, LLC ("LCP Maui") in the above-captioned mortgage
foreclosure action ("Action"). As such, I am fully aware of
the underlying action, as well as the proceedings maintained
herein. 
2. On June 13, 2013, I communicated with the
following representative of LCP-Maui, who informed me that
he: (a) personally has personally reviewed the files and
records in this Action, including but not limited to, the
Notes, the Mortgages (as those terms are defined in
LCP-Maui's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory
Decree of Foreclosure ("MSJ")), and all the documents
submitted in support of LCP-Maui's MSJ for, among other
things, factual accuracy; and (b) confirmed the factual
accuracy of the allegations set forth in the MSJ and any
supporting affidavits or declarations filed in support of
the MSJ, as well as the accuracy of the notarizations
contained in the supporting documents filed therewith. 
Name 	 Title
 
Jacob Mutz 
	 Manager, AGFLEP Lending LLC,
manager of LCP-Maui, LLC
 
3. Based upon my communication with Mr. Mutz, as well

as upon my own inspection and other reasonable inquiry under
the circumstances, I affirm that, to the best of my
knowledge, information, and belief, the MSJ and other
documents and papers filed or submitted to the Court in
connection with the MSJ contain no false statements of fact
 or law and that LCP-Maui has legal standing to bring this
foreclosure action. I understand my continuing obligation
to amend this Affirmation in light of newly discovered
material facts following its filing. 
4. I am aware of my obligations under Hawaii Rules of
Professional Conduct
.
 
(Footnote omitted.)
 
Tucker provides no authority for her contention that
 
LCP-Maui "belatedly" filed its Attorney Affirmation, which was
 
filed on June 14, 2013, four days after LCP-Maui informed the
 Circuit Court that the bankruptcy stay had been terminated. The
 Renewed MSJ referenced in the Attorney Affirmation was filed on
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
June 17, 2013. Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude
 
that the Attorney Affirmation was untimely. 
Tucker next argues that the Attorney Affirmation
 
"merely provided hearsay that that is what they were told by
 their client's representative, Jacob Mutz." However, the
 Attorney Affirmation "affirmed that, to the best of the
 attorney's knowledge, information, and belief, the allegations
 found in the [Renewed MSJ] were warranted by existing law and had
 evidentiary support in the form of confirmed affidavits and
 notarized documents." JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. v. Young, No.
 
CAAP 14-0000510, 2015 WL 5011193 at *4 (Haw. App. Aug. 24, 2015)
 (SDO). In support of its Renewed MSJ, LCP-Maui attached copies
 of Mutz's declaration, the First Note, the Second Note, allonges,
 the Subject Mortgages, SFR Venture's Corporate Assignment of
 Mortgages, LCP-Maui's Corporate Assignment of Mortgages, the
 Settlement Agreement, the Bankruptcy Court's Approval Order, and
 the Bankruptcy Court's Order Terminating Stay. Thus, we conclude
 that the Attorney Affirmation substantially conformed with the
 form provided in HRS § 667-17. 
(4) Tucker argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying her request for a continuance because "[m]ore discovery
 was obviously needed on standing issues, specifically oral
 depositions[.]" The record on appeal shows multiple continuances
 of the Renewed MSJ were granted to allow discovery. However,
 Tucker failed to conduct the requested discovery and failed to
 meet the requirements under HRCP Rule 56(f) to warrant a further
 postponement. Under the circumstances of this case, we cannot
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it
 
denied Tucker's request for another continuance.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
January 29, 2014 FOF, COL, and Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 Gary Victor Dubin, 
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,

Dan J. O'Meara,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge

Associate Judge
 Sharon V. Lovejoy,
Stephanie E.W. Thompson,

(Starn O'Toole Marcus & Fisher),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
11
 