NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000021 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ARLEY H. NOZAWA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
OPERATING ENGINEERS LOCAL UNION NO. 3,
Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 15, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
DOE LLCS 1-5, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS 1-5 and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-2623-10)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Arley H. Nozawa (Nozawa) appeals
 
from a Final Judgment (Judgment) filed on October 18, 2013, and
 
an order denying Nozawa's motion for reconsideration filed on
 
December 4, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(circuit court).  Nozawa brought claims against Operating
 
Engineer Local Union No. 3 (Union) for allegedly terminating her
 
employment on the basis of sex discrimination in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 378-2 (Supp. 2010). 
1 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Nozawa contends that the circuit court (1)
 
abused its discretion in striking the declaration of William
 
Mahoe (Mahoe) and/or in denying Nozawa's oral motion to
 
supplement the record with Mahoe's declaration; and (2) erred in
 
granting Union's motion for summary judgment. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
 
I. William Mahoe's Declaration.
 
Nozawa contends that, in addressing the Union's motion
 
for summary judgment, the circuit court abused its discretion
 when it struck the Declaration of Mahoe, the Union's former
 Treasurer, which was submitted in supplemental briefing.
2 Nozawa
 
also asserts the circuit court abused its discretion in denying
 Nozawa's oral motion to supplement the record with Mahoe's
 declaration. We do not agree because, as noted by the circuit
 court, it permitted the Union to file supplemental briefing and
 Nozawa to file a supplemental brief in response, with respect to
 a limited area. Mahoe's declaration went beyond the scope of
 supplemental briefing allowed by the circuit court, and Nozawa
 provided no justification for failing to submit Mahoe's
 declaration with her initial opposition memorandum.
 
The relevant proceedings were as follows. On February
 
12, 2013, Union filed its summary judgment motion supported by
 the declarations of, inter alia, Dan Reding (Reding), the
 
Financial Secretary of Union, and Toni Mendes (Mendes), the
 
2 Mahoe's declaration states in pertinent part:
 
3.	 During 2009 and 2010 I attended union meetings
attended by Russ Burns, Dan Redding [sic], and other
officers of [Union].
 
4.	 At the meetings in 2009 and 2010 it was discussed that
the management officers of [Union] wanted to have men
in dispatch positions rather than women.
 
5.	 I objected to the replacement of women by men in
dispatch positions. Hawaii had Arley Nozawa in
dispatch and I wanted her to remain as the dispatcher
rather than replace her with a man. I felt she was
 doing a good job in dispatch.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3  Union is a labor organization and part of its function is dispatching
members to jobs pursuant to Job Placement Regulations for the particular
state.  According to Mendes's declaration, Conradt was referred out to a joband was entitled to be returned to his original registration date underSection 05.19.00 of the Job Placement Regulations.  However, Nozawa allegedlydid not return him to the correct status under Section 05.19.00 and Conradtlost the opportunity to be dispatched to a job of significant duration.
3Office Systems and Job Placement Center Coordinator of Union.
Reding and Mendes attested that in January 2010, Nozawa made a
serious dispatching error pertaining to a Union member, Richard
Conradt Jr. ( Conradt), resulting in Conradt losing a work
opportunity and benefits.3  Reding attests that as a result of
the error, Conradt filed an unfair labor charge with the National
Labor Relations Board (NLRB ), the Union agreed to settle the
charge because Nozawa's error resulted in Conradt losing a job
opportunity, the Union paid Conradt $19,866.40 in back pay and
fringe benefits, and the Union paid about $5,500 in legal fees to
defend the charge.  Reding further attests that the Union "has
never had a dispatching error of this nature that has resulted in
the [Union] having to pay a monetary settlement of any kind to a
member or registrant."  According to Reding, he decided to
terminate Nozawa as a result of the error, but was asked by
Eugene Soquena (Soquena ), the District Representative at the
time, that Nozawa be given a last chance to improve.  Rather than
terminating Nozawa, she was given a Final Written Warning dated
April 19, 2010, which she signed.  In her declaration, Mendes
attested that prior to the Conradt error, Nozawa "made a number
of recurring errors in dispatch and inaccurate registration
overrides for [Union] members," and that Nozawa continued to make
mistakes after the Final Written Warning was issued to her.  
According to Reding, he was aware that Nozawa continued to make
dispatching mistakes following the Final Written Warning, and as
part of a staffing reorganization, Nozawa was terminated on
February 3, 2011. NOT F OR P UBLICATIO N  IN WEST' S HAW AI#I REP ORTS  AND PACIF IC REP ORTER
  Union is a labor organization and part of its function is dispatching3
members to jobs pursuant to Job Placement Regulations for the particular
state.  According to Mendes's declaration, Conradt was referred out to a job
and was entitled to be returned to his original registration date under
Section 05.19.00 of the Job Placement Regulations.  However, Nozawa allegedly
did not return him to the correct status under Section 05.19.00 and Conradt
lost the opportunity to be dispatched to a job of significant duration.
3Office Systems and Job Placement Center Coordinator of Union.
Reding and Mendes attested that in January 2010, Nozawa made a
serious dispatching error pertaining to a Union member, Richard
Conradt Jr. ( Conradt), resulting in Conradt losing a work
opportunity and benefits.   Reding attests that as a result of3
the error, Conradt filed an unfair labor charge with the National
Labor Relations Board ( NLRB), the Union agreed to settle the
charge because Nozawa's error resulted in Conradt losing a job
opportunity, the Union paid Conradt $19,866.40 in back pay and
fringe benefits, and the Union paid about $5,500 in legal fees to
defend the charge.  Reding further attests that the Union "has
never had a dispatching error of this nature that has resulted in
the [Union] having to pay a monetary settlement of any kind to a
member or registrant."  According to Reding, he decided to
terminate Nozawa as a result of the error, but was asked by
Eugene Soquena ( Soquena), the District Representative at the
time, that Nozawa be given a last chance to improve.  Rather than
terminating Nozawa, she was given a Final Written Warning dated
April 19, 2010, which she signed.  In her declaration, Mendes
attested that prior to the Conradt error, Nozawa "made a number
of recurring errors in dispatch and inaccurate registration
overrides for [Union] members," and that Nozawa continued to make
mistakes after the Final Written Warning was issued to her.  
According to Reding, he was aware that Nozawa continued to make
dispatching mistakes following the Final Written Warning, and as
part of a staffing reorganization, Nozawa was terminated on
February 3, 2011. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4
On April 22, 2013, Nozawa filed her opposition  to the
summary judgment motion and attached her declaration in which she

 
attested, inter alia, that: "I did not have any performance
 
problems at the time of termination"; and "I had been falsely
 accused of making a mistake regarding the placement of [Conradt]
 . . . I had followed proper protocol." 
On June 19, 2013, Union filed a motion seeking to

 
supplement its summary judgment motion with newly discovered
 evidence pertinent to Nozawa's claims in her declaration. The
 circuit court granted the motion allowing Union to file a
 supplemental memorandum and allowing Nozawa to file a
 supplemental memorandum in opposition addressing the Union's
 supplemental memorandum. At a continued hearing on September 27,
 2013, the circuit court stated "the [supplemental briefing]
 motion was . . . for [Union] . . . to respond to [Nozawa's
 allegations of being] falsely accused and describing why they
 didn't have enough time to do it at the original hearing." Thus,
 as to the merits of the summary judgment motion, the supplemental
 briefing was limited to Nozawa's claim of being falsely accused
 of making the Conradt dispatching error and Nozawa's opposition
 was also limited to the same scope. Mahoe's declaration did not
 address whether Nozawa was falsely accused.
 
Given this record, and the limited nature of what the
 
circuit court authorized in supplemental briefing, the Mahoe
 Declaration exceeded the scope of the supplemental briefing. The
 circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it struck the
 declaration. 
Nozawa also sought to introduce Mahoe's declaration 
through an oral motion to supplement the record which appears to be a request under Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
56(f). However, Nozawa failed to submit Mahoe's declaration with her opposition to the summary judgment motion filed on April 22, 
4
 In her opposition, Nozawa voluntarily dismissed Count II, Count III,
and Count IV. Accordingly, we only consider Count I of the original complaint
in this appeal.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2013, even though she had previously named Mahoe as a witness in
 
her Final Naming of Witnesses filed on April 5, 2013. Nozawa
 also did not request a Rule 56(f) continuance upon filing her
 opposition, and at no time provided a reason justifying her
 failure to timely submit Mahoe's declaration.
5 See HRCP Rule
 
56(f); Kaneohe Bay Cruises, Inc. v. Hirata, 75 Haw. 250, 269, 861
 P.2d 1, 11 (1993) (stating that additional evidence introduced
 along with a motion for reconsideration should have been
 presented in the original summary judgment proceedings, or the
 party should have sought a continuance under HRCP Rule 56(f) if
 more time was needed to obtain the evidence).
 
Instead, Nozawa introduced Mahoe's declaration for the
 
first time as part of her supplemental briefing filed on
 September 12, 2013, over four and a half months after filing her
 opposition to the summary judgment motion. Given these
 circumstances, including the circuit court's limited order
 allowing supplemental briefing and Nozawa's failure to provide
 any justified basis for the late submission of Mahoe's
 declaration, the court did not abuse its discretion in denying
 Nozawa's oral motion to supplement the record.
II. Summary Judgment
 
Nozawa contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
Union's motion for summary judgment because: (1) Union failed to
 establish a legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation for
 Nozawa's termination and (2) the circuit court erroneously failed
 to consider Nozawa's declarations when it determined that the
 statements were "self-serving" and "uncorroborated."
 
Sex discrimination is governed by HRS ยง 378-2 and a 
plaintiff may prove discrimination based on circumstantial evidence. Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai
'i 368, 378-79, 14 
P.3d 1049, 1059-60 (2000) (discussing the burden-shifting analysis that Hawai
'i courts use when considering a claim of age 
5 The Union, on the other hand, had filed a motion supported by its
counsel's declaration that justified why supplemental briefing was warranted
to address certain statements in Nozawa's declaration.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
discrimination under HRS ยง 378-2 that relies on circumstantial 
evidence). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has adopted a three-step 
analysis, referred to as the Shoppe-McDonnell analysis, in discrimination cases that rely on circumstantial evidence. Adams 
v. CDM Media USA, Inc., 135 Hawai
'i 1, 13, 346 P.3d 70, 82 
(2015).
 
First, 
the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by demonstrating, by a preponderance of the
evidence, the following four elements: (1) that plaintiff is
a member of a protected class; (2) that plaintiff is
qualified for the position for which plaintiff has applied .
. .; (3) that plaintiff has suffered some adverse employment
action . . .; and (4) that the position still exists.
 
Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059. 
Second, "[o]nce the plaintiff establishes a prima facie 
case of discrimination, the burden of production shifts to the 
defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." Id. "The employer's 
explanation must be in the form of admissible evidence and must clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment action."
6 Id. Recently, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court further held that "the nondiscriminatory 
reason articulated by the employer for the adverse employment action must be related to the ability of the individual to perform the work in question." Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 22, 346 
P.3d at 91. In Adams, the supreme court also recognized that an employer's nondiscriminatory reason for an adverse employment action could result from a reorganization where the reason for the employment action is related to a person's ability to perform the work in question. Id. at 20-21, 346 P.3d at 89-90 (citing 
6
 "The employer's burden to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason is not a burden to prove the truth of the legitimate, nondiscriminatory
reason. That is, the requirement in the second step is that the 'explanation'articulated be legitimate, not that the employer prove that the reason wastrue or correct." Adams, 135 Hawai' i at 23, 346 P.3d at 92 (citation
omitted). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Simmons v. Aqua Hotels & Resorts, Inc., 130 Hawai 'i 325, 310 P.3d 
1026 (App. 2013)). 
Third, "if the employer rebuts the prima facie case, 
the burden reverts to the plaintiff to demonstrate that the 
defendant's proffered reasons were 'pretextual.'" Shoppe, 94 Hawai
'i at 379, 14 P.3d at 1060. "A plaintiff may establish 
pretext either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence." Id. (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted). In circumstances where an employer hires another individual over the plaintiff, minor differences in qualifications between a plaintiff and the successful applicant are not sufficient to show pretext. Jaramillo v. Colorado 
Judicial Dep't, 427 F.3d 1303, 1308-09 (10th Cir. 2005)(cited with approval in Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 48, 346 P.3d at 117 
(Recktenwald, C.J., concurring and dissenting)). Moreover, "in the case in which there is little or no other probative evidence of discrimination, to survive summary judgment the rejected applicant's qualifications must be so significantly better than the successful applicant's qualifications that no reasonable employer would have chosen the latter applicant over the former." Bender v. Hecht's Dep't Stores, 455 F.3d 612, 627 (6th Cir. 2006)(cited with approval in Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 48, 346 P.3d 
at 117 (Recktenwald, C.J., concurring and dissenting)). 
Here, Nozawa has shown that: she is a woman and thus a
 
member of a protected class; that she was terminated from her
 position as dispatcher and thus suffered an adverse employment
 action; and that the position of dispatcher still exists.
 Although in the circuit court the parties disputed whether Nozawa
 demonstrated that she is qualified for the position, on appeal,
 the parties focus on the second and third steps of the Shoppe-
McDonnell framework. Thus, for purposes of this appeal, we will
 focus our review on steps two and three of the analysis.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
With regard to the second step of the Shoppe-McDonnell
 
analysis, the Union submitted the declaration of Mendes, who is
 
located in California but was Nozawa's "trainer and technical
 supervisor" and who was "familiar with her work history and work
 performance." Mendes attested, inter alia, that: Nozawa made a
 serious dispatching error in January 2010, related to Union
 member Conradt; that even prior to this incident Nozawa made a
 "number of recurring errors in dispatch and inaccurate
 registration overrides for members who she placed on the [out of
 work list]"; that from late 2008 until Nozawa was terminated,
 Mendes "reported to the Officer-in-Charge for Hawaii that Ms.
 Nozawa was not fully competent at her job"; as a result of the
 Conradt dispatching error, Nozawa received the Final Written
 Warning on April 19, 2010; thereafter, Mendes "engaged in
 numerous telephone calls and emails with Ms. Nozawa in further
 effort to train her in the proper dispatch procedures[,]" but
 that Nozawa "continued to make mistakes, particularly with regard
 to the registration dates and times of registrants, which
 resulted in the incorrect placement of persons on the out of work
 list[.]" Mendes also attested to, and attached as an exhibit, an
 email exchange she had with Nozawa which Mendes asserts shows
 Nozawa's inability to run a monthly registration list.
 
The Union also submitted the declaration of Reding, who
 
attests that he was appointed in July 2010 to serve as the
 Officer-in-Charge of the Hawaii District office and in that
 capacity oversaw the operations of the Hawaii district office and
 assisted the district representative in management concerns. As
 noted above, Reding became aware of Nozawa's error regarding
 Conradt, initially wanted to terminate her as a result, but then
 issued the Final Written Warning.
7 Reding further attested that,
 
7
 The Final Written Warning states, in relevant part:
 
It has come to our attention that you continue to make
numerous mistakes in the discharge of your duties as
Dispatcher. Among others, key areas of deficiencies is your
(continued...)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
after issuance of the Final Written Warning, Mendes "continued to 
work with Ms. Nozawa in an attempt to improve her understanding of the dispatching procedures, but reported to me that Ms. Nozawa was still failing to comprehend the Job Placement Regulations." Reding attests that in January 2011, a new district representative, Pane Meatoga (Meatoga) was appointed who wanted 
to bring in his own secretary and hire a particular person as an 
organizer; and there was only one organizer position in the District at that time, filled by Donald Gentzler (Gentzler), who 
also worked as a back up dispatcher. Given Reding's knowledge 
that Nozawa continued to make mistakes, he suggested and Meatoga agreed "that as part of the staffing reorganization Ms. Nozawa should be terminated and Mr. Gentzler moved into the full-time dispatcher position." Reding further attests that Gentzler has been employed by Union in Hawai
'i as an organizer since September 
2007, and that as an organizer "he obtained in-depth experience with the collective bargaining agreement and the Job Placement Regulations." Reding also attests that he reviewed Gentzler's personnel file and work history and that Gentzler's "file and history contain no written warnings of any kind regarding inadequate job performance." Mendes also attests that she "trained and monitored Mr. Gentzler in his dispatching duties as 
7(...continued)
lack of a clear grasp and understanding of the Hawaii Job

Placement Regulations (JPR). Consequently, this has caused
you to dispatch members improperly. Additionally, there is
an inordinate amount of registration overrides caused by
errors. Some of these overrides used incorrect dates which
 allowed our members and others to be dispatched incorrectly,
seriously exposing our local to potential legal liability.
Recently, this transgression manifested itself in the
dispatch of member Richard Conrad, Jr. [sic] We are still
 assessing the potential damage this error may ultimately
cause. 
This will serve notice to you that any further mistakes on
your behalf in carrying out your duties, will result in the
immediate termination of your employment with OE3.
Additionally, if in the course of our investigation in the
processing of Mr. Conrad's [sic] registration and dispatch,
we find additional errors, you will be subject to immediate
termination of employment.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
District 17 dispatcher[,]" and that throughout his tenure as
 
back-up dispatcher and then full-time dispatcher, Gentzler "did
 not make any serious dispatching errors like those made by Ms.
 Nozawa." According to Mendes's declaration, Gentzler replaced
 Nozawa as the full-time dispatcher as of February 4, 2011, and
 stayed in that position through July 31, 2012.
 
Nozawa argues on appeal that Mendes's supplemental 
declaration attached to Union's April 25, 2013 reply memorandum contains assertions that are inadmissible hearsay. 
However, 
Nozawa did not challenge the admissibility of the declaration in the circuit court and thus her challenge on appeal is deemed waived. 
Price v. AIG Hawai 'i Ins. Co.,  107 Hawai 'i 106, 111-12, 
111 P.3d 1, 6-7 (2005) (holding that a failure to challenge the admissibility of documents related to a summary judgment motion in the trial court waived the issue on appeal). 
Even assuming that Nozawa properly preserved this issue 
on appeal, Mendes's second supplemental declaration attached to Union's September 9, 2013 supplemental reply provides foundation such that the declaration falls under the hearsay exception of records of regularly conducted activity in Hawai
'i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(6). Mendes attested that she is 
familiar with the exhibits showing the dispatching mistakes, that 
Union keeps them in the ordinary course of business, and that they were created at or near the time of the event, and based on the error corrections, Nozawa's entries "were not in accordance . . . with any policy or protocol [Union] issued to any of its dispatchers" and "[h]ad [Nozawa] followed proper protocol," Nozawa "would not have entered incorrect registration dates[.]" 
Given the declarations submitted, we conclude the Union
 
articulated legitimate and nondiscriminatory reasons for Nozawa's
 termination based on the staff reorganization when a new district
 representative was appointed and considering Nozawa's ability to
 perform the dispatch work as compared to Gentzler. It is
 undisputed that Union underwent a staff reorganization when
 Meatoga was appointed as the new district representative. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Further, Nozawa's work performance issues were already documented 
in the Final Written Warning that she had received and signed. The Union's evidence shows that, in light of the staff reorganization and Nozawa's performance issues, the Union terminated Nozawa and moved Gentzler into the dispatcher position, where he stayed for almost one and a half years. These reasons are properly related to Nozawa's ability to perform the work in question. See Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 20-21; 346 P.3d at 
89-90; Simmons, 130 Hawai 'i at 331, 310 P.3d at 1032. 
Under the Shoppe-McDonnell analysis, the burden thus
 
shifted back to Nozawa to demonstrate that the Union's proffered
 reasons were pretextual. The only proper evidence Nozawa
 provides to support her claim that she was terminated because of
 her gender, and not because of her ability to perform the duties
 of her job, are her declarations which include the assertion that
 she "always received excellent employment evaluations." She also
 attested that she was falsely accused of making a mistake
 regarding Conradt and that, "I signed for the Final Written
 Warning, but disputed that I had made a mistake." However,
 Nozawa provides no documentation or further details about
 disputing the Final Written Warning.
 
More importantly, however, Nozawa does not contest that
 
there was a staff reorganization due to Meatoga being appointed
 district representative, and further, she does not provide any
 evidence to the effect that she was more qualified than Gentzler
 for the dispatcher position. Whereas the Union provided evidence
 that Gentzler was knowledgeable about the collective bargaining
 agreement and the Job Placement Regulations based on his prior
 position as organizer, and that he did not make any serious
 dispatching mistakes like Nozawa when he was a part-time
 dispatcher, Nozawa does not provide any evidence that her work
 abilities were superior to Gentzler such that her termination was
 pretextual. Given the record, we conclude Nozawa failed to raise
 a genuine issue of material fact that the Union's proffered
 reasons for terminating her were pretextual.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in granting
 
summary judgment for Union.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Final Judgment filed on
 
October 18, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 21, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Charles H. Brower,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Ashley K. Ikeda,Stephanie L. Marn,(Weinberg Roger & Rosenfeld),for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12

 