NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000615 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
EDWIN KELLER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(WAIANAE DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DCW-15-0004105)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Edwin Keller (Keller) with third-degree
 
assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­712(1)(a) (2014).
1/ After a jury-waived bench trial, the
 
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court)2/ found
 
Keller guilty as charged. The District Court sentenced Keller
 and entered its Judgment on August 11, 2016.
 
1/ HRS § 707-712 provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the third
degree if the person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily
injury to another person[.]
 
. . . .
 
(2) Assault in the third degree is a misdemeanor unless
committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent, in
which case it is a petty misdemeanor.
 
2/ The Honorable John A. Montalbano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Keller contends that the District Court
 
erred in finding him guilty of third-degree assault because there
 
was insufficient evidence to negate his claim of self-defense. 
In the alternative, Keller contends that the District Court erred
 in finding him guilty of third-degree assault as a misdemeanor,
 rather than as a petty misdemeanor, because Keller claims the
 evidence showed that he engaged in a mutual affray with the
 complaining witness. We affirm the District Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 A.
 
The complaining witness (CW) and Keller were neighbors
 
in an apartment complex. The CW testified at trial that Keller
 approached the CW and told him to "shake my fuckin' hand." 
According to the CW, the CW told Keller that after "all the
 things you've -- you did to me and my family, you disrespect my
 wife," the CW was not going to shake Keller's hand. After the CW
 refused to shake Keller's hand, the CW walked away from Keller. 
Keller taunted the CW, saying "[c]ome back over here so I can
 kick your ass." Keller followed the CW, walking alongside the
 CW. When the CW turned to look at Keller, Keller threw two
 punches that both landed on the CW's face. The first punch was a
 "closed right fist" "straight right" punch that hit the CW in the
 chin. The second punch was a "closed fist" "left cross" that hit
 the CW on the cheek. The second punch caused the CW more pain
 than the first punch. After being punched, the CW put his hands
 up for the first time because he was not sure if Keller was going
 to keep attacking him. CT, a person who worked at the apartment
 complex, stepped in and separated the CW and Keller. The CW
 testified that he did not "make contact" with Keller at any time
 during the incident.
 
CT testified that from a distance of about three feet,
 
he saw the CW refuse to shake Keller's hand and walk away from
 Keller. According to CT, Keller called the CW back, told the CW
 that he wanted to talk to the CW, and made gestures to the CW. 
When the CW walked back up on the sidewalk, Keller punched the CW
 twice, with the right and then the left hand. After being struck
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the second punch, the CW fell backward. As the CW was
 
getting himself ready to retaliate for the punches, CT yelled at
 the CW to "stop, don't touch him, it's not worth it, call the
 cops." The CW heeded CT's advice and stopped. Prior to Keller
 punching the CW, CT did not see the CW strike Keller or hear the
 CW say anything to Keller to induce the punches.
 
B.
 
Keller called Reid Elam, Ph.D. (Dr. Elam), a licensed
 
physical therapist, as a witness. Dr. Elam was Keller's physical
 therapist after Keller had surgery on his right shoulder, which
 occurred four months before the charged incident. Dr. Elam
 testified that at around the time of the incident, Keller had
 limited range of motion and reduced strength in his right arm. 
Dr. Elam opined that someone in Keller's condition would not be
 able to "get full force extension" with the right arm and would
 have difficulty making a fist with the right hand. Dr. Elam
 stated that Keller had normal range of motion in his left arm and
 was able to make a fist with his left hand.
 
Keller testified in his own defense at trial. Keller
 
testified that he saw the CW walking towards him, and Keller
 asked the CW to "shake my hand[.]" The CW said, "'F' you." 
Keller stated that as he walked past the CW, the CW told Keller,
 "I going lick you." The CW came towards Keller. Keller
 testified that Keller then put his hand up and the CW "ran into
 my fist." According to Keller, he lifted his left arm out in a
 straight line with a closed fist and the CW ran into his fist, at
 which point the CW said, "[C]all the cops."
 
C.
 
In rendering its guilty verdict, the District Court
 
stated in pertinent part:
 
That on August the 13th, 2015, defendant, Edwin
Keller, did attempt to make peace with the [CW], but was met
with anger and cussing; that the defendant, Edwin Keller,
did attempt to shake the [CW's] hand, but [the CW] rejected. 
. . . .
 
The credible testimony of [CT] supports that as an
unbiased witness, he observed the defendant try to shake
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[the CW's] hand. When [the CW] refused, the defendant
called [the CW] back and punched him in the face two times.
The testimony of [the CW] supports that he was hit in the
face and suffered pain from two punches. Furthermore, [CT]
testified that after he saw [the CW] get punched, he
observed [the CW] fall backwards and then saw [the CW] get
ready to retaliate. [CT] then intervened and told [the CW]
don't touch him, it's not worth it. 
. . . .
 
After [CT] intervened, the police were called.
 The court does not find credible defendant's
 
testimony, that he simply held up his arm and the [CW] ran
into his fist. Although defendant has attempted to
establish a self-defense justification to the assault, the
court finds that the State has disproven the justification
of self-defense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant is
 100 pounds heavier than the [CW]. The defendant is five to
 six inches taller than the [CW]. Furthermore, the
description of the punches thrown during the incident were
not immediately necessary to protect oneself, as the
defendant has attempted to testify to. 
The court finds that there was no unlawful use of
 
force that was exhibited during the incident by [the CW].
 
Given the greater weight of the credible evidence
adduced at trial, the court concludes that the State has met
its burden to establish each element of the offense of
 assault in the third degree and does find Edwin Keller
guilty of assault in the third degree.
 
The District Court also stated that "[t]here's no finding of
 
mutual affray. There was no evidence of mutual affray." 
II.
 
We resolve the issues raised on appeal by Keller as
 
follows:
 
1. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
 
negate Keller's claim of self-defense. The CW's testimony showed
 that Keller was the aggressor and that without warning, Keller
 twice punched the CW in the face. The CW's testimony was
 corroborated by CT, who testified that prior to Keller punching
 the CW two times, CT did not see the CW strike Keller or hear the
 CW say anything to Keller to induce the punches. The District
 Court also rejected Keller's version of the incident, finding
 that Keller's testimony that he simply held out his arm and the
 CW ran into his fist was not credible. The District Court did
 not err in rejecting Keller's claim of self-defense. See State
 
v.
 Jhun, 83 Hawai 'i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996) ("The 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prosecution disproves a justification defense beyond a reasonable
 
doubt when the trial court believes the prosecution's case and
 disbelieves the defendant's case.").
 
2. Third-degree assault is a misdemeanor unless
 
committed in the course of a mutual affray, that is, "a fight or
 scuffle entered into by mutual consent," in which case the
 offense becomes a petty misdemeanor. HRS § 707-712(2). 
We reject Keller's contention that the District Court 
erred in finding him guilty of third-degree assault as a misdemeanor, rather than as a petty misdemeanor. Keller's contention is based on his claim that the evidence showed that he engaged in a mutual affray with the CW. As the trier of fact, it was the District Court's prerogative to determine the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence. Jhun, 83 
Hawai
'i at 483, 927 P.2d at 1366. "Viewing the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the trier of fact," we hold that there was sufficient evidence to support the District Court's finding that Keller was guilty of third-degree assault that was not committed in the course of a mutual affray. See id. 
III. 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Cameron T. Holm 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Jonathan K.D. Tungpalan
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
5
 