NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002508
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ERNEST O. PRESAS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1627)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Ernest O. Presas (Presas) with second-degree 
theft, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­
1
831(1)(b) (2014),  for stealing merchandise exceeding $300 in
1HRS § 708-831(1)(b) provides:
 
A person commits the offense of theft in the
second degree if the person commits theft:
 
. . . 
(b) Of property or services the value of which
exceeds $300[.]
 
HRS § 708-830 (2014) provides in relevant part: 
A person commits theft if the person does any of
the following:
 
. . . 
(8) Shoplifting.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
value from Pandora Jewelry. After a jury trial, Presas was found
 
guilty as charged. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
2
(Circuit Court)  sentenced Presas to five years of incarceration
and entered its Judgment on July 5, 2013. 
On appeal, Presas contends that: (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction; (2) the Circuit
 Court abused its discretion in precluding Presas from calling
 Officer Dustin Lui (Officer Lui) as a witness; (3) the Circuit
 Court erred in failing to sua sponte correct the alleged
 modification of its jury instruction by the Deputy Prosecuting
 Attorney (DPA) during her closing argument; (4) the DPA committed
 prosecutorial misconduct during her closing argument; and (5) the
 Circuit Court committed plain error in failing to instruct the
 jury on fourth-degree theft as a lesser included offense. We
 affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
The charge against Presas stemmed from his alleged
 
theft of a gold bracelet, with a retail value of $1,415, from
 Pandora Jewelry. On August 16, 2012, Shelby Patton (Patton), a
 sales person for Pandora Jewelry in Ala Moana Center, assisted
 Presas after he entered the store. Presas asked about gold
 bracelets that could be worn around the ankle. Pandora Jewelry
 kept gold bracelets in a green box under the counter. Each
 bracelet was individually packaged in a small ziplock bag. 
Patton retrieved the green box and showed Presas three different
 bracelets at the counter. 
Presas then asked Patton for a business card. Patton
 
left Presas at the counter with the green box containing the gold
 bracelets open, and she went to the back of the store to get a 
(a) A person conceals or takes possession of
the goods or merchandise of any store or
retail establishment, with intent to
defraud.
 
2The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
business card. A surveillance video introduced at trial shows
 
that while Patton was gone, Presas reached his right hand into 
the green box, took his hand out, placed it on the counter, and
 then appears to put his hand in his pants pocket. 
When Patton returned to the counter, she gave Presas a
 
business card with her name on it. Presas asked what time the
 store closed, then left the store without leaving his name or
 phone number. Patton repackaged the three bracelets she had
 shown to Presas and placed them back into the green box, which
 she put back under the counter.
 
Later that day, Presas entered another jewelry store,
 
Jewel Flair located in Ward Center. Jewel Flair and Pandora
 Jewelry had the same owner, and the sales staff work at both
 stores. At Jewel Flair, Presas spoke to Terri Miyamoto
 (Miyamoto) and asked if they "sold the gold Pandora." Miyamoto
 responded that Jewel Flair did not sell that item, but that "we
 sell it at our Ala Moana store." Presas said that the Ala Moana
 store did not have the size he wanted, a 7.5 inch gold bracelet,
 in stock. Miyamoto thought Presas's statement was strange
 because the 7.5 inch bracelet was a common size that the Ala
 Moana store carried. She asked Presas for his name and number so
 she could check for him and call him back. Presas declined to
 leave his name and number and said he had left his information
 with Patton at the Ala Moana store. 
Miyamoto felt that Presas's behavior was "kind of
 
strange[.]" Presas would not come fully into the store and
 appeared reluctant to talk to her face to face. After Presas
 left Jewel Flair, Miyamoto called Pandora Jewelry and asked
 whether there was any note indicating that a customer interested
 in a 7.5 inch gold bracelet had left his name and number. No
 such note was found. Miyamoto was also informed that Pandora
 Jewelry had the 7.5 inch gold bracelet in stock.
3
 
3Patton testified that she did not show Presas a 7.5 inch
 
gold bracelet.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Miyamoto asked Cheryl Horikawa (Horikawa), who was
 
working at Pandora Jewelry, to do an inventory count of the gold
 
bracelets. Horikawa counted the gold bracelets in the green box. 
There were fifteen gold bracelets in the box, which was one
 bracelet short of the sixteen bracelets that should have been
 there based on the count earlier that morning. After speaking to
 Horikawa, Miyamoto texted her boss, Valerie Yamashita
 (Yamashita), to inform Yamashita that "something funny happened
 at Pandora." 
Yamashita, the owner of Pandora Jewelry, reviewed the
 
surveillance video recording from Pandora Jewelry and isolated
 the portion of the video involving Presas's interaction with
 Patton. Yamashita testified that based on an inventory check of
 Pandora Jewelry's gold bracelets, a 6.7 inch gold bracelet was
 missing from the green box. The retail price of the missing
 bracelet was $1,415.
 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve the issues Presas raises on appeal as
 
follows.
 
I.
 
Presas contends that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support his conviction because there was no substantial evidence
 that he had concealed or taken possession of the missing
 bracelet. We disagree.
 
The surveillance video shows that while Patton was 
gone, Presas reached his hand into the green box and a short time later appeared to put that hand into his pants pocket. The State also presented evidence that an inventory of the green box showed that a gold bracelet was missing and that Presas had made false statements to Miyamoto at Jewel Flair. When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, see State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 
33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998), we conclude that there was substantial evidence that Presas stole the missing bracelet by concealing or taking possession of it. 
II.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Presas's contention that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in precluding him from calling Officer Lui is without
 
merit. Miyamoto and Horikawa, who both testified at trial, had
 provided written and oral statements to Officer Lui. Officer
 Lui's police report included his write-up of the verbal
 statements made by Miyamoto and Horikawa. Presas proffered to
 the Circuit Court that he wanted to call Officer Lui to impeach
 Miyamoto's and Horikawa's trial testimony with certain verbal
 statements they had made to Officer Lui. In particular, Presas
 wanted to elicit testimony from Officer Lui, based on Officer
 Lui's police report, that: (1) Miyamoto told him that she would
 not be able to positively identify the Caucasian male she had
 encountered at Jewel Flair but remembers he had an accent; and
 (2) Horikawa told him that her review of the purchases on August
 16, 2012, did not show the purchase of a 7.5-inch Pandora
 bracelet, and that she was unable to find receipts for any
 bracelets that day.
 
The record indicates that despite Miyamoto's statement
 
to Officer Lui about her inability make a positive
 identification, she later was able to pick Presas out of a six-
person photospread. She also identified him in court. In his
 testimony, Presas acknowledged that he had gone to a jewelry
 store at Ward Center, which he referred to as "Jewelry Flair,"
 and spoke to a "young lady." 
Presas argues that he should have been allowed to call
 
Officer Lui to testify about Miyamoto's statement, not to
 challenge Miyamoto's identification of Presas, but to generally
 show she was not credible. However, during Miyamoto's testimony,
 Presas did not confront Miyamoto with the statement she had made
 to Officer Lui regarding identification.
 
The proffered testimony of Officer Lui regarding
 
Miyamoto's statement was hearsay that was inadmissible absent an
 exception to the hearsay rule. See Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 
(HRE) Rules 801 (Supp. 2014) and 802 (1993). There is a hearsay
 exception for inconsistent statements. See HRE Rule 802.1(1)
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1993). However to qualify for that exception, the statement
 
must be offered in compliance with HRE Rule 613(b) (1993), which
 provides: "Extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent statement
 by a witness is not admissible unless, on direct or
 cross-examination, (1) the circumstances of the statement have
 been brought to the attention of the witness, and (2) the witness
 has been asked whether the witness made the statement." Presas
 did not comply with HRE Rule 613(b) because he did not confront
 Miyamoto with her statement to Officer Lui. Miyamoto's statement
 to Officer Lui was not admissible under HRE Rule 802.1(1), and
 Presas does not contend that any other hearsay exception applies. 
Thus, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 precluding Presas from calling Officer Lui to testify about
 Miyamoto's statement. 
With respect to Horikawa's statements to Officer Lui,
 
Presas contends that because the missing bracelet was 6.7 inches
 long, Horikawa's statement that she was looking for a receipt for
 a 7.5-inch bracelet was admissible to impeach her credibility. 
Presas also contends that because Horikawa testified at trial
 that a bracelet had been sold that day by an employee named
 Kelley, her statement to Officer Lui that she was unable to find
 receipts for any bracelets that day and her failure to mention
 the sale to Officer Lui were admissible to impeach her
 credibility.
4
 
Presas did not confront Horikawa with her statements to
 
Officer Lui. The proffered testimony of Officer Lui about
 Horikawa's statements was therefore not admissible under HRE Rule
 802.1(1). Officer Lui's testimony about Horikawa's statements
 was hearsay and Presas fails to show the applicability of any
 exception to the hearsay rule. Therefore, the Circuit Court did
 not abuse its discretion in precluding Presas from calling
 
4The State cites to evidence that the bracelet that was sold
 
was on display, and not in the green box, and therefore had not
been included in Horikawa's inventory count.
 
6
       
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Lui to testify about Horikawa's statements. 
III.
 
Presas argues that the Circuit Court erred in failing
 
to sua sponte correct the alleged modification of its jury
 
instruction by the DPA during her closing argument. We disagree.
 
Regarding the elements of second-degree theft that the
 
State was required to prove, the Circuit Court instructed the
 jury as to the fourth element as follows: 
4. That the Defendant, either (a) intended to use
deception to injure Pandora Jewelry's interest, which had
value, in which case the required state of mind as to each
of the foregoing elements is "intentionally," or (b) knew
that he was facilitating an injury to Pandora Jewelry's
interest, which had value, in which case the required state
of mind as to each of the foregoing elements is "knowingly."
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In her closing argument, the DPA asked the jury to turn
 
to the Circuit Court's written jury instructions: "Okay.  If
 
everybody could turn to page 18. We're looking at number 4. And
 
this has to do with intent to defraud. So the elements that
 
the State needs to prove are on page 18, and the definitions that
 
go with these elements are on page 21." The DPA went on to
 
explain the 4.(b) portion of the elements instruction as follows:
 
And the -- I will -- the State will explain "B" because it's
easier to explain and it's easier to understand. So with
 
regards to "B," knew that he was facilitating an injury to
Pandora's interest which had value. Defendant knew his
 actions would result in a loss to Pandora, in not legal
English. That's a better way to help understand what
exactly that means. So he knew his actions would result in
 a loss to Pandora.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
We reject Presas's contention that the DPA
 
impermissibly modified the Circuit Court's jury instruction by 
arguing that the requirement that Presas "knew that he was
 facilitating an injury to Pandora Jewelry's interest, which had
 value," meant that the State was required to prove that Presas
 "knew his actions would result in a loss to Pandora." We
 conclude that there is no material substantive difference between
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Circuit Court's instruction and the DPA's explanation of that
 
instruction. Presas also fails to provide any persuasive
 argument on how the DPA's explanation of the Circuit Court's
 instruction resulted in prejudice to him. Accordingly, we 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not plainly err in declining
 
to sua sponte preclude or strike the DPA's explanation. 
IV.
 
A.
 
Presas contends that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct in closing argument by expressing her personal opinion
 regarding the credibility of the witnesses. We disagree.
 
1.
 
Presas argues that the DPA engaged in misconduct by
 
accusing Presas of lying. In closing argument the DPA stated:
 
Defendant is a man with a plan. He's a good
storyteller. He's got his whole cover story planned out to
the details. 
He knew what he was doing. It was all part of
his plan to take advantage of a new salesclerk and it
worked. 
He went into Pandora that day and he took advantage of
Shelby. He fooled Shelby. He stole a gold Pandora bracelet
and concealed it in his pocket, but he couldn't fool Terri.
She was onto him and the defendant knew it. He knew she was
 onto him that's why he wouldn't come into the store; that's
why he wouldn't leave his info; that's why he lied to Terri
Miyamoto.
 
In one statement that he made to Terri Miyamoto, "The

Ala Moana store does not have 7.5 gold bracelets," and he
left his information at the Pandora Store. 
There are three

 
lies contained in that one statement
. First, that he looked
at 7.5 gold bracelets at Pandora. Second, that they were
out of gold 7.5 bracelets at Pandora when in fact they had
three. And, third, that he left his information at the
Pandora Store with Shelby or the Pandora Store.
 
. . . .
 
Because the defendant has testified, his credibility,
his believability is examined the same way as other
witnesses and that's on page 13. You can look at that when
 
you go in the back.
 
What's the truth here? Defendant lied to Terri
 
Miyamoto that day, and he got on the stand and testified,
and he lied about not knowing about Pandora Jewelry. . . .
[Y]et under cross-examination he admitted he was familiarwith gold Pandora bracelets; that in fact he owned one in
July of 2012, just one month before the theft at Pandora.
Is what he testified to the really -- the truth?
 
Look at what he told Terri Miyamoto. Why would he lie
to Terri Miyamoto? If he had done nothing wrong, he has no
reason to lie. If he has nothing to hide, he has no reason
to lie. Use your reason and common sense. Does it sound
 believable that all of a sudden, when he's testifying, he's 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
telling the truth? He's a story teller. He has an answer
 
for everything and it's all part of his plan. 
. . . . 
[Rebuttal closing]
 Defense counsel wants you to believe that someone else
could have taken it; that it's the defendant's hand who was
in the green box, and it's the defendant who later -- that
very same day lies to Terri Miyamoto.
 
Defense counsel wants you to believe there's nothing
suspicious about the defendant and what he did that day, yet
in that same day he lied to a salesclerk about something
seemingly unimportant. He wants you to believe that lying
isn't suspicious.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Presas contends that the above-emphasized portions of 
the DPA's closing argument, which argue that Presas had lied, 
constituted an improper expression of her personal opinion as to Presas's credibility. This contention is without merit. The context of the DPA's statements shows that she was basing her argument that Presas had lied or was a liar on evidence presented at trial. In other words, the DPA's remarks make clear that she was not expressing her personal opinion about Presas's credibility, but arguing that the jury should find that he was not credible based on evidence presented at trial. It is not misconduct for a prosecutor to attack the defendant's credibility, to characterize the defendant as a liar, or to argue that the defendant's exculpatory trial testimony was false and should not be believed. See State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
'i 289, 304­
06, 926 P.2d 194, 209-11 (1996). We conclude that the DPA's argument regarding Presas's credibility was not improper. 
2.
 
Presas contends that the DPA improperly vouched for
 
Patton's credibility in making the following remarks:
 
And with regards to witness credibility -- if you turn
to pages seven, eight, and nine. And this has to do with
 
the different witnesses you heard from. They're all
civilians. They all work at Pandora Store. And it has to
 do with -- on the bottom of page eight, "resulting from
innocent error or deliberate falsehood." Were any of them
testifying falsely? Were any of them lying to you
purposely? No. You heard from Shelby. She was nervous
 
10
        
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
about testifying. It's her first time doing that. She
 
tried to answer the questions as honestly as possible.
 
With regards to -­
THE COURT: Well, the State submit such.
 [DPA]: The State submits such.
 With regards to Valerie Yamashita, in the video, she
testified that she gave that camera because it's the only
camera that could see anything. She's not trying to hide
things. Defense makes a -- counsel makes her out to sound
 -- made her out to sound like she's out to get the
defendant. She just provided the video that showed
anything.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Presas argues that the DPA's statement that "[Patton]
 
tried to answer the questions a honestly as possible" constituted 
impermissible personal vouching for Patton's credibility. We
 
disagree. The DPA linked her remark to the Circuit Court's jury
 
instruction about evaluating witness credibility and Patton's
 
demeanor while testifying. Patton had testified that she was
 
nineteen years old and was nervous. We conclude that the DPA's
 
remark, while perhaps inartfully phrased, did not constitute an
 
improper expression of her personal opinion regarding Shelby's
 credibility.
 
B.
 
Presas argues that the DPA engaged in misconduct by
 
attempting to shift the burden of proof to the defense by
 questioning why the defense had not produced Presas's niece. 
Presas had testified that he had gone to Pandora Jewelry to look
 to buy a gold bracelet for his niece with whom he had a special
 relationship. The DPA's comment, which Presas argues was
 
improper, was as follows:
 
He's a story teller. He has an answer for everything and
it's all part of his plan.
 
Like this niece, his favorite and only niece that he
loves and she loves him. They have a special relationship
so much that he buys her expensive presents like a 14 karat
gold bracelet. This niece that loves him so much, where is
she? She's not in the back of the courtroom here to support
him.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Defense counsel]: Objection.
 
THE COURT: Sustained. I'll strike -­[Defense counsel]: Move to strike.
 THE COURT: -- that last argument. Jury will disregard
it.
 
The record shows that the Circuit Court sustained
 
Presas's objection to the comment about Presas's niece, granted
 
Presas's motion to strike the comment, and instructed the jury to
 disregard it. We conclude that any impropriety in the DPA's
 comment about Presas's niece did not affect Presas's substantial
 rights.
 
IV.
 
Presas contends that the Circuit Court committed plain
 
error in failing to instruct the jury on fourth-degree theft as a
 lesser included offense. This contention is without merit.
 
The State presented undisputed testimony from 
Yamashita, the owner of Pandora Jewelry, that the missing bracelet had a retail value of $1,415. Yamashita also testified that the wholesale value of the missing bracelet far exceeded the $300 threshold for second-degree theft. Presas did not challenge or contest the State's evidence regarding the value of the missing bracelet. Indeed, Presas's defense was not related to the value of the missing bracelet; Presas's defense was that he did not steal the missing bracelet. We conclude that there was no rational basis in the evidence for the jury to acquit Presas of the charged second-degree theft but convict him of fourth-degree theft. See State v. Flores, 131 Hawai
'i 43, 53, 314 P.3d 
120, 130 (2013). Therefore, the Circuit Court did not commit plain error in failing to sua sponte instruct the jury on fourth-degree theft. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit 
Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 29, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Hayley Y.C. Cheng
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Brandon H. Ito 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
13

 