 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000265
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
PAPAIKANIAU KAIANUI, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-15-00730)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i (State) appeals 
from the March 4, 2016 Second Amended Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Motion to Suppress Evidence (Order Granting Motion to Suppress) of the District Court of the 
Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (District Court).
1 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On June 12, 2015, the State filed a Complaint against 
Kaianui on the following counts: Operating a Vehicle Under the 
Influence of an Intoxicant in violation of Hawai' i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1)(3), Duty Upon Striking Unattended 
Vehicle or Other Property in violation of HRS § 291C-15, 
1
 The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inattention to Driving in violation of HRS § 291-12, Reckless
 
Driving of Vehicle in violation of HRS § 291-2, and Lack of Due
 Care in violation of Maui County Code § 10.52.010.
 
On September 18, 2015, Kaianui filed a Motion to
 
Suppress Evidence (Motion to Suppress), seeking to suppress "all
 
evidence recovered as the result of the warrantless entry by
 
police into the curtilage of [Kaianui's] home and the warrantless
 seizure of [Kaianui] therein on May 24, 2015." The Motion to
 Suppress was based on factual allegations attributed to the
 police reports of three police officers, which were received from
 the State. In the motion, Kaianui asserted that a police officer
 entered the curtilage of her home, with the reason obviously
 being to obtain information and gather evidence, which exceeds
 the customary license that members of the public and the police
 have to enter the curtilage of a home. Thus, Kaianui argued that
 entry was a search and the State must demonstrate probable cause
 and an applicable exception to the warrant requirement. In
 addition, Kaianui argued that she was seized and, absent at least
 reasonable suspicion for that seizure, it is presumed that the
 seizure was unreasonable. Kaianui submitted that, as a result of
 the allegedly unjustified search and seizure, all evidence
 derived therefrom should be suppressed.
 
In opposition, the State argued that the officer's
 
approach and contact of Kaianui was a proper temporary
 investigative detention and, therefore, did not need to be
 supported by probable cause. The State represented that it would
 "stand on the testimony presented by its witnesses at the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidentiary hearing," but stated that a witness had told an
 
officer, Maui Police Department (MPD) Officer Kyle Badayos
 
(Officer Badayos), that a champagne-colored pickup, matching the
 description of Kaianui's vehicle,
2 had been involved in a nearby
 
collision and left the scene. The State further argued that
 
because the suspect had left the scene of the collision minutes
 earlier, exigent circumstances existed, which "allow police
 contact, even to the point of entry of a defendant's house."
 
In reply, Kaianui argued, inter alia, that the cases
 
relied on by the State involved traffic stops, and not police
 entering the curtilage of a person's home, that the State failed
 to address precedent equating the physical intrusion onto the
 curtilage to gather evidence with a search, and that the State
 has the burden to prove the applicability of the exigent
 circumstances exception to the warrant requirement.
 
The District Court heard testimony on the Motion to
 
Suppress on October 28, 2015. The State called Alexis Felicilda
 (Felicilda), Officer Badayos, and MPD Officer Dennis Arnds
 
(Officer Arnds). 
Felicilda testified that on the night of May 24, 2015,
 
she and her boyfriend were visiting with friends, Kathy and John
 
Paio, on Eha Street in Wailuku. Felicilda's boyfriend had driven
 her there and parked her vehicle, a black Toyota pick-up truck,
 on the street in front of the Paios's home. During her visit,
 
2
 As discussed, infra, no testimony supporting this specific
description was presented at the evidentiary hearing. The State's opposition
also referenced "extensive front damage" to a gold-colored pickup truck seen
at Kaianui's residence, but testimony at the evidentiary hearing revealed that
this damage was not visible to the officers when they arrived at the home.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Felicilda heard what sounded "like a car accident. Basically a
 
loud screech and then a boom." Within seconds, she and her
 boyfriend, along with the Paios, exited the home to investigate. 
Once outside, Felicilda observed her truck
3 on the curb
 
about 25 feet away from where it had been parked with its entire
 rear left side smashed in "like an accordion;" and there was a
 great deal of metal and glass debris, as well as fluid, on the
 ground near the damaged vehicle. Felicilda saw a truck speeding
 away, going makai. She testified that she was certain it was a
 Toyota, because she drives a Toyota, but that she could not make
 out any other specific features of the vehicle. She could not
 discern the license plate number or the precise color of the
 vehicle but only observed that it was "metallic" in color; she
 could not tell if the color of the truck was light or dark. She
 was unable to observe who was driving the truck that was speeding
 away. Immediately thereafter, Mr. Paio got in his vehicle and
 began following the truck that Felicilda had observed. At that
 point, Felicilda dialed 9-1-1 and informed them that her truck
 had been hit, that the responsible vehicle had left the scene,
 and that her friend was following it.
 
Officer Badayos testified that, while on patrol in
 
Kahului, he overheard police dispatch assign two other officers,
 Officer Lago and Officer Arnds, to a motor vehicle collision on
 Eha Street and decided to report to the scene to assist. Upon
 arrival, he found Officer Lago on scene and observed a black
 
3
 Felicilda testified that she had originally purchased the truck in
2005 but that the title is currently in her boyfriend's name. For
 
convenience, it is simply referred to as Felicilda's truck.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pickup truck, partially on the sidewalk with damage to its left
 
rear corner. Officer Badayos obtained a statement from
 Felicilda's boyfriend and then he conferred with Officer Lago in
 order to assist with the investigation. Officer Badayos did not
 testify that he relayed any information to dispatch or anyone
 other than Officer Lago.
4
 
Officer Arnds testified that on the night of May 24,
 
2015, he was on patrol with another officer, Officer Rodney Haia,
 and was assigned to investigate a motor vehicle collision on Eha
 Street. He testified that en route to the scene, Central
 Dispatch advised him that the responsible vehicle had fled the
 scene and was in the area of Pohala Street and Kuhio Street. 
Officer Arnds then proceeded directly to that area. 
After investigating Kuhio Street, Officer Arnds
 
proceeded to Pohala Street. He testified on direct examination
 that, there, at about 10:45 p.m., he "pulled up to a vehicle that
 [] might have been involved in a crash." He testified that he
 thought it might have been involved because "[w]hen we looked at
 the vehicle it was a gold Toyota pickup truck and had heavy front
 end damage." On cross-examination, however, Officer Arnds
 admitted that, the truck was parked on a grassy area next to –­adjacent to –- Kaianui's garage, and that from the street, he
 couldn't see any front end damage. Officer Arnds also observed
 Kaianui standing out in front of her residence; Officer Arnds
 later described her location as "kind of in front of the garage
 
4
 The State did not offer testimony from Officer Lago, Felicida's
boyfriend, or either of the Paios.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
area." On re-direct, when asked again what drew his attention to
 
the truck (and what prompted him to approach Kaianui) he stated: 
"I can't -- we had a witness statement recalling that there was –
 there was a beige color –- I mean a champagne color Toyota pickup
 truck. At that point, I don't recall how we got that
 information."
 
Officer Arnds then added:
 
I do remember that there was a -– a local, is it a
Hawaiian neighbor, standing next to her house pointing at
the car. He was out front. I didn't get his statement,
though, but he was pointing at the car.
 
It was Kaianui's neighbor was pointing at her truck.
That –- that was when we were kind of –- we were already
pulling up. . . .
 
Q. Okay.
 
A. So, the information the other officer had,
we were at the house, I don't know.
 
. . . .
 
Q. And so were you –- what roads were you checking
on?
 
A. Well, Kuhio Street. . . . 
And then Pohala
 
Street is right –- is right next, is above, is one of the
most northern mauka bound streets. . . . So we made a right
on Pohala. And then, like I said, there was a heavy set
local Hawaiian neighbor out pointing at her car.
 
So I don't know why he was pointing at the car at the
time. No, I don't know why. He didn't say she was involved
in a crash or anything like that. He just pointed at her
car.
 
On recross-examination, Officer Arnds was asked:
 
Q. Have you seen gold, a gold pickup –- Toyota
pickups on this island before?
 
A. Yeah.
 
Q. More than ten?
 
A. Multiple.
 
Q. Okay. Um, did you note the guy –- the guy who
was pointing, did you note that in your police report?
 
A. No.
 
Q. It's something you remembered today?
 
6
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. As you were just testifying on it?
 
A. Yes. 
No other testimony was offered concerning what
 
information caused Officer Arnds to pull up to Kaianui's
 
residence, exit his vehicle, and then approach and question
 Kaianui as she stood in front of the home. Officer Arnds did,
 however, testify about his encounter with Kaianui.
 
Q. After you arrived, what did you do? 
A. I made contact with her. Stated the reason why
I was there. 
Q. Do you recall what you told her as to the reason
you were there? 
A. Yeah, we were investigating a traffic crash, and
then she stated that she had been involved with a traffic
 
crash and that she had hit a pole and then drove home. 
Q. Did you ask her any questions about her
physical condition? 
A. Um, well, I asked her where she'd been coming
from. She said Tropical Plantation she was at a graduation.
And I asked her where she was going. And she said she was
 driving home. 
And then I asked her if she had been drinking. And
 
she said she had a few drinks at the graduation party at the
Tropical Plantation. 
And then I asked her why she fled the scene, and she
stated that she thought she had hit a pole and then she
drove home. 
And that point I saw she had red, watery eyes, slurred
speech and odor of liquor from her breath. 
Q. When you were speaking to her, where were you
speaking to her now? 
A. In front of the -- front of her residence. 
Front of the driveway area, by the garage. 
Q. And what type of lighting was in that area? 
A. Um, we had our cruiser lights on, headlights
from our cruisers. 
And our spotlight lighting up the area.
But her house is in darkness.
 
Q. And what, if anything, did you observe of any
injuries on her? 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. I asked her if she was injured. She said she
 
was not injured. And I didn't observe any injuries. 
On cross-examination, Officer Arnds testified that
 
after speaking with Kaianui, Officer Arnds walked up to Kaianui's
 
truck and observed that the front end was damaged:
 
Q. Officer, when -- when you guys -- when you
drove up in your patrol vehicle, the car was parked kind of
on the grassy area of the yard next to the garage; correct? 
A. Correct. Adjacent to the garage. 
Q. Right. And it was pulled in directly straight
in? 
A. Correct. 
Q. So from the street you couldn't see any front
end damage; correct? 
A. No. Could not. 
Q. Okay. And you said she was standing kind of in
the driveway? I'm sorry, I didn't remember what --
A. She was kind of in front of the garage area.
But it was real dark. But I just remember there was a
figure out front. 
Q. Okay. Did she look -- and I know sometimes you
can't tell if somebody looks injured. But was there any
obvious injuries when you first saw her? 
A. There was none. 
Q. Did you ask her to come to the car to see if she
could walk and if she had any injuries?
 
A. We went to her and I shined my light on her to
see if I could see any injuries. 
Q. And was it after that that you went up to go
look at the truck? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And that's when you noticed the damage? 
A. Yes. 
No further witnesses were heard and the District Court
 
solicited proposed findings of fact and informed the parties that
 
it would issue a written decision.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 12, 2016, the District Court entered an
 
order denying the Motion to Suppress. On January 21, 2016,
 
Kaianui filed a Motion for Reconsideration, challenging the
 clarity and the legal basis for the denial of the Motion to
 Suppress, and arguing, based on Officer Arnds's testimony, that
 there was no probable cause justifying the warrantless entry on
 the curtilage of Kaianui's home and no evidence supporting a
 reasonable suspicion justifying Kaianui's seizure. In
 opposition, the State primarily argued that Kaianui's motion
 failed to meet the criteria for reconsideration.
 
The District Court heard further argument on January
 
29, 2016, at which time it indicated it was granting Kaianui's
 Motion for Reconsideration. On March 4, 2016, the District Court
 entered the Order Granting Motion to Suppress.
5 The State filed
 
a Notice of Appeal on March 30, 2016.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
The State argues that the District Court erred as a
 
matter of law: (1) when it concluded that Officer Arnds lacked
 reasonable suspicion to approach Kaianui; and (2) when it
 concluded that Officer Arnds's contact with Kaianui was
 unreasonable because he entered the curtilage of Kaianui's home
 without probable cause. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to suppress evidence
 
is reviewed de novo to determine whether the ruling was "right"
 
5
 The Order Granting Motion to Suppress also reflected clarification
requested by the State of a prior order entered on February 9, 2016.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or "wrong." State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai' i 351, 357, 173 P.3d 
498, 504 (2007). The proponent of the motion to suppress has the 
burden of establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the evidence sought to be excluded was unlawfully secured in violation of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution. State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 370, 375, 56 P.3d 
138, 143 (2002). 
The "right/wrong" standard of review also applies to 
the lower court's conclusions of law, which allows the appellate court to "examine the facts and answer the question without being required to give any weight to the trial court's answer to it." Id. Accordingly, a conclusion of law does not bind the court and 
is "freely reviewable for its correctness." State v. Bowe, 77 
Hawai'i 51, 53, 881 P.2d 538, 540 (1994). 
However, where a conclusion of law "presents mixed
 
questions of fact and law, it is reviewed under the clearly
 erroneous standard because the court's conclusions are dependant
 upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case." State
 
v. Trinque, 140 Hawai' i 269, 276, 400 P.3d 470, 477 (2017) 
(quoting State v. Furutani, 76 Hawai' i 172, 180, 873 P.2d 51, 59 
(1994) (internal quotation marks and additional citations omitted)).  "A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) 
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." State v. Okumura, 78 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i 383, 392, 894 P.2d 80, 89 (1995) (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted).
IV.DISCUSSION
A.Reasonable Suspicion
In appropriate circumstances, "[t]he police may
temporarily seize or detain an individual to investigate possible
criminal behavior based on reasonable suspicion, even if there is
no probable cause for an arrest."  State v. Dawson , 120 Hawai #i
363, 369, 205 P.3d 628, 634 (App. 2009) (citing Spillner , 116
Hawai#i at 357-58, 173 P.3d at 504-05; State v. Melear, 63 Haw.
488, 493, 630 P.2d 619, 624 (1981)).  The State does not deny
that a seizure occurred when Officer Arnds approached Kaianui in
front of her home and began asking her about the collision.6
Instead, the disputed issue is whether Officer Arnds possessed a
"reasonable suspicion" to justify the seizure. 
"The ultimate test in these situations must be whether
from these facts, measured by an objective standard, a man of
reasonable caution would be warranted in believing that criminal
activity was afoot and that the action taken was appropriate." 
6A defendant is seized when, in view of the totality of the
circumstances, "a reasonable person would have believed that he [or she] was
not free to leave."  State v. Quino, 74 Haw. 161, 169, 840 P.2d 358, 362
(1992) (quoting United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 554, (1980)).  The
Hawai#i Supreme Court has also held that a person is seized "when a police
officer approaches that person for the express or implied purpose of
investigating him or her for possible criminal violations and begins to ask
for information."  State v. Kearns, 75 Haw. 558, 567, 867 P.2d 903, 907
(1994).  Here, the record indicates that Officer Arnds approached Kaianui at
10:45 p.m., while in uniform and after shining his patrol car's spotlight on
her house, and immediately began questioning her about her possible
involvement in a motor vehicle collision.  He testified that he approached
Kaianui because "it's our job to investigate crashes."  Officer Arnds did not
request Kaianui's consent to enter her property or to question her nor did
Kaianui request a police response to her home or otherwise invite the police
onto her property.  Accordingly, we conclude that Officer Arnds seized Kaianui
when he approached and questioned her.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Perez, 111 Hawai' i 392, 398, 141 P.3d 1039, 1045 (2006) 
(quoting State v. Barnes, 58 Haw. 333, 338, 568 P.2d 1207, 1211 
(1977) (internal quotation marks omitted)). The purpose of the stop is "to allow the officer to confirm or deny [his or her reasonable] suspicions by reasonable questioning, rather than forcing in each instance the 'all or nothing' choice between arrest and inaction." State v. Ah Loo, 94 Hawai' i 207, 211, 10 
P.3d 728, 732 (2000) (quoting State v. Patterson, 59 Haw. 357, 363, 581 P.2d 752, 756 (1978) (internal quotation marks omitted)). However, to support the stop, law enforcement "must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant [the] intrusion." Barnes, 58 Haw. at 338, 568 P.2d at 
1212. Ultimately, reasonable suspicion determinations are "grounded in a fact-intensive, case-by-case approach," considering the totality of the circumstances. Spillner, 116 
Hawai'i at 358, 173 P.3d at 505; State v. Prendergast, 103 Hawai' i 
451, 460, 83 P.3d 714, 723 (2004). 
The State argues that the District Court "failed to
 
comprehend that [Officer Arnds's] 'particularized and objective
 basis' for suspecting legal wrongdoing sufficed to establish
 reasonable suspicion." Specifically, the State contends that
 Officer Arnds possessed a reasonable suspicion based on the
 following facts known to him at the time he approached Kaianui:
 (1) the location of Kaianui's vehicle within the same vicinity
 that was communicated by dispatch; (2) the purported description
 of the responsible vehicle as a champagne-colored Toyota pickup
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
truck; and (3) a man standing next door to Kaianui's home, who
 
reportedly pointed at her vehicle as the police pulled up to her
 home.
 
Regarding information communicated over police radio, 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that "[w]hile police officers 
are acting in concert and are keeping each other informed of the progress of a particular investigation, the knowledge of each is deemed to be the knowledge of all." Barnes, 58 Haw. at 336, 568 
P.2d at 1210. It is not necessary that the police officer making the reasonable suspicion determination have personal knowledge of its justification. Id. Indeed, an officer in "hot pursuit" of a 
suspect "has no opportunity to check on the reliability of the information he receives over the police radio, and necessarily relies on headquarters." State v. Pokini, 45 Haw. 295, 311, 367 
P.2d 499, 507-08 (1961). 
Here, Officer Arnds was permitted to rely on the
 
information provided by dispatch relating to the general location
 of the responsible vehicle, which was in the general vicinity of
 Kaianui's residence. However, this information--that the
 responsible vehicle was in the area of Kuhio and Pohala Streets-­is not on its own sufficient to form a basis for reasonable
 suspicion. Nor does the State contend so. Instead, the State
 argues, because the color, make, and type of Kaianui's vehicle
 matched the description of the vehicle for which Officer Arnds
 was searching and because a man standing near Kaianui's house
 pointed at her vehicle upon Officer Arnds's arrival, this was 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient to establish reasonable suspicion. We address each of
 
these purported facts in turn. 
With regards to the responsible vehicle's description
 
as a champagne-colored Toyota pickup truck, there is no testimony
 or other evidence in the record as to the origin of this
 information or how Officer Arnds learned of it. Officer Arnds
 testified that he did not know where that particular information
 came from, although he thought maybe it was from a witness
 statement. Felicilda's testimony was that she could not discern
 the color; she did not describe it as champagne-colored, did not
 know if it was light or dark in color, only metallic. Officer
 Badayos testified that he took a statement from a male witness,
 who appears to have been Felicilda's boyfriend, but he did not
 testify that he relayed any information to dispatch or anyone
 other than Officer Lago and offered no testimony regarding the
 color of the suspect vehicle. Therefore, the source of this
 description is unknown.
 
Viewing the "champagne-colored" Toyota pickup as 
information obtained from an unknown source, we consider the supreme court's holding that "the reliability of [a] tip is a predominant factor in [the] examination of the totality of the circumstances regarding the constitutionality of [an] investigative stop." Prendergast, 103 Hawai' i at 460, 83 P.3d at 
723 (emphasis added). In Prendergast, the court upheld the constitutionality of a traffic stop based on a tip in which the caller (who identified himself by name), provided a contemporaneous, first-hand account of erratic driving, along 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the make, model, license plate number, location, and
 
direction of the involved vehicle. Id. at 452-53, 83 P.3d at
 715-16. The court recognized that the basis of the informant's
 knowledge was known to "clearly derive[] from personal
 observations." Id. at 460, 83 P.3d at 723. The court found that
 because the information was "firmly rooted in time and place and
 based on firsthand observations of criminal activity," it was
 sufficient in those narrow circumstances to support a finding of
 reasonable suspicion. Id. at 461, 83 P.3d at 724; see also State
 
v. Goudy, 52 Haw. 497, 498, 504, 479 P.2d 800, 801, 804 (1971)
 (anonymous tip with specific predictions of future activity, in
 combination with police confirmation of that activity, was
 sufficient to justify temporary stop). 
Conversely, when the source of the information is
 
unknown and thus "devoid of any of the underlying circumstances
 which explain how the informant knew [the suspect was] committing
 crime," the tip cannot serve as the basis for a seizure. State
 
v. Phillips, 67 Haw. 535, 540, 696 P.2d 346, 350 (1985). In
 Phillips, an anonymous caller reported that an unidentified male
 was threatening people while brandishing a weapon at the Lanikai
 Boat Ramp. Id. at 536, 696 P.2d at 348. The caller further
 
provided the color, make, and license plate of the offender's
 vehicle. Id. Upon arrival at the scene, the police saw a car
 
matching this description with the defendant sitting in the
 vehicle, but otherwise noted nothing out of the ordinary. Id. 
The officers approached the vehicle, spotted and seized a 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sheathed knife sitting on the front seat, and asked the defendant
 
to step out of the vehicle. Id. at 536-37, 696 P.2d at 348-49. 
The supreme court held that the evidence should have
 
been suppressed because, "[w]ithout more, a faceless informer's
 tip does not give cause for the forcible stop of a person." Id.
 
at 540, 696 P.2d at 350. Although the informant had provided a
 correct and specific description of the defendant's vehicle, the
 informant did not explain how she or he knew "that the defendant
 had committed or was committing a crime." Id. at 539, 696 P.2d
 
at 350 (emphasis added). Furthermore, the defendant's possession
 of the knife in the car did not justify a further search, because
 mere possession of a knife is not unlawful. Id.
 
Here, Officer Arnds initially testified that he
 
approached Kaianui because the vehicle parked in front of her
 residence "was a gold Toyota pickup truck and had heavy front end
 damage." However, he later admitted that he could not see any
 damage from the street; therefore, the only correlating
 information concerning the description of the truck was its make
 and color. However, Officer Arnds did not establish how he came
 to know this information or at what point in the investigation he
 learned of the description. While he did initially state that
 "we had a witness statement," he ultimately could not "recall how
 we got that information." There is nothing in the record to
 indicate the origin of the information. The only evidence of
 what witnesses said at the scene of the collision was Felicilda's
 testimony, and she did not identify the color of the truck, only
 its make. 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State contends that it is "wrong to require the
 
source of the dispatch information be proven in order for the
 
State to show that reasonable suspicion existed." The State
 correctly recognizes that law enforcement may rely on dispatch
 descriptions, even where those descriptions do not identically
 correspond to the suspect. Melear, 63 Haw. at 493, 630 P.2d at
 
624. However, in this case, the record does not establish that
 
dispatch conveyed any description of the responsible vehicle or
 of its operator or any other particularized facts that would lead
 the police to single out Kaianui's vehicle or Kaianui herself at
 that point in the investigation. Thus, unlike the geographic
 information that was conveyed by dispatch in this case, the court
 cannot attribute the same reliability to the description of the
 vehicle where there is no demonstration at all of its origin.
 
As the supreme court recognized in Prendergast, the 
reliability of the information from an unknown source is paramount. 103 Hawai' i at 460, 83 P.3d at 723. Thus, without 
being "firmly rooted in time and place and based on firsthand observations of criminal activity," the information from an unknown source that the involved vehicle was a gold or champagne colored pickup truck does not provide additional support for Officer Arnds's reasonable suspicion that Kaianui may have been involved in criminal wrongdoing. See id. at 461, 83 P.3d at 724. 
Finally, the State asserts that an unidentified
 
neighbor's pointing at Kaianui's truck "substantially
 corroborat[ed] what [Officer Arnds] was dispatched to look for." 
However, Officer Arnds did not testify that he relied on the
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pointing man to form his "reasonable suspicion" concerning
 
Kaianui. Instead, he testified, "I don't know why he was
 pointing at the car at the time. No, I don't know why. He
 didn't say she was involved in a crash or anything like that. He
 just pointed at her car." Officer Arnds did not speak with the
 man before entering Kaianui's property and seizing her. That an
 unidentified man, who may have been Kaianui's neighbor, was
 pointing toward a car parked on a property located on one of the
 streets that Officer Arnds was cruising does not "substantially
 corroborate" a suspicion that the responsible vehicle was parked
 at this particular defendant's house.
 
Further, the cases cited by the State are readily
 
distinguishable, as they include additional facts from which a
 reasonable inference can be made that the nonverbal pointing was
 intended to indicate criminal wrongdoing. In People v.
 Dickerson, for example, officers responded to a radio
 communication of a man with a gun in a specific restaurant. 655
 N.Y.S.2d 48, 49, 238 A.D.2d 147, 148 (N.Y. App. Div. 1997). Upon
 arriving at the scene, a man outside the restaurant stated, "The
 man you're looking for is in the restaurant." Id. Upon entering
 
the restaurant, the defendant was the only patron inside and a
 worker behind the counter immediately pointed to the defendant. 
Id. The New York appellate court upheld the conviction,
 
concluding that the stop was constitutional and based on
 reasonable suspicion. Id.
 
Similarly in Commonwealth v. Vazquez, several
 
individuals had described the suspect to law enforcement and
 
18
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
given his location on a particular street. 686 N.E.2d 993, 994
 
(Mass. 1997). Additional individuals pointed to the suspect who
 
was standing near his vehicle and the officer stopped and frisked
 
the suspect. Id. In upholding the lawfulness of the stop, the
 
Massachusetts Supreme Court held that the information from
 multiple witnesses to the criminal activity in combination with
 the nonverbal indication of two or three additional witnesses was
 sufficient to form the basis for reasonable suspicion. Id. at
 
996. 
Here, however, the unidentified man made no verbal or
 
nonverbal accusation that Kaianui was involved in any wrongdoing.
 In contrast with the cases cited by the State, there is no
 indication in the record that he witnessed any criminal activity
 and the police did not obtain his statement or even his identity. 
Indeed, Officer Arnds did not tesify that he acted based on the
 man's pointing, rather he was already pulling up to Kaianui's
 house to conduct an investigation; nor did Officer Arnds note the
 pointing man in his police report. Without additional facts, the
 pointing man did not further support a basis for Officer Arnds to
 have formed a reasonable suspicion sufficient to seize Kaianui.
 
Thus, while the State correctly states that "collective
 
information" communicated by police radio can serve as the basis
 for reasonable suspicion (even where the information is not a
 precise correlation to the actual suspect), the only "collective"
 knowledge established by the record that can be imputed to
 Officer Arnds was a general location of the responsible vehicle
 and possibly, by inference, Felicilda's general identification of
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the vehicle as a Toyota pickup was relied to Officer Arnds. We 
conclude that the evidence in the record does not support a reasonable suspicion that "criminal activity was afoot." Perez, 
111 Hawai' i at 398, 141 P.3d at 1045 (holding that facts which 
"[give] rise only to the inchoate suspicion that defendant might intend to engage in drug activity in the future" are insufficient to support a reasonable suspicion determination). Indeed, Kaianui exhibited no sign of injury and there was no vehicle damage visible to Officer Arnds from the street. Furthermore, and as the District Court properly recognized, "[a] truck parked outside a home in a residential neighborhood at that time of the evening raises no suspicion." Testimony that the conversation between Officer Arnds and Kaianui quickly revealed that she had been in a motor vehicle collision and that his subsequent observations revealed damage to her vehicle does not justify, after the fact, the initial seizure without reasonable suspicion. Id. at 398, 141 P.3d at 1045 ("[the] standard requires reasonable suspicion to be based on facts known to the police at the time of the search or seizure"). 
Accordingly, we reject the State's first contention of
 
error.
 
B. Officer Arnds's Entry Onto Kaianui's Property
 The State argues that the District Court erred in
 
concluding that Officer Arnds needed probable cause because he
 entered the curtilage of Kaianui's home.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The United States Supreme Court recently reiterated its
 
rule that "[w]hen a law enforcement officer physically intrudes
 
on the curtilage to gather evidence, a search within the meaning
 of the Fourth Amendment has occurred." Collins v. Virginia, –­
U.S. –-, 138 S.Ct. 1663, 1670 (2018) (emphasis added) (citing Florida v. Jardines, 569 U.S. 1, 11 (2013)). This test, which the Hawai' i Supreme Court dubs the "trespass-intrusion test" 
relies on a property-based understanding of the Fourth Amendment doctrine. State v. Phillips, 138 Hawai' i 321, 337, 382 P.3d 133, 
149 (2016). The first question under this test is whether there is a trespass or physical intrusion, which means an act of "entering without permission," to a constitutionally-protected area, i.e., persons, houses, papers or effects. Id. (quoting 
Black's Law Dictionary 951 (10th ed. 2014)). If so, it must further be determined "whether the underlying purpose of the police, objectively examined and at the time of the trespass or physical intrusion, is to gather evidence." Id. (citing 
Jardines, 569 U.S. at 7-11. Once both elements are met, a constitutional "search" has occurred and the inquiry then shifts to whether the search was reasonable, as having been authorized by a warrant or an applicable exception to the warrant requirement. Id. 
Alternatively, and if the trespass-intrusion test does
 
not dictate that a search has occurred, a search may also result
 when the government intrudes into areas, objects, or activities
 in which an individual has exhibited a "reasonable expectation of
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
privacy." Phillips, 138 Hawai' i at 337 n.10, 382 P.3d at 337 
n.10 ("[These tests] are alternative tests. . . . [W]here no
 
Fourth Amendment search is found under one of the tests, the
 inquiry does not stop there, and the court must determine whether
 a search occurred under the other test."). To find that a
 defendant's expectation of privacy is reasonable, "there is a
 two-fold requirement:" (1) that the first exhibited an actual,
 subjective expectation of privacy; and (2) the expectation is one
 that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable. Id. at 337,
 382 P.3d at 149 (citing Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 361
 (1967) (Harlan, J., concurring)).
 
The threshold issue for either test is whether the 
District Court erred in concluding that Officer Arnds entered the constitutionally-protected area, or curtilage, of Kaianui's residence during his investigation. The curtilage determination is "dependent upon the facts and circumstances of [this] individual" case and therefore is a mixed question of law and fact, which we review for clear error. Trinque, 140 Hawai' i at 
276, 400 P.3d at 477. A court has clearly erred when its finding lacks substantial evidence in the record to support the finding or the appellate court is left with the conviction that a mistake has been made. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 392, 894 P.2d at 89. 
Moreover, the lower court "may draw all reasonable and legitimate inferences and deductions from the evidence adduced." State v. 
Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 245-46, 831 P.2d 924, 930 (1992) (quoting 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Nelson, 69 Haw. 461, 469, 748 P.2d 365, 370 (1987))
 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
While the Fourth Amendment "does not . . . prevent all 
investigations conducted on private property," it affords the home a protection "first among equals." Jardines, 569 U.S. at 6. 
The area "immediately surrounding and associated with the home"–­the curtilage--is regarded as "part of the home itself for Fourth Amendment purposes." Oliver v. United States, 466 U.S. 170, 180 
(1984). "Curtilage is usually defined as a small piece of land, not necessarily enclosed, around a dwelling house and generally includes buildings used for domestic purposes in the conduct of family affairs." State v. Kender, 60 Haw. 301, 304, 588 P.2d 
447, 449 (1978). It is "an area where the private domestic activities normally conducted within the sanctity of the home itself can be expected to extend." State v. Quiday, 141 Hawai' i 
116, 126, 405 P.3d 552, 562 (2017) (citing and adopting the curtilage rationale of People v. Cook, 710 P.2d 299 (Cal. 1985)). It is the area around the home that is "'intimately linked to the home, both physically and psychologically' and is where 'privacy expectations are most heightened.'" Jardines, 569 U.S. at 7 
(quoting California v. Ciraolo, 476 U.S. 207, 213 (1986)). The "conception defining the curtilage . . . is a familiar one easily understood from our daily experience." Oliver, 466 U.S. at 182 n.12. Ultimately, curtilage is to be contrasted with areas in
 
open fields. See United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400, 411
 
(2012) ("Quite simply, an open field, unlike the curtilage of a
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
home, is not one of those protected areas enumerated in the
 
Fourth Amendment."). 
To aid in determining where the curtilage ends and an
 
open field begins, the Supreme Court has provided certain factors
 that may be applied to a particular area at issue.
7 United
 
States v. Dunn, 480 U.S. 294(1987); but see Jardines, 569 U.S. 1,
 and Collins, 138 S.Ct. 1663 (finding, without application of the
 Dunn factors, that both the front porch and a partially enclosed
 driveway, respectively, were included within the curtilage). 
These factors, while useful, are not dispositive of the inquiry
 into whether an area is included in the curtilage. See, e.g.,
 
United States v. Johnson, 256 F.3d 895, 911 (9th Cir. 2001) (en
 banc) ("the Dunn factors do not yield a definite answer; rather
 they guide [us] in determining whether the area is so intimately
 connected to the home that it should fall under the umbrella of
 the Fourth Amendment's protections"). 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has not specifically employed 
the Dunn factors to make a curtilage determination, perhaps because it did not need to engage in a detailed analysis whether a particular area is included within the curtilage. See, e.g., Kender, 60 Haw. at 304, 588 P.2d at 449 ("one's back yard may be part of one's curtilage"); Quiday, 141 Hawai' i at 124, 405 P.3d 
at 560 (finding that marijuana plants in defendant's backyard 
7
 These factors are: (1) the proximity of the area to the home; (2)
whether the area is included within an enclosure surrounding the home; (3) the
nature of the uses to which the area is put; and (4) the steps taken by the
resident to protect the area from observation by people passing by. Dunn, 480
 
U.S. at 301.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were "tucked in the curtilage" of the home "directly along the 
west side" of the residence); State v. Jensen, 69 Haw. 534, 750 P.2d 932 (1988) (backyard in a residential area is part of a defendant's curtilage); Phillips, 138 Hawai' i at 348-50, 382 P.3d 
at 160-62 (interior of garage is, at a minimum, within the curtilage of the home); State v. Cuntapay, 104 Hawai' i 109, 118, 
85 P.3d 634, 643 (2004) (recognizing Fourth Amendment protections for a washroom "located in the garage area"); cf. State v. Stachler, 58 Haw. 412, 418-421, 570 P.2d 1323, 1328-29 (1977) (marijuana patch located roughly fifteen feet south of the defendant's house not determined to be within the curtilage); State v. Knight, 63 Haw. 90, 93, 621 P.2d 370, 373 (1980) (greenhouse located approximately forty-five feet away from the defendant's home not shown to be within the curtilage of the residence). 
The United States Supreme Court has engaged in a
 
curtilage analysis with regard to the front porch of a residence
 as well as a partially-enclosed portion of a driveway. In
 Jardines, the Court considered whether using a drug-sniffing dog
 on a homeowner's porch to investigate the contents of the home is
 a "search" within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. 569 U.S.
 at 3. The Court found that the "front porch is the classic
 exemplar of an area adjacent to the home and to 'which the
 activity of home life extends.'" Id. at 7 (quoting Oliver, 466
 
U.S. at 180).
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Collins, the police viewed from the street what
 
appeared to be a motorcycle (matching the description of one that
 
had been reported stolen) parked on defendant's driveway. __ U.S.
 __, 138 S.Ct. at 1668. The officer photographed the motorcycle
 from the sidewalk and then walked onto the residential property
 and up to the top of the driveway to where the motorcycle was
 parked. Id. He then pulled off a tarp covering the motorcycle,
 
ran a search of the license plate and vehicle identification
 numbers (which confirmed the motorcycle was stolen), took a
 photograph of the uncovered motorcycle, put the tarp back on, and
 left the property. Id. 
The Court sought to apply the holding in Jardines that
 
a law enforcement officer's physical intrusion "on the curtilage
 to gather evidence," constitutes a search within the meaning of
 the Fourth Amendment. Id. at 1670. Thus, as a threshold issue,
 
the Court addressed whether the "part of the driveway where
 [defendant's] motorcycle was parked and subsequently searched is
 curtilage." Id. (emphasis added). The Court carefully parsed
 
the record, which included photographs of the front of the house
 and driveway. Id. In concluding that the area at issue was
 
curtilage, the Court relied on the following facts: (1) the
 driveway ran alongside the front lawn and up a few yards past the
 front perimeter of the house; (2) the top portion of the driveway
 sat behind the front perimeter of the house and was enclosed on
 two sides by a brick wall about the height of a car and on a
 third side by the house; (3) a side door provided direct access
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
between this partially enclosed section of the driveway and the
 
house; and (4) a visitor seeking to reach the front door of the
 house would have to walk part way up the driveway, but would turn
 off before entering the enclosure and instead proceed up a set of
 steps leading to the front porch. Id. at 1670-71. The Court
 
concluded that, similar to "the front porch [in Jardines], the
 side garden, or area 'outside the front window,' the driveway
 enclosure where [the Officer] searched the motorcycle
 constitutes' an area adjacent to the home and 'to which the
 activity of home life extends' and so is properly considered
 curtilage." Id. at 1671 (quoting Jardines, 569 U.S. at 6;
 Oliver, 466 U.S. at 182, n.12.
 
Here, therefore, to determine whether the District
 
Court clearly erred in finding that Officer Arnds entered the
 curtilage of Kaianui's home, we must consider Officer Arnds's
 testimony and any reasonable inferences therefrom. Officer Arnds
 testified that Kaianui was out in front of her residence, that
 she was kind of by her garage. The house was in darkness, but
 the police had their headlights on and had lit up the area with
 their spotlight. Kaianui's vehicle was pulled up on the grassy
 area of her yard next to her garage and the damaged front-end of
 the vehicle was not visible from the street. It also was not
 visible to the officer from his vantage point where he seized
 Kaianui, as he ultimately testified that he could not see the
 damage to the truck until after he spoke with Kaianui and he
 walked further into Kaianui's property and up to the truck. 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on this record, we cannot conclude that the
 
District Court clearly erred in finding and concluding that
 
Officer Arnds had entered the curtilage when he approached
 Kaianui in front of her residence or when he observed the damage
 to Kaianui's vehicle. It is a reasonable inference from the
 testimony that the area where Kaianui was standing directly
 borders the home itself and that Officer Arnds had to further
 encroach into a nearby area on Kaianui's property, which was not
 visible without that further encroachment, in order to inspect
 the vehicle. The record is sparse; however, the evidence and
 reasonable inferences therefrom support the District Court's 
conclusion that Officer Arnds entered the curtilage. 
Accordingly, our inquiry shifts to whether this entry 
was accomplished through an "intrusion" (i.e., entry without permission) and "whether the underlying purpose . . . objectively examined and at the time of the trespass or physical intrusion, is to gather evidence." Phillips, 138 Hawai' i at 337, 382 P.3d 
at 149. 
It is undisputed that Officer Arnds never requested
 
Kaianui's express permission to enter onto her property. 
Additionally, there is no evidence indicating her implied
 permission to do so. The Supreme Court recognizes an implied
 license that permits a "visitor to approach the home by the front
 path, knock promptly, wait briefly to be received, and then
 (absent invitation to linger longer) leave." Jardines, 569 U.S.
 
at 8. Here, however, Officer Arnds testified that he approached
 
28
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kaianui, immediately began questioning her about her involvement
 
in a motor vehicle collision, and further entered and lingered on
 her property to inspect her vehicle, all without her consent to
 do so. The record therefore supports the conclusion that Officer
 Arnds entered the curtilage intrusively and without permission.
 
The record also supports the District Court's mixed
 
finding and conclusion that Officer Arnds entered Kaianui's
 property with the purpose of investigating and gathering evidence
 of a crime.
8 Specifically, when asked why he thought it was
 
necessary to immediately approach Kaianui, he responded, in part:
 "[I]t's our job to investigate crashes. . . . [M]y investigation
 of the crash was to go there, find the operator, for get her
 statement, and make sure, again, . . . that she wouldn't –­didn't have serious injuries." The court recognizes Officer
 Arnds's additional motivation of ensuring that a potentially-
injured motorist receive the necessary medical treatment;
 however, we cannot conclude that the District Court clearly erred
 in finding and concluding that Officer Arnds entered Kaianui's
 property in order to gather evidence relevant to his
 investigation. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the District Court did
 
not err in concluding that Officer Arnds effected a search when
 he entered the curtilage of Kaianui's residence.
 
8
 Namely, Kaianui's alleged violations of HRS §§ 291E-61(a)(1)(3),
291C-15, HRS § 291-12, 291-2. 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, we turn to whether the search was reasonable. A 
warrantless search, while presumptively unreasonable, may be 
justified where the search was supported by probable cause and exigent circumstances. See Phillips, 138 Hawai' i at 336, 382 
P.3d at 148; State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai' i 308, 313, 893 P.2d 159, 
163 (1995) (citing State v. Ritte, 68 Haw. 253, 257, 710 P.2d 1197, 1201 (1985)). 
Probable cause exists when "the facts and circumstances 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an offense has been committed." State v. Navas, 81 Hawai' i 113, 116, 913 P.2d 39, 42 
(1996). The District Court determined that Officer Arnds "lacked . . . probable cause to enter the curtilage to effect a search." We agree. 
As stated above, Officer Arnds's testimony fails to 
establish a sufficient basis for having singled out Kaianui and her vehicle as potentially responsible for the motor vehicle collision. Having failed to establish even a reasonable suspicion to support Officer Arnds entry onto Kaianui's property, it necessarily follows that the record also fails to establish sufficient probable cause to enter the property. See, e.g., 
Perez, 111 Hawai' i at 398, 141 P.3d at 1045 (acknowledging 
reasonable suspicion as a standard lower than probable cause). 
The argument that Officer Arnds's questioning of
 
Kaianui provided the probable cause to further enter onto her
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property and inspect her vehicle is without merit. As we
 
concluded above, Officer Arnds engaged in an improper seizure of
 Kaianui when he questioned her about her purported involvement in
 the collision. The probable cause for a subsequent search cannot
 therefore be based on her responses to such questioning. Without
 those responses, or assuming for argument's sake that Kaianui had
 not been present at all, the remaining facts do not provide a
 sufficient basis to justify Officer Arnds's entry onto Kaianui's
 property without a warrant. Accordingly, we need not address the
 State's argument that exigent circumstances justified the
 warrantless search.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the District Court's March 4, 2016
 
Order Granting Motion to Suppress is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2018. 
On the briefs: Renee Ishikawa Delizo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
David A. Sereno,
for Defendant-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
31
 