 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000636
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY,
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
A.P., Defendant-Appellee and
J.W., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 12-1-0154)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant J.W. appeals pro se from a June 13, 
2012 Family Court of the First Circuit, State of Hawai' i (Family 
Court) Judgment of Paternity that resolved issues of paternity, 
custody, visitation, and child support with respect to J.W.'s and 
1
Defendant-Appellee A.P.'s biological child (Child).  On March 7, 
2012, Plaintiff-Appellee Child Support Enforcement Agency, State 
of Hawai' i (CSEA) filed a complaint to establish paternity for 
Child against J.W. and A.P. The June 13, 2012 judgment declared 
that J.W. and A.P. are Child's biological parents and awarded (1) 
legal and physical custody of Child to A.P., (2) visitation to 
J.W., and (3) monthly child support payments to A.P. 
J.W.'s Opening Brief fails to include a "concise
 
statement of the points of error set forth in separately numbered
 
1
 The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
paragraphs", as required by Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), and otherwise fails to comply with HRAP 
Rule 28(b), but appears to contend that: (1) the Family Court 
lacked jurisdiction; and (2) the amount of the child support 
award was excessive and unreasonable. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve J.W.'s appeal as follows:
 
(1) The Family Court has jurisdiction over this 
paternity and child support action, even though neither of the 
parents or Child currently live in Hawai' i, because Child was 
born in Honolulu, Hawai' i. Mother and Child were residents of 
Oahu when the complaint was filed and the paternity and child 
support hearing was held. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 584-8 (Supp. 2012)
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
§584-8 Jurisdiction; venue. (a) Without limiting the
jurisdiction of any other court, the family court has
jurisdiction of an action brought under this chapter. The
 action may be joined with an action for divorce, annulment,
separate maintenance, or support.
 
.  .  .
 
(d) The action may be brought in the county in which . . .
the child was born[.]
 
The Family Court correctly concluded that it has
 
subject matter jurisdiction over this paternity proceeding
 
pursuant to HRS § 584-3 (2006). HRS § 584-3 provides, in
 
relevant part:
 
[§584-3] How parent and child relationship
established. The parent and child relationship between a
child and:
 
.  .  .
 
(2) The natural father may be established under this
chapter[.]
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The CSEA has the authority to bring a paternity action
 
pursuant to HRS §§ 576D-3 (2006), 576D-4 (2006), and 584-6(a)
 
(2006).2
 
HRS § 576D-3 provides, in relevant part:
 
§576D-3 Obtaining or enforcing child support. (a)
The agency [ 3
] shall undertake any legal or administrative
action to secure support for a child by enforcing an
existing court order or obtaining a court order of support.
(b) To carry out its responsibilities imposed under
this chapter, the agency . . . may commence or appear in any
proceeding before any court . . . for the purpose of
establishing paternity for children born out of wedlock[.]
 
HRS § 576D-4 provides:
 
[§576D-4] Establishment of paternity. When necessary
to obtain child support for a child under section 576D-3,
the agency shall take any legal or administrative action to
establish the paternity of the child. The agency shall
undertake the action on behalf of the State, child,
custodial parent of the child, or any other person for whom
the agency has a duty to obtain or enforce a child support
order.
 
HRS § 584-6(a) provides, in relevant part:
 
§584-6 Determination of father and child
 
relationship; who may bring action; when action may be
brought; process, warrant, bond, etc.  (a) . . . [T]he child
support enforcement agency[] may bring an action for the
purpose of declaring the existence or nonexistence of the
father and child relationship within the following time
periods:
 
. . . 
(2) 	If the child has not become the subject of an
adoption proceeding, within three years after the child
reaches the age of majority[.]
 
In addition to subject matter jurisdiction, the Family
 
Court has personal jurisdiction over J.W.
 
HRS § 584-8 provides, in relevant part:
 
§584-8 Jurisdiction; venue. . . .
 
(c) In addition to any other method of service
provided by statute or court rule, if the defendant is not
found within the circuit, service may be effectuated by
registered or certified mail, with request for a return
 
2
 HRS Chapter 576D is entitled "Child Support Enforcement" and HRS
Chapter 584 is entitled "Uniform Parentage Act[.]"
 
3
 "'Agency' means the child support enforcement agency established
under section 576D-2." HRS § 576D-1.
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
receipt and direction to deliver to addressee only. The
 
return receipt signed by the defendant shall be prima facie
evidence that the defendant accepted delivery of the
complaint and summons on the date set forth on the receipt.
Actual receipt by the defendant of the complaint and summons
sent by registered or certified mail shall be equivalent to
personal service on the defendant by an authorized process
server as of the date of the receipt.
 
.  .  .
 (e) For service effectuated by registered or certified
mail, an electronic copy or facsimile of the signature of the
served individual on certified mailers provided by the United
States Postal Service shall constitute valid proof of service on
the individual. 
The FOFs provide: 
On April 3, 2012, CSEA filed a Statement of Mailing to
[J.W.] showing service of the Complaint by mail on [J.W.].
The Certified Mail Return Receipt from the U.S. Postal
Service attached to the Statement of Mailing shows
restricted delivery of the Complaint to [J.W.] at [J.W.’s
specified address]; the certified mail receipt was signed by
[J.W.] on March 21, 2012. 
The return receipt signed by J.W. is prima facie
 
evidence that he accepted delivery of the Complaint and summons
 
on March 21, 2012. 
J.W.'s argument that the Family Court lacks
 
jurisdiction over him because he is not a resident of Hawai
'i is 
unpersuasive. HRS § 576B-201 (2006)4
 provides, in relevant part:
[§576B-201] Bases for jurisdiction over nonresident.
In a proceeding to establish, enforce, or modify a support
order or to determine parentage, a tribunal of this State
may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresident
individual . . . if:
 
.   . .
 
(2) 	The individual submits to the jurisdiction of
this State by consent, by entering a general
appearance, or by filing a responsive document
having the effect of waiving any contest to
personal jurisdiction[.]
 
HRS § 576B-205 (2006) provides, in relevant part:
 
[§576B-205]  Continuing, exclusive jurisdiction. (a)
A tribunal of this State issuing a support order consistent
with the law of this State has continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction over a child support order:
(1) 	As long as this State remains the residence of
 
4
 HRS Chapter 576B is entitled "Uniform Interstate Family Support
Act[.]"
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5     the obligor, the individual obligee, or the child for
     whose benefit the support order is issued; or
(2)  Until all of the parties who are individuals have 
     filed written consents with the tribunal of this  
     State for a tribunal of another state to modify   
     the order and assume continuing, exclusive        
     jurisdiction.
(b)  A tribunal of this State issuing a child support order 
     consistent with the law of this State may not exercise  
     its continuing jurisdiction to modify the order if the  
     order has been modified by a tribunal of another state  
     pursuant to this chapter or a law substantially similar 
     to this chapter.
(c)  If a child support order of this State is modified by a 
     tribunal of another state pursuant to this chapter or a 
     law substantially similar to this chapter, a tribunal   
     of this State loses its continuing, exclusive           
     jurisdiction with regard to prospective enforcement of  
     the order issued in this State, and may only: 
(1)  Enforce the order that was modified as to amounts       
     accruing before the modification;
(2)  Enforce nonmodifiable aspects of that order; and 
(3)  Provide other appropriate relief for violations of tha
 order which occurred before the effective date of the 
 modification.t 
      
    
 
Douglas v. Brittlebank-Douglas , 98 Hawai #i 168, 45 P.3d
368 (App. 2002), provides guidance.  The question we addressed in
Douglas was:  "Under the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act,
does the state that issued the child support order retain the
right to enforce that order when the father, mother, and children
are not residents of that state?"  98 Hawai# i at 173, 45 P.3d at
373.  We answered the question as follows:
In the following two situations, the answer is no:  (1)
under HRS § 576B-205(a)(2), when all of the parties who are
individuals have filed written consents with the tribunal of
the issuing state for a tribunal of another state to modify
the order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction; and
(2), under HRS § 576B-205(b), when the order has been
modified by a tribunal of another state pursuant to the
Uniform Interstate Family Support Act (UIFSA) or a law
substantially similar to it.  The instant case does not
present either of the above situations.
When [father], [mother], and the children no longer resided
in Hawai# i, the basis for Hawai# i's "continuing jurisdiction"
over [father] and the child support order was HRS § 576B-201
which, as noted above, states, in relevant part, that "[i]n
a proceeding to establish, enforce, or modify a support
order . . ., a tribunal of this State may exercise personal
jurisdiction over a nonresident individual . . . if: . . .
(3) The individual resided with the child in this State[.]" 
It is a fact that [father] resided with the children in
Hawai#i. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 576B-205(a)(1) specifies that when [father], [mother], and
the children do not reside in Hawai' i, Hawai' i does not have 
"continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over a child support order."HRS § 576B-205(b) states that Hawai' i "may not exercise its
continuing jurisdiction to modify the order if the order has beenmodified by a tribunal of another state pursuant to this chapteror a law substantially similar to this chapter." Reading thesetwo sections together, the clear implication is that althoughHawai'i loses its "continuing, exclusive jurisdiction," and its
"continuing jurisdiction to modify the order," Hawai' i retains its 
"continuing jurisdiction" to enforce the order as long as theorder has not been modified by a tribunal of another statepursuant to HRS Chapter 576B or a law substantially similar to it. 
The Official Comment of the National Conference of Commissioners
 
on Uniform State Laws to that part of the UIFSA that correspond
with HRS Chapter 576B supports this view. The Official Comment to
 that part of the UIFSA that corresponds with HRS § 576B-201 states
that "[t]he intent is to insure that every enacting state has a
long-arm statute as broad as constitutionally permitted." It also
 states that 
UIFSA creates a structure designed to provide for only one support
order at a time. This one order regime is facilitated and
combined with a broad assertion of personal jurisdiction under
this long-arm statute. The frequency of a two-state procedure
involving the participation of tribunals in both states should be
substantially reduced by the introduction of this long-arm
statute.
 
The Official Comment to that part of the UIFSA that corresponds
with HRS § 576B-205 states:
 
If all parties and the child reside elsewhere, the issuing state
loses its continuing, exclusive jurisdiction-which in practical
terms means the issuing tribunal loses its authority to modify its
order. The issuing state no longer has a nexus with the parties
or child and, furthermore, the issuing tribunal has no current
information about the circumstances of anyone involved. Note,
however, that the one-order of the issuing tribunal remains valid
and enforceable. That order is in effect not only in the issuing
state and those states in which the order has been registered, but
also may be enforced in additional states in which the one-order
is registered for enforcement after the issuing state loses its
power to modify the original order, . . . . The one-order remains
 in effect until it is properly modified in accordance with the
narrow terms of the Act[.]
 
In other words, although the loss of "continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction . . . means the issuing tribunal loses its authority
to modify its order[,]" it does not mean that the issuing tribunal
loses its authority to enforce the order.
 
Douglas, 98 Hawai' i at 173-74, 45 P.3d at 373-74 (block quote 
format altered). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, we conclude that HRS § 576B-201 authorized the 
Family Court to establish and enforce the child support order in 
the June 13, 2012 judgment. The exceptions discussed in Douglas 
do not apply here. See 98 Hawai' i at 173-74, 45 P.3d at 373-74. 
J.W. and A.P. have not filed written consents with the tribunal
 of this State, the issuing state, for a tribunal of another state
 
to modify the order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction
 
pursuant to HRS § 576B-205(a)(2). Additionally, under HRS §
 
576B-205(b), the order has not been modified by a tribunal of
 
another state pursuant to the Uniform Interstate Family Support
 
Act or a law substantially similar to it. 
The basis for Hawai' i's "continuing jurisdiction" over 
J.W. and the child support order was HRS § 576B-201, which
 
states, in relevant part, that "[i]n a proceeding to establish,
 
enforce, or modify a support order or to determine parentage, a
 
tribunal of this State may exercise personal jurisdiction over a
 
nonresident individual . . . if: . . . (2) The individual submits
 
to the jurisdiction of this State by consent, by entering a
 
general appearance, or by filing a responsive document having the
 
effect of waiving any contest to personal jurisdiction[.]" J.W.,
 
after being properly served, requested genetic testing to
 
establish paternity. J.W. also requested that he be allowed to
 
appear at the May 4, 2012 hearing by telephone and did, in fact,
 
appear by telephone conference call. 
As articulated in Douglas, HRS § 576B-205(a)(1) 
specifies that when J.W., A.P., and Child do not reside in 
Hawai'i, Hawai' i does not have "continuing, exclusive jurisdiction 
over a child support order." However, "Hawai' i retains its 
'continuing jurisdiction' to enforce the order as long as the 
order has not been modified by a tribunal of another state 
pursuant to HRS Chapter 576B or a law substantially similar to 
it." Douglas, 98 Hawai' i at 174, 45 P.3d at 374. In other 
words, although the Family Court loses its authority to modify 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its order, it does not lose its authority to enforce the order. 
Douglas, 98 Hawai' i at 174, 45 P.3d at 374. 
(2) J.W. contends that the Family Court awarded A.P.
 
an inflated child support award amount. We disagree.
 
As discussed above, HRS § 584-8 provides that the
 
Family Court has jurisdiction of a paternity action, which may be
 
joined with an action for child support. HRS § 584-15 (2006)
 
further provides, in relevant part:
 
§584-15 Judgment or order. . . . 
(c) The judgment or order may contain any other
provision directed against the appropriate party to the
proceeding, concerning the duty of support . . . or any
other matter in the best interest of the child. . . . The
 court may further order the noncustodial parent to reimburse
the custodial parent . . . for reasonable expenses incurred
prior to entry of judgment, including support[.]
 
. . . 
(e) In determining the amount to be paid by a parent
for support of the child and the period during which the
duty of support is owed, a court enforcing the obligation of
support shall use the guidelines established under section
576D-7. . . .
 
Hawai'i Family Courts must follow the Hawai' i Child 
Support Guidelines when calculating monthly child support. 
Hawai'i State Judiciary, 2010 Hawai' i Child Support Guidelines 
(effective Aug. 29, 2010) at 1 (hereinafter Guidelines). Hawai' i 
Family Courts "must order the amount of child support as 
calculated by the [Child Support Guidelines] Worksheet(s) unless 
there are exceptional circumstances which warrant a deviation." 
Guidelines at 11. If a parent believes that there are 
exceptional circumstances that warrant a deviation, that parent 
"has the burden of proving that exceptional circumstances exist 
and that the circumstances warrant a departure from the child 
support as calculated by the Worksheet(s)." Guidelines at 11. 
Here, the Family Court did not err in computing J.W.'s 
child support obligation using the Hawai' i Child Support 
Guidelines Worksheet. For the purpose of calculating the child support amount, J.W.'s gross monthly income was $3605.00. J.W. 
did not object to this monthly income figure nor did he propose 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an alternative amount. A.P.'s gross monthly income was $1167.00,
 
her monthly child care expenses were $451.00, and her monthly
 
health insurance costs were $27.00. J.W. did not object to these
 
figures. The Family Court ordered that J.W.'s monthly child
 
support obligation for Child is $981.00 as computed using the
 
Child Support Guidelines Worksheet, and CSEA requested that child
 
support commence in June 2012. J.W. apparently concurred with
 
this figure and commencement date by saying "OK." Additionally,
 
CSEA then asked for a past child support debt of $3,845.00
 
through May 2012 to be liquidated at $19.00 per month commencing
 
June 2012 and J.W. apparently acquiesced to this figure. At the
 
conclusion of the May 4, 2012 hearing, the Family Court asked
 
A.P. and J.W. if they had any questions regarding the hearing and
 
they did not. 
The Family Court was required to order J.W. to pay
 
$981.00 per month in child support as calculated by the Worksheet
 
because J.W. did not prove the existence of exceptional
 
circumstances warranting a deviation. See Guidelines at 11. 
J.W. did not contest his gross monthly income figure, A.P.'s
 monthly income figure, or his monthly child support obligation,
 
and J.W. did not offer any other evidence or testimony concerning
 
income to use in the calculation of child support. Accordingly,
 
we find no basis for granting relief to J.W. on appeal.
5
 
5
 We note, however, that our decision does not preclude J.W. or A.P.
from moving to register the support order in another state for modification.
The Family Court loses its continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over the child
support order when the parties are no longer residents of the state. HRS §
576B-205(a)(1). J.W. states in his Opening Brief, "I'm just asking that the
Child Support Enforcement Agency move jurisdiction to a state where either the
child and mother or where the father resides." However, it does not appear
that CSEA has the authority to sua sponte transfer jurisdiction of this case
or the order in this case to another state."
 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's July 13, 2012
 
judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 6, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
J.W. 
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Rosemary McShaneMaryanne MagnierDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10 