NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000705
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BARABBAS DIETRICH, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-2075)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Barabbas Dietrich (Dietrich)
 
appeals from the September 6, 2011 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court) convicting Dietrich on one count of Robbery in
 
the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
ÿÿ 708-841(1)(b) (Supp. 2009).
 
Dietrich raises the following points of error: (1) the
 
prosecution withheld exculpatory evidence violating his due
 
process rights, and the circuit court erred by (2) failing to
 
suspend the proceedings pursuant to HRS ÿÿ 704-404(1) (Supp.
 
2010); (3) denying his motion for judgment of acquittal; (4)
 
permitting the prosecution to comment during closing argument on
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dietrich's failure to call witnesses; (5) failing to instruct the
 
jury as to involuntary or nonself-induced intoxication and giving
 
improper jury instructions.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On December 21, 2010, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai» i (State) charged Dietrich with one count of robbery in the 
second degree and one count of driving without a license, in 
violation of HRS ÿÿ 286-102 (2007 Repl.). On June 28, 2011, 
Dietrich pled guilty to the offense of driving without a license. 
At trial, the complaining witness (CW) testified for
 
the State that at approximately 11:00 p.m. on December 12, 2010,
 
Dietrich approached him in a parking lot and asked for a
 
cigarette. Dietrich then asked CW for $20, and when CW refused,
 
Dietrich closed his fists, stuck out his chest, and said "oh, you
 
like me lick you right now?" CW eventually handed approximately
 
$70 in cash to Dietrich. Dietrich then left the parking lot, and
 
CW called the police, providing a description of Dietrich and
 
Dietrich's vehicle.
 
The State's second witness, a Honolulu Police
 
Department officer, testified that he stopped Dietrich's vehicle
 
on the freeway approximately an hour and a half later. The
 
officer noted Dietrich and his vehicle matched a description that
 
had been relayed over dispatch concerning CW's case. Another
 
officer arrived with CW. CW identified Dietrich, and the
 
officers arrested Dietrich.
 
Dietrich testified in his defense and stated CW
 
willingly gave Dietrich the cash. He denied approaching CW with
 
closed fists, demanding money, or making threatening statements. 
Dietrich also testified that after his encounter with CW, he
 
received additional cash from a sale he made later in the night.
 
Following deliberations, the jury found Dietrich guilty
 
as charged of the offense of robbery in the second degree. The
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court entered its Judgment of Conviction and Sentence on
 
September 6, 2011, and Dietrich filed a timely notice of appeal
 
on September 27, 2011.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Suppression of Evidence
 
"The suppression by the prosecution of evidence 
favorable to the accused violates due process where the evidence 
is material to guilt or punishment, regardless of the good faith 
or bad faith of the prosecution. However, in order to establish 
a Brady violation, an appellant must make a showing that the 
suppressed evidence would create a reasonable doubt about the 
appellant's guilt that would not otherwise exist." State v. 
Fukusaku, 85 Hawai» i 462, 479, 946 P.2d 32, 49 (1997) (internal 
quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
B. Examination Under HRS ÿÿ 704-404 (1993 & Supp. 2010)
 
"[A] trial court's ruling with regard to a defendant's 
fitness to proceed is appropriately reviewed on appeal for an 
abuse of discretion." State v. Castro , 93 Hawai» i 424, 426 n.1, 
5 P.3d 414, 416 n.1 (2000). 
C. Sufficiency of the Evidence 
The standard of review for sufficiency of the evidence
is well established; namely, whether, upon the evidence
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in
full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 
evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full play
to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility,
weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact. 
State v. Grace , 107 Hawai» i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(block quote format changed) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai» i 
409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction.
Misconduct of a prosecutor may provide grounds for a new
trial if the prosecutor's actions denied the defendant a
fair trial.
 
State v. Mainaaupo , 117 Hawai» i 235, 247-48, 178 P.3d 1, 13-14 
(2008) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
E. Jury Instructions
 
The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or
 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively
appears from the record as a whole that the error was not
prejudicial. In other words, error is not to be viewed in
isolation and considered purely in the abstract.
 
State v. Kassebeer , 118 Hawai» i 493, 504, 193 P.3d 409, 420 
(2008) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets 
omitted) (quoting State v. Mainaaupo , 117 Hawai» i 235, 247, 178 
P.3d 1, 13 (2008)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Suppression of Exculpatory Evidence
 
Dietrich contends the State withheld exculpatory 
evidence, violating his due process right to a fair trial. "The 
suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to the 
accused violates due process where the evidence is material to 
guilt or punishment, regardless of the good faith or bad faith of 
the prosecution. However, in order to establish a Brady 
violation, an appellant must make a showing that the suppressed 
evidence would create a reasonable doubt about the appellant's 
guilt that would not otherwise exist." State v. Fukusaku , 85 
Hawai» i 462, 479, 946 P.2d 32, 49 (1997) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The exculpatory evidence Dietrich refers to is a 2005
 
presentence report (PSI), which listed Dietrich's mental health
 
diagnoses and medication prescriptions. The 2011 PSI produced
 
for the instant case cited an excerpt from the 2005 PSI, stating
 
Dietrich was diagnosed with Attention Deficit with Hyperactivity
 
Disorder (ADHD), conduct disorder, depression, and mood disorder;
 
had a history of mental health services; and had been prescribed
 
Ritalin, antidepressant medications, and Depakote. Dietrich
 
contends the 2005 PSI could have been used to raise a defense of
 
nonself-induced intoxication.
 
We disagree. Dietrich fails to demonstrate that he or
 
his counsel did not have access to his 2005 PSI at the time of
 
his trial, or that the information in the 2005 PSI was material
 
to his defense. Dietrich was aware of his mental history; in
 
fact, during a pretrial plea colloquy (discussed further below),
 
Dietrich discussed his mental history with the court.
 
B. Examination Under HRS ÿÿ 704-404
 
Dietrich claims the circuit court erred because it did
 
not sua sponte  suspend the proceedings for a mental and physical
 
2
examination under to HRS ÿÿ 704-404.  The question of whether to 
stay the proceedings and order an examination rests in the sound 
discretion of the court. State v. Castro , 93 Hawai» i 424, 426, 5 
P.3d 414, 416 (2000). Dietrich did not file a notice of 
2
 HRS ÿÿ 704-404 states:
 
ÿÿ704-404 Examination of defendant with respect to physical
or mental disease, disorder, or defect. (1) Whenever the
defendant has filed a notice of intention to rely on the defense
of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding
responsibility, or there is reason to doubt the defendant's
fitness to proceed, or reason to believe that the physical or
mental disease, disorder, or defect of the defendant will or has
become an issue in the case, the court may immediately suspend all
further proceedings in the prosecution. If a trial jury has been
empanelled, it shall be discharged or retained at the discretion
of the court. The discharge of the trial jury shall not be a bar
to further prosecution.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intention to rely on a defense of mental disease or defect, nor
 
did he move for a mental examination. 
Dietrich asserts the circuit court had reason to doubt
 
his fitness based on the following responses Dietrich gave the
 
court during a pretrial plea colloquy: 
Q. 	Is your mind clear?
 
A. 	Yes, ma'am.
 
Q. 	Any medication, drugs or liquor in the last two days?
 
A. 	No, ma'am.
 
Q. 	Ever been diagnosed or treated for mental illness or
emotional disability?
 
A. 	ADHD, but I don't use it as an excuse.
 
Q. 	This is when? When you were younger?
 
A. 	Yeah.
 
Q. 	You take medication?
 
A. 	They give me medication, but I don't take it.
 
Q. 	Is the medication interfering in any way with your
ability to understand?
 
A. 	No.
 
Nothing in the record, nor in the allegedly suppressed
 
2005 PSI, demonstrated a rational for ordering a mental
 
examination under HRS ÿÿ 704-404. Therefore, the circuit court
 
did not abuse its discretion in not ordering an examination sua
 
sponte.
 
C. Sufficiency of Evidence
 
Dietrich's primary argument is that because CW stated
 
he had difficulties with the English language, CW's testimony was
 
insufficient to support the jury's verdict. However, CW stated
 
he learned English in school and has used English since 2003. 
The record demonstrates CW had sufficient command of English to
 
understand the questions posed and to accurately testify at
 
trial.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At trial, CW testified Dietrich closed his fists, stuck 
out his chest, and said: "You like me lick you right now?" when 
CW refused to hand over money. CW also testified that after he 
handed over $20, Dietrich asked CW for more money, told CW to 
take out his wallet, and repeated: "Like me lick you?" Viewing 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, State v. 
Kaulia, 128 Hawai» i 479, 496, 291 P.3d 377, 394 (2013), 
substantial evidence exists to support the jury's verdict, and 
the circuit court did not err in denying Dietrich's motion for 
judgment of acquittal. 
D. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Dietrich contends the prosecution engaged in 
prosecutorial misconduct by commenting during closing argument on 
Dietrich's failure to call corroborating witnesses. Because 
Dietrich did not object during closing argument, we review for 
plain error. State v. Iuli , 101 Hawai» i 196, 208, 65 P.3d 143, 
155 (2003). 
"The prosecution is permitted to draw reasonable 
inferences from the evidence, and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence." Id.  at 208, 65 P.3d at 155. 
Consequently, the prosecution may invoke the adverse inference against the defendant's failure to call a witness "when it would 
be natural under the circumstances for the defendant to call the 
witness, and when the comments do not suggest to the jury that it 
was the defendant's burden to produce proof by explaining the 
absence of witnesses or evidence[.]" State v. Mainaaupo , 117 
Hawai» i 235, 257, 178 P.3d 1, 23 (2008) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
During closing argument, the prosecutor stated: 
Defendant took the stand in this case. He is to be treated
 
like any other witness. So you look at the manner in which
he testified, the way in which he testified. You look at
 
whether or not his story makes sense. You look at whether
 
or not it's corroborated by any other evidence, which parts
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of it are, the parts that [CW] told you happened. Parts of
 
it aren't.
 
He talks to you about this friend [Castillo]. Now,
they don't have a burden, but if that's where he got all the
money from, where is [Castillo]? He talks about his friend
 Bronson who is in the car with him when he's pulled over by
the police who should actually have all of this information,
but we're not going to hear from Bronson.
 
They don't have a burden, ladies and gentlemen, but
there's absolutely no corroboration for anything [Dietrich]
has told you other than what coincides with what [CW] has
already told you.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Dietrich does not dispute that it would have been
 
natural for him to call Castillo or Bronson as witnesses. At
 
trial, Dietrich testified he had received the money in his wallet
 
from Castillo, and Bronson had been with him when he received the
 
money. The prosecutor expressly stated the defendant did not
 
bear the burden, and the prosecutor's comments did not otherwise
 
shift the burden to Dietrich. The prosecutor's comments were not
 
improper.
 
E. Jury Instructions
 
Dietrich contends the circuit court erred when it did 
not instruct the jury on nonself-induced intoxication. Dietrich 
did not request this instruction at trial, and there is no 
evidence indicating Dietrich was intoxicated at the time of the 
offense. See HRS ÿÿ 702-230(4) (1993 Repl.) (stating nonself­
induced intoxication "is a defense if by reason of such intoxication the defendant at the time of the defendant's conduct 
lacks substantial capacity[.]"); State v. Sawyer , 88 Hawai» i 325, 
333, 966 P.2d 637, 645 (1998) (no error in failing to instruct where evidentiary support for an asserted defense or for any of 
its essential components is clearly lacking). The circuit court 
did not commit plain error by not instructing the jury on 
nonself-induced intoxication. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dietrich contends the circuit court's jury instruction
 
was ambiguous. Specifically, Dietrich challenges the following
 
language: 
Now, a verdict must represent the considered judgment
of each juror, and in order to return a verdict, it is
necessary that each juror agree thereto. In other words,
your verdict must be unanimous.
 
* * * *
 
You may bring in either one of the following verdicts:
Number one, not guilty; or
Number two, guilty as charged.
Your verdict must be unanimous.
 
After your verdict has been reached and your
foreperson has signed and dated the verdict form, you will
notify the bailiff, and court will be reconvened to receive
the verdict.
 
Dietrich argues the above language misled the jury
 
because the jury sent a communication to the circuit court
 
stating: "If the vote is 11 guilty and 1 not guilty, does that
 
mean he's not guilty, or is it a hung jury?" Despite the jury
 
communication, we conclude the instructions, considered as a
 
whole, were not misleading as to the need for a unanimous verdict
 
or to the prosecution's burden and were not erroneous.
 
Dietrich further argues the circuit court erred when it
 
responded to the above jury communication, which the jury sent
 
about an hour after deliberations. After conferring with the
 
parties, the court responded to the jury: "Please refer to all of
 
the Court's instructions to you."
 
Dietrich asserts the jury communication indicates the
 
trial resulted in a hung jury. The circuit court is obligated to
 
exercise its broad discretion to obtain a verdict from the jury,
 
but in so doing, the court must not direct the jury to matters
 
outside the evidence presented, which may cause undue pressure on
 
the jury to reach a verdict based on compromise and expediency. 
State v. Villeza , 72 Haw. 327, 333-34, 817 P.2d 1054, 1058
 
(1991). 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
re-instructed the jury rather than declaring a mistrial. The
 
circuit court's re-instruction was not prejudicial. The court
 
only repeated its earlier instruction. See State v. Fajardo, 67
 
Haw. 593, 601, 699 P.2d 20, 25 (1985) ("Had the trial court
 simply repeated an instruction given earlier to the jury on how
 
to go about its deliberations, we feel that no prejudicial effect
 
would have befallen Appellant.").
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The September 6, 2011 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, May 17, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Stephen M. Shaw
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
10
 