NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000211 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
DL, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
C
L, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 16-1-1014) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant DL (DL) appeals from an April 26, 
2018 Divorce Decree and challenges the April 26, 2018 First 
Amended Findings of Fact [(
FOFs)], Conclusions of Law [(COLs)] 
and Order Regarding: June 21, 2017 Order Re: Defendant's Motion 
for Pre-Decree Relief; March 13, 2016 Order Re: Evidentiary Hearing; and March 16, 2018 First Amended Order Re: Evidentiary 
Hearing (Amended Order),
1 as well as the April 23, 2018 [FOFs], 
[COLs] and Order Regarding Plaintiff's Motion to Disqualify 
1 DL also challenges numerous preceding findings, conclusions, and
orders entered by the Family Court. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Counsel (Order Denying Disqualification), all entered by the 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).2 
DL raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Family Court erred and abused its discretion in: (1) 
awarding Defendant-Appellee CL (CL) sole physical custody of the 
parties' children (Children) and in permitting the Children's 
relocation to Arizona; and (2) entering the Order Denying 
Disqualification. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve DL's points of error as follows: 
(1) DL argues that the Family Court erred in awarding 
CL sole physical custody of the Children and permitting their relocation to Arizona because the evidence did not establish that it was in the Children's best interest to relocate to Arizona or away from DL, there was neither a finding of family violence made against DL nor any evidence of family violence, the Family Court erred in relying on the custody evaluator's purported recommendation in favor of relocation, and the Family Court should not have relied on evidence outside the record in deciding custody and relocation. DL also argues it was error for the 
2 The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court to "rubber-stamp" all FOFs, COLs, and written orders 
submitted by CL's attorney. 
The standards that guide the Family Court's decision 
regarding custody, including the relocation of children with a parent, are well-established. The 
Hawai# i Supreme Court has 
repeatedly affirmed that "[u]nder HRS § 571–46, the sole issue in a custody determination is the child's best interests, which is an issue of ultimate fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 
47, 137 P.3d 355, 361 (2006) (citation omitted). HRS § 571-46(b) sets forth a non-exclusive list of factors the court must consider in determining the best interest of children, and "the family court is granted broad discretion to weigh the various factors involved, with no single factor being given presumptive paramount weight, in determining whether the standard has been met." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 50, 137 P.3d at 364. Regarding the 
issue of "family violence," HRS § 571-46(a) (2018) provides, in relevant part: 
(9) In every proceeding where there is at issue a dispute
as to the custody of a child, a determination by thecourt that family violence has been committed by aparent raises a rebuttable presumption that it isdetrimental to the child and not in the best interest of the child to be placed in sole custody, joint legalcustody, or joint physical custody with theperpetrator of family violence. In addition to otherfactors that a court shall consider in a proceeding inwhich the custody of a child or visitation by a parentis at issue, and in which the court has made a findingof family violence by a parent:(A) The court shall consider as the primary factorthe safety and well-being of the child and ofthe parent who is the victim of family violence;
(B) The court shall consider the perpetrator'shistory of causing physical harm, bodily injury,or assault or causing reasonable fear of 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
physical harm, bodily injury, or assault to
another person; and
(C) If a parent is absent or relocates because of anact of family violence by the other parent, theabsence or relocation shall not be a factor that weighs against the parent in determining custodyor visitation; 
(10) A court may award visitation to a parent who hascommitted family violence only if the court finds thatadequate provision can be made for the physical safetyand psychological well-being of the child and for thesafety of the parent who is a victim of familyviolence[.] 
HRS § 571-46(a)(9)-(10). 
"Family violence" means the occurrence of one or more
of the following acts by a family or household member, butdoes not include acts of self-defense: 
(1) Attempting to cause or causing physical harm toanother family or household member;
(2) Placing a family or household member in fear ofphysical harm; or 
(3) Causing a family or household member to engageinvoluntarily in sexual activity by force,threat of force, or duress. 
HRS § 571-2 (2018) (emphasis added). 
The Amended Order, which followed thirteen evidentiary 
hearing days, includes the following: 
7. [CL] credibly testified that prior to the Parties moveto Hawaii, [DL] experienced bouts of anger and actingout violently, including, but not limited to separateinstances in which a computer and a vase were brokenby [DL] in the presence of [CL]. 
. . . . 
11. [CL] credibly testified that both before and during
the course of the marriage, [DL] verbally abused herand engaged in emotional and physical acts of violencein the presence of [CL]. 
12. [CL] also credibly testified that during the marriage[DL] engaged in emotional and physical acts ofviolence in the presence of the Minor Children. 
13. 
The credible testimony at trial confirms [DL] engaged
in acts of family violence. 
14. [CL] credibly testified that she first began to notice
[DL's] anger problems in December of 2005. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15. The evidence and testimony at trial confirms that
after the parties moved to Hawaii in October of 2016,[DL's] outbursts of anger and violence increased infrequency and intensity. 
16. [CL] credibly testified that she made extensiveattempts to address her concerns directly with [DL]without success, and then attempt to resolve herconcerns with [DL's] family. 
17. Despite the efforts of [CL], [DL's] angry outburstsdirected at her and Minor Children continued to increase. 
18. The credible testimony at trial confirms that [DL]engaged in several acts of violence after moving toHawaii in October of 2016. 
19. These acts include, but or not limited to an incidentin which a [sic] [DL] threw a bottle that broke awindow in the Presence of [CL]. 
20. Among other acts, the credibl[e] testimony at trialconfirms that on or about July 8, 2016, [DL] picked up[minor child], swore in his face, and shook him. 
21. Lori Love, PH.D. was appointed as the CustodyEvaluator ("CE") in this case to evaluate issues ofdomestic violence, relocation of [CL], physicalcustody, legal custody and visitation. 
22. The CE credibly testified that based upon herinvestigation and conversations with [DL] and [CL], itis her expert opinion that [DL] was the perpetrator ofdomestic violence toward [CL] and Minor Children. 
23. During his testimony, [DL] acknowledged that, throughthe course of marriage, he experienced angry outburstswhich were inappropriate. 
24. No allegations of violence or emotional abuse by [CL]were described by any witness. 
25. On or about July 9, 2016, [CL] fled with the MinorChildren to Arizona in order to protect herself andthe Minor Children. 
26. [CL] credibly testified that the move to Arizona wasbased on her desire to protect herself and MinorChildren from [DL's] escalating pattern of abuse. 
27. Defendant's Mother, . . . and sister, . . . crediblydescribed [CL's] traumatized condition upon herarrival in Arizona in July 2016. 
28. The CE credibly testified that, based on herinvestigation, it is her e[x]pert opinion that [CL]fled Hawaii based on her own belief that doing so wasnecessary to protect herself and the Minor Children. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
29. After a day-long evidentiary hearing on September 19,
[2016],3 this Court found, among other things, that
[CL] fled to Arizona due to the threat of violenceagainst her and Minor Children, awarded sole temporaryphysically custody of Minor Children to [CL], andallowed her to remain in Arizona with the Minor Children. 
(Emphasis added). 
The Family Court's finding of family violence created a 
rebuttable presumption that it is detrimental to the Children and 
not in the best interest of the Children to be placed in sole custody, joint legal custody, or joint physical custody with the perpetrator of family violence, in this case, DL. See HRS § 571-46(a)(9). In addition, because the Family Court found that family violence caused CL's relocation to Arizona with the Children, that fact was not weighed against her in the Family Court's custody determination. See HRS § 571-46(a)(9)(C). The COLs in the Amended Order included: 
4. Pursuant to § 571-46(a)(9)(A), H.R.S., the safety and
well-being of the children and the parent who is thevictim of family violence are the primary factors whenevaluating custody. 
5. Pursuant to § 571-46(a)(l1)[sic], H.R.S. if a party isabsent or relocates because of an act of familyviolence by the other party, the absence or relocationshall not be a factor that weighs against the parentin determining custody or visitation. 
6. 
In the instant case, it is in the best interest ofMinor Children for them to Relocate to reside with [CL] in Arizona, considering among other things, CE'scredible testimony that: 
a. There remains a rebuttable presumption against [DL]
having custody based on the Court's finding of family
violence. 
  
3 The Amended FOF 29 mistakenly listed the year of the hearing as
2002. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Contrary to DL's arguments on appeal, the Family Court 
made express findings in its Amended Order that "family violence" 
had occurred and its determinations are supported by substantial evidence in the record. See, e.g., Inoue v. Inoue, 118 
Hawai# i 
86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App. 2008) ("the question on appeal is whether the record contains substantial evidence supporting the family court's determinations, and appellate review is thereby limited to assessing whether those determinations are supported by credible evidence of sufficient quality and probative value") (citation omitted). For example, CL, whom the Family Court found to be credible, testified regarding DL's anger and continuing pattern of acting out against her and the Children both emotionally and physically and testified that these actions 
caused her increasing concern for her and the Children's welfare.  
CL testified regarding specific acts by DL, including one act 
that occurred shortly before and precipitated her decision to leave with the Children for Arizona. CL testified that on July 8, 2016, DL became frustrated with one of the Children because the child was crying and did not want to put on his shoes. DL cursed at the child. The child sat down and cried, and DL then picked him up, held him above his head, and shook him. CL testified that she was terrified and that DL's behavior caused her to become concerned for the Children's emotional and physical safety. CL testified that she was concerned about DL's mental 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
health and decided she had to leave for the safety of the 
Children. 
In a Custody Evaluation Report that was submitted into 
evidence, Dr. Lori Love (Dr. Love), the custody evaluator, 
included: 
The nature of the aggression between [DL] and [CL] was
largely a result of the marital conflict. While it is clear both parties participated in the arguing andanimosity it appears only [DL] escalated to a placewhere property such as his computer, a vase, and awindow were broken. The frequency of [DL's] use ofinappropriate language in front of the children and
having a physical display of anger appeared to be
increasing while the couple resided in the same home.[CL] and [DL] are both responsible for their conflictbut [DL] is the one who escalated this conflict toinappropriate levels . . . It appears [Child] hasexperienced this confect and was emotionally impactedby the water bottle breaking the window. While this examiner does not believe [Child] is in any physicaldanger from his father, the emotional consequences ofbeing exposed to such violence are detrimental to hisdevelopmental process. 
Dr. Love's testimony also supported the Family Court's 
finding that family violence had occurred. The Family Court 
found Dr. Love to be a credible witness. 
"Family violence" includes "[p]lacing a family or 
household member in fear of physical harm." HRS § 571-2. The testimony and other evidence in the record is sufficient for the Family Court to have reasonably inferred that DL placed CL and at least one of the children in fear of physical harm. See In re Doe, 107 
Hawai# i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973 (2005) (quoting State 
v. Lubong, 77 Hawai# i 429, 432, 886 P.2d 766, 769 (App. 1994) 
(explaining that the appellate courts "give due deference to the right of the trier of fact 'to determine credibility, weigh the 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence 
adduced'")). 
DL argues that the actions described to support the 
finding of "family violence" are nothing more than the permissible imposition of discipline on a child by a parent, citing Hamilton v. Lethem, 126 Haw. 294, 302, 270 P.3d 1024, 1032 (2012). Hamilton discussed the right of parents to discipline their children, codified in part by HRS § 703-309 (2014), which provides that certain uses of force are justifiable by a parent in disciplining a child as a defense to abuse of a child. See i.d. However, the actions of DL described by CL and found credible by the Family Court do not constitute the imposition of discipline on children but rather lashing out emotionally and physically from a place of anger. See Tortorello v. Tortorello, No. CAAP-13-0004373, 2015 WL 1311496 at *7 (Haw. App. Mar. 23, 2015) (mem. op.) (HRS § 703-309(1) requires that force used is "employed with due regard for the age and size of the minor and is reasonably related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the minor, including the prevention or punishment of the minor's misconduct"). 
DL also argues that "the totality of the evidence 
established that [DL] was a good father and committed to his children." DL points to testimony in the record showing that he is a good father. However, the question before this court is whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Family Court's best interest determination. Inoue, 118 
Hawai# i at 101, 185 P.3d at 849. It is not this court's role to 
re-weigh the evidence or substitute our judgment for the Family Court's judgment. 
See In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 197, 20 P.3d 
616, 630 (2001). 
Regarding the relocation determination, the Family 
Court found that it is in the best interest of the children to relocate and reside with CL in Arizona, citing Dr. Love's "credible testimony" that: 
a. There remains a rebuttable presumption against [DL]
having custody based on the Court's finding of familyviolence. 
b. Minor Children are most strongly attached to [CL]; 
c. Removing Minor Children from [CL's] care would haveimmediate and long-term detrimental impacts on therewell-being; 
d. Minor Children will benefit greatest being in [CL's]primary care; 
e. [CL] is the most psychologically stable figure forMinor Children; 
f. The history of abuse that created the necessity for[CL] to flee Hawaii in July 2016 must be consideredand should not be held against her in her decision toleave Hawaii; 
g. [CL] has provided an extensive access plan for [DL] tosee Minor Children both in Phoenix and in Hawaii; 
h. [CL] is resilient, organized, and has excellent lifemanagement skills, superior to [DL's] to enable her toprovide for herself and children and facilitate theircontact with [DL]; 
i. [CL] has secured employment in Phoenix, Arizona; 
j. Phoenix offers excellent educational, social andextracurricular opportunities for Minor Children; and 
k. Phoenix and its surrounding areas hosts an extensivesupport network for [CL], including numerousrelatives, a supportive church community and manyfamily friends. 
10   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DL cites other evidence in the record, which he submits 
supports a different decision regarding relocation of the 
Children. However, it is the Family Court's role to hear the evidence, gauge credibility, weigh the evidence, and make a determination as to the best interest of the Children. Inoue, 118 
Hawai# i at 101, 185 P.3d at 849. On the record in this case, 
we cannot conclude that the Family Court clearly erred or abused its discretion in determining that allowing relocation was in the Children's best interests. 
DL argues that the Family Court's reliance on Dr. 
Love's evaluation of attachment was a "delegation of the court's fact-finding duty to the Custody Evaluator without making the correct and sufficient findings itself." 
We note that Dr. Love 
was stipulated by DL to be an expert psychologist who is an 
expert in child custody and visitation. HRS § 571-46(a)(4) 
specifically provides that custody evaluators shall make 
investigations and create reports and be subject to cross-
examination thereon. Here, the Family Court found Dr. Love's 
reports and testimony credible and relied on her expert opinion, 
but the Family Court also heard and considered the testimony of a number of other witnesses over the course of the evidentiary hearing, and we cannot conclude that the Family Court delegated its fact-finding to Dr. Love. 
DL argues that the Family Court's findings that CL was 
living in Arizona and was employed as an attorney were based on 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence not appearing in the record. However, CL testified that 
at the time of her testimony she had received a job offer from Banner Health as a contract management specialist. Entered into evidence was the email and letter containing the job offer. CL testified at trial regarding an offer on December 14, 2017, and she testified she had accepted the offer and was set to start at that position on January 2, 2018. CL testified that the position was appealing to her because it was the opportunity to work for a big company with some stability and it provided the chance for growth as well as good benefits. The FOFs set forth in the Amended Order are supported by CL's testimony at trial.
4 
Finally, DL argues that the Family Court improperly 
adopted the findings, conclusions, and various interim orders drafted by CL's counsel. DL provides no authority for the proposition that it is inappropriate for the Family Court to adopt orders and findings drafted by the parties, and we find none. To the extent that DL submits that findings have been entered in error, that contention is subject to the clearly erroneous standard of review and we have reviewed the challenged findings accordingly. See Brutsch v. Brutsch, 139 Hawai# i 373, 
381, 390 P.3d 1260, 1268 (2017). 
DL further argues that the 
Amended Order contains obvious errors. However, DL fails to argue that any of the "obvious errors" merit vacating the Family 
DL has not identified which specific FOF(s) was or were
purportedly based on facts outside the trial court record. 
12 4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's custody determination. Minor errors in a court's 
findings that are harmless do not warrant relief. See, e.g., Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai# i 297, 320 n.28, 219 P.3d 1084, 1107 
n.28 (2009) ("FOF No. 13, which states that McComber testified that he 'ha[d] not seen Mr.
 Kaho# ohalahala on Lana# i,' is 
therefore clearly erroneous. However, we find the error was harmless. . . ."); Kahawaiolaa v. United Airlines, Inc., No. 30580, 2012 WL 54497 at *2 (Haw. App. Jan. 9, 2012) (SDO) ("Regardless of whether LIRAB's FOFs 14 and 15 are clearly erroneous, any error was harmless"); Kawamoto v. NHC, Inc., No. 29295, 2009 WL 3350309 at *5 (Haw. App. Oct. 19, 2009) (SDO) (stating that a challenged LIRAB finding played no "meaningful role" in LIRAB's determination regarding claimant's injury and thus any potential error was harmless). We conclude that none of the "obvious errors" referenced by DL played any meaningful role in the Family Court's custody determination and thus any such error was harmless. 
(2) DL argues that CL's attorney was disqualified from 
representing CL due to a conflict of interest based on CL's attorney having hired a paralegal who purportedly had worked on this case on DL's behalf and therefore possessed privileged and confidential information. 
The Hawai# i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 
1.10 pertains to the imputation of conflicts of interest. HRPC Rule 1.10(a) states, in relevant part: 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) While lawyers are associated in a firm, none of them
shall knowingly represent a client when any one of them practicing
alone would be prohibited from doing so by Rules[ ] . . . 1.9 [reConflict of Interest: Former Client] . . . of these Rules, unlessthe prohibition is based on a personal interest of the prohibitedlawyer and does not present a significant risk of materiallylimiting the representation of the client by the remaining lawyersin the firm. 
Comment 4 to Rule 1.10 states: 
[4] The Rule in paragraph (a) also does not
necessarily prohibit representation by others in the lawfirm where the person prohibited from involvement in amatter is a nonlawyer, such as a paralegal or legalsecretary. Nor does paragraph (a) necessarily prohibitrepresentation if the lawyer is prohibited from actingbecause of the events before the person became a lawyer, forexample, work that the person did while a law student. Such persons, however, may be screened where effective from anypersonal participation in the matter to avoid communicationto others in the firm of confidential information that both the nonlawyers and the firm have a legal duty to protect. 
Although the comments to the HRPC rules are provided 
for interpretive assistance and are not binding on the courts, 
they are often used to provide such assistance. See, e.g., Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai# i 92, 109 
n.19, 176 P.3d 91, 108 n.19 (2008) (referencing HRPC Rules 5.1 and 8.3(a) and commentary); 
State v. Baron, 80 Hawai# i 107, 115-
16, 905 P.2d 613, 621-22 (1995) (referencing HRPC Rule 3.8 and comment). "Screen[ing]" is defined in HRPC Rule 1.0(l) as "the isolation of a lawyer from any participation in a matter through the timely imposition of procedures within a firm that are reasonably adequate under the circumstances to protect the information that the isolated lawyer is obligated to protect under these Rules or other law." 
Here, it is undisputed that Paul Tomar of the law firm 
Ashford & Wriston represented DL in the divorce action until 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
January 4, 2017, when that firm's involvement as counsel for DL 
ended. It is also undisputed that a paralegal from Ashford & Wriston, who at least had been copied on confidential communications involving this case, applied for a position with 
Porter McGuire Kiakona & Chow, LLP (PMKC) on May 26, 2017, and 
was hired and began working at PMKC on September 12, 2017. 
After hearing testimony and taking evidence, the Family 
Court found, inter alia, that PMKC was aware from the outset that 
the paralegal in question had a conflict in this case and that 
she "would be prohibited from any work on or involvement in that case." In addition, "at no time did PMKC attempt to inquire about case-specific details of [the paralegal's] involvement in any cases." The Family Court found that "[u]pon her start date, [CL's attorney] reminded [the paralegal] that she was prohibited from any involvement in [CL's] case in any form and specifically instructed that she would be excluded from any internal and external emails and any other communications regarding the case, any meetings with the trial team, any meetings with the client and witnesses and any drafting, revising or filing of any pleadings or other documents relevant to the case." At the hearing on the Motion to Disqualify, the Family Court found credible the paralegal's testimony that "since her interview with PMKC to the present, she has been completely excluded from any involvement in [CL's] case at PMKC, to the point that she was excluded from all emails, correspondence and telephone calls, her 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
computer cannot access [CL's] case file and [the paralegal] has 
no idea where the files regarding [CL's] case are stored. [The paralegal] also confirmed that she has had no contact with [CL] or any witnesses in the case and has not been a part of any meetings related [to] the case." The paralegal's testimony was corroborated by Kapono Kiakona, a co-managing partner for PMKC, that the Family Court also found credible. 
DL points to an alleged discrepancy in the testimony 
regarding the screening process, i.e., that at one point the 
paralegal testified that she did not believe this case was 
specifically mentioned during her interview process with PMKC. Aside from that inconsistency, the Family Court's findings with respect to the credibility determinations and FOFs regarding the screening procedures adopted and used by PMKC in this case appear to be undisputed. DL argues that the screening was not sufficient to avoid disqualification. Upon review of the record on appeal and the Family Court's findings, we cannot conclude that the Family Court's rejection of this argument was wrong. Accordingly, we conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in entering the Order Denying Disqualification. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's April 26, 2018 
Divorce Decree and April 23, 2018 Order Denying Disqualification, 
as well as all related and preceding orders, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2019. 
On the briefs: Rebecca A. Copeland,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Crystal Waitkus Leas,
Defendant-Appellee, 
Pro Se. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
17 