NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000808
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
M. ANNE SCHMIDT, Defendant-Appellee.
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 2DTA-13-00955)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai #i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellee M. Anne Schmidt (Schmidt) with operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) (Count 1);
and refusal to submit to breath, blood, or urine test (Refusal to
Submit to Testing) (Count 2).  The OVUII charge alleged that
Schmidt was under the influence of drugs.
Prior to trial, Schmidt moved to suppress evidence on
the grounds that: (1) there was no reasonable suspicion for her
traffic stop; (2) there was no probable cause to arrest her; (3)
there was no probable cause to request that she submit to drug
testing because the arresting officer was not a drug recognition
expert (DRE) and police DRE procedures were not followed; and (4)
Schmidt's post-refusal offer to take a urine test was improperly
rejected.  After an evidentiary hearing, the District Court ofNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Second Circuit (District Court)1 granted Schmidt's motion to
suppress, and it suppressed "any evidence obtained subsequent to
the stop of [Schmidt's] vehicle."  The District Court filed its
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order
Granting Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence" (Suppression
Order) on April 24, 2014. 
On appeal, the State argues that the District Court
erred in granting Schmidt's motion to suppress evidence.  As
explained below, we vacate in part, and affirm in part, the
District Court's Suppression Order.
I.
Maui Police Department (MPD) Officer Jerry Barrera
stopped Schmidt's car after the police received reports that the
car was being driven erratically.  At the suppression motion
hearing, Elizabeth Ryan (Ryan) testified that at about 11:45
a.m., she saw a Toyota car (later identified as Schmidt's car)
"weaving in and out of the lane."  The Toyota was crossing over
the lane lines by about a foot on each side, coming close to
striking vehicles attempting to go around the Toyota, and kicking
up clouds of dust on the right.  Ryan was scared that the driver
of the Toyota was "going to hurt herself or she was going to hurt
other people," and Ryan called 911.  Ryan informed the operator
of what she had observed.  Ryan's car followed the Toyota, which
eventually pulled into the drive-thru lane of a McDonald's
restaurant.  Ryan waited at the McDonald's for the police to
arrive and gave a statement to the police. 
Officer Jerry Barrera (Officer Barrera) testified that
after receiving a report from dispatch of a reckless driver, he 
saw Schmidt in a Toyota matching the description provided by
dispatch in the McDonald's drive-thru lane.  Officer Barrera
motioned to Schmidt to pull forward and stop in the parking lot,
and Schmidt complied.  Officer Barrera approached Schmidt and
observed that "she was smiling and incoherent, and she was moving
1The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
very slow and speaking in a very soft tone of voice."  Schmidt's
eyes were red and watery.  Officer Barrera asked Schmidt if she
had been drinking.  Schmidt responded "no," but said that "she
took a Valium the night prior" and that she was tired.  Officer
Barrera did not note the odor of alcohol. 
Schdmit agreed to participate in field sobriety tests. 
Officer Barrera administered the horizontal gaze nystagmus, walk
and turn, and one leg stand tests.  For each test, Schmidt
exhibited a sufficient number of "clues" to "fail" the test.  On
the walk-and-turn test, Schmidt could not keep her balance,
swayed, missed heel to toe, stopped walking, stepped off the
line, took the wrong number of steps, raised her arms, and made
an improper turn.  On the one-leg-stand test, Schmidt raised her
arms, swayed, put her foot down, lost her balance, and almost
fell.  Officer Barrera believed that it was unsafe for Schmidt to
drive, and he arrested her for OVUII. 
II.
The State contends that the District Court erred in
suppressing evidence of Schmidt's refusal to submit to testing
for drugs.  Based on the analysis in the Hawai #i Supreme Court's
decision in State v. Won, 137 Hawai# i 330, 372 P.3d 1065 (2015),
we conclude that the State was precluded from prosecuting Schmidt
for Refusal to Submit to Testing.  State v. Wilson , No. CAAP-15-
0000682, 2018 WL 564771, at *1-8 (Hawai #i App. Jan. 26, 2018). 
On this basis, we affirm the District Court's Suppression Order
to the extent that it suppressed evidence of Schmidt's refusal to
submit to testing for drugs, and we need not address the State's
arguments on this issue.
III.
We conclude that there was reasonable articulable
suspicion for Officer Barrera to stop Schmidt's vehicle and to
conduct the field sobriety tests, and therefore, the District
Court erred in suppressing "any evidence obtained subsequent to
the stop of [Schmidt's] vehicle."  
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Prior to Officer Barrera's stop of Schmidt's vehicle,
the police had received a witness's contemporaneous report of
Schmidt's dangerous and erratic driving, and the substance of
this report had been conveyed by dispatch to Officer Barrera.  We
conclude that Officer Barrera had reasonable articulable
suspicion to stop Schmidt's car.  See State v. Prendergast , 103
Hawai#i 451, 83 P.3d 714 (2004) (holding that an anonymous tip of
reckless driving provided a police officer with reasonable
suspicion to justify a traffic stop).  We also conclude that
Officer Barrera had reasonable suspicion to conduct the field
sobriety tests and had probable cause to arrest Schmidt for OVUII
after the field sobriety tests were completed.  See Kernan v.
Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 36-40, 856 P.2d 1207, 1225-27 (1993); State v.
Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 303-06, 687 P.2d 544, 552-53 (1984).  We
therefore vacate the District Court's Suppression Order to the
extent that it suppressed all evidence obtained subsequent to the
stop of Schmidt's car.  We express no opinion on the sufficiency
of evidence to establish that Schmidt was "under the influence of
any drug."  See  Hawaii Revised Statutes ยง 291E-61(a)(2)( 2007).
IV.
Based on the foregoing, we vacate in part and affirm in
part the District Court's Suppression Order, and we remand the
case for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
Disposition Order.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 15, 2018.
On the briefs:
Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-AppellantChief Judge
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
(Law Office of Philip H. Lowenthal)
for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge
4