 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000097 16-FEB-2024 08:11 AM Dkt. 103 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000097 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF 
B
YUNG TAE OH, Deceased 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(P. NO. 17-1-0230) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting C.J., and Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
This appeal arises out of a proceeding in which 
Petitioner-Appellee Wonki Oh (Petitioner
) sought and obtained the 
appointment of a special administrator for the estate of his 
deceased father (Estate), Byong Tae Oh (Decedent), over the 
objection of Respondents-Appellants Hie Sung Lee, Hyung Kee Oh, 
and Heinjoo Oh, Decedent's surviving spouse, son and daughter, respectively (collectively, Respondents). Respondents appeal 
from the Order Discharging Special Administrator and Awarding 
Fees and Costs (Order) and the Judgment on Order Discharging 
Special Administrator and Awarding Fees and Costs (Judgment), 
both entered on January 18, 2019, by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit sitting in probate (Probate Court).
1/ 
On appeal, Respondents contend that the Probate Court 
erred in: (1) ordering that the fees and expenses of the special administrator, and the attorneys' fees of Respondents and Petitioner, be paid from the Estate, where the court lacked jurisdiction over the Estate; (2) failing to order that 
1/ The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Petitioner pay the special administrator's fees and costs; and 
(3) ordering that Petitioner's attorneys' fees be paid from the Estate, even if the court had jurisdiction to do so. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Respondents' contentions as follows. 
I. Background 
Decedent died in the Republic of Korea in February 
2012. 
At the time of his death, Decedent was domiciled in the 
Republic of Korea. 
On April 4, 2017, Petitioner filed a Petition for 
Appointment of Special Administrator (
Petition) in the Probate 
Court. Petitioner sought appointment of a special administrator in 
Hawai#i: 
to identify any and all accounts, real property or other
tangible or intangible, real or personal property of theDecedent, including those held by any agent of the Decedent,located in Hawaii that should be or should have been reported on Decedent's United States federal estate or gifttax returns or any other estate or gift tax or similarreturn required to be filed in another jurisdiction, eitheras assets of the estate of the Decedent or as reportablelifetime gifts by the Decedent, including, withoutlimitation receiving copies of statements for bank accountswith First Hawaiian Bank or other bank with a Hawaii office held [by] the Decedent during life or at death, andincluding, without limitation, obtaining informationnecessary to determine whether Hawaii real property held byothers where funds for the purchase and/or maintenance ofsame came from the Decedent were held by the others as agentfor the Decedent, or whether the amounts paid by theDecedent to purchase or maintain Hawaii property held byothers were taxable gifts to the owners of record. 
Petitioner alleged that Decedent owned property within the First 
Circuit at the time of his death. 
Respondents filed an objection to the Petition, 
asserting in part that they were not aware of any assets of the Decedent that would be subject to probate in Hawai# i, and 
appearing to challenge Petitioner's allegation that Decedent owned property within the First Circuit. 
On September 12, 2017, the Probate Court entered an 
Order Granting in Part and Continuing in Part Petition for 
2  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appointment of Special Administrator. The Court appointed Estate 
Administrative Services, LLC, by its principal, Stephen E. Harris, to serve as special administrator, with powers "to locate or identify assets located in the State of Hawai[# ]i that would 
be subject to the [D]ecedent's probate estate, as defined in [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 560:2-201.
2/" 
On December 15, 2017, Petitioner filed an ex parte 
petition in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Ex Parte 
Petition), which initiated a separate, special proceeding to 
request issuance of a subpoena duces tecum upon the Custodian of 
Records of First Hawaiian Bank (FHB).3/ Petitioner was allegedly 
concerned that Respondents were attempting to conceal Hawai# i 
assets at FHB which, while not subject to probate in Hawai# i, 
would impact the amount of Petitioner's inheritance under Korean law, and could give rise to potential gift or estate tax obligations of Decedent. 
The Ex Parte Petition was granted and the court 
directed issuance of a subpoena duces tecum (Subpoena) on FHB. 
Respondents filed a motion to quash the Subpoena, which was 
denied. 
Pursuant to the Subpoena, Petitioner obtained a copy of 
a FHB statement for a joint account held by Decedent at the time of his death. 
However, the special administrator was unable to 
locate any assets of Decedent subject to probate in Hawai#i 
(i.e., "probate assets"), which the special administrator reported to the Probate Court. 
The Probate Court subsequently entered the Order and 
Judgment, which discharged the special administrator and ordered that the fees and costs of the special administrator, and the attorneys' fees and costs of Respondents and Petitioner, be paid from the Estate. 
2/ HRS § 560:2-201 (2006) provides that "[i]n this part[,] i.e., HRS
chapter 560, art. II, part 2, "'[p]robate estate' means property that would
pass by intestate succession if the decedent died without a valid will." 
3/ The Honorable James H. Ashford presided over the special
proceeding. 
3   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Further, on April 16, 2019, the court entered its 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOFs/COLs) regarding 
this matter. 
 II. Discussion 
A. The Probate Court's Jurisdiction 
Respondents contend that the Probate Court lacked 
jurisdiction over the Estate, because the Decedent was not 
domiciled in Hawai# i, and the court — through the special 
administrator's investigation and report — determined that Decedent had no probate assets in 
Hawai#i.  According to 
Respondents, "[o]nce the [P]robate [C]ourt determined that there were no assets subject to probate in Hawai# i, . . . it should 
have dismissed the case." Instead, Respondents contend, the Probate Court, without jurisdiction, erroneously ordered that the fees and expenses of the special administrator, and the attorneys' fees of Respondents and Petitioner, be paid from the Estate. 
HRS chapter 560 codifies Hawaii's version of the 
Uniform Probate Code. See HRS § 560:1-101 (2006). 
HRS §§ 560:1-
301 (2006) and 560:1-302 (2006) set forth the territorial application of chapter 560 and the subject matter jurisdiction of the probate court. Under HRS § 560:1-302(a), the probate court has jurisdiction, "[t]o the full extent permitted by the Constitution," over "all subject matter relating to[,]" among other things, "[e]states of decedents . . . ."
4/ Under HRS 
§ 560:1-301(1) and (2), chapter 560 applies to, among other things, "[t]he affairs and estates of decedents . . . domiciled in this State" and "[t]he property of nonresidents located in this State or property coming into the control of a fiduciary who is subject to the laws of this State[.]"
5/ See Estate of Von 
4/ HRS § 560:1-201 (2006) defines "[e]state" as follows: "'Estate' 
includes the property of the decedent, trust, or other person whose affairs
are subject to this chapter as originally constituted and as it exists fromtime to time during administration." 
5/ HRS § 560:1-201 defines "[p]roperty" as follows: "'Property'
includes both real and personal property or any interest therein and meansanything that may be the subject of ownership." 
4   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Baravalle, No. CAAP-16-0000073, 2019 WL 762406, at *1 (Haw. App. 
Feb. 12, 2019) (SDO) (ruling in the case of a non-domiciliary decedent that "Chapter 560 provides for extra-territorial subject matter jurisdiction of the Probate Court over property coming into the control of a fiduciary"). Further, HRS § 560:3-614(2) specifically authorizes the probate court, upon petition from an interested person and after proper notice and a hearing, to appoint a special administrator where such an appointment "is necessary to preserve the estate or to secure its proper administration . . . ."
6/ 
Here, there is no dispute that Decedent was not 
domiciled in Hawai# i. The issue in the first instance is whether 
the Probate Court had subject matter jurisdiction over "the property of [Decedent] located in [
Hawai#i]" as the basis for 
appointment of the special administrator. Respondents argue that as to nonresident decedents, the probate court has jurisdiction over only those assets that the decedent possessed in Hawai# i and 
that are subject to probate in Hawai# i, not other assets such as 
jointly held bank accounts that are not subject to probate. Under Respondents' theory, because the FHB joint account was not part of the Estate, it could not serve as a basis for the Probate Court's jurisdiction, and the court lacked jurisdiction to do anything further than dismiss the case.
7/ 
The plain language of HRS §§ 560:1-301 and 560:1-302 
does not support Respondents' theory. The Probate Court's subject matter jurisdiction extends to "[t]he property of 
6/ Accordingly, Hawai #i Probate Rules ( HPR) Rule 56 provides that
"[a]n interested person may seek appointment of a special administrator where
necessary to preserve the estate or to secure its proper administration,including . . . where: (a) the existence of assets to be probated isuncertain, and an administrator is required to locate or identify assets,including investigating the merits of pursuing a lawsuit or claim forrelief[.]" (Formatting altered.) The commentary to HPR Rule 56 further states
that "the most common situations giving rise to the appointment of a special
administrator" include "the appointment of a special administrator to trackdown assets, since many times financial institutions are reluctant to releaseinformation about a deceased's assets except to a court-appointed official." 
7/ Somewhat paradoxically, Respondents also argue that "the probate
court's initial order appointing the special administrator was proper, becauseit looked to investigate whether there were assets subject to probate[,]" and"because '[a] court always has jurisdiction to determine whether it hassubject matter jurisdiction[.]' State v. Alagao
, 77 Hawai #i 260, 262, 883
P.2d 682, 684 (App. 1994)." 
5  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Decedent] located in this State . . . [.] HRS §§ 560:1-301(2). 
The language of HRS § 560:1-301 and the definition of "property" under HRS § 560:1-201 do not limit the court's jurisdiction to only those assets of Decedent that are subject to probate in Hawai#i. See also HPR Rule 56(a) and (b) (providing for 
appointment of a special administrator where (a) "the existence of assets to be probated is uncertain" and (b) "no probate assets exist"). Accordingly, the Probate Court had subject matter jurisdiction to appoint the special administrator "to locate or identify assets located in the State of Hawai[# ]i that would be 
subject to the [D]ecedent's probate estate, as defined in HRS § 560:2-201."
8/ 
With jurisdiction to appoint the special administrator, 
the Probate Court also had subject matter jurisdiction to award, in appropriate circumstances: (1) the special administrator's fees and costs from the Estate; see HRS § 560:3-719 (2006) (providing that "[a] personal representative is entitled to reasonable compensation for the personal representative's services"); HRS § 560:1-201 (defining "personal representative" to include a "special administrator"); HPR Rule 59 ("Unless otherwise agreed between the special administrator and heirs or beneficiaries of an estate, the court shall set the compensation of a special administrator in the manner set forth under HRS § 560:3-719."); see also HRS § 560:3-720 (2006) ("If any personal representative . . . defends or prosecutes any proceeding in good faith, whether successful or not that person is entitled to receive from the estate that person's necessary expenses and disbursements including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred."
9/); 
and (2) the parties' fees and costs from the Estate; see In re Estate of Campbell, 46 Haw. 475, 522-23, 382 P.2d 920, 953-54 
8/ Respondents' reliance on In re Estate of Marcos, 88 Hawai #i 148,
963 P.2d 1124 (1998), is misplaced. There, the supreme court ruled that
"because the Marcos Estate owned no assets in Hawai i #, there was no basis for
opening a probate proceeding in 
Hawai #i and no grounds for appointing a
special representative." Id. at 157, 963 P.2d at 1133. 
Here, the special
administrator was appointed to determine whether Decedent had assets inHawai #i that were subject to probate, not in connection with opening probate. 
9/ HRS § 560:3-720 has been amended, effective June 29, 2023. 
6   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1963).10/ Whether such fees and costs were properly charged to 
the Estate in the circumstances of this case is discussed below. 
B. Award of the Special Administrator's Fees and Costs 
Respondents contend that the Probate Court erred in 
failing to order that Petitioner pay the special administrator's 
fees and costs. 
Respondents predicate this argument on their 
contention that the Probate Court lacked jurisdiction to bind the Estate after the special administrator concluded there were no assets subject to probate in 
Hawai#i.  Because we have rejected 
Respondents' jurisdictional argument (
see supra), we likewise 
conclude that Respondents' second contention is without merit.11/ 
C. Award of Petitioner's Attorneys' Fees 
Respondents contend that the Probate Court erred in 
ordering that Petitioner's attorneys' fees be paid from the Estate, even if the court had jurisdiction to do so. Respondents argue that "[t]here is no authority to shift attorneys' fees in the special proceeding before Judge Ashford [for issuance of the Subpoena], and that proceeding — not the probate court proceeding — is the source of Petitioner's claim that he benefitted the Estate." Respondents also argue that the FOFs/COLs do not articulate how the Petitioner's actions benefitted the Estate. 
We conclude that the Probate Court's FOFs/COLs, read in 
their entirety, provided sufficient support for the award of attorneys' fees and costs to both Petitioners and Respondents. 
III. Conclusion 
For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the Order 
Discharging Special Administrator and Awarding Fees and Costs and 
10/ We further conclude that FOFs 9-15 and 19 are not clearly
erroneous and COLs 1-11 and 13 are not wrong. 
11/ We also note that in FOF 13, the court found that "[a]ppointment
of a special administrator would benefit Petitioner, Respondents, and
Decedent's Estate by helping to determine the nature and extent of Decedent'sassets located in Hawaii at the time of Decedent's death and the extent of Decedent's U.S. tax liabilities." (Emphasis added.) Respondents challenge FOF13 to the extent that it "makes an erroneous decision regarding the probatecourt's jurisdiction." As stated above, we conclude that FOF 13 is notclearly erroneous. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Judgment on Order Discharging Special Administrator and 
Awarding Fees and Costs, both entered on January 18, 2019, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit sitting in probate. Because this court has properly exercised jurisdiction over this appeal, Respondents' pending motion to confirm jurisdiction, filed on May 2, 2019, is dismissed as moot. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 16, 2024. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Edmund K. Saffery, Acting Chief Judge
Rosemarie S.J. Sam, and
Deirdre Marie-Iha (Goodsill Anderson Quinn & /s/ Keith K. HiraokaStifel, A Limited Liability Associate JudgeLaw Partnership LLP)for Respondents-Appellants. 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Douglas C. Smith and Associate Judge
Ross Uehara-Tilton (Damon Key Leong KupchakHastert)for Petitioner-Appellee. 
8 