NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000497
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHADWICK TADLY, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0039)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.
with Nakamura, C.J. dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Chadwick Tadly (Tadly) appeals from
 
a Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on June 22, 2011, in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court). 
Judgment was entered against Tadly for Manslaughter in violation
 
2
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702 (Supp. 2012),  and
Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony 
1
 The Honorable Randal K. O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-702 provides, in relevant part, that:
 
§707-702 Manslaughter.  (1) A person commits the
offense of manslaughter if:
(a)
 The person recklessly causes the death of another
person; . . .
. . . .
 
(3)
 Manslaughter is a class A felony. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011).3 The charges arise from a
 
shooting incident which caused the death of Kamuela Kaleikilo
 
(decedent). 
On appeal, Tadly contends that the circuit court abused
 
its discretion by (1) excluding relevant character traits of the
 decedent's violence and aggressiveness; (2) prohibiting the use
 of decedent's toxicology report for the purpose of demonstrating
 the reasonableness of Tadly's actions; and (3) prohibiting
 opinion testimony by lay witnesses. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Tadly's
 points of error as follows:
 
(1) Prior to trial, the defense filed notices that it
 
intended to introduce evidence of decedent's prior acts of
 violence, including a conviction for assault in the second
 degree, an assault with a golf club, a stabbing incident in
 Waipahu, and an assault against an unknown male in the evening
 hours just prior to the shooting incident. Appellee State of
 Hawaii (State) filed a motion in limine seeking to preclude the
 evidence of decedent's prior aggressive conduct, and at the
 hearing on the motion, the State stipulated it would not
 challenge that decedent was the first aggressor. The circuit
 
3 HRS § 134-21 provides that:
 
[§134-21] Carrying or use of firearm in the commission
of a separate felony; penalty.  (a) It shall be unlawful for
a person to knowingly carry on the person or have within the
person's immediate control or intentionally use or threaten
to use a firearm while engaged in the commission of a
separate felony, whether the firearm was loaded or not, and
whether operable or not . . . .
. . .
 
(b)
 A conviction and sentence under this section shall
be in addition to and not in lieu of any conviction and
sentence for the separate felony; provided that the sentence
imposed under this section may run concurrently or
consecutively with the sentence for the separate felony.
(c) Any person violating this section shall be guilty
of a class A felony.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court ruled that, balancing the probative value and prejudicial
 
effects of the evidence, it would not allow evidence of the
 assault conviction, the golf club incident, or the stabbing
 incident.
4
 
Tadly contends on appeal that, although Hawaii Rules of
 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) generally precludes evidence of a
 person's prior bad acts to demonstrate that he acted in
 conformity therewith, this case fell within exceptions allowed
 under State v. Lui, 61 Haw. 328, 603 P.2d 151 (1979) and State v.
 Basque, 66 Haw. 510, 666 P.2d 599 (1983). In particular, Tadly
 argues under Lui and Basque that the excluded evidence should
 have been admitted to show not only that the decedent was the
 aggressor, but that decedent's violent character traits would
 have demonstrated the reasonableness of Tadly's apprehension of
 immediate danger. We conclude that the circuit court did not
 abuse its discretion.
 
In both Lui and Basque, the defendants claimed self-
defense against murder charges. In this case, the State contends
 that Tadly did not assert self-defense at trial and Tadly does
 not dispute the State's contention.
5 Rather, Tadly argues that
 
the evidence was relevant to show that his actions were
 reasonable in not calling the police when decedent started being
 aggressive toward another house guest and why Tadly needed to act
 quickly and produce a gun "to get decedent's attention." Because
 there is no dispute that the decedent was the first aggressor and
 because Tadly did not claim self-defense or defense of others at
 
4 The circuit court initially took under advisement whether it would
allow evidence of the assault in the evening before the shooting, but
subsequently allowed evidence of this assault at trial. Tadly's challenge on
appeal does not involve this evidence. 
5
 At the hearing on the motion in limine, in response to the State's
motion for disclosure of defenses, defense counsel advised that Tadly would
rely on accidental death and did not indicate a reliance on self-defense.
Moreover, the defense did not argue self-defense in opening or closing
statements. Although the defense requested a self-defense jury instruction,
which was denied by the circuit court, Tadly does not claim on appeal that the
circuit court's denial of that request was error.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
precluding the evidence in issue. "Where the details of the
 fatal encounter are free from doubt, a defendant cannot bootstrap
 into evidence the character of deceased to serve improperly as an
 excuse for the killing under the pretext of evidencing deceased's
 aggression." 
Lui, 61 Haw. at 331, 603 P.2d at 154. 
Even if we were to assume arguendo that Tadly raised a
 
self-defense or defense of others claim at trial, he did not lay
 a proper foundation for admission of decedent's prior acts of
 violence.
 
[W]here character evidence is offered to show the
reasonableness of the defendant's apprehension, he must lay
a foundation, prior to the admission of the evidence, that
he knew at the time of the homicide of the deceased's
 reputation or of the specific acts of violence committed.
This foundation is required because the evidence is
probative of the defendant's state of mind, showing his
belief or corroborating his knowledge as to the deceased's
character and tending to prove that he acted as a reasonably
prudent person would under similar beliefs and
circumstances.
 
Id. at 329-30, 603 P.2d at 154. In Lui, the supreme court held
 
that the trial court had not abused its discretion in precluding
 evidence that the decedent had raped and beaten a 13-year-old
 girl because "[t]he trial court was required to weigh the
 probative value of this evidence against the prejudicial impact
 on the minds of the jurors. Not only was the rape incident
 remotely connected to the circumstances of this case, there was
 no foundation as to when it happened." Id. at 331, 603 P.2d at
 
154.
 
Here, Tadly does not point to any foundation evidence
 
as to what he knew about the decedent's prior violent acts or
 when the prior acts occurred. Tadly makes conclusory assertions
 in his appellate briefs, without citation to evidence in the
 record, that he was aware of decedent's prior violent acts and
 that they were close in time to the shooting. If we consider the
 argument of counsel during the hearing on the State's motion in
 limine, counsel argued that decedent bragged about his prior
 violent acts and thus Tadly knew about them; however, there was
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
no assertion by counsel as to when the prior acts occurred. 
Without the required foundation, we cannot say that the circuit
 court abused its discretion in precluding the evidence of
 decedent's prior violent acts.
 
(2) Tadly contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in not allowing Tadly to utilize decedent's toxicology
 report -- showing decedent had alcohol, cocaine and ecstasy in
 his system -- for the purpose of establishing "the reasonableness
 of [Tadly's] action, i.e. why decedent was so out of control that
 [Tadly] needed to show a handgun to get decedent's attention." 
The circuit court allowed the toxicology report for purposes of
 addressing cause of death, however, the court ruled it would not
 allow the toxicology report for establishing decedent's
 aggressive conduct unless a foundation was laid by an expert as
 to the effect of the substances on decedent. 
Tadly relies on State v. Sabog, 108 Hawai' i 102, 117 
P.3d 834 (App. 2005) for the broad proposition that there is no requirement for expert testimony to explain the effects of drugs ingested by a person and that a jury is "fully capable of determining the effects of drugs and giving it the appropriate weight in its determinations." However, the holding in Sabog is narrower, that a witness could be questioned about her drug use and addiction "at or near the time of the incident to the extent that it affected her perception or recollection of the alleged event," without the need for expert testimony to that effect. Id. at 111, 117 P.3d at 843 (emphasis added). Sabog thus does 
not support the broad notion that Tadly asserts. 
Ultimately, it was within the circuit court's
 
discretion whether allowing Tadly to use the toxicology report to
 establish decedent's aggressiveness had probative value that
 outweighed the potential for prejudice. Under the circumstances
 of this case, we conclude it was within the circuit court's
 discretion to require expert testimony to explain at least the
 general effects of the substances found in the toxicology report.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, even if we assume that the circuit court
 
should not have limited the use of the toxicology report as it
 
did, it was harmless error. The toxicology report was admitted
 into evidence related to decedent's cause of death. Thus, the
 jury had the information as to the substances in decedent's body
 at the time of his death. If Tadly's assertion is correct, that
 a jury is fully capable of determining the effects of drugs and
 giving it the appropriate weight, the jury was able to consider
 the information in this case.
 
(3) Tadly's third point of error is that the circuit
 
court abused its discretion in prohibiting lay opinion on the
 ultimate issue of whether the shooting was accidental. Tadly
 mischaracterizes the circuit court's ruling. The circuit court
 simply sustained the prosecution's objection to defense counsel's
 question to Brenton Dwiggins (Dwiggins), "[Did Tadly] show[] the
 gun to really let [decedent] know to calm down?" The circuit
 court ruled that this question called for speculation of Tadly's
 motivation. This ruling did not limit inquiry into the witness's
 opinion whether the shooting was accidental.
 
Furthermore, the challenged evidentiary ruling did not
 
prevent eyewitnesses from relating to the jury that the shooting
 may have been accidental. Chance Tadly testified that the
 shooting was an accident and that his father was in shock
 afterward. Dwiggins confirmed that Tadly appeared to be in
 shock. Takahide Nakamura testified that the shooting was the
 result of a struggle. The jury also heard from Tadly that he did
 not mean to shoot decedent when the State played a DVD of Tadly's
 statement to police. 
Moreover, based on its verdict, the jury determined
 
that the shooting was not intentional or knowing. Tadly was
 convicted of the lesser included offense of Manslaughter and not
 the offense charged of Murder in the Second Degree. As opposed
 to Murder in the Second Degree, which requires intentionally or
 knowingly causing the death of another, to commit Manslaughter
 one must recklessly cause the death of another. HRS §§ 707-701.5
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1993) & 707-702(1)(a). The record is replete with evidence to
 
support the jury's conclusion that Tadly recklessly caused the
 death of another.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence filed on June 22, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 25, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Nelson W.S. Goo
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Associate Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 