NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000700
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT COVINGTON, JR., Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1DTC-17-067411)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Robert Covington, Jr. (Covington ),
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment ( Judgment) entered on August 10, 2018, by the
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division ( District
Court).  At the conclusion of a bench trial, Covington was found
to be in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) ยง 431:10C-104
(2005) (the No-Fault Insurance Statute), which provides:1
ยง 431:10C-104  Conditions of operation and
registration of motor vehicles.   (a)  Except as provided in
section 431:10C-105, no person shall operate or use a motor
vehicle upon any public street, road, or highway of this
State at any time unless such motor vehicle is insured at
all times under a motor vehicle insurance policy.
(b)  Every owner of a motor vehicle used or operated
at any time upon any public street, road, or highway of this
1The Honorable Michael A. Marr presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
State shall obtain a motor vehicle insurance policy upon
such vehicle which provides the coverage required by this
article and shall maintain the motor vehicle insurance
policy at all times for the entire motor vehicle
registration period.
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the provisions of section
431:10C-117(a).
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to
any vehicle owned by or registered in the name of any agency
of the federal government, or to any antique motor vehicle
as defined in section 249-1. 
On appeal, Covington raises five points of error,
contending that the District Court erred in convicting him
because:  (1) the conviction violates his right of personal
freedom; (2) the conviction violates his right to travel; (3) he
did not "operate" a "vehicle"; (4)  the conviction violates his
right to due process; and (5)  the conviction converts his right
to travel into a criminal act.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Covington's contentions as follows:
We first address Covington's argument supporting his
third point of error, which is that he was a "traveler", not an
"operator" because he was not using the road as a place of
business, nor was he using the road for personal economic gain. 
As the State points out, however, the No-Fault Insurance Statute
requires that all vehicles, commercial, private, or otherwise,
must be insured.  Covington cites no authority to the contrary
and we find none.
In his other points of error, Covington submits that
his constitutional right to personal liberty, to travel, and to
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
due process were violated because a citizen has a right to travel
upon the public highways by automobile, a citizen cannot be
rightfully deprived of his or her liberty to do so, Covington was
not given proper notice as to the loss of his right to travel,
and his conviction converts the exercise of a fundamental
constitutional right into a crime.  Essentially the same
arguments were raised and rejected by this court in State v.
French, 77 Hawai#i 222, 230-32, 883 P.2d 644, 652-54 (App. 1994). 
For the reasons stated in French, we conclude that Covington's
contention that his constitutional rights were violated is
without merit.
Accordingly, the District Court's August 10, 2018
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 8, 2019.
On the briefs:
Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
3