  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000597
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JENNIFER MARIE CANNON, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MAURICE ANTONIO CANNON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 14-1-1517)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
This appeal arises out of a dispute over the terms of a
 
divorce decree that divided military retirement benefits. 
Defendant-Appellant Maurice Antonio Cannon (Husband) appeals from
 the "Decree Granting Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" (Divorce
 Decree) entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family
 
1 2 
Court) on July 27, 2015.
At the time of the divorce proceedings, Husband was

 
accruing military retirement benefits based on his service in the 
United States Marine Corps. Husband and Plaintiff-Appellee
 Jennifer Marie Cannon (Wife) reached an agreement regarding the
 division of their property, which included an award to Wife of
 
1The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided.
 
2Plaintiff-Appellee Jennifer Marie Cannon (Wife) obtained representation
in this appeal through the Appellate Pro Bono Pilot Project and is represented
on appeal by Daniel M. Gluck, Esq., in his individual capacity. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her martial share of Husband's retirement benefits pursuant to
 
the "Linson formula." However, when Wife submitted the proposed
 divorce decree, Husband objected to the provision that defined
 "military retirement." Citing Mansell v. Mansell, 490 U.S. 581
 (1989), Husband argued that disability payments to a service
 member "are not divisible disposable retired pay."
3 The Family
 
Court rejected Husband's objection and entered the Divorce Decree
 without changing the challenged provision. 
On appeal, Husband contends that the Family Court erred
 
in including military veterans' disability pay in its definition
 of military retirement. He also contends that the Family Court
 erred in dividing and awarding to Wife (1) veterans' disability
 benefits or (2) military retirement benefits that Husband may
 waive or forfeit in the future to receive such disability
 benefits, if he should become eligible for disability benefits. 
We affirm.
 
I.
 
In Mansell, the United States Supreme Court held that
 
under the Uniformed Services Former Spouses' Protection Act,
 state courts may not treat military retirement pay waived by the
 retiree in order to receive veterans' disability benefits as
 property divisible upon divorce. Mansell, 490 U.S. at 583. In
 
Mansell, the husband had already waived a portion of his military
 retirement pay in order to receive veterans' disability payments
 at the time of the divorce. Id. at 585-86. The state court, in
 
dividing the parties' property, had ordered husband to pay wife a
 portion of the military retirement pay he had waived in order to
 receive disability payments. Id.
 
In Perez v. Perez, 107 Hawai
'i 85, 110 P.3d 409 (App. 
2005), the family court entered a divorce decree granting wife forty percent of husband's military retirement pay. Perez, 107 
Hawai
'i at 85-86, 110 P.3d at 409-10. The divorce decree also 
3The record does not indicate that Husband was disabled or entitled to
 
receive military disability benefits when the Divorce Decree was entered.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required husband to reimburse wife if he voluntarily caused a
 
reduction in his retirement pay and thereby deprived wife of the
 full benefit of her forty percent interest. Id. at 86, 110 P.3d
 
at 410. After the divorce decree was entered, husband converted
 a portion of his retirement benefits into veterans' disability
 benefits, which reduced the amount of husband's retirement pay
 that wife was receiving. Id. at 87, 110 P.3d at 411. The family
 
court granted wife's request to enforce the divorce decree and
 ordered husband to pay wife forty percent of what his military
 retirement benefits would have been had the amount not been
 reduced by the disability benefits. Id. at 88, 110 P.3d at 412.
 
On appeal, this court affirmed the family court's order
 
and rejected husband's claim that the family court's order
 violated the law prohibiting courts from dividing military
 disability benefits in divorce cases. Id. at 88, 92, 110 P.3d at
 
412, 416. We noted that when the divorce decree was entered,
 "[husband] was not entitled to, and the family court did not
 divide, military disability benefits." Id. at 89, 110 P.3d at
 
413. In support of our decision, we quoted an extensive passage
 
from In re Marriage of Nielsen, 792 N.E.2d 844 (Ill. App. Ct.
 2003), which we found to be instructive. Id. at 90-92, 110 P.3d
 
414-16 (quoting Nielsen, 792 N.E.2d at 867-70).
 
Nielsen noted that a growing number of courts have
 
found Mansell to be inapplicable and have enforced judgments
 requiring the military spouse to indemnify the nonmilitary spouse
 for any diminution in retirement pay caused by actions taken by
 the military spouse. Id. at 90, 110 P.3d at 414. These courts
 
had reasoned that "because the military spouse is free to satisfy
 the indemnity obligation with assets other than the disability
 benefits, there is no division of disability benefits in
 contravention of Mansell." Id. (quoting Nielsen, 792 N.E.2d at
 
867). Nielsen also quoted with approval the Florida Supreme
 
Court's holding that:
 
while federal law prohibits the division of disability
benefits, it does not prohibit spouses from entering into a
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
property settlement agreement that awards the non-military
spouse a set portion of the military spouse's retirement
pay. Nor does it exclude indemnification provisions
ensuring such payments, so long as veteran's disability
payments are not the source of such payments.
 
Id. (quoting Nielsen, 792 N.E.2d at 867); see also Merrill v.
 
Merrill, 284 P.3d 880, 884 n.2 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2012) ("A clear
 majority of the jurisdictions that have addressed the issue
 likewise allow relief to a former spouse whose share of military
 retirement benefits is reduced by the other spouse's post-decree
 waiver of retirement in favor of disability payments.") 
II.
 
As in Perez, the Divorce Decree in this case did not
 
divide military disability benefits. Contrary to Husband's
 claim, the provision defining military retirement to which he
 objected, Paragraph 8.D.(1)(w), does not divide military
 disability benefits. Based on Perez, we also reject Husband's
 contentions that the Divorce Decree improperly divided and
 awarded veterans' disability benefits or military retirement
 benefits that Husband may waive or forfeit in the future to
 receive such disability benefits. The Divorce Decree properly
 divided military retirement benefits that Husband had accrued
 during the marriage. We conclude that the arguments raised by
 Husband on appeal are without merit.
4
 
4We note that to comply with  Mansell,  the military spouse "must be able
to satisfy [his or her] obligation [in the divorce decree to pay a percentage
of military retirement benefits to the other spouse] with a source of fundsother than [the military spouse's] disability benefits." 
Nielsen
, 792 N.E.2d 
at 849 (quoted in Perez, 107 Hawai' i at 92, 110 P.3d at 416). In this case,
there is no indication that Husband had begun to receive retirement benefitsor that he is eligible for disability payments. However, should Husband inthe future waive a portion of his military retirement payments in order toreceive military disability benefits, and should he be unable to reimburse orindemnify Wife for the resulting reduction in her payments with a source offunds other than his military disability benefits, Husband will be entitled toseek appropriate relief from the Family Court. We further note that althoughnot challenged by Husband on appeal, the Divorce Decree cross-references"Paragraph 6" in Paragraph 8.D.(1)(n) and "Section 6" and "Section 16" inParagraph 8.D.(1)(w). These cross-references do not appear to refer to theintended portions of the Divorce Decree, and the parties may wish to seek tocorrect these cross-references. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Divorce Decree
 
entered by the Family Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Scot Stuart Brower 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Daniel M. Gluck Appellate Pro Bono Pilot
Project Attorney
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5

 