NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000061
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
PATRICK DEGUAIR, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0773)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth, J.,

with Fujise, J., concurring and dissenting)
 
This appeal raises questions regarding the application

 
of the mitigating defense to kidnapping set forth in Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-720(3) (2014). To give kidnappers
 an incentive to release their victims in a safe place with no
 serious or substantial bodily injury, and to reward them for such
 action, the Legislature established a mitigating defense that
 reduces the penalty for kidnapping. Specifically, "[i]n a
 prosecution for kidnapping, it is a defense which reduces the
 offense to a class B felony that the defendant voluntarily
 released the victim, alive and not suffering from serious or
 substantial bodily injury, in a safe place prior to trial." HRS
 § 707-720(3). Where the mitigating defense applies, the
 Legislature reduced the crime from a twenty-year class A felony
 to a ten-year class B felony. Id. 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The instant case stems from the robbery of the Aiea Cue 
pool hall and the kidnapping of four individuals who were 
present. Defendant-Appellant Patrick Deguair, Jr. (Deguair) and 
co-defendants David Teo (Teo) and Ju Young Woo (Woo) 
(collectively, "Defendants") were each charged with first-degree robbery (Count 1) and the kidnapping of four individuals at Aiea Cue (Counts 2, 3, 4, and 5). Teo and Woo pleaded guilty to certain offenses pursuant to plea agreements with Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State), and Deguair proceeded to 
trial. During the settling of jury instructions after the close of the evidence, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
1
Court) ruled, as a matter of law, that the mitigating defense
applied to the alleged kidnapping of three of the victims. 
The
 
Circuit Court submitted to the jury the question of whether the
 mitigating defense applied to the alleged kidnapping of the
 fourth victim, Paul Beltran (Beltran). The only significant
 difference between Beltran and the other victims was that Beltran
 had been handcuffed upon Defendants' entry into Aiea Cue and
 remained handcuffed when Defendants departed from Aiea Cue.
 
The jury found Deguair guilty of the included offense

 
of second-degree robbery (Count 1) and guilty as charged of the
 four kidnapping counts (Counts 2 through 5). With respect to the
 kidnapping charge involving Beltran, the jury found that the
 State had disproved the mitigating defense. The jury also found
 merger between the robbery count and each of the kidnapping
 counts. Based on the jury's merger finding, the Circuit Court
 dismissed the robbery count. The Circuit Court sentenced Deguair
 
to twenty years of imprisonment for the kidnapping of Beltran
 
(Count 2) and ten years of imprisonment for the kidnapping of
 each of the other three victims (Counts 3, 4, and 5), with all
 terms to run concurrently. 
1/ The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Deguair argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in: (1) refusing to apply the mitigating defense and reduce the
 
kidnapping of Beltran to a class B felony; (2) failing to sua
 sponte dismiss the kidnapping counts by merging them together and
 then into the robbery count; (3) denying his motion to suppress
 evidence; (4) granting most of the State's motion in limine and
 excluding evidence of certain bad acts of Teo and Woo; (5)
 denying his motion for mistrial; and (6) denying his motion for a
 new trial. 
Although Defendants did not remove the handcuffs used
 
to restrain Beltran when they departed from Aiea Cue, it was
 undisputed that they left Beltran uninjured, in familiar and safe
 surroundings, and in the company of unrestrained individuals,
 including a friend and others Beltran knew, who quickly called
 the police. We conclude that the State failed to present
 sufficient evidence to disprove the mitigating defense as to
 Beltran's kidnapping. Accordingly, we hold that the Circuit
 Court erred in failing to apply the mitigating defense to
 Beltran's kidnapping and reduce that offense to a class B felony. 
We affirm the Circuit Court in all other respects. We vacate
 Deguair's conviction for a class A felony and his sentence on
 Count 2, and we remand the case for entry of a judgment of
 conviction on Count 2 as a class B felony and for resentencing on
 Count 2.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The State charged Defendants in relevant part as
 
follows:
 
COUNT I : On or about the 3rd day of April, 2008, in
the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, PATRICK
DEGUAIR, JR., JU YOUNG WOO, and DAVID TEO, while in the
course of committing a theft from Wayne K. Enterprise, Inc.,
dba Aiea Cue, and/or HSK Hawaii, Inc., and/or Ruth Lemons,
and/or John Llacuna, and while armed with a dangerous
instrument, did threaten the imminent use of force against a
person who was present, with intent to compel acquiesce to
the taking of or escaping with the property, thereby
committing the offense of Robbery in the First Degree, in 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
violation of Section 708-840(1)(b)(ii) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
. . . .
 
COUNT II : On or about the 3rd day of April, 2008, in
the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, PATRICK
DEGUAIR, JR., JU YOUNG WOO, and DAVID TEO, did intentionally
or knowingly restrain Paul Beltran with intent to terrorize
Paul Beltran or a third person, thereby committing the
offense of Kidnapping, in violation of Section 707-720(1)(e)
of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 . . . .

 
COUNT III : On or about the 3rd day of April, 2008, in
the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, PATRICK
DEGUAIR, JR., JU YOUNG WOO, and DAVID TEO, did intentionally
or knowingly restrain Ruth Lemons with intent to terrorize
Ruth Lemons or a third person, thereby committing the
offense of Kidnapping, in violation of Section 707-720(1)(e)
of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
. . . .

 
COUNT IV : On or about the 3rd day of April, 2008, in
the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, PATRICK
DEGUAIR, JR., JU YOUNG WOO, and DAVID TEO, did intentionally
or knowingly restrain John Llacuna, with intent to terrorize
John Llacuna or a third person, thereby committing the
offense of Kidnapping, in violation of Section 707-720(1)(e)
of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
. . . .

 
COUNT V : On or about the 3rd day of April, 2008, in
the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, PATRICK
DEGUAIR, JR., JU YOUNG WOO, and DAVID TEO, did intentionally
or knowingly restrain Talagu Moliga with intent to terrorize
Talagu Moliga or a third person, thereby committing the
offense of Kidnapping, in violation of Section 707-720(1)(e)
of the Hawaii Revised [Statutes].
 
II.
 
With respect to the mitigating defense issue, the
 
following pertinent evidence was presented at trial.
 
In the early morning hours of April 3, 2008, the
 
following individuals were inside the Aiea Cue pool hall: John
 
Llacuna (Llacuna), who worked as a cashier for Aiea Cue; Ruth
 Lemons (Lemons), who was Llacuna's girlfriend; Beltran, who was
 friends with Llacuna and helped to close Aiea Cue; and Talagu
 Moliga (Moliga), who worked as a lot attendant and as security
 for Aiea Cue.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sometime after Aiea Cue had closed, Deguair, Woo, and
 
Teo burst in through the back door of the pool hall. When
 
Beltran tried to run, he was tackled and his hands were
 handcuffed behind his back. Llacuna, Lemons, and Moliga were not
 physically restrained, but Defendants ordered them and Beltran to
 lie face down on the ground by the back area. Defendants then
 proceeded to disable the security cameras, used a blow torch and
 crowbar to open an ATM machine and a change machine, and took
 money, cigarettes, and other items. A short time after
 Defendants entered the pool hall, a phone rang, at which time one
 of the Defendants said that it was time to leave. Defendants
 left through the back door. 
Moliga waited a couple of seconds to confirm that
 
Defendants had actually left before getting up and locking the
 back door. Llacuna immediately called the police. After the
 police arrived, they removed Beltran's handcuffs. 
III.
 
During the settling of jury instructions after the
 
close of the evidence, the Circuit Court ruled, as a matter of
 law, that the mitigating defense had been established for the
 counts in which Lemons, Llacuna, and Moliga were the alleged
 victims. The Circuit Court, however, ruled that it would submit
 to the jury the question of whether the mitigating defense
 applied to the alleged kidnapping of Beltran charged in Count 2. 
The jury found Deguair guilty of the lesser included
 
offense of second-degree robbery in Count 1. In Count 2, the
 jury found Deguair guilty as charged of kidnapping Beltran and
 also found that the mitigating defense did not apply.
2 As to the
 
2/ The jury answered "yes" to each of the following three
interrogatories regarding the mitigating defense:
 
1. Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
prior to trial [Deguair] did not release Paul Beltran voluntarily?
 
2. Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
prior to trial [Deguair] did not release Paul Beltran alive and
not suffering from serious or substantial bodily injury?
 
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remaining kidnapping counts (Counts 3, 4, and 5), the jury found
 
Deguair guilty. 
The jury was asked to answer interrogatories in the
 
event it found Deguair guilty of the charged or lesser included
 offenses for the following pairs of counts: Counts 1 and 2,
 Counts 1 and 3, Counts 1 and 4, and Counts 1 and 5. With respect
 to Counts 1 and 2, the jury was asked:
 
1.	 Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that Counts 1 and 2 were not part of a continuing and
uninterrupted course of conduct? and
 
2.	 Did the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that [Deguair] committed Count 1 and Count 2 with
separate and distinct intents, rather than with one
intention, one general impulse, and one plan
encompassing both offenses?
 
The jury was asked the same interrogatories with respect to
 
Counts 1 and 3, Counts 1 and 4, and Counts 1 and 5. The jury
 answered "no" to the interrogatories for each of the pairs of
 counts. 
Without objection from Deguair or the State, the
 
Circuit Court dismissed Count 1 "pursuant to the jury verdict"
 and adjudged Deguair guilty of the four kidnapping counts. 
IV.
 
The Circuit Court sentenced Deguair to twenty years
 
imprisonment on Count 2 and ten years imprisonment on each of
 Counts 3, 4, and 5, with all terms to be served concurrently. 
The Circuit Court entered its Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 (Judgment) on January 2, 2013, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Deguair raises six points of error. 
We
 
conclude that only his claim regarding the mitigating defense to
 
2/(...continued)
3. Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
prior to trial [Deguair] did not release Paul Beltran in a safe
place?
 
The jury only needed to answer one of these interrogatories in the affirmativeto reject the mitigating defense. See State v. Mara, 102 Hawai' i 346, 356-57,
76 P.3d 589, 599-600 (App. 2003). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Beltran's kidnapping has merit, and we begin with a discussion of
that claim.
I.
Deguair alleges that the Circuit Court erred in
refusing to apply the mitigating defense to Beltran's kidnapping
and reduce that offense to a class B felony.  We agree.
A. 
Kidnapping is a class A felony, which can be reduced to
a class B felony where the mitigating defense applies.  Under HRS
§ 707-720(3), the mitigating defense applies where "the defendant
voluntarily release[s] the victim, alive and not suffering from
serious or substantial bodily injury, in a safe place prior to
trial."  HRS § 707-720(3).  The Commentary to the kidnapping
statute explains that the Legislature's purpose in enacting the 
mitigating defense was "(1) to differentiate according to the
severity of the actual harm involved, and (2) to encourage the
actor to proceed less dangerously once the criminal course of
conduct has begun."  Commentary to HRS §§ 707-720 to 707-722.  
The Hawai #i mitigation scheme is similar to that set
forth in Section 212.1 of the Model Penal Code (MPC).  The
commentary to MPC Section 212.1 explains the rationale for a
mitigating defense to kidnapping:
If the most severe sanctions are available once some harm
has come to the victim, there is no remaining incentive not
to do further harm.  Thus, while causing harm to the victim
will aggravate the offense as explained above, the actor may
still escape the extreme sanctions of a first-degree felony
by preserving the life of the victim and voluntarily
releasing him alive and in a safe place prior to trial.
The effect of this scheme is to provide at every stage
an incentive to release the victim and not to inflict any
further harm.  The requirement that the release be
"voluntary" means that rescue by the police or escape by the
victim will not operate in mitigation of the first-degree
penalties.  So long as the actor maintains his control over
the victim, therefore, the risk of first degree penalties
will be present.  Penalties will escalate above the second-
degree level, moreover, according to the degree of harm
inflicted upon the victim and the number of separate
offenses committed.  The escalation can be terminated at any
point and first-degree penalties avoided by the voluntary
conduct of the actor.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Model Penal Code and Commentaries § 212.1 cmt. at 233-34
 
(Official Draft and Revised Comments 1980) (emphases added).
 
B.
 
The following was shown through undisputed evidence: 
Beltran was familiar with Aiea Cue and well acquainted with the
 other kidnapping victims, Llacuna, Lemons, and Moliga. Beltran
 was friends with Llacuna and helped close Aiea Cue. Llacuna was
 the cashier for Aiea Cue, Lemons was Llacuna's girlfriend, and
 Moliga provided security for Aiea Cue and was its lot attendant.
 Defendants handcuffed Beltran after he attempted to run, but they
 did not physically restrain the other victims. A few seconds
 after Defendants left Aiea Cue, Moliga locked the door. Llacuna
 called the police, who removed the handcuffs from Betran after
 they arrived. There was no indication that Defendants' actions
 resulted in injury to any of the victims. Aiea Cue was a
 commercial establishment located in Honolulu on Kamehameha
 Highway.
 
In ruling on the mitigating defense issue, the Circuit
 
Court found that the facts relating to the defense were basically
 undisputed. The Circuit Court agreed with Deguair that, as a
 matter of law, the State had failed to disprove the mitigating
 defense beyond a reasonable doubt as to Llacuna, Lemons, and
 Moliga. However, the Circuit Court denied Deguair's request for
 the same ruling as to the kidnapping of Beltran. The Circuit
 Court distinguished Beltran's situation from that of the other
 victims based on the sole fact that Defendants did not remove the
 handcuffs placed on Beltran when they left Aiea Cue. The Circuit
 Court stated:
 
And in my view I agree with the defense, except for Beltran.
I agree with the State as to Beltran. They didn't take the
cuffs off. He was still cuffed and I think that makes it a
 factual question for the jury. So it's denied as to
 Beltran. It's granted as to the other three.
 
C.
 
We conclude that there was insufficient evidence to
 
disprove the mitigating defense with respect to Beltran's
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
kidnapping and therefore the Circuit Court should have reduced
 
that offense to a class B felony. The Legislature's rationale
 for establishing the mitigating defense clearly and directly
 applies to Beltran's situation. As acknowledged by the Circuit
 Court, the only fact that distinguished Beltran's situation from
 that of the other victims were his handcuffs. This distinction
 did not justify a finding that Defendants had not voluntarily
 released Beltran and therefore the mitigating defense was
 inapplicable to Beltran's kidnapping.
3
 
There was no dispute that Defendants left Beltran
 
uninjured at Aiea Cue, in the company of unrestrained
 individuals, including a friend and others well-known to Beltran, 
who quickly called the police. That Beltran remained handcuffed
 did not detract from the fact that he was left at Aiea Cue, a
 place that was safe and familiar to him, with readily available
 assistance and with no threat of further harm. We conclude that
 the Circuit Court erred in failing to apply the mitigating
 defense to Beltran's kidnapping. Our conclusion is fully
 supported by the Legislature's purpose in enacting the mitigating
 defense -- to differentiate punishment "according to the severity
 of the actual harm involved" and "to encourage the actor to
 proceed less dangerously once the criminal course of conduct has
 begun." See Commentary to HRS §§ 707-720 to 707-722. Applying
 
the mitigating defense to Beltran's situation would advance and
 serve the Legislature's purpose, whereas denying the defense
 would be inconsistent with the reason for the defense.
 
II.
 
Deguair contends that the Circuit Court committed plain
 
error in failing to sua sponte dismiss the kidnapping counts by
 merging them together and then into the robbery count. We
 disagree.
 
3/ The State argued in closing that because Beltran remained handcuffed,
he had not been "released" voluntarily by Deguair, and therefore the
prosecution had disproved the mitigating defense. On appeal, both parties
only focus on the "voluntarily released" element of the mitigating defense. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the jury's answers to the interrogatories, the 
Circuit Court merged the robbery count into the kidnapping 
counts. It dismissed the robbery count and adjudicated Deguair guilty of the four kidnapping counts. Where the jury returns a verdict of guilty on two counts that merge, the State is given the option to decide which of counts subject to merger should be dismissed. See State v. Padilla, 114 Hawai
'i 507, 517, 164 P.3d 
765, 775 (App. 2007). Here, the State did not oppose the Circuit Court's decision to merge the robbery count into the separate kidnapping counts.
4 We conclude that the Circuit Court did not 
err in dismissing the robbery count rather than the kidnapping counts. 
Deguair cites no authority to support the proposition
 
that kidnapping counts regarding different victims are subject to
 merger. We conclude that the kidnapping counts charged in this
 case required proof of a separate and distinct intent with
 respect to each victim and were not subject to merger. See 
State v. Correa, 5 Haw. App. 644, 706 P.2d 1321 (1985) (affirming
 kidnapping counts involving separate victims); State v. Kwambana,
 No. CA2013-12-092, 2014 WL 2732311, at *4 (Ohio Jun. 16, 2014)
 (concluding that "a kidnapping that involves multiple kidnapping
 victims necessarily includes a finding of a separate animus for
 each kidnapping offense"); Jones v. State, 725 S.E.2d 236, 241
 (Ga. 2012) (holding that the defendant's "contention that the
 trial court erroneously failed to merge the three kidnapping
 counts with each other 'is specious since those counts involved
 different victims'" (citation omitted)). We therefore reject
 Deguair's argument that the Circuit Court erred in failing to
 merge the kidnapping counts together. 
4/ We note that when the Circuit Court made its merger decision, the
jury had found Deguair guilty of a class A felony (without the mitigating
defense) for the Count 2 kidnapping and a class B felony for second-degree
robbery with respect to Count 1. The State does not argue on appeal that it
would have objected to the Circuit Court's merger decision if the mitigating
defense had been applied to Count 2. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
Deguair contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
denied his motion to suppress evidence. The evidence Deguair
 
sought to suppress had been seized by police during the execution
 of a search warrant in an investigation unrelated to the Aiea Cue
 case. Deguair contends that the seizure of the challenged
 evidence was illegal because the police exceeded the scope of the
 search warrant in discovering the evidence related to the Aiea
 Cue case and because the discovery of this evidence was not
 inadvertent. Deguair's contentions are without merit.
 
On the same day as the kidnappings and robbery at Aiea
 
Cue, the police obtained a warrant to search a hotel room that
 had been linked to Deguair. The detectives involved in preparing
 and executing the search warrant were not involved in the Aiea
 Cue investigation, but were involved in a murder investigation,
 in which Deguair was a suspect, that was unrelated to the Aiea
 Cue case. Prior to the execution of the search warrant, at least
 one of the detectives in the murder investigation was aware that
 Aiea Cue had been robbed and that the robbery included breaking
 into an ATM machine. Deguair, however, had not been identified
 as a suspect in the kidnappings and robbery at Aiea Cue. During
 the execution of the search warrant, the police seized evidence
 related to the Aiea Cue case.
 
We reject Deguair's claim that the police exceeded the
 
scope of the search warrant in discovering the evidence related
 to the Aiea Cue case. The search warrant authorized the police
 to search for firearms, a silencer, and ammunition, as well as 
articles of personal property tending to establish the identity
 of the person in control of the hotel room and containers where
 evidence may be found, including personal identification, bills,
 checks, photographs, and other documents. The police did not
 exceed the scope of the warrant in discovering the evidence
 related to the Aiea Cue case, which was discovered in areas and
 containers the police were authorized to search under the search
 warrant.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We also reject Deguair's claim that the discovery by
 
the police of the evidence related to the Aiea Cue case was not
 
inadvertent. In denying Deguair's motion to suppress evidence,
 the Circuit Court specifically found that prior to entering the
 hotel room to execute the search warrant, detectives in charge of
 the murder investigation "had no reason to believe that evidence
 from . . . the Aiea Cue robbery would be found in the room." 
There was substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's
 finding, which we conclude was not clearly erroneous. Deguair
 provides no basis for this court to overturn the Circuit Court's
 determination that the evidence he sought to suppress was legally
 discovered and seized under the plain view doctrine. See State
 
v. Meyer, 78 Hawai
'i 308, 314-17, 893 P.2d 159, 165-68 (1995). 
IV.
 
Deguair argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in granting most of the State's motion in limine and
 excluding evidence of certain bad acts of Teo and Woo. We
 disagree.
 
Prior to trial, the State moved in limine to preclude
 
Deguair from introducing eleven items of "bad act" evidence
 relating to the alleged involvement of Teo and Woo in acts of
 violence and "strong arm" and criminal debt collection
 activities."
5 The State argued that Deguair's disclosure of his
 
5/ The State's motion in limine sought to exclude the following eleven
items of evidence:
 
1. David Teo is/was known as a strong arm and debt
collector for Oahu criminal organizations.
 
2. 	David Teo participated in the "taxing" of legal and
illegal gambling businesses for protection of their
businesses.
 
3. 	In or about March 2008, David Teo smashed a man's face
into the windshield of a car while attempting to
collect money from the man, in the parking lot of Tony
Roma's restaurant in Pearl City.
 
4. 	David Teo told Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr. that he
(David Teo) had just gotten out of jail and "needed
this take."
 
(continued...)
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intent to use this evidence had been untimely under Hawaii Rules
 
of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2014). Deguair opposed the
 State's motion in limine, arguing that all the alleged bad acts
 listed in the State's motion in limine were relevant to his
 duress and choice of evils defenses. Deguair acknowledged that
 the proffered bad act evidence would be introduced solely through
 his own testimony.
 
The Circuit Court ruled that Deguair would be permitted
 
to testify regarding the alleged bad acts described in items 3
 and 5 of the State's motion in limine -- that Deguair witnessed
 Teo smash a man's face into the windshield of a car and later
 reminded Deguair of this incident. The Circuit Court excluded
 the remainder of the bad acts identified in the State's motion in
 limine, ruling that the probative value of the proffered
 uncorroborated evidence was "substantially outweighed by the
 danger of unfair prejudice and confusion of the issues, et
 cetera[,]" pursuant to HRE Rule 403, and that Deguair's
 disclosure of his intent to use the evidence had been untimely. 
At trial, Deguair was permitted to testify that he
 
witnessed Teo smash a man's face into a car and that Teo reminded
 Deguair of this incident in ordering him to participate in the
 
5/(...continued)
5. 	David Teo said to Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr.,
"Remember what happened to the guy in the parking
lot."
 
6. 	Ju Young Woo protected criminal organizations
operating in the Pearl City and Aiea Communities.
 
7. 	Ju Young Woo received and sold stolen motor vehicle
parts.
 
8. 	Ju Young Woo collected money for drug dealers.
 
9. 	Ju Young Woo beat several people with a metal pipe on
the bike path near the ABC Used Auto Parts.
 
10. 	Aiea Cue was not paying its "tax" for protection to
"the Samoans."
 
11. 	Ju Young Woo needed money to pay a lawyer for
representation concerning an arrest for stealing a
tractor.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Aiea Cue robbery/kidnappings. Prior to Deguair taking the stand,
 
the Court also ruled that Deguair would be permitted to testify
 that he witnessed Woo kill a man (an alleged bad act that had not
 been identified in the State's motion in limine) and that Deguair
 acceded to Woo's demand to participate in the Aiea Cue
 robbery/kidnappings because he was afraid of Woo. Although the
 Circuit Court ruled that Deguair would be allowed to testify
 about the bad act killing allegedly committed by Woo, Deguair
 chose not to present such evidence during his testimony. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in ruling on the State's motion in limine. Deguair's
 disclosure of his intent to use the bad act evidence was
 untimely. The trial had been pending for several years, and
 Deguair did not provide a reasonable explanation for why he
 waited until two weeks before trial to disclose his intent to use
 the evidence identified in the State's motion in limine. 
Permitting Deguair to introduce the excluded bad act evidence
 would have created a danger of unfair prejudice and confusion of
 the issues, and it may have resulted in unduly prolonging the
 trial. Moreover, the Circuit Court allowed Deguair to present
 evidence (other than the excluded bad acts) that directly
 supported his duress and choice of evils defenses. Under the
 circumstances of this case, we cannot say that the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in ruling on the State's motion in limine,
 and we conclude that the Circuit Court's ruling did not deprive
 Deguair of a fair trial. 
V.
 
Deguair argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in denying his motion for mistrial. Deguair's
 mistrial motion was based on the State's asking Deguair at trial
 whether he "took David Teo to the Koko Head Range to shoot guns"
 before the Aiea Cue robbery/kindappings. Deguair contends that,
 as the Circuit Court found, this question was prejudicial and
 improperly suggested bad act evidence. The State counters that
 the question did not seek bad act evidence, because going to a
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shooting range is not a bad act, but instead was designed to
 
elicit relevant evidence showing that Deguair and Teo were
 friends and that Deguair had not been coerced to participate in
 the Aiea Cue robbery/kidnappings. 
We need not resolve whether the State's question was
 
improper. The Circuit Court sustained defense counsel's
 objection to the question before Deguair gave an answer. The
 Circuit Court offered to strike the question and instruct the
 jury to disregard it, but defense counsel declined to pursue this
 remedy offered by the Circuit Court.
6 Given the brief and
 
isolated nature of the State's question, and the Circuit Court's
 sustaining of defense counsel's objection before Deguair gave an
 answer, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 discretion in declining to declare a mistrial.
 
VI.
 
Deguair argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion by denying his motion for new trial. We disagree.
 
Deguair moved for a new trial based on his assertion
 
that Woo presented false testimony at trial. This argument was
 
based on (1) Woo's testimony at trial that he did not see
 
anything inside the change machine except canisters containing
 coins and did not take payroll checks from the change machine,
 and (2) a pretrial statement by Wayne Choe (Choe), the owner of
 Aiea Cue, that the change machine was used as a safe and stored
 $1,100-1,200 in currency that was taken in the robbery. 
The State argued, among other things, that (1) Deguair
 
had not shown that Woo's testimony constituted perjury, (2) the
 asserted discrepancy between Woo's testimony and Choe's statement
 was not newly discovered evidence, and (3) the contents of Choe's
 statement was known to the defense before trial. The Circuit 
6/ We note that in its preliminary instructions to the jury, the Circuit
Court instructed the jury that an unanswered question was not evidence of any
kind. The jury is presumed to follow the trial court's instructions. State
 
v. Kazanas, 134 Hawai' i 117, 129, 336 P.3d 217, 229 (App. 2014). 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court agreed with these arguments and denied Deguair's motion for
 
a new trial. 
We review a trial court's decision to deny a motion for 
new trial for clear abuse of discretion. State v. Yamada, 108 
Hawai'i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005). "When a defendant 
seeks a new trial on the grounds that a prosecution witness gave false testimony at trial, the trial court must first determine whether 'it is reasonably satisfied that the testimony at trial of a material prosecution witness was, in fact, false.'" State 
v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i 390, 424, 56 P.3d 692, 726 (2000) 
(brackets and citation omitted). 
Based on our review of the record, Deguair did not
 
demonstrate that Woo provided false testimony or that Woo
 committed perjury. In addition, Woo's alleged false testimony
 concerned a collateral matter. We conclude that the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Deguair's motion
 for a new trial. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment with respect to Deguair's conviction and
 sentence on Count 2 as a class A felony, and we remand the case
 for entry of a judgment of conviction on Count 2 as class B
 felony and for resentencing on Count 2. We affirm the Circuit
 Court's Judgment with respect to the convictions and sentences on
 Counts 3, 4, and 5.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 27, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Dwight C.H. Lum

for Defendant-Appellant
 
James M. Anderson 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney

City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
16
 