NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000752
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TINA L. QUIZON, also known as Tina Quizon,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0945)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Tina L. Quizon, also known as Tina
 
Quizon, appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence;
 
Notice of Entry filed on March 12, 2014 in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1 Quizon was charged with
 
Criminal Trespass in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 708-813(1)(a)(ii).
2 After a bench
 
trial, the Circuit Court found Quizon guilty as charged,
 sentenced her to a one-year term of probation and one-day of
 imprisonment with credit for time served, and ordered her to pay
 fees. This appeal follows.
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-813 provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of criminal
trespass in the first degree if:
 
(a)	 That person knowingly enters or remains unlawfully:
 
. . . .
 (ii)	 In or upon the premises of a hotel or apartment
building[.]
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-813(1)(a)(ii) (Supp. 2012).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Quizon asserts that there was insufficient 
evidence to convict her of criminal trespass in the first degree. 
Specifically, Quizon argues that the Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i failed to prove: (1) that the YWCA Fernhurst Residence 
for Women ("YWCA Fernhurst") was a "hotel" under HRS § 708-800; or (2) that she possessed the requisite mens rea, that is that she knew that the YWCA Fernhurst was a hotel. As explained below, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to prove that the YWCA Ferhurst was a hotel, but insufficient evidence to prove that Quizon knew that the YWCA Ferhurst was a hotel. We therefore reverse Quizon's conviction. 
Although the State charged Quizon with trespass upon "a
 
hotel and/or apartment building," its theory of the case and the
 evidence it presented was designed to prove that the YWCA
 Fernhurst met the statutory definition of a "hotel." In
 addition, the term "apartment building" is defined to exclude any
 structure that is a hotel. We therefore focus on whether the
 State presented sufficient evidence to prove that Quizon
 knowingly entered or remained unlawfully upon the premises of a
 hotel. 
For purposes of first-degree trespass, the term hotel
 
is defined to mean "a structure in which a majority of the
 tenants are roomers or boarders." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-800
 (2014). The status of the YWCA Fernhurst as a hotel was an
 attendant-circumstance element of the offense, and the State was
 required to prove that Quizon knew that the YWCA Fernhurst was a
 hotel. See Haw. Rev. Stat. § 702-207 (2014) ("When the
 
definition of an offense specifies the state of mind sufficient
 for the commission of that offense, without distinguishing among
 the elements thereof, the specified state of mind shall apply to
 all elements of the offense, unless a contrary purpose plainly
 appears.") 
Here, the testimony of Rhonda Jones, the general
 
manager of the YWCA Fernhurst, provided sufficient evidence to
 establish that the YWCA Fernhurst satisfied the statutory
 definition of a hotel. However, the State failed to adduce
 substantial evidence to show that Quizon knew that the YWCA
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fernhurst was a hotel as defined by HRS § 708-800 or evidence
 
from which such knowledge could reasonably be inferred. 
Jones testified that the YWCA Fernhurst had forty-two
 
rooms. The State argues that Quizon's testimony that the YWCA
 Fernhurst had ten rooms for women in the United States Veteran's
 program, under which Quizon was staying at the YWCA Fernhurst,
 and was responsible for providing meals for those in the program
 was sufficient to prove that Quizon knew that the YWCA Fernhurst
 was "a structure in which a majority of the tenants are roomers
 or boarders." We disagree. The testimony cited by the State
 does not support a reasonable inference that Quizon knew that the
 majority of the YWCA Fernhurst's tenants were roomers or
 boarders. 
We note that Quizon was given a written trespass
 
warning. However, the trespass warning erroneously referred to
 second-degree trespass upon a "commercial premises," instead of
 first-degree trespass upon a hotel. Therefore, the trespass
 warning did not provide evidence that Quizon knew that the YWCA
 Fernhurst was a hotel. 
Because the State failed to present sufficient evidence
 
to show that Quizon knew that the YMCA Ferhurst was a hotel, we
 reverse the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 8, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Lila Barbara Kanae,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3

 