  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000692
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SHUAN E. FLEETWOOD, also known as SHAUN FLEETWOOD, 
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-1668)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Shuan E. Fleetwood, also known as
 
Shaun Fleetwood (Fleetwood), appeals from the "Order of
 
Resentencing, Revocation of Probation" (Order of Resentencing),
 
filed on September 19, 2016 in the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On appeal, Fleetwood contends that the Circuit Court:
 
(1) wrongly concluded that he inexcusably failed to comply with a
 substantial requirement imposed as a condition of his probation
 because the evidence showed that his violations occurred as a
 result of his reasonable understanding of what his probation
 officer had permitted him to do; and (2) abused its discretion in
 
1 The Honorable William M. Domingo presided regarding the Order of
Resentencing and the related hearing on September 16, 2016.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resentencing Fleetwood to the indeterminate term of imprisonment
 
of ten years rather than a second chance at probation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted and having given due consideration to the arguments
 advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the
 relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Fleetwood's points of
 error as follows, and affirm.
 
On October 13, 2010, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai'i (State) charged Fleetwood via Grand Jury Indictment in 
Criminal No. 10-1-1668 with two counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­
730(1)(c) (2014). On January 18, 2011, Fleetwood entered guilty 
pleas on both counts to the lesser offense of Sexual Assault in the Second Degree in violation of HRS § 707-731(1)(a) (2014) pursuant to a plea agreement with the State. On April 15, 2011, the Circuit Court
2 entered a Judgment of Conviction and Probation 
Sentence (Judgment), which sentenced Fleetwood to a five-year 
term of probation under the Hawai' i's Opportunity Probation with 
Enforcement (HOPE) Program on each count to run concurrently. 
The Circuit Court also ordered specified terms and conditions of 
probation, including that Fleetwood serve a one-year term of incarceration, with credit for time served. The record contains a "Terms and Conditions of Probation" form which appears to be signed by Fleetwood and dated July 26, 2011 (7/26/11 Terms and
Conditions Form), acknowledging both Fleetwood's receipt of the 
terms and conditions of probation and that the terms and 
conditions of probation had been explained to him. 
On November 8, 2011, Adult Client Services Branch
 
Senior Probation Officer Ty Tamasaka (Probation Officer Tamasaka)
 
filed a Motion for Revocation of Probation
3 (Motion for
 
2 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided regarding the Judgment. 
3 The Motion for Revocation filed November 8, 2011, in the Circuit Court
is labeled as both a "Motion for Modification of the Terms and Conditions of
 
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revocation), alleging that Fleetwood violated his terms and
 
conditions of probation by: (1) failing to report to his
 
probation officer as ordered on November 7, 2011; (2) failing to
 obtain and maintain mental health treatment or services; (3)
 failing to abide by curfew, travel, or leisure time restrictions
 imposed by his probation officer; and (4) failing to obtain and
 maintain a residence as approved by his probation officer. The
 Circuit Court issued a bench warrant for Fleetwood's arrest the
 same day. 
On March 11, 2016, the bench warrant was executed on 
Fleetwood in Dermott, Arkansas. Fleetwood had been incarcerated in Arkansas on a prior offense, and was extradited back to Hawai'i in March 2016. 
Following a number of other proceedings before the 
Circuit Court, the State's Motion for Revocation of Probation came on for hearing before the Circuit Court on September 16, 2016. At the revocation hearing, Fleetwood argued that his violations of the terms and conditions of probation were due to his belief that Probation Officer Tamasaka had given him permission to leave Hawai' i to visit his father in Louisiana, who 
had been in failing health. Fleetwood also argued that his absence from Hawai' i was involuntary, and thus excusable, because 
when he went to a police station in Louisiana to report as a sex offender, he was arrested on an outstanding warrant in Arkansas and subsequently sentenced to a four-year term of incarceration in Arkansas, making it impossible to return to Hawai' i.
4 
Upon consideration of the evidence and testimony
 
presented by both parties at the Revocation Hearing, the Circuit
 Court concluded that Fleetwood had inexcusably violated a
 
3(...continued)
Probation, Deferred Acceptance of Guilty Plea, Or Deferred Acceptance of No
Contest Plea" and as a "Motion for Revocation of Probation". 
For purposes of
the instant appeal, we refer to the motion as the "Motion for Revocation".
 
4 In January 2013, Fleetwood had been convicted of Sexual Assault in the
Fourth Degree in the Circuit Court of Chicot County, Arkansas, of the Tenth
Judicial District ( Arkansas Circuit Court ). 
3
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial term and condition of his probation, and revoked his
 
probation. The Circuit Court proceeded to resentence Fleetwood
 to an indeterminate term of imprisonment of ten years for each
 count, to run concurrently. This appeal follows. 
The Circuit Court's authority to revoke a criminal 
defendant's probation is governed by HRS § 706-625 (2014).
5 
Under HRS § 706-625(3), "[t]he court shall revoke probation if the defendant has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement imposed as a condition of the order[.]" HRS § 706­625(3). As set forth in State v. Villiarimo, a probationer's failure to comply is "inexcusable" as contemplated under HRS § 706-625(3), when it is "a willful and deliberate attempt to circumvent the order of the court." 132 Hawai' i 209, 222, 320 
P.3d 874, 887 (2014) (ellipsis omitted). "This standard requires both an intentional act on the part of the defendant ('willful'), and a deliberate attempt by him or her to circumvent the probation order, taking into consideration the significance of the defendant's action with respect to the court's order and 
5 HRS § 706-625 provides in pertinent part:
 
§706-625 Revocation, modification of probation
conditions . (1) The court, on application of a probation
officer, the prosecuting attorney, the defendant, or in its
own motion, after a hearing, may revoke probation except as
provided in subsection (7), reduce or enlarge the conditions
of a sentence of probation, pursuant to the provisions
applicable to the initial setting of the conditions and the
provisions of section 706-627
 
. . .
 
(3) The court shall revoke probation if the defendant
has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial
requirement imposed as a condition of the order or has been
convicted of a felony. The court may revoke the suspension
of sentence or probation if the defendant has been convicted
of another crime other than a felony. 
. . .
 
(5) When the court revokes probation, it may impose on
the defendant any sentence that might have been imposed
originally for the crime of which the defendant was
convicted.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
goals of probation ('to circumvent the order of the court')." Id. 
Here, the Circuit Court concluded that Fleetwood's failure to
 comply with the terms of his probation was inexcusable as
 contemplated under HRS § 706-625(3).
 
The decision that a probationer's failure was 
inexcusable is a conclusion of law that is reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. State v. Reyes, 93 Hawai' i 321, 327, 2 
P.3d 725, 731 (Haw. App. 2000). Accordingly, a trial court's determination that a probationer inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement of probation will not be overturned, so long as it is supported by the trial court's findings of fact, and reflects an application of the correct rule of law. Id. 
Here, Fleetwood does not challenge the Circuit Court's 
finding of fact that he had failed to comply with a substantial requirement imposed as a condition of probation by leaving the jurisdiction. Instead, Fleetwood argues that the Circuit Court erred in determining that his failure was inexcusable. In support of his argument, Fleetwood enumerates eight "mitigating circumstances"
6 that he asserts compels this court to vacate the 
Circuit Court's conclusion that his absence from Hawai' i was 
inexcusable. 
6 In Fleetwood's Opening Brief, he asserts the evidence at the
Revocation hearing showed: (1) he testified that after obtaining permission
from Probation Officer Tamasaka to visit his father, Fleetwood remainedunaware of any required protocols (e.g., provide a copy of round-trip airlineticket, etc.), and he had provided Probation Officer Tamasaka the name,address, and phone number of an uncle in Arkansas with whom he would stay, whowould help him get to Louisiana to see his father and through whom ProbationOfficer Tamasaka could contact him; (2) Fleetwood did not leave Hawai 'i to 
avoid HOPE supervision, but rather to see his dying father; (3) Fleetwoodfollowed Probation Officer Tamasaka's advice by going to a police station inPierre County, Louisiana and tried to register as a sex offender (which is howhe was arrested on outstanding warrants); (4) Fleetwood intended, but wasunable, to return to Hawai 'i due to his arrest and sentence in the Arkansas 
case; (5) the Arkansas offense occurred in 2009, prior to the incident inFleetwood's Hawai 'i case and placement on HOPE probation; (6) Fleetwood's
inability to return to Hawai 'i was due to the Arkansas authorities' refusal to 
relinquish control over him until he finished his sentence; (7) Fleetwood hadjust completed four years of prison in Arkansas which, as the circuit courtobserved, could not be credited to his ten-year Hawai 'i terms; (8) the purpose
and design of HOPE probation is to give defendants corrective action andsecond chances as they learn how to better handle their missteps on probation. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In its ruling, the Circuit Court considered the
 
evidence and argument presented by both the State and Fleetwood
 
at the revocation hearing, including the mitigating circumstances
 that Fleetwood alleges on appeal, and found that Fleetwood's
 failure to remain in the Circuit Court's jurisdiction was
 inexcusable. At the revocation hearing, Probation Officer
 Tamasaka testified that he had reviewed the terms and conditions
 of probation with Fleetwood and that Fleetwood's signature was at
 the bottom of the 7/26/11 Terms and Conditions Form. Fleetwood
 testified to the contrary, that Probation Officer Tamasaka did
 not go over all the terms and conditions of probation with him
 and that the signature at the bottom of the 7/26/11 Terms and
 Conditions Form was not his. However, Fleetwood admitted that
 his signature did appear on a Waiver of Extradition form, which
 was also admitted into evidence. It is apparent from the record
 that the Circuit Court did not believe Fleetwood's claim that he
 was not advised of the terms and conditions of probation, or his
 claim that he did not sign the 7/26/11 Terms and Conditions Form.
 
Moreover, contrary to Fleetwood's testimony, Probation 
Officer Tamasaka testified that he did not give Fleetwood permission to leave Hawai' i to go to Arkansas. Such testimony 
led the Circuit Court to find that "there was a substantial term regarding being in the State of Hawai' i and not . . . leaving 
without permission. And therefore the reason for [Fleetwood's] noncompliance, even based on his testimony, was unreasonable." The Circuit Court also specifically noted that Fleetwood's actions were intentional as evidenced by the fact that he had previously spoken to Probation Officer Tamasaka about his desire to transfer to Arkansas before he left Hawai' i. 
Based on the record, the Circuit Court had a sufficient
 
basis to find that Fleetwood committed an intentional act of
 leaving the jurisdiction which was a deliberate attempt by him to
 circumvent a substantial requirement in the probation order. The
 record supports the Circuit Court's conclusion that Fleetwood's
 failure to comply with a substantial term or condition of his
 
6
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probation was inexcusable, and thus warranted revocation of his
 
probation. 
We likewise conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in resentencing Fleetwood to the
 indeterminate ten-year term of incarceration on each count, to
 run concurrently, rather than resentence him again to probation. 
As articulated by the Supreme Court of Hawai
'i in State v. 
Mundon, 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review
for sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the
court committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion
in its decision. Factors which indicate a plain and
manifest abuse of discretion are arbitrary or capricious
action by the judge and a rigid refusal to consider the
defendant's contentions. And, generally, to constitute
an abuse it must appear that the court clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant.
 
121 Hawai' i 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009) (citation 
omitted). We conclude that no such plain and manifest abuse of 
discretion was committed by the Circuit Court in its Order of Resentencing. 
HRS § 706-625(5) provides "[w]hen the court revokes
 
probation, it may impose on the defendant any sentence that might
 have been imposed originally for the crime of which the defendant
 was convicted." HRS § 706-625(5). As such, the Circuit Court
 had discretion to sentence Fleetwood to the indeterminate term of
 ten years of incarceration as his sentence is in accordance to
 his convictions for two counts of Sexual Assault in the Second
 Degree, a class B felony. See HRS § 707-731(2); HRS § 706-660
 
(2014). 
In the instant case, the Circuit Court considered the
 
State and Fleetwood's arguments on resentencing and concluded
 that Fleetwood was no longer a viable candidate for probation. 
The Circuit Court cited to a variety of factors in determining
 its sentence, including Fleetwood's prior criminal record, his
 denial of wrongdoing related to his probation violations, that he
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denied knowing the terms and conditions of his probation, and his 
assertion that his probation officer had told him he could leave Hawai'i. Given the record in this case, the Circuit Court did 
not abuse its discretion in resentencing Fleetwood to the indeterminate term of ten years of incarceration in its Order of Resentencing. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit's "Order of Resentencing, Revocation of
 Probation", filed September 19, 2016, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 8, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 