NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-18-0000010
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
IN THE INTEREST OF AB
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 15-0007 )
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Proposed Intervenor-Appellant KL (KL) appeals from the
 
following orders entered by the Family Court of the Third Circuit
 
(Family Court):1 (1) Order Awarding Permanent Custody, filed on
 
April 3, 2017 (Order Awarding Permanent Custody); (2) Order
 
Continuing Permanent Custody, filed on July 31, 2017 (Order
 Continuing Permanent Custody); (3) Order Denying Motion to
 Intervene, filed on October 9, 2017 (Order Denying Intervention);
 and (4) Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration of Order Entered
 
October 9, 2017, Denying Motion to Intervene, filed on December
 21, 2017 (Order Denying Reconsideration). KL filed a Notice of
 
Appeal on January 5, 2018.
 
1
 The Honorable Darien W.L. Ching Nagata presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, KL contends that the Family Court: (1)
 
plainly erred when it entered the Order Awarding Permanent
 
Custody; (2) plainly erred when it entered the Order Continuing
 Permanent Custody; (3) erred in entering the Order Denying
 Intervention; and (4) abused its discretion in entering the Order
 Denying Reconsideration. KL states that the relief she is
 seeking from this court is to vacate the Order Awarding Permanent
 Custody and award permanent custody of AB to her.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve KL's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Even if KL had standing to oppose the award of 
permanent custody to the State of Hawai' i, Department of Human 
Services (DHS),
2 this court lacks appellate jurisdiction over 
KL's appeal from the Order Awarding Permanent Custody because the appeal is untimely. Appeals must be taken "in the manner and within the time provided by the rules of court." Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-1(c) (2016). Pursuant to HRS § 571-54 
(2006), "[a]n interested party, aggrieved by any order or decree 
of the [family court], may appeal to the intermediate appellate court. . . . upon the same terms and conditions as in other cases 
2
 When the Order Awarding Custody was entered, KL was not a party
and had not sought to intervene in this proceeding for termination of parental
rights. KL lacks standing to enforce the parental rights of AB's mother
(Mother) or father ( Father). 
In re F Children , Nos. 28882, 28883, and 28884,
2009 WL 1300933 (Haw. App. May 8, 2009) (mem. op.) at *8 (Father lacks
standing to enforce Mother's parental rights). Mother and Father did not
 appeal the termination of their parental rights to AB. Therefore, the
termination of their parental rights is final. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the circuit court, and review shall be governed by chapter 
602, except as hereinafter provided." Rule 3 of the Rules Expediting Child Protective Appeals requires that a notice of appeal be filed within fifteen days after entry of an appealable judgment, order, or decree, but further provides that if the appeal "is otherwise filed within the time permitted by Rule 4 of the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure [(HRAP)], the appeal 
shall not be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction[.]" HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) provides that a notice of appeal "shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the judgment or appealable order." (Emphasis added). 
The Order Awarding Permanent Custody was entered on 
April 3, 2017. This final order was immediately appealable. In 
re Doe, 77 Hawai' i 109, 114-15, 883 P.2d 30, 35-36 (1994). KL 
filed the Notice of Appeal on January 5, 2018. Therefore, the appeal was untimely. The failure to timely file a notice of appeal is a jurisdictional defect that cannot be waived by the parties or disregarded by the court. Bacon v. Karlin, 68 Haw. 
648, 650, 727 P.2d 1127, 1129 (1986). Therefore, this court lacks jurisdiction to review the Order Awarding Permanent Custody. 
(2) Similarly, even if KL had standing to appeal from
 
the Order Continuing Permanent Custody, this court lacks
 appellate jurisdiction over KL's appeal from the Order Continuing
 Permanent Custody because the appeal is untimely. The Order
 Continuing Permanent Custody, entered on July 31, 2017, continued
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AB's Permanent custody with DHS, but modified AB's foster custody 
placement, and was appealable within thirty days of its entry. See, e.g., In re Doe, 7 Haw. App. 547, 551, 784 P.2d 873, 877 (1989) (GAL's 11/28/88 notice of appeal was timely filed from (1) 11/9/88 order denying reconsideration of 10/20/88 order transferring foster custody and (2) the 10/20/88 order transferring foster custody), overruled on other grounds by In re AS, 130 Hawai' i 486, 312 P.3d 1193 (App. 2013); In re M.M., No. 
29022, 2008 WL 5238611 at *1 (Haw. App. Dec. 17, 2008) (SDO) (Intervenors' 2/22/08 notice of appeal was timely filed from 1/29/08 order that denied their request to place M.M. in their custody rather than current foster parents). KL filed the Notice of Appeal on January 5, 2018. Therefore, the appeal was untimely and this court lacks jurisdiction to review the Order Continuing Permanent Custody. 
(3) KL argues that the Family Court erred in denying
 
her August 21, 2017 motion to intervene based on lack of
 standing, rather than addressing the merits of KL's challenge to
 DHS's decision, which was approved and adopted by the Family
 Court in the Order Continuing Permanent Custody, to change AB's
 resource caregiver placement from KL to AB's maternal great-aunt
 and her husband (SH and JH), with whom AB was visiting in New
 
Hampshire, pursuant to a prior order. KL argued that she had a
 
right to intervene based on her hanai relationship with AB and
 that KL's minor child, TL, had a right to be considered in
 deciding AB's permanent placement because TL had a blood sibling
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relationship with AB. KL also stated that she wished to adopt
 
AB. With the motion to intervene, KL also submitted a motion for
 emergency change of placement, nunc pro tunc, from July 13, 2017.
 
KL contends that the Family Court erred in not 
recognizing her standing at the September 7, 2017 hearing on the motion to intervene because, at a July 13, 2017 hearing, the court had previously recognized KL's standing in this case. However, the Family Court did not recognize KL as having standing to be a party to these termination proceedings during the July 13, 2017 hearing. After DHS objected to KL speaking at the hearing, the Family Court noted KL was still the resource caregiver at that time and allowed her to speak. Allowing KL to address the court because she was a resource caregiver is consistent with HRS § 587A-14(d) (2006), but does not constitute recognition as a party. The Family Court made no finding at the July 13, 2017 hearing that it was in AB's best interest to allow KL to participate in this termination proceeding as a party or a person with standing to be a party. Moreover, contrary to KL's argument on appeal, KL did not and could not have orally requested to intervene during that hearing because a motion to intervene under Hawai' i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 24(c) must 
be made in writing. 
Here, DHS argued and the Family Court agreed that KL
 
failed to establish a right or grounds for permission to
 intervene in this child protective action pursuant to HFCR Rule
 24(a) or (b). In her motion to intervene, KL claimed a right of
 
5
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intervention pursuant to HFCR Rule 24(a) and (c). HFCR Rule 24
provides, in relevant part:
  
Rule 24. INTERVENTION.
 
(a) Intervention of right . Upon timely application
anyone shall be permitted to intervene in an action:
(1) when a statute confers an unconditional right to
intervene; or
(2) when the applicant claims an interest relating to
the property, transaction, or custody, visitation, or
parental rights of a minor child which is the subject of the
action and the applicant is so situated that the disposition
of the action may as a practical matter impair or impede the
applicant's ability to protect that interest, unless the
applicants interest is adequately represented by existing
parties.
(b) Permissive intervention . Upon timely application
anyone may be permitted to intervene in an action:
(1) when a statute confers a conditional right to
intervene; or
(2) when an applicant’s claim or defense and the main
action have a question of law or fact in common.
When a party to an action relies for ground of claim
or defense upon any statute, ordinance or executive order
administered by an officer, agency or governmental
organization of the State or a county, or upon any
regulation, order, requirement or agreement issued or made
pursuant to the statute, ordinance or executive order, the
officer, agency or governmental organization upon timely
application may be permitted to intervene in the action. In
 exercising its discretion the court shall consider whether
the intervention will unduly delay or prejudice the
adjudication of the rights of the original parties.
(c) Procedure . A person desiring to intervene shall
serve a motion to intervene upon all parties affected
thereby. The motion shall state the ground therefor and
shall be accompanied by a pleading setting forth the claim
for which intervention is sought. The same procedure shall
be followed when a statute gives a right to intervene.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Although not contained in the record on appeal in this
 
case, it appears that some time prior to the Family Court's
 
September 1, 2017 hearing on KL's motion to intervene, petitions
 for the adoption of AB had been submitted on behalf of KL and on
 behalf of SH and JH.
 
As set forth above, HFCR Rule 24(a)(2) requires a
 
family court to permit intervention by anyone who claims an
 interest in the custody or visitation of the subject minor child
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
when the applicant is "so situated that the disposition of the
 
action may as a practical matter impair or impede the applicant's
 ability to protect that interest[.]" We conclude that, upon the
 post-termination submission of a petition for adoption of a minor
 child, the adoption petitioner is claiming an interest in the
 custody or visitation of the child and is so situated that the
 disposition of the placement issues in the termination of
 parental rights action may, as a practical matter, impair or
 impede the adoption petitioner's ability to protect that
 interest. It cannot be ignored that, as a practical matter,
 post-termination placement decisions can impact adoption
 proceedings in a variety of ways. That is not to say that the
 adoption petitioner's interest must be given particular weight,
 but such petitioners should be permitted to intervene, post-
termination, to ensure that their interests are adequately
 protected.
 
Here, if at the time the Family Court denied KL's
 
motion to intervene, there was a pending petition for adoption
 filed on behalf of KL, then the Family Court erred in denying the
 motion to intervene.
3 However, we reject KL's argument that the
 
Family Court should have necessarily granted such relief nunc pro
 tunc. KL cites no authority for that proposition and we find
 none. 
3
 We note that the Family Court also denied a post-termination
motion to intervene filed by SH and JH. If at the time the Family Court
denied that motion, a petition for adoption on behalf of SH and JH was
pending, then the Family Court also erred in denying that motion.
 
7
      
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) On appeal, KL states that the Order Denying
 
Reconsideration was entered after the Family Court consolidated
 
the two adoption petitions and declared that the court's action
 rendered KL's arguments in this case moot. KL argues on appeal
 that if KL was able to have overturned the DHS's choice of
 resource caregiver placement and KL regained custody of AB, then
 KL's consent would have been required for any proposed adoption
 of AB, which would have allowed KL to withhold consent to the New
 Hampshire adoption. However, it appears that KL's argument that
 her consent for adoption would have been required if AB were
 returned to her custody is wrong. HRS § 578-2(a) (2006 & Supp.
 2017) states:
 
§ 578-2 Consent to adoption.  (a) Persons
 
required to consent to adoption. Unless consent is
 
not required or is dispensed with under subsection (c)
hereof, a petition to adopt a child may be granted
only if written consent to the proposed adoption has
been executed by:
 
(1)	 The mother of the child;
 
(2)	 A legal father as to whom the child is a
legitimate child;
 
(3)	 An adjudicated father whose relationship to the
child has been determined by a court;
 
(4)	 A presumed father under section 578-2(d);
 
(5) 	A concerned natural father who is not the legal,
adjudicated, or presumed father but who has
demonstrated a reasonable degree of interest, concern
or responsibility as to the welfare of a child,
either:
 
(A)	 During the first thirty days after such
child's birth; or
 
(B)	 Prior to the execution of a valid consent
 by the mother of the child; or
 
(C)	 Prior to the placement of the child with
adoptive parents; whichever period of time
is greater;
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6)	 Any person or agency having legal custody of the
child or legally empowered to consent;
 
(7)	 The court having jurisdiction of the custody of
the child, if the legal guardian or legal
custodian of the person of the child is not
empowered to consent to adoption;
 
(8)	 The child to be adopted if more than ten years
of age, unless the court in the best interest of
the child dispenses with the child's consent.
 
Even if KL resumed foster custody of AB, KL would not
 
have had legal custody of AB. HRS § 571-2 (2006) states:
 
"Legal custody" means the relationship created by the
court's decree which imposes on the custodian the
responsibility of physical possession of the minor and the
duty to protect, train, and discipline the minor and to
provide the minor with food, shelter, education, and
ordinary medical care, all subject to residual parental
rights and responsibilities and the rights and
responsibilities of any legally appointed guardian of the
person.
 
HRS § 587A-4 (Supp. 2017) defines foster custody as
 
follows:4
 
"Foster custody" means the legal status created when
the department places a child outside of the family home
with the agreement of the legal custodian or pursuant to
court order, after the court has determined that the child's
family is not presently willing and able to provide the
child with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan.
 
The Letters of Permanent Custody, filed on April 3,
 
2017, appointed DHS as the permanent custodian, with the duty to
 
provide food, clothing, shelter, psychological care, physical
 care, medical care, supervision, other necessities, and
 appropriate education to AB. Thus, DHS, not KL, had legal
 custody of AB and could provide consent to an adoption under HRS
 § 578-2(a)(6).
 
4
 "'Resource family'" means a person or family licensed by the
department or another authorized agency to provide foster care services for
children and can be used interchangeably with 'foster parent' and 'foster
family.'" HRS § 587A-4.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, KL presents no other argument that the
 
Family Court abused its discretion in entering the Order Denying
 
Reconsideration. Nevertheless, as stated above, if a post-
termination petition for adoption filed on behalf of KL was
 pending, then the Family Court erred in declining to permit KL to
 intervene.
 
For these reasons, KL's appeal is dismissed in part for
 
lack of appellate jurisdiction with respect to the Family Court's
 April 3, 2017 Order Awarding Permanent Custody and the July 31,
 2017 Order Continuing Permanent Custody. The Family Court's
 October 9, 2017 Order Denying Intervention and December 21, 2017
 Order Denying Reconsideration are vacated. Recognizing, however,
 that AB's circumstances may have changed and the issue of
 intervention in this termination proceeding may be moot, we
 remand this case to the Family Court for such further proceedings
 as may be necessary.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 30, 2018. 
On the briefs: Peter L. Steinberg
for Appellant. Chief Judge 
Sandra L.S. Freitas,Julio C. Herrera,Deputy Attorneys General,for Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 