NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001134
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
U.S. BANK N.A. IN ITS CAPACITY AS TRUSTEE FOR
 
THE REGISTERED HOLDERS OF MASTR ASSET BACKED
 
SECURITIES TRUST 2005-NC1, MORTGAGE PASS-THROUGH
CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2005-NC1, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSEPH KEAOULA MATTOS, CHANELLE LEOLA
MENESES, Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
CITIFINANCIAL, INC., ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT
OWNERS OF TERRAZZA/CORTEBELLA/LAS BRISIS/TIBURON,
EWA BY GENTRY COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10, and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1539)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Joseph Keaoula Mattos and
 
Chanelle Leola Meneses (together, Appellants) appeal from the (1)
 
August 26, 2014 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of
 Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed July 21,
 2011" and (2) August 26, 2014 "Judgment on Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
 Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on Complaint Filed July 21, 2011," both entered in the Circuit
 
1
 Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Appellants argue that the circuit court

 
erred when it (1) held that Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank N.A. in
 
its Capacity as Trustee for the Registered Holders of the Mastr
 Asset Backed Securities Trust 2005-NC1, Mortgage Pass-Through
 Certificates, Series 2005-NC1 (U.S. Bank) "did not need to prove
 
that it had standing to judicially foreclose on the subject
 
property prior to filing its complaint" and (2) granted summary
 judgment in U.S. Bank's favor.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Appellants' appeal is without merit.
 
(1) Appellants contend U.S. Bank lacked standing to
 
foreclose on the Mortgage because the Assignment of Mortgage
 (AOM), dated January 3, 2007, and Second Assignment of Mortgage
 
(Second AOM), dated September 29, 2010, contained "fatal flaws."
 
First, Appellants contend the AOM and Second AOM were
 
invalid because the signer and notary were "robo-signers."
 
Appellants' "Opposition to [U.S. Bank's] Motion for Summary
 Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on
 Complaint Filed July 21, 2011" failed to assert facts or law
 explaining how the alleged "robo-signing" caused them harm or
 damages. See U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Benoist, No. CAAP-14­
0001176 at *4 (App. Nov. 12, 2015) (SDO); see also Nastrom v. New
 Century Mortg. Corp., 2012 WL 2090145, at *6 (E.D. Cal. June 8,
 2012) (dismissing claim where "Plaintiffs offer[ed] no factual
 allegations (or legal theory) indicating how the alleged
 robo-signing of documents which assigned the subject loans harmed
 Plaintiffs."); Block v. BAC Home Loans Servicing LP, 2012 WL
 2031640, at *4 (E.D. Mich. June 6, 2012) ("Plaintiffs' vague and
 speculative assertions of what has been labeled as 'robo-signing'
 are insufficient to state a plausible claim of fraud or
 
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
irregularity."). This court has previously held that "such 
conclusory assertions of 'robo-signing' fail to state a plausible claim." Benoist, SDO at *4 (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Lee v. Mortgage Elec. Registration Sys., Inc., 2012 WL 2467085, at *5 (D. Hawai
'i 2012)) (rejecting an identical "robo­
signing" argument); see Nottage v. Bank of New York Mellon, 2012 WL 5305506, at *6 (D. Hawai
'i 2012) (summarizing case law where 
courts have rejected "robo-signing" argument). 
Second, Appellants contend U.S. Bank lacked standing to 
foreclose on the Mortgage because the AOM and Second AOM violated the securitized trust's Pooling and Servicing Agreement (PSA) 
when it attempted to assign the Mortgage to U.S. Bank after the 
securitized trust had closed. "Typically, borrowers do not have standing to challenge the validity of an assignment of [their] loans because they are not parties to the agreement and because noncompliance with a trust's governing document is irrelevant to the assignee's standing to foreclose." U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. 
Salvacion, 134 Hawai
'i 170, 175, 338 P.3d 1185, 1190 (App. 2014). 
"Hawai 'i courts may recognize exceptions when a challenge would 
deem the assignment void, not voidable." Salvacion, 134 Hawai 'i 
at 175, 338 P.3d at 1190; see Benoist, SDO at *2 (holding that an identical PSA argument was without merit). This court, however, has held that the non-compliance with a PSA does not render the assignment void. Given our holding in Salvacion, Appellants have no standing to challenge U.S. Bank's alleged noncompliance with the PSA. 
Third, Appellants argue that U.S. Bank lacked standing
 
to foreclose on the Mortgage because New Century Mortgage
 Corporation (New Century) did not assign the underlying Note to
 
U.S. Bank and, therefore, U.S. Bank "could not show that it
 
represented a party with a legal chain of ownership." In
 response, U.S. Bank argues that U.S. Bank was the holder of the
 Note and, therefore, was entitled to foreclose the Mortgage as a
 matter of law.
 
"In order to enforce a note and mortgage under Hawaii
 
law, a creditor must be 'a person entitled to enforce' the note. 
One person entitled to enforce an instrument is a 'holder' of the
 
3
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instrument. A 'holder' is the 'person in possession of a
 
negotiable instrument.'" In re Tyrell, 528 B.R. 790, 794 (Bankr.
 
D. Haw. 2015) (citing Hawaii Revised Statute (HRS) § 490:3-301
 
2	 3
(2008 Repl.)  and HRS § 490:1-201(b) (2008 Repl.) ).
In support of its "Motion for Summary Judgment and
 
Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed

 
July 21, 2011" (U.S. Bank's MSJ), U.S. Bank submitted the
 
declaration of Richard Work (Work), the Contract Management
 
Coordinator of Ocwen Loan Servicing, LLC (Ocwen).4
 Work's
 
declaration stated:
 
5) According to the Ocwen Records, [U.S. Bank] is in
possession of an original promissory note dated October 15,
2004, in the principal amount of Two Hundred Ninety-Six
Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($296,000.00) executed by
[Joseph Keaoula Mattos] in favor of [New Century]. A true
 and correct copy of the Note is attached hereto as Exhibit
1.
 
6) The Note has been endorsed to [U.S. Bank] by Ocwen acting
as the attorney-in-fact for [New Century]. A true and correct
 
2
 HRS § 490:3-301 provides: 
§490:3-301 Person entitled to enforce instrument. 
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i) the
holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of
the instrument who has the rights of a holder, or (iii) a
person not in possession of the instrument who is entitled
to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 or
490:3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce
the instrument even though the person is not the owner of
the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the
instrument.
 
3
 HRS § 490:1-201(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
§490-1-201 General definitions.
. . . .
 
"Holder" means:
 (1)	 The person in possession of a negotiable
instrument that is payable either to bearer or
to an identified person that is the person in
possession;
 
(2)	 The person in possession of a negotiable
tangible document of title if the goods are
deliverable either to bearer or to the order of
 the person in possession; or
 
(3)	 The person in control of a negotiable electronic
document of title.
 
4
 Ocwen had limited power of attorney to act as New Century's loan
servicer, per an agreement signed and dated March 2, 2005.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
copy of the Limited Power of Attorney designating Ocwen as New
Century's attorney-in-fact is attached hereto as Exhibit 2.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
5
U.S. Bank's exhibits included an allonge,  which was
executed by Ocwen on June 22, 2010. The allonge transferred the
 
Note to U.S. Bank and instructed, "Pay to the order of [U.S.
 Bank.]" The allonge also indicated that "[a]s a result of said
 transfer, [New Century] has no further interest in the Note."
 
Because the allonge indicated the Note was now payable

 
to U.S. Bank, U.S. Bank was the holder of the Note at the time it
 filed this foreclosure action on July 21, 2011. See HRS § 490:1­
201 ("'Holder' means . . . [t]he person in possession of a
 negotiable instrument that is payable either to bearer or to an
 identified person that is the person in possession[.]"). 
Therefore, Appellants' argument that U.S. Bank was without
 standing to enforce the Note is without merit. See HRS § 490:3­
301.
 
(2) Appellants argue that the circuit court erred in 
granting summary judgment in U.S. Bank's favor because U.S. Bank's declarations and exhibits failed to comply with Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e). Specifically, 
Appellants contend the circuit court erred in relying on Work's 
declaration because his declaration "did not rise to the level of an 'Affidavit' as required in HRCP [Rule] 56(e)."
6 Appellants' 
5
 "An 'allonge' is defined as 'a slip of paper sometimes attached to a
negotiable instrument for the purpose of receiving further indorsements when
the original paper is filled with indorsements.'" Mortgage Elec. Registration
Sys., Inc. v. Wise, 130 Hawai' i 11, 14 n.6, 304 P.3d 1192, 1195 n.6 (2013), as
amended July 10, 2013 (quoting Black's Law Dictionary 88 (9th ed. 2009))(brackets omitted). 
6
 HRCP Rule 56(e) provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 56. 
SUMMARY JUDGMENT.
 
. . . .
 
(e)
 Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
required.  Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made
on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would
be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that
the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated
therein. Sworn or certified copies of all papers or parts
thereof referred to in an affidavit shall be attached
 thereto or served therewith. 
5
 ________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument that U.S. Bank's declarations do not satisfy HRCP Rule
 
56(e) is without merit.
 
Rules of the Circuit Court (RCCH) Rule 7(g) explicitly
 
provides:
 
Rule 7. FORMS OF MOTIONS.
 
. . . .
 
(g) Declaration in lieu of affidavit. In lieu of an
 
affidavit, an unsworn declaration may be made by a person,
in writing, subscribed as true under penalty of law, and
dated, in substantially the following form:
 
I, (name of person), do declare under
penalty of law that the foregoing is true and
correct.
 
Dated:
 
(Signature) 
Work signed his declaration and declared, under the
 
penalty of law, that the statements found within the declaration
 
were "true and correct, to the best of [his] knowledge and
 belief." Work's declaration indicated that he had "personal
 knowledge of the facts and matters stated herein based on [his]
 review of the business records . . . ." Furthermore, all
 documents to which Work's declaration referenced–-including the
 Note, allonge, Mortgage, AOM, Second AOM, limited power of
 attorney agreement, and affidavit of debt--were certified as true
 copies and attached as exhibits to U.S. Bank's MSJ. Work's
 declaration, therefore, was sufficient under RCCH Rule 7(g) and
 HRCP Rule 56(e).
 
Appellants also argue that U.S. Bank's exhibits failed
 
to satisfy HRCP Rule 56(e) because they were not certified by
 U.S. Bank's custodian of records and were not sworn or certified
 copies. Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) does not require the
 
documents be certified by U.S. Bank's custodian of records, as
 
Appellants suggest. 
HRE Rule 803(b)(6) (Supp. 2015) provides:
 
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of
declarant immaterial.
 
. . . . 
(b) Other exceptions.
 
. . . .

 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(6)	 Records of regularly conducted activity. A
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation,
in any form, of acts, events, conditions,
opinions, or diagnoses, made in the course of a
regularly conducted activity, at or near the
time of the acts, events, conditions, opinions,
or diagnoses, as shown by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified
witness, or by certification that complies with
rule 902(11) or a statute permitting
certification, unless the sources of information
or other circumstances indicate lack of
 trustworthiness.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that a "qualified witness" can 
authenticate a document as a record of regularly conducted
 
activity pursuant HRE Rule 803(b)(6) "even if he or she is not an
 employee of the business that created the document, or has no
 direct, personal knowledge of how the document was created."
 
State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawai 'i 354, 366, 227 P.3d 520, 532 
(2010), as amended Apr. 5, 2010. In Fitzwater, the supreme court
 noted that to be a "qualified witness"
 
[t]he witness need only have enough familiarity with the
record-keeping system of the business in question to explain
how the record came into existence in the ordinary course of
business. The witness need not have personal knowledge of
the actual creation of the documents or have personally
assembled the records. In fact, the witness need not even be
an employee of the record-keeping entity as long as the
witness understands the entity's record-keeping system.
 
There is no requirement that the records have been
prepared by the entity that has custody of them, as
long as they were created in the regular course of
some entity's business.
 
Id. (quoting 5 Joseph McLaughlin, Weinstein's Federal Evidence
 
§ 803.08[8][a] (2d ed. 2009)). 
Work's declaration stated that he had access to and was
 
familiar with Appellants' loan records through the regular
 performance of his job. Furthermore, Work's declaration
 indicated the documents to which he referred to in preparing his
 declaration were "maintained in the regular course of Ocwen's
 business consistent with Ocwen's regular practices . . . at or
 near the time of the transactions documented by a person with
 knowledge of the transactions or from information transmitted by
 such a person." Thus, the documents constituted "records of
 regularly conducted activity" that were admissible as a hearsay
 exception, pursuant to HRE Rule 803(b)(6). The circuit court,
 
7
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
therefore, did not err in relying upon the documents when it
 
granted summary judgment in U.S. Bank's favor.7
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) August 26, 2014
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
 Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure
 Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed July 21, 2011" and (2)
 August 26, 2014 "Judgment on Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law
 and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and
 Decree of Foreclosure Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed
 July 21, 2011," both entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 12, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Melodie Aduja
(Aduja & Aduja)for Defendants-Appellants. 
Chief Judge 
Paul Alston J. Blaine RogersKee M. Campbell(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
7
 Appellants also challenge the declaration of Robert M. Ehrhorn, Jr.
(Ehrhorn). Insofar as U.S. Bank sufficiently showed that no genuine issue of
material fact existed as to whether it was entitled to foreclose on
 Appellants' Property through Work's declaration and exhibits, Appellants'
challenge to Ehrhorn's declaration and exhibits have no bearing on the issues
before this court. 
8
 