NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001328
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
OHANA HO 'OPAKELE, a Hawai 'i non-profit corporation;
RALPH PALIKAPU DEDMAN; RONALD S. FUJIYOSHI;
JAMES ALBERTINI; LEULLA NOHEA CRUTCHER;
SAMUEL KALELEIKI, JR; VAN KEOKI KAHUMOKU; and
CEDRIC ALI 'I KAI AH SING, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING AND GENERAL SERVICES and
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY, STATE OF HAWAI 'I; and
DEAN H. SEKI, in his capacity as Comptroller,
State of Hawai 'i, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0474)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Ohana Ho 'opakele, a Hawai 'i 
Nonprofit Corporation; Ralph Palikapu Dedman; Ronald S.
 
Fujiyoshi; James Albertini; Leulla Nohea Crutcher; Samuel
 Kaleleiki Jr.; Van Keoki Kahumoku; and Cedric Ali
'i Kai Ah Sing 
(collectively, Ohana Ho 'opakele) appeal from the "Final Judgment 
in Favor of State Defendants and Against Plaintiffs" (Final
 
Judgment) entered on November 14, 2014 in the Circuit Court of
 
1
the Third Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Ohana Ho 'opakele contends the circuit court 
erred in (1) finding "there was no substantial deviation from the
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirements of law or rules on the part of the State Defendants"
 
and (2) finding that the "content of the Final Environmental
 Assessment sufficiently addressed requirements of the law and
 rules, including consultation requirements."
I. BACKGROUND
 
In 1946, the State of Hawai
'i founded K ulani 
Correctional Facility (K ulani CF) as a prison on approximately
 
7,244 acres in the South Hilo District on the slopes of Mauna
 Kea. In 2009, K
ulani CF was reduced in size to 280 acres and its
 
160 inmates were transferred to other Hawai 'i and Mainland 
correctional facilities. 
On June 15, 2012, Act 117 was signed into law. 2012
 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 117 at 419-20. Act 117 lists the
 Legislature's findings regarding the high rate of substance abuse
 amongst the Native Hawaiian population. Id. § 1, at 419.
2 The 
2 Section 1 of Act 117 provides, in relevant part:
 
SECTION 1. The legislature finds that the most recent
information on the use of drugs, alcohol, and tobacco
reveals a disturbing rise in the use of these substances
among the native Hawaiian population. Many studies
conducted both nationally and statewide show native
Hawaiians to be at particularly high risk for substance
abuse. Among students in the eighth and tenth grades,
native Hawaiian children rank highest among all ethnic
groups in the use of these substances. The studies also
 show that substance abuse starts at an early age and, if not
addressed will:
 
(1)	 Lead to more serious offenses, which break down
family structures spiritually, psychologically,
socially, and economically;
 
(2)	 Create many health hazards and problems; and
 
(3)	 Lead to other serious problems, such as poverty,
homelessness, and a growing dependence on both
legal and illegal drugs, which in turn may lead
to child abuse, family abuse, sexual abuse, and
other serious, life-threatening crimes.
 
The legislature finds that a pu' uhonua, or wellness
center, based on Hawaiian cultural practices will help thenative Hawaiian community and the community at-large.Unquestionably, many high-risk persons need to be cared forin a much more sensitive intervention program that willaddress solutions that will alleviate their problems. The greatest potential to stem the tide of this horrific
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Legislature found, "a pu 'uhonua, or wellness center, based on 
Hawaiian cultural practices will help the native Hawaiian
 
community and the community at-large." Id. Further, the
 
Legislature found, "the site formerly used as the [K ulani CF] in
 
east Hawaii would be an ideal site for such a wellness center."3
  
2(...continued)
situation lies in the creation of a pu 'uhonua comprising a
culturally-based substance abuse treatment and intervention
program that takes a holistic approach based upon culturalidentity and strength to get to the core of substance abuse.The cultural practices of pule, ho' oponopono, aloha ' aina,
mahi'ai, la'au lapa' au, and aloha will help create a
sensitive setting. These cultural practices have beensuccessful in the past, possessing the optimal potential toheal an individual. A culturally-based pu' uhonua will 
restore and maintain a better atmosphere and relationshipbetween family, friends, community, and society. 
The legislature further finds that the site formerly
used as the Kulani correctional facility in east Hawaii
would be an ideal site for such a wellness center. It is a
 place of deep spirituality for the Hawaiian people and,
pragmatically, it has the infrastructure and historical
precedent for use in sustainable living.
 
. . . .
 
The purpose of this Act is to:
 (1)	 Reduce recidivism, prevent crime, and ensure
long-term positive change by developing a plan
to create a wellness center that reestablishes
 highly recognized native Hawaiian cultural
practices to restore the overall well-being of
persons, families, and the native Hawaiian
community; and
 
(2)	 Create a pilot program to allow incarcerated
persons on the Big Island to work in the
community on community projects that benefit the
local community and the State.
 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 117 at 419-20. 
3 Relatedly, Section 2 of Act 117 provides:
 
SECTION 2. The department of public safety, in
cooperation with Ohana Ho' opakele and other restorative
justice groups, is directed to prepare a plan for thecreation of a pu' uhonua, or wellness center, on lands owned
or controlled by the State. The public land developmentcorporation shall assist in determining an appropriate sitefor the center; provided that the site formerly used as theKulani correctional facility on the island of Hawaii shallbe given preference, unless another site will provide agreater possibility of success. 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id.
 
On November 8, 2012, Defendants-Appellees the
 
Department of Accounting and General Services (DAGS) and
 
Department of Public Safety for the State of Hawai 'i (DPS) 
(together, State) sent a Draft Environmental Assessment (Draft
 EA) to the Office of Environmental Quality Control in the
 
Department of Health (OEQC). The Draft EA summarized the
 
proposed action:
 
The [DPS], proposes to reactivate (reopen) developed
portions of the 280-acre Ku lani Correctional Facility
(Kulani CF), closed in 2009, to accommodate approximately
200 minimum security inmates. Many inmates assigned to
Kulani CF will be transferred from in-state facilities,
allowing for the return to Hawai' i of inmates currently
serving sentences in Mainland correctional facilities. The project involves primarily logistical actions to assemblerequired staff and physically transfer Hawai' i inmates. 
Architectural, engineering and environmental analyses in2012 of the existing dormitories, workshops, diningfacilities, and administrative spaces revealed that thefacility is ready for occupation by 200 inmates with onlynominal repairs and no major facility upgrades. The budgetfor making necessary repairs and upgrades is $600,000.[DPS] proposes to occupy the site as soon as possible but by2014 at the latest. 
The former Ku lani CF is located on the slopes of Mauna
Kea, Island of Hawai' i, about 20 miles southwest of Hilo and
is accessed through the 19-mile substandard StainbackHighway. The proposed reactivation of Ku lani CF is 
consistent with numerous established polices. The proposedreactivation supports Hawai' i's justice reinvestment
initiative strategy to bring out-of-state prisoners back toHawai'i, reduce spending on corrections, and reinvest
savings generated in strategies that would reverse recentcrime trends. 
The proposed action was included in the November 23, 2012 issue
 
of The Environmental Notice.
 
On June 12, 2013, the State submitted its Final
 
Environmental Assessment (Final EA) to the OEQC with its Finding
 
3(...continued)
 
The department of public safety shall submit a report
to the legislature on its plan, findings, and
recommendations, including the factors used in determining
site selection, and any budget requests necessary to achieve
the purposes of this Act, no later than twenty days prior to
the convening of the regular session of 2013.
 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 117, § 2 at 420. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of No Significant Impact (FONSI) for publication in The
 
Environmental Notice.
 
On August 2, 2013, Ohana Ho 'opakele filed a "Complaint 
for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief" (Complaint), challenging 
the sufficiency of the Draft EA and Final EA. Ohana Ho 'opakele 
filed a "Stipulation to Amend First Amended Complaint Filed 
Decemeber 24, 2013" (Second Amended Complaint) on February 10, 
2014. 
On June 2, 2014, Ohana Ho 'opakele filed a "Motion for 
Summary Judgment on [its Second Amended Complaint]" (Ohana MSJ). 
On June 12, 2014, the State filed its "Memorandum in Opposition 
to [the Ohana MSJ]. The hearing on the Ohana MSJ took place on June 20, 2014, at which time the circuit court denied the Ohana MSJ. 
On June 30, 2014, the State filed its own "[State's] 
Motion for Summary Judgment (State MSJ), to which Ohana 
Ho
'opakele did not submit an opposition memorandum. A hearing on 
the State MSJ took place on July 23, 2014. In the order entered 
on September 25, 2014, the circuit court granted the State MSJ and concluded: 
Pursuant to the standard set forth in [Hawai' i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(c)], this Court finds that
there are no genuine issues as to any material fact, and the[State is] entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The Court finds that there was no substantial deviation from the requirements of law and rules. Given the overall review of the project, the matter was decided within a practical timeas required by the statute; the content of the Final [EA]sufficiently addressed requirements of the law and rules,including but not limited to consultation requirements, andthe period for receiving and responding to comments. 
The Final Judgment of the circuit court was entered on November 
14, 2014. Ohana Ho 'opakele filed its notice of appeal on 
December 1, 2014. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW

 
Summary Judgment
 
We review summary judgments de novo. See Kamaka v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176
P.3d 91, 103 (2008). Under HRCP Rule 56(c), the circuit
court must grant a motion for summary judgment when themoving party: (1) has shown that there is no genuine issueregarding any material fact, and (2) is entitled to judgment 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
as a matter of law. Id.
 
. . . .
 
In cases of public importance, summary judgments
should be granted sparingly, and never on limited and
indefinite factual foundations. Molokai Homesteaders Coop.
Ass'n v. Cobb, 63 Haw. 453, 458, 629 P.2d 1134, 1139 (1981).
But where there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and [the moving parties] clearly demonstrate they should
prevail as a matter of law, the disposition of a case by
summary judgment is proper. Id.
 
Kilakila 'O Haleakala v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 134 Hawai 'i 86, 91, 332 
P.3d 688, 693 (App. 2014). 
"In order to determine whether [the proponent of an
 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)] has demonstrated that it is
 
entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law, we use the 'rule
 
of reason' to determine whether the EIS is legally sufficient in
 adequately disclosing facts to enable a decision-making body to
 render an informed decision." Price v. Obayashi Hawaii Corp., 81
 
Hawai
'i 171, 182, 914 P.2d 1364, 1375 (1996) (citing Life of the 
Land v. Ariyoshi, 59 Haw. 156, 164, 577 P.3d 1116, 1121 (1978)). 
Under the rule of reason:
 
[A]n EIS need not be exhaustive to the point of discussing
all possible details bearing on the proposed action but will
be upheld as adequate if it has been compiled in good faith
and sets forth sufficient information to enable the
 decision-maker to consider fully the environmental factors
involved and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the
risks of harm to the environment against the benefits to be
derived from the proposed action, as well as to make a
reasoned choice between alternatives.
 
Price, 81 Hawai 'i at 183, 914 P.2d at 1376 (quoting Life of the 
Land, 59 Haw. at 164-65, 577 P.2d at 1121).4 Although this case
 
4
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court noted: 
Furthermore, Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) §§ 11­
200-17 and -18 state the minimum content requirements for a
draft and a final EIS, respectively. These sections provide
a long list of specific topics that must be included within
the EIS. It is important to note that neither [Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter] 343 nor the administrative
rules of [c]hapter 200 indicate the level of detail or
specificity that should be included on any given subject.
The statute and rules were designed to give latitude to the
accepting agency as to the content of each EIS. Thus, what
is required in one EIS may not be required in another, based
upon the circumstances presented by the particular project.
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presents the question of the sufficiency of the State's 
compliance with regulations regarding an EA rather than an EIS, we recognize the same latitude in the HAR given to the accepting agency over EISs for EAs, and apply the same standard in evaluating EAs. See Price, 81 Hawai
'i at 182-83, 914 P.3d at 
1375-76. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Ohana Ho 'opakele argues the circuit court 
erred because "[State's] EA is not adequate as a [HRS chapter]
 343 evaluation document and fails to acknowledge how the proposed
 action adversely affects social welfare and cultural practices,
 among other significant effects." Specifically, Ohana Ho
'opakele 
contends: 
[T]he [State] did not meet requirements of HRS [c]hapter 343
and HAR [c]hapter 11-200. In terms of consulting withmembers of the public that they should reasonably believewould be affected, the [State] side-stepped requirements ofAct 117 and HAR 11-200-9(A)(1) by running parallel coursesduring preparation of the Draft EA: while disregarding therequirements of Act 117 in the actual environmental review,[DPS] nonetheless purported to be complying with Act 117,such as by meeting with Ohana Ho' opakele, holding the
Pu'uhonua Summit with OHA and briefly answering written
pu'uhonua comments in the Final EA. 
(Emphasis omitted.) Ohana Ho 'opakele raises three issues which 
it contends undermines the State's assessment and evaluation of 
the proposed action. Ohana Ho 'opakele argues that the State (1) 
"disregard[ed] the consultation with Ohana Ho 'opakele that was 
required by both Act 117 and applicable regulations," (2) did not consider a pu
'uhonua as an alternative action to the reactivation 
of Kulani as a minimum security prison, and (3) "disregard[ed] endangered species." 
Ohana Ho
'opakele's challenge is based on HRS § 343­
5(a)(1) (2010 Repl.), which provides, in relevant part: 
§343-5 Applicability and requirements. (a) Except as
otherwise provided, an environmental assessment shall be
required for actions that:
 
4(...continued)
 
Price, 81 Hawai' i at 182-83, 914 P.3d at 1375-76.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1)	 Propose the use of state or county lands or the
use of state or county funds, other than funds
to be used for feasibility or planning studies
for possible future programs or projects that
the agency has not approved, adopted, or funded,
or funds to be used for the acquisition of
unimproved real property; provided that the
agency shall consider environmental factors and
available alternatives in its feasibility or
planning studies; provided further that an
environmental assessment for proposed uses under
section 205-2(d)(11) or 205-4.5(a)(13) shall
only be required pursuant to section 205-5(b).
 
HRS § 343-5(c)(4) (Supp. 2015) requires, "For environmental
 
assessments for which a finding of no significant impact is
 anticipated . . . [an environmental impact] statement shall be
 required if the agency finds that the proposed action may have a
 significant effect on the environment[.]" HAR § 11-200-2 (1996)
 defines "environmental assessment" as "a written evaluation to
 determine whether an action may have a significant environmental
 effect." A "significant effect" or "significant impact" under
 HAR § 11-200-2 is defined as 
the sum of effects on the quality of the environment,
including actions that irrevocably commit a natural
resource, curtail the range of beneficial uses of the
environment, are contrary to the state's environmental
policies or long-term environmental goals and guidelines as
established by law, or adversely affect the economic or
social welfare, or are otherwise set forth in section 11­200-12 of this chapter.
 
Every environmental assessment is required to include, at a
 
minimum, certain information:
 
§ 11-200-10 Contents of an Environmental Assessment.
 
. . . .
 
(1)	 Identification of applicant or proposing
agency;
 
(2)	 Identification of approving agency, if
applicable;
 
(3)	 Identification of agencies, citizen
groups, and individuals consulted in
making the assessment;
 
(4)	 General description of the action's
technical, economic, social, and
environmental characteristics;
 
(5)	 Summary description of the affected
environment, including suitable and
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
adequate regional, location and site maps
such as Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
Floodway Boundary Maps, or United States
Geological Survey topographic maps;
 
(6)	 Identification and summary of impacts and
alternatives considered;
 
(7)	 Proposed mitigation measures;
 
(8)	 Agency determination or, for draft
environmental assessments only, an
anticipated determination;
 
(9)	 Findings and reasons supporting the agency
determination or anticipated
determination;
 
(10)	 Agencies to be consulted in the
preparation of the EIS, if an EIS is to be
prepared;
 
(11)	 List of all permits and approvals (State,
federal, county) required; and 
(12)	 Written comments and responses to
the comments under the early
consultation provisions of sections
11-200-9(a)(1), 11-200-9(b)(1), or
11-200-15, and statutorily
prescribed public review periods.
 
HAR §11-200-10 (1996)
 
A. Act 117
 
The crux of Ohana Ho 'opakele's appeal is that Act 117 
established standards to which the State was required to comply
 
in reactivating K ulani CF. Ohana Ho 'opakele argues that Act 117 
and applicable regulations required the State to consult with
 Ohana Ho
'opakele and to consider the creation of a pu 'uhonua as an 
alternative to the reactivation of K ulani CF.
 
1. Consultation with Ohana Ho 'opakele 
Ohana Ho 'opalele argues that the State failed to 
consult with Ohana Ho 'opalele in the State's environmental 
review. HAR § 11-200-9(a)(1) (1996) requires an agency preparing
 an environmental assessment to "consult with other agencies
 having jurisdiction or expertise as well as those citizen groups
 and individuals which the proposing agency reasonably believes to
 be affected." HAR § 11-200-10(3) requires that a draft or final
 environmental assessment include an "[i]dentification of
 
9

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agencies, citizen groups, and individuals consulted in making the 
assessment[.]" Ohana Ho 'opakele argues that instead of 
consulting with them as an interested citizen group, "[DPS] just decided to re-open the K
ulani [CF], got the funding to do so, 
then went through the motions of appearing to comply with environmental review requirements while actually considering only a single purpose as the proposed action." The single purpose, Ohana Ho
'opakele asserts, was to use K ulani CF as it was used 
prior to its closure as a prison. 
In response, the State asserted:
 
Approximately 60 agencies, organizations, and
citizens, including [Ohana Ho' opakele and other individual
Plaintiffs], were consulted or availed themselves of the
opportunity to comment on the EA. . . . The State considered, and responded in writing to their comments,prior to finalizing the EA. . . . Further, Act 117 wasincluded and considered in the Final EA. 
The State elaborated: 
The identification of those who were consulted and all those who submitted comments, including their comments and [DPS's]responses, were incorporated in the Final EA. All comments were considered, responded to in writing, and included asappendices to the Final EA as an entire, completeinformational document. . . . Act 117 and [DPS's] report tothe legislature on Act 117, including Ohana Ho' opakele's
presentation at the pu' uhonua summit, were also included as
appendices to the Final EA. 
The State MSJ contended, "The fact that [Ohana Ho 'opakele] do[es] 
not agree that this list is sufficient does not mean that the 
State failed to consult with county and other agencies as well as citizen groups and individuals." The State further argued that "[a]ll comments, including those of [Ohana Ho
'opakele and other 
individual Plaintiffs], were considered in the preparation of the Final EA." 
Ohana Ho
'opakele asserts that the State was required to 
consult with Ohana Ho 'opakele pursuant to Act 117. Act 117, 
however, does not alter the requirements of HAR chapter 200. See 
2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 117, at 419-20. Even if Act 117 created a binding requirement for the State to consult with Ohana Ho
'opakele, the State clearly met that requirement. In its 2013 
report to the Legislature, titled "Act 117: Wellness Center that 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reestablishes Native Hawaiian Cultural Practices," the DPS
 
reported:
 
This annual report has been prepared in compliance
with [2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 117]. . . .
 
At the request of [DPS's] Interim Director (IDIR) Ted
Sakai, the Chief Executive Officer, Dr. Kamana' opono Crabbe,
of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) and IDIR Sakai met
on August 29, 2012 to discuss the pu' uhonua concept. After 
this meeting, it was decided that OHA, with the support of
[DPS], would hold a Pu' uhonua Summit that would allow 
various kupuna to share their in-depth knowledge of the
pu'uhonua concept and to educate [DPS] and other
stakeholders (e.g. Judiciary, Department of the Prosecuting
Attorney) on the pu' uhonua concept. 
On July 13, 2012, IDIR Ted Sakai met with
representatives of Ohana Ho' opakele to listen to their ideas
on the pu
'uhonua concept. The IDIR encouraged Ohana
Ho'opakele to present their ideas in writing, including a
concept of how a pu' uhonua would work with offenders. On 
September 19, 2012, IDIR Sakai and a [DPS] staff member met
again with various associates of Ohana Ho' opakele to listen
to their ideas on the pu' uhonua concept. . . . 
OHA and [DPS] invited various kupuna and stakeholders,
including Ohana Ho
'opakele, to the Pu' uhonua Summit that was 
held on November 2 and 3, 2012. Invitees included members
 of the Judiciary, corrections administrators, the Hawaii
Paroling Authority, legislators, cultural practitioners, and
experts in Hawaiian culture.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The circuit court did not err in concluding that the
 
State was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law on the
 
issue of whether the State complied with the consultation
 requirements of HAR chapter 200.
2. Alternative Action
 
Ohana Ho
'opakele argues "there was a specific legal 
requirement for [DPS] to consider as an alternative the use of
 the site for a pu
'uhonua, in consultation with Ohana Ho 'opakele." 
HAR § 11-200-9(c) requires the proposing agency to
 
"analyze alternatives, in addition to the proposed action in the

 
environmental assessment."5 Additionally, HAR § 11-200-10
 
5 The regulations concerning an EIS provides examples of alternatives,
including:
 
(1) The alternative of no action;
 
(2)	 Alternatives requiring actions of a significantly
(continued...)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requires a draft or final environmental assessment to contain the
 
"[i]dentification and summary of impacts and alternatives
 considered."
 
In its Final EA, the State included two alternatives:
 
(1) the "No-Reactivation Alternative," in which "the inmates
 would remain in Mainland correctional facilities[,]" and (2) the
 "Delayed-Project Alternative," in which the "200 minimum security
 inmates would remain in Mainland correctional facilities" and
 "[t]he staff would not be hired by or work at the facility in the
 near future."
 
Ohana Ho
'opakele cites no authority for the proposition 
that the State is required to consider all alternatives to the proposed action. The standard that applies to the alternative action provisions of the HAR should be the same standard that applies to assessing the legal sufficiency of an EIS–-the "rule of reason." See Price, 81 Hawai
'i at 182, 914 P.2d at 1375. 
Under the rule of reason, the State is not required to exhaust all possible alternatives to the proposed action. Id. Instead, 
an EIS 
will be upheld as adequate if it has been compiled in good
faith and sets forth sufficient information to enable the
 decision-maker to consider fully the environmental factors
involved and to make a reasoned decision after balancing the
risks of harm to the environment against the benefits to be
derived from the proposed action, as well as to make a
reasoned choice between alternatives.
 
Id. (quoting Life of the Land, 59 Haw. at 164-65, 577 P.2d at
 
1121). 
Here, there is no evidence in the record to suggest
 
5(...continued)
different nature which would provide similar benefits

with different environmental impacts;
 
(3)	 Alternatives related to different designs or details
of the proposed actions which would present different
environmental impacts;
 
(4)	 The alternative of postponing action pending further
study; and,
 
(5)	 Alternative locations for the proposed project.
 
HAR § 11-200-17(f) (1996).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the State did not compile the EA in good faith. As the
 
State asserts, there is no evidence that a plan for a pu 'uhonua 
had been sufficiently developed or prepared to make a pu 'uhonua a 
viable alternative at the time the EA was prepared, and the
 reactivation of the K
ulani site as a correctional facility did
 
not prevent the site from being considered for a pu 'uhonua in the 
future. The Final EA stated that the DPS "is working to make the
 reactivation of [K
ulani CF] consistent with the goals stated in
 
Act 117, including evaluation of [K ulani CF] as 'the ideal site'
 
for a wellness center vs. other state lands." The Final EA sets
 forth sufficient information for a decision-maker to consider
 fully the environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned
 analysis of alternative actions. The circuit court did not err
 in concluding that the State was entitled to summary judgment on
 the issue of its consideration of alternative actions in its
 Final EA. 
B. Endangered Species
 
On appeal, Ohana Ho
'opakele argues that "the Final EA 
does not consider the issue of preservation of endangered and
 
threatened plant and animal species . . . ." The State's Final
 
6
EA , Ohana Ho 'opakele argues, "essentially 
6 The Final EA includes a discussion of the impact of the proposed
project on plant and animal species. The Final EA states in relevant part:
 
4.7	 Flora and Fauna Resources
 
The developed portion of Ku lani CF does not provide habitat
and . . . does [not] contain any rare, endangered or threatened
animal or plant species. However, it has been pointed out by [the
Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR)] as follows:
 
•	 [ N§n§ ("Hawaiian Goose," Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H.
Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary at 264 (1986))], an
endangered species, are present in the developed areas
of [Kulani CF] and the area provides feeding, resting
and potential nesting habitat. Threats to [N§ n§] at
[Kulani CF] include humans, predators (e.g. dogs,
cats, and mongoose) and vehicles. In the past,
[Kulani CF] conflicts with [N§ n§] included staff and
inmates feeding [N§ n§], inmates trying to capture
[N§n§] and [N§ n§] attraction to the sewage treatment
plant leaching fields and water catchment. Mitigation
for [N§ n§] will be needed for reactivation, and the
specific details of mitigation should be addressed
through consultation with [the Department of Fish and
Wildlife (DOFAW)] and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
[(USFWS)]. Potential mitigation includes educational
efforts for staff and inmates, trapping of predators
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
6(...continued)
such as feral dogs and cats, and access for DOFAW

staff to manage and monitor birds. The exception,
however, is the observed use of [Ku lani CF's]
ballfield by the N§ n§ Goose (Branta sandwichense) for
foraging. It should be noted that the entire facility
is open for foraging by the N§ n§.
 
•
	 DOFAW is planning to release the endangered ' Alala 
(Corvus hawaiiensis), or Hawaiian Crow, in theadjacent Pu' u Maka'ala Natural Area Reserve (NAR), and
mitigation for this species may also be needed. DOFAW staff and partners will need to access [Ku lani CF] 24
hours/day to manage and/or monitor released birds andcontrol predators. The loud sirens previously used at[Kulani CF] could potentially attract released ' Alala 
to [Kulani CF] and alternatives to use of the sirens
should be analyzed. Educational efforts for staff and inmates should also be pursued to avoid conflict withany 'Alala that enter the facility grounds. 
•	 Fifteen species of federally listed endangered plantsoccur in or near Pu' u Maka'ala NAR. Endangered plants
such as Phyllostegia velutina, have been found in theintact native forest scattered throughout thedeveloped portions of [Ku lani CF]. [Ku lani CF] does
contain habitat for this species and potentially someof the other rare species known from adjacent areas.Botanical surveys for rare plants will need to be donefor any work that includes tree/vegetation or grounddisturbance or clearing such as cinder mining,agriculture, road widening and/or clearing,maintaining electric lines etc. 
•	 Forested portions of [Ku lani CF] and the adjacent
DOFAW lands provide habitat for native forest birdsincluding three endangered species: Hawai' i Creeper
(Oreomystis mana), Hawai' i 'Akepa (Loxops coccineus),
and 'Akiapola' au (Hemignathus munroi). The status of 
'I'iwi (Vestiaria coccinea) is currently being review
[sic] to determine if this species should be listed asendangered or threatened. The non-endangered forestbirds found in the project area include: ' Apapane
(Himatione sanguinea), Hawai' i 'Amakihi (Hemignathus
virens), 'Elepaio (Chasiempis sandwichensis), and
'Oma'o or Hawaiian thrush (Myadestes obscurus). Other 
birds include the endangered Hawaiian hawk or ' Io 
(Buteo solitarius), Hawaiian owl or Pueo (Asioflammeus sandwichensis) and Pacific golden-plover orKolea (Pluvialisfulva). DOFAW staff will need access to [Kulani CF] to manage and/or protect these
endangered native birds by maintaining fencing,controlling predators and removing weeds.Additionally, activities such as tree clearing, roadmaintenance, introduction of predators (e.g. cats) mayaffect nesting of these species. 
•	 The endangered ' Ua'u or Hawaiian petrel (Pterodroma
sandwichensis) and the ' Ake'ake or band-rumped storm
petrel (Oceanodroma castro) may overfly [Ku lani CF]
going to nesting areas on the upper, eastern slopes ofMauna Loa [(on the island of Hawai' i)]. These birds 
may be impacted by [Ku lani CF] lighting as well as
predators, particularly cats. The EA should clarify
(continued...)
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disregards comments from individuals, organizations and state and
 
federal agencies regarding potential impacts on federally and
 state listed endangered flora and fauna at the [K
ulani CF] site."
 
HAR § 11-200-12 (1996) provides, in relevant part:

 
§ 11-200-12 Significance criteria. (a) In considering
the significance of potential environmental effects,
agencies shall consider the sum of effects on the quality of
the environment, and shall evaluate the overall and
cumulative effects of an action.
 
(b) In determining whether an action may have a
significant effect on the environment, the agency shall
consider every phase of a proposed action, the expected
consequences, both primary and secondary, and the cumulative
as well as the short-term and long-term effects of the
action. In most instances, an action shall be determined to
have a significant effect on the environment if it:
 
. . . .
 
(9)	 Substantially affects a rare, threatened, or
endangered species or its habitat[.]
 
Ohana Ho 'opakele cites, for example, the letter written 
6(...continued)
that lighting will follow standards recommended to

prevent impacts to migrating seabirds.
 
•	 Hawai'i's only endemic land mammal, the ' ope'ape'a or 
endangered Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereussemotus), is also present at [Ku lani CF] and in
adjacent areas. Bats may be attracted to facilitylighting for feeding, and activities such as treeclearing may negatively impact the ' ope'ape'a,
particularly during pupping season. 
In a June 6, 2002 letter regarding possible impacts of aproposed new wastewater treatment plant at the project site,the [USFWS] stated the following: "...based on informationfrom our files, data compiled by the Hawai' i Biodiversity
and Mapping Program, data compiled by the Hawai' i GAP 
program, and local expert knowledge, the USFWS determinedthat there are four federally listed species that may occurwithin or adjacent to areas of Ku lani CF: threatened 
Newell's Shearwater (Puffinus aurlcularis newlli) andendangered Hawaiian Petrel (Pterodroma phaepygiasandwichensis) (collectively known as seabirds); endangeredHawaiian stilt (Himantopus mexicanus knudseni); andendangered N§ n§ (Bronta sandiwchense). No federally
designated critical habitats are present." (DAGS, 2002). 
N§n§ are known to frequent the ball field and other
developed areas at Ku lani CF and tend to use the area for 
loafing and feeding during spring and summer flocking
seasons. Biologists at Hawai' i Volcanoes National Park have 
received reports of n§ n§ on the [Ku lani CF ball field]
(DAGS, 2002). 
(Emphasis omitted.)
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7
by the Three Mountain Alliance  providing suggestions to the
State in response to its Draft EA. 
All of Three Mountain
 
Alliance's suggestions, however, were incorporated into the Final
 
EA. Additionally, the letter itself was attached as part of
 Appendix A to the Final EA. The Final EA lists all of the
 individuals and organizations from whom it received comments
 during the public comment period. The Final EA also included an
 appendix listing the comments it received on the Draft EA and the
 State's responses to the comments.
 
There is no support for Ohana Ho 'opakele's argument 
that "the Final EA does not consider the issue of preservation of endangered and threatened plant and animal species," nor its argument that the State "essentially disregards comments from individuals, organizations and state and federal agencies regarding potential impacts on federally and state listed endangered flora and fauna at the [K
ulani CF] site." 
Ohana Ho 'opakele also argues that the effect of the 
proposed project on endangered species is sufficiently significant as to require an EIS. Ohana Ho
'opakele cites no 
evidence that supports such a conclusion. The applicable standard that applies to "determining the necessity of an EIS based on the language of HRS § 343-5(c) . . . is whether the proposed action will 'likely' have a significant effect on the environment." Kepo
'o v. Kane, 106 Hawai 'i 270, 289, 103 P.3d 939, 
958 (2005). Ohana Ho 'opakele cites to a statement made by the 
Three Mountain Alliance concluding that the project "will likely affect several endangered and/or rare species in the area, not just found on [K
ulani CF] grounds but in the immediately adjacent 
forests of Pu 'u Maka 'ala and Kilauea." In response, DPS stated, 
"While we are cognizant of the important resources surrounding the [K
ulani CF], we are not able to address mitigation of 
protective measures for the immediate area surrounding [K ulani 
CF]." Additionally, as previously noted, the Final EA 
7 The Three Mountain Alliance states on its letterhead that its 
membership includes the DLNR, U.S. Geological Survey Biological Resources
Division, Kamehameha Schools, U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service,Natural Resources Conservation Services, DPS, Hawai' i Volcanoes National Park,
USFWS, and the Nature Conservancy of Hawai' i. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
incorporated the concerns listed by the Three Mountain Alliance, 
and DPS included its responses to the Three Mountain Alliance in the appendix to the Final EA. Ohana Ho
'opakele did not 
demonstrate that the information provided to the State established that the proposed action will likely have a significant effect on the environment. 
We conclude that the section of the Final EA regarding 
the effect of the proposed action on endangered and threatened species "sets forth sufficient information to enable the decision-maker to consider fully the environmental factors involved and to make a reasoned decision" that the proposed action would not have a significant effect on endangered and threatened species. See Price, 81 Hawai
'i at 183, 914 P.2d at 
1376 (quoting Life of the Land, 59 Haw. at 164, 577 P.2d at 1121). 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Final Judgment in Favor of State
 
Defendants and Against Plaintiffs" entered on November 14, 2014
 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 12, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
James M. Dombroski 
and Georgette Yaindl(Preventive Law Hawai
'i)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Diane Taira Renee R. Sonobe HongDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
17

 