 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001367
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DAVID JEMWAI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0241)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant David Jemwai (Jemwai) appeals from
 
the November 18, 2014 Judgment and the May 15, 2015 Amended
 
Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court),  convicting him of Assault in the First Degree,
a violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-710 (2014).2
 
On appeal, Jemwai argues that the jury instruction
 
regarding accomplice liability was prejudicially insufficient,
 erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. 
After a careful review of the issue raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record on appeal, and the
 relevant legal authority, we resolve Jemwai's point on appeal as
 follows and affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 Both the Judgment entered November 18, 2014 and the Amended
Judgment entered on May 15, 2015 have Jemwai convicted and found guilty of
Assault in the First Degree (§ 710-710, H.R.S.). The statute for Assault in
 the First Degree is HRS § 707-710.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jemwai argues, not that the Circuit Court's accomplice 
liability instruction was an incorrect statement of the law, but 
that it lacked the concepts contained in HRS §§ 702-223, -224, and -226. Instructions are reviewed de novo, to determine "whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai
'i 289, 292-93, 119 
P.3d 597, 600-01 (2005) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted), overruled on other grounds by State v. Auld, 136 Hawai
'i 244, 361 P.3d 471 (2015).
1. Proposed Jury Instruction 6A
 
Jemwai argues that under HRS § 702-223 (2014), jurors 
needed to be instructed that to be held liable for the offense as an accomplice, it must find that Jemwai intended or promoted the result of the offense.
3 Jury instructions need not "parrot the 
language of the statute, but should also adequately apprise the jury, in easily understandable language, the law to be applied in its deliberation." State v. Kaiama, 81 Hawai
'i 15, 27, 911 P.2d 
735, 747 (1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
4
The second paragraph of the given instruction  tracked the exact
3
 Jemwai's proposed jury instruction 6A stated:
 
When causing a particular result is an element of an
offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing the result is
an accomplice in the commission of that offense, if the
accomplice acts, with respect to that result, with the state
of mind that is sufficient for the commission of the
 offense.
 
4
 The jury was instructed on accomplice liability as follows:
 
A defendant charged with committing an offense may be
guilty because he is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of the offense. . . . 
A person is an accomplice of another in the commission
of an offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate
the commission of the offense, he:
 
a. solicits the other person to commit
it; or
 
b. aids or agrees or attempts to aid the
other person in the planning or commission of
the offense.
 
Mere presence at the scene of an offense or knowledge
that an offense is being committed, without more, does not
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
language of HRS § 702-222 (2014) and thus was a correct statement
 
of the intent required for accomplice liability. 
The jury was instructed on the elements of Assault in
 
the First Degree and the last paragraph of the given accomplice 
instruction stated, "if a person plans or participates in the
 commission of an offense with the intent to promote or facilitate
 the offense, he is an accomplice[.]" This adequately apprised
 the jury that Jemwai must have "intended or promoted the result
 of the offense," as Jemwai argued is required under HRS § 702­223. Thus "when read and considered as a whole," the
 
instructions were not "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous,
 inconsistent or misleading." Id. 
2. Proposed Jury Instruction 7
 
Jemwai argues that an instruction under HRS § 702-224 
(2014) was needed to explain that if a person terminates his complicity prior to the commission of the offense, then the person is not an accomplice.
5 This instruction is not supported 
by the evidence presented in this case. A defendant is only entitled to an instruction on every defense or theory of defense having any support in the evidence. See State v. Hironaka, 99 
Hawai
'i 198, 204, 53 P.3d 806, 812 (2002) and HRS § 701-115(2) 
(2014) ("No defense may be considered by the trier of fact unless evidence of the specified fact or facts has been presented."). 
Jemwai's defense was not that he did not participate in
 
the assault, but that he did not participate to the extent of his
 alleged accomplices. Jemwai testified that he pushed the
 complaining witness, who fell back on his bike, and then kicked
 
4(...continued)
make a person an accomplice to the offense. However, if a
person plans or participates in the commission of an offense
with the intent to promote or facilitate the offense, he is
an accomplice to the commission of the offense.
 
5
 Jemwai's proposed jury instruction 7 stated:
 
A person is not an accomplice in an offense committed
by another person if he terminates his complicity prior to
the commission of the offense and wholly deprives his
complicity of effectiveness in the commission of the
offense; or otherwise makes reasonable effort to prevent
commission of the offense.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the complaining witness's face before Jemwai left the scene. 
There was no evidence presented that Jemwai "terminate[d] his
 complicity prior to the commission of the offense and . . .
 [w]holly deprive[d] his complicity of effectiveness in the
 commission of the offense[.]" HRS § 702-224 (emphasis added). 
Therefore, there was no evidence to support an instruction along
 the lines of Jemwai's proposed jury instruction 7.
3. Proposed Jury Instruction 8
 
Jemwai argues that HRS § 702-226 (2014) requires the 
fact finder to determine a person's individual culpability based 
on that person's state of mind and accountability.
6 As jury 
instructions are to be considered as a whole, see Gonsalves, 108 Hawai
'i at 292-93, 119 P.3d at 600-01, the instructions 
sufficiently instructed the jury about the individual state of mind required to convict Jemwai. 
The accomplice liability instruction began, "a
 
defendant charged with committing an offense may be guilty
 because he is an accomplice of another person in the commission
 of the offense." The jury was also instructed that it was to
 consider the lesser included offense of Assault in the First
 Degree, which is the offense for which Jemwai was ultimately
 convicted. That instruction stated, "[a] person commits the
 offense of Assault in the First Degree if he intentionally or
 knowingly causes serious bodily injury to another person," and
 intentionally and knowingly were further defined. Thus, the jury
 
was adequately instructed on the intent required for the assault
 
conviction as an individual or an accomplice
 
We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's determination
 
that Jemwai committed the offense of Assault in the First Degree
 in Count I. However, because the Judgments have cited to the
 
6
 Jemwai's proposed jury instruction 8 stated:
 
When two or more persons are liable for an offense
which is divided into degrees, each person is guilty of the
degree of the offense which is consistent with the person's
own state of mind and with the person's own accountability
for an aggravating fact or circumstance.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
incorrect statute, we vacate these Judgments and remand to the
 
Circuit Court for entry of a Judgment citing the correct statute.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 29, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 