NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000041
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANDREW KEONE KAOIHANA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 07-1-0400)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Andrew Keoni Kaoihana (Kaoihana)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
September 3, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court).  On July 9, 2008, Kaiohana waived his right to
 
a trial, and pled guilty to one count of Burglary in the Second
 
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-811
 
(1993) (Burglary) and one count of Attempted Theft in the First
 
Degree in violation of HRS §§ 705-500 and 708-830.5 (1993 & Supp.
 
2010) (Attempted Theft). On September 18, 2009 Kaoihana moved to
 
withdraw his guilty pleas. After a hearing, on January 28, 2010,
 
the Circuit Court entered an order denying Kaoihana's motion to
 
withdraw his plea. On September 3, 2010, the Circuit Court
 
sentenced Kaoihana to five years imprisonment on the Burglary
 
count and ten years imprisonment on the Attempted Theft count,
 
with mandatory minimum sentences stemming from Kaoihana's repeat
 
offender status.
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Kaoihana raises a single point of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred by not allowing him to
 
withdraw his guilty pleas.2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Kaoihana's contention as follows:
 
As explained by defense counsel at the hearing on the
 
motion to withdraw guilty pleas, Kaoihana changed his pleas to
 
guilty so that he could enter into treatment at the Sand Island
 
Treatment Center. However, after Kaoihana was later terminated
 
from the program, he wanted to withdraw his pleas. Kaoihana
 
argued below, as he argues on appeal, that the colloquy of the
 
3
Circuit Court  was inadequate because "the Court failed to inform
[him] that [he] had a right to persist in his pleading not guilty
 
and proceed to trial no matter how strong the evidence was
 
against him.' 
In addition, Kaoihana argues that the plea was not
 
valid because the Circuit Court "should have discussed the
 elements of what constituted an attempted theft[.]"
 
A defendant does not have an absolute right to withdraw 
a guilty plea. See, 
e.g., State v. Jim, 58 Haw. 574, 575, 574 
P.2d 521, 522 (1978). In State v. Topasna, 94 Hawai' i 444, 16 
P.3d 849 (App. 2000), this court discussed the withdrawal of a 
guilty plea: 
Accordingly, when the motion to withdraw guilty plea
is made after sentence is imposed, the "manifest injustice"
standard applies to the court's consideration of the motion.
On the other hand, where . . . the motion is made before the
court passes sentence, a more liberal approach is to be
taken, and the motion should be granted if the defendant has
presented a fair and just reason for his request and the
 
2
 Kaoihana's points of error fail to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). His points of error contain none of
the required citations to the record. We have, nevertheless, reviewed the
merits of Kaoihana's appeal. 
3
 A different judge, the Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto, presided over
the guilty pleas at issue here.
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prosecution has not relied upon the guilty plea to its
substantial prejudice.
 
Where the record pertaining to the motion to withdraw
guilty plea is complete, . . . the defendant has the burden
of establishing plausible and legitimate grounds for the
withdrawal.
 
. . . .
 
The two fundamental bases for showing a "fair and just
reason" for withdrawing a guilty plea are (1) that the
defendant did not knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily
waive the rights relinquished upon pleading guilty, or (2)
that changed circumstances or new information justify
withdrawal of the plea. 
Where the first fundamental basis is concerned, . . .
the defendant is entitled to withdraw the guilty plea if (1)
the defendant has not entered the plea knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily; (2) there has been no undue
delay in moving to withdraw the plea; and (3) the
prosecution has not otherwise met its burden of establishing
that it relied on the plea to its substantial prejudice.
 
. . . .
 
Generally, we review the trial court's denial of a
motion to withdraw guilty plea for abuse of discretion.
 
. . . [If] our evaluation of the court's exercise of
its discretion hinges solely upon the constitutional inquiry
whether [the defendant] knowing[ly], intelligently and
voluntarily entered his [or her] pleas of guilty[,] . . .
the underlying and determining mode of review . . . is de
 novo, i.e., according to the right/wrong standard, based
upon an examination of the entire record.
 
Id. at 451-52, 16 P.3d at 856-57 (internal quotation marks,
 
citations, and original brackets omitted; format altered). 
Here, Kaoihana moved to withdraw his pleas prior to
 
sentencing. Kaoihana asserts, and the State does not deny, that
 
the State did not present sufficient evidence that it relied upon
 
Kaoihana's plea to its substantial prejudice. Likewise, it does
 
not appear that there was any substantial delay in filing the
 
motion to withdraw the pleas. Thus, the issue before us is
 
whether Kaoihana presented a "fair and just reason" for
 
withdrawing his plea.
 
Kaoihana cites no authority supporting his argument 
that he should have been allowed to withdraw his pleas because
 
the Circuit Court did not specifically inform him that he "had a
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to persist in his pleading not guilty and proceed to trial
 
no matter how strong the evidence was against him." (Emphasis
 
added.) The law does not require such an advisement. Upon
 
review of the transcript of the July 9, 2008 proceedings, it
 
appears that the court thoroughly discussed with Kaoihana his
 
right to proceed to a trial by either a judge or jury,
 
including, inter alia, his right to confront witnesses, challenge
 
evidence, call witnesses, raise defenses, testify (or not
 
testify), as well as the consequences of giving up those rights. 
Similarly, Kaoihana cites no authority supporting his 
argument that the court's colloquy was inadequate because it did 
not specifically set forth the elements of the offense of 
Attempted Theft. Although the court taking a defendant's plea 
must determine that the defendant understands "the nature of the 
charge to which the plea is offered," this requirement does not 
mean that the court must explain the elements of the offense to 
the defendant. Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
11(c)(1); see, e.g., State v. Harned, 135 P.3d 1169, 1185 (Kan. 2006); Bradshaw v Stumpf, 545 U.S. 175, 183 (2005). The Circuit 
Court specifically queried Kaoihana about the two-page guilty 
plea form that he had signed. In response to the court's 
questions, Kaoihana stated, inter alia, that he read the guilty 
plea form, he understood it, his attorney went over it thoroughly 
with him, his attorney answered all of his questions, his 
attorney explained the charges to him, his attorney went over the 
evidence and police reports with him, he had no questions about 
the charges, and he was satisfied with the work and advice that 
his attorney had given him. The written plea form signed by 
Kaoihana stated, inter alia, that Kaoihana received a written 
copy of the original charges (which set forth the elements of the 
charges), that the charges had been explained to him, that he 
understood the charges, and his lawyer had explained, inter alia, 
the facts that the State had to prove in order to convict him. 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The plea form also stated that Kaoihana was pleading guilty
 
because, after discussing the evidence and receiving advice on
 
the law from his lawyer, he believed he was guilty, and included
 
the following statement of the facts establishing his guilt,
 
which Kaoihana repeated aloud in open court, in conjunction with
 
the court's colloquy:
 
On February 26, 2007, at approximately 3:00 a.m., I was
caught by police inside of the 14 Karat Club jewelry store
located in Waikiki with numerous pieces of jewelry in the
store. I did not have permission to be in the Karat Club,
nor have permission to take any jewelry.
 
Kaoihana later testified (after he was terminated from
 
the Sand Island treatment center), and argued, that he had not
 
fully understood what he was pleading guilty to – "I was
 
thinking of pleading guilty to the burg second, not the theft one
 
. . . that one slipped past me.' We conclude, however, that the
 
Circuit Court did not err in determining that Kaoihana's guilty
 
pleas were entered intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily,
 
with a complete understanding of the charges against him and the
 
consequences of changing his pleas to guilty. Kaoihana does not
 
argue any change of circumstances justifying withdrawal of the
 
pleas. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence filed on September 3, 2010 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 9, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Richard D. Gronna 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Loren J. Thomas for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5 