NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000404 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF KS 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 17-00232) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Mother-Appellant (
Mother) appeals from the Order 
Terminating Parental Rights (Termination Order) and Letters of 
Permanent Custody, which were both entered on April 23, 2019, by 
the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1  Mother 
also challenges the Family Court's May 22, 2019 Orders Concerning Child Protective Act (Order Denying Immediate Review), as well as 
Findings of Fact (FOFs) 27-32, 40-43, 47-49, and 59-61, and Conclusions of Law (COLs) 2-5, and 12-16, which were set forth in the Family Court's June 27, 2019 FOFs and COLs. 
Mother primarily contends that the Family Court abused 
its discretion in:  (1) "its unconscionable sanction of 
terminating Mother's parental rights for a single non-appearance on April 18, 2019"; and (2) its "equally unconscionable 
1 The Honorable Brian A. Costa presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deprivation of affording Mother a reasonable opportunity to be 
heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner" on Mother's Motion for Immediate Review, which was received by the Family Court on May 15, 2019, filed on May 20, 2019, and set for hearing on May 22, 2019. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Mother's contentions as follows: 
(1)  Mother contends that the Family Court abused its 
discretion in orally entering default against her and then entering the Termination Order.  We review the Family Court's decision in context of the proceedings leading to that decision. 
On October 6, 2017, then twelve-year-old KS was taken 
into protective custody by the Honolulu Police Department, and Petitioner-Appellee Department of Human Services (DHS) assumed 
temporary foster custody and placed KS in an Emergency Shelter 
Home.  Mother's Boyfriend (Boyfriend), with whom Mother and KS 
lived, had allegedly forced KS to have vaginal and anal 
intercourse with him on two occasions; Boyfriend denied it.  On October 9, 2017, Mother consented to a voluntary foster custody placement of KS, but told the DHS social worker that she did not believe that Boyfriend sexually harmed KS. 
After an October 30, 2017 hearing, based on a DHS Safe 
Family Home Report, a DHS Family Service Plan was ordered, and DHS's petition for foster custody was granted.  Mother appeared at the hearing, was represented by appointed counsel, and 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required a Chuukese interpreter.  The whereabouts of KS's father 
(Father) was unknown, but it was believed that he was somewhere 
in Micronesia. 
Mother appeared at further hearings on April 18, 2018, 
October 3, 2018, December 10, 2018 (albeit late, reportedly due 
to a misunderstanding as to the hearing time), and January 7, 2019.  At the October 3, 2018 hearing, the Family Court ordered that the December 10, 2018 hearing would be calendared as a show cause hearing pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-29 
(2018),
2 as well as a periodic review hearing pursuant to HRS 
§ 587A-30 (2018),3 and a permanency hearing pursuant to HRS 
§ 587A-31 (2018).4  Prior to Mother's late arrival at the 
2 HRS § 587A-29 provides: 
§ 587A-29 Show cause hearing.   At any stage of the
proceeding, the court may set a show cause hearing at which
a child's parents shall have the burden of presentingevidence as to why the case should not be set for atermination of parental rights or legal guardianshiphearing. 
3 HRS § 587A-30 requires the family court to conduct periodic review
hearings after a child enters foster care and sets forth specific evaluationsand determinations that must be made at the review hearings. 
4 HRS § 587-31 provides, inter alia : 
§ 587A-31  Permanency hearing.   (a)  A permanency
hearing shall be conducted within twelve months of thechild's date of entry into foster care[.] . . .
. . . . 
(c) At each permanency hearing, the court shall make
written findings pertaining to:
(1) The extent to which each party has complied with
the service plan and progressed in making thehome safe; 
(2) Whether the current placement of the childcontinues to be appropriate and in the bestinterests of the child or if another in-state or out-of-state placement should be considered; 
(3) The court's projected timetable forreunification or, if the current placement isnot expected to be permanent, placement in anadoptive home, with a legal guardian, or under
(continued...) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4(...continued) 
the permanent custody of the department or an
authorized agency;. . . . 
(5) The appropriate permanency goal for the child,including whether a change in goal is necessary; 
(6) Whether the department has made reasonableefforts to finalize the permanency goal ineffect for the child and a summary of thoseefforts; 
(7) The date by which the permanency goal for thechild is to be achieved; 
. . . . 
(d) At each permanency hearing, the court shall 
order: 
(1) The child's reunification with a parent or
parents; 
(2) The child's continued placement in foster care,where: (A) Reunification is expected to occur withina time frame that is consistent with the developmental needs of the child; and 
(B) The safety and health of the child can beadequately safeguarded; or 
(3) A permanent plan with a goal of:(A) Placing the child for adoption and whenthe department will file a motion to setthe matter for the termination of parentalrights; 
(B) Placing the child for legal guardianshipif the department documents and presentsto the court a compelling reason whytermination of parental rights andadoption are not in the best interests ofthe child; or 
(C) Awarding permanent custody to thedepartment or an authorized agency, if thedepartment documents and presents to thecourt a compelling reason why adoption andlegal guardianship are not in the bestinterests of the child. 
(e) At each permanency hearing where a permanent
plan is ordered, the court shall make appropriate orders toensure timely implementation of the permanent plan and toensure that the plan is accomplished within a specifiedperiod of time. 
(f)  
A permanency hearing may be held concurrently
with a periodic review hearing. 
(g) If the child has been in foster care under the 
responsibility of the department for a total of twelveconsecutive months . . ., the department shall file a motionto terminate parental rights, unless:
(1)  The department has documented in the safe familyhome factors or other written report submittedto the court a compelling reason why it is notin the best interest of the child to file a motion; or 
(continued...) 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
December 10, 2018 hearing, the court, inter alia, took testimony 
of the DHS social worker regarding the DHS Safe Family Home Report dated September 18, 2018, at which time DHS was not requesting to terminate parental rights, and admitted the DHS Safe Family Home Report dated December 4, 2018, into evidence. Before further testimony was given, Mother arrived at the hearing and default was set aside, prospectively only.  As no Chuukese interpreters were present in the courthouse, the Family Court continued the remainder of the hearing to January 7, 2019. 
At the January 7, 2019 hearing, the DHS social worker 
testified that she stood by the DHS Safe Family Home Report dated December 4, 2018, which, in sum, reported that DHS had no contact with Mother since the October 3, 2018 hearing, notwithstanding efforts to contact her and that DHS was disappointed at Mother's lack of cooperation to attend, participate in, and complete services.  The DHS social worker further testified that, since the December hearing, Mother was re-referred to services, but had not been contacted yet.  DHS wanted Mother to reengage in therapy.  It was DHS's position that if Mother was dedicated to finishing up therapy, she should be able to provide a safe family home, but Mother's continued relationship with Boyfriend, who 
4(...continued)
(2) The department has not provided to the family of
the child, consistent with the time periodrequired in the service plan, such services asthe department deems necessary for the safereturn of the child to the family home. 
(h) Nothing in this section shall prevent the
department from filing a motion to terminate parental rightsif the department determines that the criteria forterminating parental rights are present. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also had not completed services (sex offender treatment and a 
pychosexual assessment), remained a concern.  The social worker's understanding was that Mother still lived with Boyfriend.  
Mother's attorney declined to call Mother as a witness 
and argued that notwithstanding that Mother had cancelled or discontinued therapy meetings for various reasons, including a family emergency and a subsequent delay in returning from Chuuk, Mother wanted to reengage in services.  Mother's attorney further argued that there was no compelling reason to proceed to a termination petition, as there was no permanent plan for KS.  The guardian ad litem for KS emphasized that Mother was not currently able to provide a safe family home even with the assistance of a service plan because Mother remained in a relationship with Boyfriend, and it was not in KS's best interest to delay permanency. 
The Family Court stated its consideration of all 
exhibits, testimony, and arguments.  The court noted that while mother did have a family emergency, she had stopped engaging in services prior to that.  The court discussed that KS had not had visits with Mother, at the recommendation of KS's therapist, but also because KS did not want to return to Mother as long as she was with Boyfriend.  The court recounted the initial allegations of sex abuse and the filing of a criminal complaint, which Mother withdrew, but which may have been proceeding again pursuant to cooperation with DHS.  The Family Court described Mother's progress as "extremely minimal" and Mother as lacking insight as to the sex abuse allegations, noting Mother's continued 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relationship with Boyfriend.  The court expressed doubt as to the 
social worker's opinion that Mother may be able to provide a safe family home with the assistance of a service plan in light of the fact that Mother was still living with Boyfriend after more than fourteen months since the case began, appearing to choose her Boyfriend over her daughter.  Noting that Mother presented no evidence, and relied solely on cross-examination of the DHS social worker, the Family Court concluded that Mother failed to meet her burden to show cause why the case should not be set for a termination hearing, pursuant to HRS § 587A-29, and ordered DHS to file a motion to terminate parental rights within thirty days of the hearing.  Among other things, the court set a further hearing for April 18, 2019, as a periodic review and permanency hearing, as well as a hearing on a motion to terminate parental rights, provided that one was timely filed.
5 
DHS filed a Motion to Terminate Parental Rights on 
February 11, 2019 (Motion to Terminate), and served Mother's 
counsel by mail on February 12, 2019.  While not within thirty 
days of the January 7, 2019 hearing, as ordered by the Family Court, the filing date and service provided Mother ample advance notice and an opportunity to be heard at the April 18, 2019 hearing.  No written response was filed by Mother.  
5 Although the Family Court set the hearing on December 10, 2018, as
continued on January 7, 2019, as a Permanency hearing, as required at that
point by HRS § 587A-31, we note that the Family Court did not, in its writtenorder or otherwise, enter all of the written findings required by the statute. Although Mother raises no point of error as to this deficiency, in particular,written findings as required pursuant to HRS § 587A-31(c)(1), pertaining tothe extent to which Mother complied with the service plan and progressed inmaking the home safe, may have aided Mother in better understanding where shestood in the case and the precariousness of her situation with respect topermanency. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although her attorney was present, Mother failed to 
appear at the April 18, 2019 hearing.  Counsel said that she did 
not know why Mother was not present and objected to her being defaulted, noting that Mother had been at every other hearing. Counsel represented that her last communication with Mother, which was "just to remind her of the hearing coming up", was at the beginning of April.  She had previously spoken with Mother, since the January 2019 hearing, but before receiving the Motion to Terminate.  The Family Court indicated that it was going to allow the State to proceed with the Motion to Terminate.  DHS elicited testimony from its social worker, Mother's attorney was allowed cross-examination and argument, and Mother's attorney requested a one-month continuance.  Noting that it had informed Mother previously of the consequences for failure to appear, the Family Court denied the motion to continue.  
After further proceedings, the court announced that 
Mother was being defaulted (noting Father had been previously defaulted), all testimony received to date was credible, the guardian ad litem was in support of termination, and by clear and convincing evidence, inter alia, Mother was presently unwilling or unable to provide KS with a safe family home even with a service plan, and it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide KS with a safe family home even with the assistance of a service plan within a reasonable period of time, generally not to exceed two years. The court briefly stated the facts supporting its findings and conclusions, announced further rulings, and granted counsel's 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
request for a thirty-day discharge date so that if Mother 
contacted her, counsel would have a vehicle to be able to file something on Mother's behalf.  The court further stated that if counsel gained contact with Mother, counsel could file any appropriate motion.  The Termination Order and Letters of Permanent Custody were entered on April 23, 2019. 
Mother argues that it was an abuse of discretion for 
the Family Court to proceed as it did at the April 18, 2019 hearing because of the harshness of the sanctions of defaulting her and granting the Motion to Terminate.  The record is clear, however, that the Family Court's entry of the Termination Order was based on all of the circumstances of the case, especially the testimony and evidence presented to the Family Court, as well as length of time KS had been in foster care and the parties' positions and arguments; the Termination Order was not entered as a sanction against Mother. 
With respect to the default entered against Mother, 
Mother points to this court's (ICA's) opinion in In re TW
, 124 
Hawai# i 468, 469, 248 P.3d 234, 235 (App. 2011), which recognized 
that "parents have a fundamental liberty interest in the care, custody, and management of their children, and parental rights cannot be denied without an opportunity for parents to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner." (Citation omitted; format altered).  In that case, the ICA observed that:  it was the first hearing for which the mother failed to appear; the motion for termination was filed six days before the hearing; at the hearing on termination, the mother's 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel reported that counsel had not received the motion so she 
had not sent it to the mother; and the mother had actively engaged in the services required by the service plan and attended scheduled visitations with TW, as well attended every other court hearing over an eighteen-month period.  Id. at 471, 474, 248 P.3d at 237, 240.  The ICA explained that through her actions and conduct, TW's mother "displayed a strong and sustained interest in participating in the family court proceedings affecting her parental rights over [TW] and in securing reunification with [TW]" and emphasized that the divestment of the mother's parental rights was in fact a sanction for her failure to appear, noting that the hearing-in-question had been set only as a procedural, trial-setting date.  Id. at 474, 248 P.3d at 240.  Under those circumstances, the ICA held that the sanction of default and divestiture of the mother's parental rights was "decidedly and manifestly disproportionate[.]"  Id.
Here, Mother argues that she was defaulted and her 
parental rights were terminated based on a single missed hearing, just like in In re TW.  As stated above, although the default against Mother effectively cut off her opportunity to testify in opposition to the Motion to Terminate, the Termination Order was entered based on the evidence and arguments presented to the Family Court throughout the proceedings, including at the April 18, 2019 hearing, in which Mother's counsel fully participated, including witness examination and argument.  Mother's counsel never indicated to the court that she would have called Mother to testify at the April 18, 2019 hearing, if Mother had appeared, 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and never made an offer of proof as to what testimony or other 
evidence might have been offered in opposition to the Motion to Terminate if Mother had appeared at the April 18, 2019 hearing.
6 
With respect to the default, Mother appears to argue in 
particular, that FOFs 40-43 are without substantial support in the record, and a finding of these facts after divesting her of the right to be heard is an abuse of discretion.  These findings are as follows: 
40.  Mother continues to reside with and maintain a 
relationship with [Boyfriend]. 
41.  Mother does not intend to live separately from
[Boyfriend]. 
42.  Mother still does not believe [Boyfriend]
sexually abused [KS]. 
43.  
Mother was given a reasonable opportunity to
reunify with [KS]. 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support 
that Mother continued to reside with Boyfriend, did not intend to live separately, and did not believe that he sexually abused KS. At no point in the case did Mother deny these facts, either in court or during therapy or other services, as reported in exhibits entered into evidence.  At the April 18, 2019 hearing, Mother's counsel made no offer of proof nor otherwise argued that Mother was prepared to testify to the contrary.  Even after the April 18, 2019 hearing, Mother made no proffer or argument to the contrary when she sought to set aside the Termination Order.  The record also supports the Family Court's finding that Mother was 
6 We note that Mother did not, at any point in the case, identify
anyone other than herself and Boyfriend as potential witnesses and, when given
the opportunity to testify at the January 7, 2019 hearing, Mother declined totestify in an attempt to show cause as to why the case should not be set for atermination of parental rights hearing. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
given a reasonable opportunity to reunite with KS, as well as the 
Family Court's other findings pertaining to the Motion to Terminate.  Again, Mother made no offer of proof and did not otherwise argue that Mother was prepared to testify to the contrary, at the April 18, 2019 hearing or thereafter.  In addition, Mother does not challenge findings that: 
44.  Despite the court's October 30, 2017 order for
Mother to complete Sexual Harm Counseling/Individual/
Conjoint Family Counseling, Mother chose to stop attendingtherapy on September 7, 2018. 
45.  Despite the court's October 30, 2017 order for
Mother to complete Parenting Education, Mother was non-clinically discharged from PARENTS, Inc. on August 22, 2018because she had four unexcused absences. 
46.  Mother has yet to complete Sexual Harm
Counseling/Individual/Conjoint Family Counseling andParenting Education. 
Finally, while we are aware of the gravity of the 
Family Court's entry of default at this critical juncture in 
these proceedings based on a single, unexplained absence, the circumstances of this case are very different than the circumstances in In re TW.  Here, based on the Family Court's ruling on January 7, 2019, where Mother was present, as well as based on the fact that the Motion to Terminate was filed and served more than two months before the April 18, 2019 hearing, Mother had ample notice of the date, time, and nature of the hearing on the State's Motion to Terminate.
7  Here, although 
Mother participated in services for a period of time, she no-
7 At the April 18, 2019 hearing, Mother's counsel raised concerns
about whether Mother received a copy of the motion, based on a possible change
of address, but at no point at the April 18, 2019 hearing or thereafter didcounsel represent that the copy of the motion that she mailed to Mother wasreturned, that Mother in fact changed her address, that Mother was unaware ofthe hearing date and time, or that Mother did not in fact receive a copy ofthe motion.  On the contrary, counsel represented that she had contactedMother earlier in the month to remind her of the hearing. 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showed, cancelled appointments, made little effort to stay in 
contact with KS, and, as the Family Court stated at the January 7, 2019 hearing, appeared to choose her relationship with Boyfriend over her relationship with KS.  While there is nothing in the record to suggest that a short continuance would have unduly infringed upon the Family Court's need to manage its docket or prejudiced DHS, there was evidence that Mother's continued lack of engagement in services and the lack of permanence in KS's life was causing distress to KS.  Here, the Family Court made clear that Mother could file an appropriate motion for relief from its April 18, 2019 rulings.  For these reasons, under the circumstances of this case, we cannot conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in entering default against Mother at the April 18, 2019 hearing.
8 
(2) Mother briefly contends that the Family Court 
abused its discretion in conjunction with its entry of the Order Denying Immediate Review.  We conclude that Mother's contentions are without merit. 
In BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, 57 Haw. 73, 77, 549 P.2d 1147, 
1150 (1976), the supreme court held that a motion to set aside an entry of default should be granted if a court "finds (1) that the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act."  (Citations omitted). 
8 Mother makes no other argument on the substance of the Family
Court's Termination Order. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 15, 2019, Mother submitted a Motion for 
Immediate Review, along with an ex parte motion for shortened 
time to hear the Motion for Immediate Review.  The Motion for Immediate Review stated that it sought to set aside Mother's default and the Termination Order, and asked to set the issue of termination for trial.  It cited HRS § 587A-30(a) and Rule 10 of the Family Court Rules and was supported only by a declaration of counsel, but suggested that further evidence might be adduced at the hearing on the motion.  Counsel's declaration stated only that: 
1.  Declarant is MOTHER's court-appointed counsel in
the above-entitled matter; 
2.  Declarant is informed and of the good faith and
belief that on or around, April 30, 2019, Mother was in
communication with the subject child's [resource caregiver(RCG)] in regards to [KS] and visitation and was told that
RCG would check with DHS and get back to Mother; 
3.  Declarant is informed and of the good faith and
belief that on May 15, 2019, Mother contacted counsel to seeif any word had been received from counsel in regards tovisits as RCG did not yet get back to Mother and to file amotion. 
4.  After consultation, Mother requested this motion
be filed seeking mediation and a trial on the issue oftermination of parental rights. 
5.  Based on the foregoing and any evidence adduced at
a hearing on this motion, Mother request 1) her default beset aside prospectively; 2) request mediation and a trial onthe motion to terminate her parental rights as soon aspossible; and 3) that this serve as notice of appeal for theorders defaulting her and terminating her parental rightsentered on April 18, 2019. 
6.  
I hereby declare under penalty of law that the
foregoing is true and correct. 
On May 20, 2019, the ex parte motion for shortened time 
was granted and the Motion for Immediate Review was set for 
hearing on May 22, 2019.  Mother did not appear at the May 22, 2019 hearing.  Counsel represented to the Family Court that she had informed Mother that because of the ex parte  motion the 
14  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
matter would be "short-set", but Mother informed her, when 
counsel gave her the date, that she was not able to take off from work on such short notice, that she would probably be fired, and she did not want to lose her job.  Mother was seeking a continuance to see if she could request time off.  The Family Court noted the importance of the matter and that May 23, 2019, would be thirty days from the date of the entry of the Termination Order.  Counsel noted that Mother called the bailiff asking to appear by phone, but counsel had informed Mother that such request was unlikely to be granted.  The court noted, inter 
alia, that a motion to set aside a default is an evidentiary motion and that for various reasons related to assessing credibility, possible coaching of a witness, and the ability to confront and cross-examine a witness, Mother's request to appear by telephone would be denied.  The court offered to excuse Mother, but questioned how counsel would support her requested relief.  Counsel in essence offered that Mother's testimony would be that she did not appear at the April 18, 2019 hearing because she woke up late and then had transportation issues.  Counsel made no attempt to address what Mother's meritorious defense to the Motion to Terminate would have been, or whether the nondefaulting parties would have been prejudiced by the reopening, notwithstanding that the Family Court had just stated the standard to set aside default.  In fact, counsel stated, "we don't know what the -- what [the] meritorious evidence could be." 
The court noted that it was "not aware of any 
meritorious defense at this time of mother, and the court would 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
likely find that the child will be prejudiced by the reopening of 
the case as it would take longer to achieve permanency in this matter."  Based on those reasons, and the lack of prosecution of the Motion for Immediate Review, the Family Court denied the motion.  After further argument of counsel, the Family Court denied what it construed as an oral motion for reconsideration. 
Upon review, we conclude that the Family Court did not 
clearly err in its FOFs related to the Motion for Immediate Review and did not abuse its discretion in denying Mother's request to set aside the Termination Order on the grounds that Mother failed to meet her burden for such relief. 
For these reasons, the Family Court's April 23, 2019 
Termination Order and Letters of Permanent Custody, as well as its May 22, 2019 Order Denying Immediate Review are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai i #, December 31, 2019. 
On the briefs: Crystal M. Asano, 
Court-Appointed Counsel,for Mother-Appellant. 
Michael V. Domingo, 
Julio Herrera,Patrick A. Pascual,Erin K.S. Torres,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee  Department of Human Services. 
Michelle K. Moorhead,
Ashlyn L. Whitbeck,(Legal Aid Society of Hawaii),Guardian Ad Litem. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
16 