NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
NO. CAAP-22-0000468 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JOHN SING, Defendant-Appellant   
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1CPC-19-0001722)  
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)
 
 
Defendant-Appellant John Sing (Sing) appeals from the 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit on July 5, 2022.1  Upon 
careful review of the record and the briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised, we affirm. 
Sing was charged by felony indictment with one count 
of Robbery in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
 
1  The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided over the jury trial, 
and the Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided over the sentencing. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2 
 Statutes (HRS) § 708-841(1)(a) (2014),  and one count of 
Harassment in violation of HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) (2014).  Sing 
pleaded guilty to the Harassment charge, and was sentenced to 
thirty days of incarceration.  His robbery charge proceeded to a
jury trial.32
 
 
Sing raises three points of error on appeal.  Sing 
contends that: (1) the circuit court erred in instructing the 
jury on the included offense of Attempted Robbery in the Second 
Degree, pursuant to HRS §§ 705-500 (2014) and 708-841(1)(a) 
(2014); (2) his conviction for Attempted Robbery in the Second 
Degree is not supported by sufficient evidence; and (3) the circuit court erred by not granting his motion for mistrial, or 
issuing a curative instruction, following the prosecutor's 
alleged violation during her opening statement, of the circuit 
court's order granting Sing's motion in limine to exclude 
evidence of, inter alia, video footage of Sing's behavior on the 
night of his arrest. 
 
2  Abraham Sionesini (Sionesini) was also charged, in the same 
felony indictment, with violating HRS § 708- 841(1)(a) (2014).  In May 2021, 
the circuit court granted Sing's motion to sever his charges from 
Sionesini's.  Sionesini is not a party to this appeal. 
 
3  The felony indictment provided, with respect to the charge for 
Robbery in the Second Degree,  
COUNT 1 : On or about November 18, 2019, in the City and 
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaiʻ i, ABRAHAM SIONESINI and 
JOHN SING, while in the course of committing theft, did use 
force against the person of Wesley Mau, a person who was 
present, with the intent to overcome Wesley Mau's physical 
resistance or physical power of resistance, thereby 
committing the offense of Robbery in the Second Degree, in 
violation of Section 708
-841(1)(a) of the Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3 
 We resolve Sing's contentions of error as follows:  
(1) Sing contends first that the circuit court erred 
by instructing the jury as to the included offense of Attempted 
Robbery in the Second Degree.4  "When jury instructions or the 
omission thereof are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the 
instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading."  State v. Kinnane, 79 Hawaiʻ i 46, 
49, 897 P.2d 973, 976 (1995) (citation and emphasis omitted). 
The circuit court did not err in instructing the jury
as to Attempted Robbery in the Second Degree.  The offense of  
 
4  The circuit court read the following instruction to the jury, 
with regard to Attempted Robbery in the Second Degree, 
If and only if you find the defendant not guilty of 
Robbery in the Second Degree, or you are unable to reach a 
unanimous verdict as to this offense, then you must 
consider whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of 
the included offense of Attempted Robbery in the Second 
Degree. 
 A person commits the offense of Attempted Robbery in 
the Second Degree if he intentionally engages in conduct 
which, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, 
constitutes a substantial step in the course of -- in a 
course of conduct intended to culminate in his commission of Robbery in the Second Degree. 
 
  There are two material elements of the offense of Attempted 
Robbery in the Second Degree, each of which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. 
 These two elements are: 1. That, on or about November 18, 2019, in the City 
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, the defendant 
engaged in conduct which, under the circumstances as the 
defendant believed them to be, was a substantial step in a 
course of conduct intended by the defendant to culminate in 
the commission of Robbery in the Second Degree; and 
2.  That the defendant engaged in such conduct 
intentionally. 
Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step 
until it is strongly corroborative of the defendant
's 
intent to commit Robbery in the Second Degree. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4 
 Attempted Robbery is an included offense of Robbery.  See HRS § 
701-109(4)(b) (Supp.2018) (an offense is included, inter alia, when it "consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged or 
to commit an offense otherwise included therein").  "[W]hen 
there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict 
acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting 
the defendant of the included offense," the jury must be 
instructed on the included offense.  State v. Martin, 146 Hawaiʻ i
365, 387, 463 P.3d 1022, 1044 (2020), as corrected, (Apr. 23, 
2020).  
The offense of criminal attempt is set forth in HRS § 
705-500.  As relevant here, "[a] person is guilty of an attempt 
to commit a crime if the person . . . Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the circumstances as the person believes 
them to be, constitutes a substantial step in a course of 
conduct intended to culminate in the person's commission of the 
crime."  HRS § 705-500(1)(b).  In order to be considered a 
substantial step, the conduct must be "strongly corroborative of 
the defendant's criminal intent."  HRS § 705-500(3). 
The record reflects that Sing approached Mau alongside 
Sionesini, as Sionesini questioned Mau about his watch, and, 
upon Mau's refusal to surrender the watch to Sionesini, Sing 
punched Mau across the face.  These actions support a jury
's 
reasonable finding that Sing intentionally engaged in conduct NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 
 that, under the circumstances as he believed them to be, 
constituted a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the commission of Robbery in the Second Degree.  
There was a rational basis in the evidence for the jury to find 
that Sing attempted to obtain or exert control over Mau's watch, 
and thus to convict Sing of the included offense of Attempted 
Robbery in the Second Degree.  
We conclude that the circuit court did not err in 
instructing the jury on the included offense of Attempted 
Robbery in the Second Degree. 
(2)  Sing next contends that the record contains 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction for Attempted Robbery in the Second Degree.  When reviewing the sufficiency of 
evidence on appeal, the court applies the following standard of 
review, 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in 
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate 
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to 
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the case was before a judge or jury.  The test on appeal is not 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but 
whether there was substantial evidence to support the 
conclusion of the trier of fact. 
 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawaiʻ i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citations omitted).  "Substantial evidence" is "credible 
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion."  
Id.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6 
 We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to 
support the jury's finding that Sing attempted to commit theft 
of Mau's watch, that he did so intentionally, and that he used 
force during the attempt.  The evidence supports that Sing and 
Sionesini approached Mau, while Mau was seated on a bench in the 
Waikīkī Triangle Park.  Mau testified that Sing and Sionesini 
approached him, "walking side by side," as Sionesini said, "I 
want your watch.  Your watch.  Give me your watch."  Mau 
testified that Sionesini then once or twice "tried to put his 
finger and then pull" at the watch band on Mau's wrist, while 
Mau told him "no, you can't have my watch," and pulled his arm away.  Mau further testified that Sing was "watching" Sionesini.  
Sing told Mau, "So what?  You gonna call the police?  You gonna 
call the police?" at which time Sing punched him, with his fist, 
"lightly across" the face. 
Based on our examination of the record, we conclude 
that there was substantial evidence to support the jury's 
finding that Sing intentionally engaged in conduct which, under the circumstances as he believed them to be, constituted a 
substantial step in the course of conduct intended to culminate 
in his commission of Robbery in the Second Degree.  The jury 
reasonably found, based on Mau's testimony, that Sing's punch 
constituted force intended to overcome Mau's physical resistance
or physical power of resistance that occurred as part of the 
course of conduct by which Sing, together with Sionesini,  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7 
 attempted to obtain or exert unauthorized control over Mau's 
watch.  State v. Teale, 139 Hawaiʻ i 351, 359, 390 P.3d 1238, 1246
(2017) ("[I]n reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence to 
support the conviction the appellate court must take that view 
of the evidence with inferences reasonably and justifiably to be 
drawn therefrom most favorable to the Government, without weighing the evidence or determining the credibility of the 
witnesses.") (citation omitted).  
Viewing the evidence in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, we conclude that the record contained substantial 
evidence to support Sing's conviction for Attempted Robbery in 
the Second Degree. 
(3)  Sing contends, as his final point of error, that 
the circuit court erred in denying his motion for a mistrial.  "The denial of a motion for mistrial is within the sound 
discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a 
clear abuse of discretion."  State v. Rogan, 91 Hawaiʻ i 405, 411, 
984 P.2d 1231, 1237 (1999).  "The trial court abuses its 
discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or 
disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant."  Id. (citations 
omitted).   
Sing alleged below, as a basis for mistrial, that the
State violated the circuit court's order granting Sing's motion 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8 
 in limine,  when the prosecutor made two sets of remarks during 
opening statements in apparent reference to an officer's 
observation, based on closed-circuit television (CCTV) footage,
of Sing's demeanor on the night of the alleged robbery attempt,
as follows: 5
 
 
That night Officer Osborne was monitoring the CCTV monitors 
and what caught her attention, she saw two men in the 
monitors in the area right next to McDonald's, which is on Kuhio just maybe one block Diamond Head of the Hyatt Hotel, 
you know, those two towers.  And what she saw is two men, 
one in a black T- shirt, black shorts, the other in a red T-
shirt, red shorts, having a face off with another individual.  That caught her attention, these two men who seemed to have an aggressive stance with another person. 
. . . 
You'll hear from the officers at the scene.  That's Officer 
Osborne who will describe how the defendant acted that 
evening, that he was belligerent, that he did not follow instructions.  
 
The record reflects that Sing objected to the prosecutor's 
remark that Sing was "belligerent, that he did not follow 
instructions" and the circuit court sustained the objection.6  
The prosecutor's alleged misconduct was confined to these statements, and Sing makes no further allegations of 
prosecutorial misconduct.   
The circuit court, after the jury was excused on the 
day opening statements were presented, further addressed the 
 
5  The circuit court granted Sing's motion in limine to exclude, 
inter alia, video evidence of Sing's behavior on the night of his arrest. 
 
6  Sing contends that his objection to the prosecutor's first set of 
remarks, regarding the "two men who seemed to have an aggressive stance with another person," was lodged with the court, though that objection is not 
reflected in the transcript.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 9 matter of Sing's allegation of prosecutorial misconduct, and 
clarified the scope of his order granting the motion in limine, 
I just wanted to address the objection issue because I 
don't think I was -- I was not clear on this point.  When I 
said that the State was kept -- was supposed to keep out 
the video for the 404(b) versus 404(a) considerations, I didn't extend that to everything about the belligerence 
later, but I am now, because I feel that defense's 
objections regarding the 404(a) evidence i.e., the idea that they're belligerent is character evidence that usually 
keep -- we keep out of in a 404(a) and is not sufficiently 
idiosyncratic to satisfy an exception under 404(b), so that's why I sustained that objection.  And that is my 
ruling going forward to the rest of the trial.  
  
After the circuit court made this clarification, Sing 
moved for a mistrial, contending that the State's opening 
statement violated the order granting Sing's motions in limine.  
The circuit court responded that "[m]otion for mistrial is 
lodged but denied," because the prosecutor's statement did not "rise[] to the level of requiring a mistrial, especially if as 
we proceed forward no evidence of that sort is adduced."
 
The circuit court further expressed that a curative 
instruction might not serve to cure the harm as intended, 
I have the general instruction that opening statements 
aren't evidence.  If I were to issue a limiting instruction 
after that, in my mind that would draw attention to it in a 
way that would not necessarily cure the harm.  It would, as a practical matter, draw attention to it. 
 The opening statement said, after this evidence will 
be presented.  It's going to be two days till that happens.  And the key evidence will be Mr. Mau's testimony.  Once 
that's out of the way, I don't see that there's a necessity for it, so I'm not going to issue a curative instruction.  
Your objection is noted, as is your motion for mistrial 
lodged and we'll take it from there. 
 
We conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Sing's motion for a mistrial, or in 
declining to issue a curative instruction.  The circuit court  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10 
  instructed the jury that counsels' opening statement remarks are
not evidence, and the jury is presumed to have followed the 
circuit court's instructions.  State v. Hauge, 103 Hawaiʻ i 38, 
59, 79 P.3d 131, 152 (2003), as corrected, (Nov. 26, 2003).  
("This court has repeatedly adhered to the construct that the 
jury is presumed to have followed the circuit court's instructions.") (cleaned up).  The prosecutor's remarks, which 
were confined to two brief references to Sing's alleged 
behavior, did not deny Sing his right to a fair trial.  The 
circuit court did not err in declining to issue a curative 
instruction.  
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit's Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered on July 5, 2022, is affirmed. 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, September 1, 2023. 
 
On the briefs:  
Daniel Kawamoto, 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
 Donn Fudo, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.   /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Presiding Judge 
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge 
 
 