NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000386
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL SHIMABUKURO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1686)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Shimabukuro (Shimabukuro), a karate 
instructor, with four counts of sexually assaulting his karate student, while the student was a minor. The complaining witness (CW) was twelve to fifteen years old during the period when the alleged sexual assaults occurred. Shimabukuro was charged with two counts of first-degree sexual assault for engaging in sexual penetration by inserting the CW's penis into Shimabukuro's mouth (Counts 1 and 3) and two counts of third-degree sexual assault for causing the CW to have sexual contact with Shimabukuro by placing his hand on the CW's penis (Counts 2 and 4). A jury found Shimabukuro guilty of the included offense of third-degree sexual assault as to Count 1, guilty as charged of third-degree   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual assault as to Counts 2 and 4, and not guilty on Count 3.1
 
2
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced
Shimabukuro to concurrent five-year terms of imprisonment. 
On appeal, Shimabukuro contends that his trial counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance by: (1) failing to object to
 
evidence of an incident where Shimabukuro placed a penis
 enlargement device on the CW; (2) opening the door to evidence
 that Shimabukuro placed the device on another karate student; (3)
 failing to prevent the prosecutor from eliciting demeanor
 testimony; (4) asking a witness whether she believed the CW; and
 (5) asking Shimabukuro's mother certain questions that supported
 the testimony provided by two of the State's witnesses. We
 affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Shimabukuro is a former Pan-American karate champion 
and karate instructor. 
Shimabukuro formed his own karate school, 
the Hawaii Karate Association (HKA), and his students trained at the Japanese Cultural Center of Hawai
'i. 
1Shimabukoro was found guilty of violating Hawaii Revised Statutes
§ 707-732 (2014), which provides in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
third degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 The person knowingly subjects to sexual contact
another person who is less than fourteen years old or
causes such a person to have sexual contact with the
person; [or]
 
(c) 	The person knowingly engages in sexual contact with a
person who is at least fourteen years old but less
than sixteen years old or causes the minor to have
sexual contact with the person; provided that:
 
(i)	 The person is not less than five years older
than the minor; and
 
(ii)	 The person is not legally married to the
minor[.]
 
2The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The CW first began studying karate at the age of six.
 
Karate was his passion. The CW became highly skilled at karate
 
and earned his black belt by the age of nine.
 
The CW began training with Shimabukuro when the CW was
 
ten years old. The CW wanted to train with Shimabukuro because 
Shimabukuro was a Pan-American champion, and the CW aspired to be
 a champion. The CW trained diligently under Shimabukuro, two
 hours a day on weekdays and four to five hours a day during the
 weekend. The CW was a member of the HKA's competition team and
 
was highly successful. He became a champion and won medals in
 
national and international karate competitions. Based on his
 
dedication and success, the CW became a senpai, or teacher's aid,
 
and the CW was given the responsibility of teaching other
 students at Shimabukuro's HKA school. 
As the head karate instructor, Shimabukuro was referred
 
to as "sensei" and held a position of trust and authority over
 his students. When sensei Shimabukuro entered the dojo, the
 
students would all stand up, face Shimabukuro, and bow to him. 
The CW was taught to respect and obey Shimabukuro. The
 importance of loyalty and discipline was also emphasized by
 Shimabukuro. 
II.
 
According to the CW, the first incident of sexual
 
assault occurred when the CW was about twelve to thirteen years
 old. The CW was training intensively in preparation for a
 national karate competition and was taking a nap before an
 afternoon training session on the floor of Shimabukuro's office.
 Shimabukuro woke the CW by tapping his shoulder, and when the CW
 turned over on his back, Shimabukuro touched and patted the CW's
 penis over the CW's clothes. Shimabukuro used his hand to touch
 and pat the CW's penis. The CW was shocked that Shimabukuro,
 whom he looked up to, would do that to him. The CW did not know
 how to react and "was afraid of what to say[.]" He did not tell
 anyone about the incident at that time.
 
Shimabukuro held sleepovers at the Japanese Cultural
 
3
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Center for students training for national competitions to give
 
them more time to train. Sleepovers occurred four over five
 
times during the summer and two or three times during the rest of
 
the year. Parents did not attend the sleepovers; it was just
 
Shimabukuro and the students. The CW attended the sleepovers
 
held at the dojo.
 
During the sleepovers, Shimabukuro provided his minor
 
students with alcohol (beer and hard liquor), pornographic
 
magazines, and sexual paraphernalia, such as a penis enlarger.3
 
The CW drank the alcohol provided by Shimabukuro and would get
 drunk.
 
The CW testified that during a sleepover when the CW
 
was twelve to thirteen years old, Shimabukuro showed the CW a
 penis enlarger while they were in a storage closet in the dojo. 
Shimabukuro explained how the device worked and then coaxed the
 CW into using it. Shimabukuro gave the CW the penis enlarger. 
The CW took off his pants and put the device on, and Shimabukuro
 helped the CW use the pump for the device. R.C., another student
 of Shimabukoro, testified that he saw Shimabukuro place the penis
 enlarger on student B.N., while the CW, R.C., B.N., and
 Shimabukuro were in the storage closet, and that Shimabukuro
 later gave the device to the CW. 
The CW testified that after becoming "really
 
intoxicated" at night during a sleepover, he fell asleep in the
 storage closet. The CW awoke to find that his shorts were
 halfway down his legs and Shimabukuro's hand was on the CW's
 penis masturbating him. Shimabukuro also sucked on the CW's
 penis. Shimabukuro did this more than once to the CW.
 
The CW stated he was unsure of how many times
 
Shimabukuro placed his hand on the CW's penis and masturbated the
 CW, but Shimabukuro engaged in such conduct at least once when
 the CW was twelve or thirteen and at least once while the CW was
 
3The penis enlarger was described during trial as a clear cylinder tube
with a pump connected to it.
 
4
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fourteen or fifteen. Similarly, the CW was unsure of how many
 
times Shimabukuro sucked on the CW's penis, but Shimabukuro
 engaged in such conduct at least once when the CW was twelve or
 thirteen and at least once when the CW was fourteen or fifteen. 
These incidents occurred in the storage closet during sleepovers
 when the CW was intoxicated and had fallen asleep. The CW
 indicated that because of his intoxication, his young age, and
 Shimabukuro's position as the CW's teacher, the CW felt powerless
 and confused and did not feel as though he could tell Shimabukuro
 to stop.
 
III.
 
The CW testified that he did not tell anyone about
 
Shimabukuro's sexual abuse "right away[,]" but that it took "a
 while[.]" The first person the CW told was his mother, after he
 got into a dispute with Shimabukuro. The dispute arose because
 the CW had just become a Pan American champion and wanted to take
 a break from training, but Shimabukuro wanted him to continue
 training and inspire other students at the dojo. To punish the
 CW, Shimabukuro took away the CW's black belt. The CW's mother
 testified that Shimabukuro also punished the CW by requiring him
 to sit facing the wall while other students trained. 
Following these events, the CW told his mother that
 
Shimabukuro had "touched" the CW. After learning of the abuse,
 the CW's mother took the CW to confront Shimabukuro. Mother
 allowed Shimabukuro to speak to the CW separately. The CW
 testified that Shimabukuro told the CW how sorry he was; then
 Shimabukuro broke down, began to cry, got on his knees, and asked
 the CW for forgiveness.  The CW accepted Shimabukuro's apology.
 
Shimabukuro told the CW that if Shimabukuro's father found out,
 
the father would kill Shimabukuro, Shimabukuro's mother, and
 himself. The CW and Shimabukuro then gave each other a hug.
 
IV.
 
Mother did not call the police after the CW told her
 
about the abuse and allowed the CW to continue to train with
 Shimabukuro. Although the CW reduced the frequency of his
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
training at Shimabukuro's dojo, he continued to train with
 
Shimabukuro until he was sixteen or seventeen. While training
 with Shimabukuro, he won a gold medal at another national
 competition.
 
The CW's mother told the mother of another student,
 
R.C., about the CW's report of sexual abuse by Shimabukuro. 
After R.C.'s mother found out about the CW's sexual abuse
 allegations, she spoke with the CW about the allegations. R.C.'s
 mother testified that the CW "was crying" and "was real upset and
 hysterical" when she spoke to him. R.C.'s mother then talked to
 R.C. who told his mother about the alcohol, pornography, and
 penis enlarger at the sleepovers. 
About a week after speaking to R.C., R.C.'s mother and
 
her husband confronted Shimabukuro. According to R.C.'s mother,
 she told Shimabukuro that "[the CW] is saying you molested him."
 In response, Shimabukuro said "he couldn't deny it because he was
 drunk all the time." R.C.'s mother had other meetings with
 Shimabukuro "under the same topic" in which Shimabukuro stated
 two or three more times that "he could not deny it." Shimabukuro
 also admitted that he served alcohol at the sleepovers. R.C.'s
 mother did not expeditiously report what she had learned to the
 police, but encouraged Shimabukuro to talk with his mother. 
R.C.'s mother also permitted her son to continue to train with
 Shimabukuro.
 
Russell Titus (Titus) was a karate instructor who had
 
known Shimabukuro for at least fifteen years. Titus testified
 that Shimabukuro came to him and began the conversation by
 telling Titus, "[T]his is going to be bad." Shimabukuro told
 
Titus that he had served alcohol to minors during sleepovers at
 
the dojo and that he was being accused of sexual misconduct and
 sexual molestation. Titus also recalled the word "oral" being
 used. When Titus asked Shimabukuro if the sexual allegations
 were true, Shimabukuro responded, "I don't know, I can't
 remember."
 
Approximately two years after the CW first told her
 
about the abuse, the CW's mother reported the allegations to the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
police. R.C.'s parents also filed a report with the police
 
around the same time, about two years after they learned of the
 CW's allegations.
 
V.
 
Shimabukuro's theory of defense at trial was that the
 
alleged sexual abuse never occurred but was made up by the CW. 
In support of this theory, Shimabukuro's trial counsel emphasized
 problems with the CW's memory, his inability to recall dates for
 the alleged incidents of sexual abuse, and inconsistencies in the
 various statements the CW had made regarding the incidents.
 Shimabukuro's trial counsel also pointed to the failure of the
 CW's mother and R.C.'s mother to report the allegations to the
 police for a prolonged period of time and their continuing to
 allow their sons to train with Shimabukuro as proof that they did
 not believe the CW's allegations. Shimabukuro chose not to
 testify at trial.
 
VI.
 
As noted, the jury found Shimabukuro guilty of three
 
counts of third-degree sexual assault. The Circuit Court entered
 its Judgment on February 5, 2013, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Shimabukuro seeks to vacate his convictions
 
on the ground that his trial counsel provided ineffective
 assistance. When a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel is
 raised, we examine "whether, viewed as a whole, the assistance
 provided [the defendant was] 'within the range of competence
 demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.'" State v. Antone, 62
 
Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (citations omitted). 
"[T]he defendant has the burden of establishing 
ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1247 (1998) (format altered; citation omitted). 
"Counsel's assistance need not be errorless nor will it
 
be judged ineffective solely by hindsight." Antone, 62 Haw. at
 
348, 615 P.2d at 104. Even performance that is "far from
 
commendable" will not necessarily warrant a finding of
 ineffective assistance of counsel. See id. at 353, 615 P.2d at
 
107. We give wide latitude to lawyers to make on-the-spot 
strategic choices in trying cases, and "tactical decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a reviewing court." Id. at 352, 615 P.2d at 106. "[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 
39–40, 960 P.2d 1247–48 (1998) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
With these principles in mind, we examine Shimabukuro's
 
claims of ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
I.
 
Shimabukuro contends that his trial counsel provided 
ineffective assistance by failing to object to evidence of Shimabukuro's involvement in having a penis enlargement device placed on the CW during a sleepover at the dojo. Shimabukuro contends that he received inadequate notice of this incident under Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2014), 
and therefore, his counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to object to this evidence on the ground of lack of adequate notice.
4 We disagree. 
Prior to trial, the State filed a "Notice of Intent to
 
Use Evidence" (Notice) which advised Shimabukuro that pursuant to 
4HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in relevant part: "In criminal cases, the
proponent of evidence to be offered under this subsection shall provide
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location, and general nature
of any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRE Rule 404(b), the State would seek to introduce evidence,
 
including:
 
a. During the time frame charged in the indictment
. . . , [Shimabukuro] at the Dojo, plied the [CW] with
alcohol, pornographic DVD's[5] and sexual paraphernalia to
release his inhibitions and to de-sensitize him to the
 sexual acts.
 
(Emphasis added.) Although the Notice did not further describe
 
the "sexual paraphernalia" involved in the acts by Shimabukuro
 involving the CW, the Notice referred to a "penis pump" and a
 "rubber vagina" in describing various acts by Shimabukuro that
 involved the other students at the dojo. More importantly, the
 record clearly indicates that Shimabukuro's trial counsel knew
 that the references in the Notice to Shimabukuro using "sexual
 paraphernalia to release [the CW's] inhibitions and to
 de-sensitize [the CW] to the sexual acts" included the incident
 in which Shimabukuro was identified as being involved in having
 the penis enlargement device placed on the CW.
6
 
Shimabukuro moved in limine to exclude the evidence
 
disclosed by the State in its Notice. The Circuit Court
 indicated that it would permit evidence of Shimabukuro's other
 bad acts involving the CW, provided the State could lay a proper
 foundation, but would preclude evidence of other bad acts only
 involving the other students. As Shimabukuro acknowledges, the
 record suggests that counsel for both parties and the Circuit
 Court had off the record discussions regarding the motion in
 limine before the Circuit Court announced its rulings. 
Shimabukuro also moved in limine to exclude oral
 
statements he had purportedly made that the State had disclosed. 
In a hearing on this motion prior to trial, the parties discussed
 the statement: "He ordered us to drink . . . I have this thing
 you gotta check out." When the Circuit Court asked the
 
5The State filed an Amended Notice of Intent to Use Evidence which
 
changed the reference to "pornographic DVD's" to "pornography."
 
6We note that the record does not include the discovery provided by the
State to Shimabukuro, and thus we do not know whether such discovery contained
additional details regarding the "sexual paraphernalia" allegedly used by
Shimabukuro.
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecutor to explain the context of the statement "I have this
 
thing you got to check out," the prosecutor responded, "That's
 when he brought out the penis enlarger." Shimbukuro's counsel
 
replied, "I'm going to object to that but I think that's res
 
gestae[,]" and the Circuit Court ruled, over objection, that it
 was "going to allow that." In opening statement, the prosecutor
 stated that during the sleepovers, Shimabukuro "brought
 pornographic magazines, and he brought a sex toy known as a -­what the boy -- what [the CW] will describe as a penis enlarger." 
Also, prior to the first witness being called,
 
Shimabukuro's trial counsel raised the subject of the penis
 enlarger. Apparently, the police had recovered a penis enlarger
 from another student at the dojo (not the CW), and DNA testing
 did not reveal Shimabukuro's DNA on the device. Shimabukuro's
 counsel indicated that if the CW testified about the incident
 involving the penis enlarger, then counsel may want to introduce
 evidence that a penis enlarger, without Shimabukuro's DNA, had
 been recovered from another student. The discussion regarding
 this issue strongly indicates that Shimabukuro's counsel was
 aware that the reference in the State's Notice to Shimabukuro's
 using "sexual paraphernalia to release [the CW's] inhibitions and
 to de-sensitize [the CW] to the sexual acts" included the
 incident in which the CW alleged that Shimabukuro had the CW use
 a penis enlargement device. 
Because the record indicates that Shimabukuro's counsel
 
knew in advance that the State intended to elicit evidence of the
 alleged incident in which Shimabukuro had a penis enlargement
 device placed on the CW, an objection to such evidence based on a
 lack of adequate notice under HRE Rule 404(b) would have been
 without merit. Accordingly, Shimabukoro has failed to show that
 his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to object on this
 basis.
 
II.
 
Shimabukuro argues that his trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by opening the door to evidence that
 
10
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Shimabukuro placed the penis enlargement device on another karate
 
student. During defense counsel's cross-examination of R.C., the
 following took place:
 
Q. You've never witnessed any inappropriate sexual
contact between [Shimabukuro] and [the CW]; correct?
 
A. Yes 
Q. You've never witnessed any inappropriate touching
between [Shimabukuro] and any other student? 
A. No.
 
The parties interpreted R.C.'s answers to mean that he had not
 witnessed any inappropriate sexual contact between Shimabukuro
 and the CW or any inappropriate touching between Shimabukuro and
 any other student. 
The State, however, argued that defense counsel had
 
opened the door to R.C. testifying that he observed Shimabukuro
 place the penis enlarger on B.N. Defense counsel countered that
 he had not opened the door to such evidence because he asked
 about inappropriate touching and having someone use the penis
 enlarger was not inappropriate touching.
7 The Circuit Court
 
ultimately ruled that defense counsel's question had opened the
 door to the State asking whether R.C. had witnessed Shimabukuro
 place the penis enlarger on B.N., and it permitted the State to
 make this inquiry. R.C. then testified that he had seen
 Shimabukuro, with the CW present, place a penis enlarger on B.N.
 in the storage closet during a dojo sleepover. R.C. stated that
 later that night, Shimabukuro gave the penis enlarger to the CW. 
We conclude that defense counsel's questions involved a
 
tactical decision that did not constitute ineffective assistance. 
Defense counsel's questions and R.C.'s answers were of benefit to
 Shimabukuro. They provided evidence that R.C., a student who
 
7Defense counsel also argued that the door had not been opened because
the installation of a penis enlarger on someone else may or may not amount to
inappropriate touching. Defense counsel further requested that if the Circuit
Court believed the door had been opened, it strike R.C.'s answer to the
inappropriate touching question instead of a permitting the State to adduce
the proffered evidence.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
spent a lot of time training at the dojo, had not witnessed any 
inappropriate sexual contact between Shimabukuro and the CW or any inappropriate touching between Shimabukuro and any other student. Defense counsel apparently made a judgment call that his question regarding inappropriate touching would not open the door to evidence about Shimabukuro having another student use the penis enlarger. While the Circuit Court ultimately disagreed with defense counsel's assessment, we cannot say that defense counsel's judgment call constituted ineffective assistance. See 
Antone, 62 Haw. at 352, 615 P.2d at 106 ("Lawyers require and are permitted broad latitude to make on-the-spot strategic choices in the course of trying a case."); Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39–40, 960 
P.2d at 1247–48 ("[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
III.
 
Shimabukuro argues that his trial counsel was
 
ineffective for failing to prevent the prosecutor from eliciting
 certain demeanor testimony. The State elicited testimony from
 R.C.'s mother that when she spoke to the CW about the sexual
 abuse allegations, his demeanor was "[h]e was crying, and he was
 real upset and hysterical." Shimabukuro argues that his trial
 counsel should have objected on hearsay grounds to preliminary
 questions that led to R.C.'s mother's demeanor testimony. 
We conclude that Shimabukuro's claim that his trial
 
counsel was ineffective in this respect is without merit. R.C.'s
 mother's demeanor testimony was not hearsay and was admissible. 
See HRE Rule 801 (Supp. 2014) (defining hearsay). The objections
 Shimabukuro argues that his trial counsel should have made would
 not have prevented the State from presenting the demeanor
 testimony.
 
IV.
 
Shimabukuro argues that his trial counsel was
 
ineffective for asking R.C.'s mother whether she believed the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW's allegations. Defense counsel asked R.C.'s mother the
 
following question and obtained the following answer:
 
Q. . . . isn't it true that at the time that you
learned of the these allegations from [the CW], you didn't
believe him?
 
A. No, absolutely not. Absolutely not. I believed
 
him.
 
Shimabukuro's claim is without merit.
 
The record shows that Shimabukuro's counsel asked this
 
question as a means of setting up the remainder of his cross-
examination, which was directed at impeaching the claim of R.C.'s
 mother that she believed the CW.
8 Defense counsel elicited
 
testimony on cross-examination that R.C.'s mother did not report
 the allegations to the police for a prolonged period of time and
 that she permitted her son to continue training with Shimabukuro
 on a regular basis -- actions inconsistent with a belief that
 Shimabukuro was a child molester. The question challenged by
 Shimabukuro did not reflect trial counsel's lack of skill,
 judgment, diligence, or competence.
 
V.
 
Finally, Shimabukuro argues that his trial counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance by asking Shimabukuro's mother
 certain questions in an attempt to provide context to testimony
 provided by Titus and R.C.'s mother regarding statements
 Shimabukuro had made to them. Defense counsel apparently sought
 to introduce evidence that Shimabukuro's demeanor and tone of
 voice when Shimabukuro discussed the allegations of sexual abuse
 with Titus and R.C.'s mother indicated disbelief and incredulity
 on Shimabukuro's part. When defense counsel asked Shimabukuro's
 mother about her son's tone and demeanor when he discussed the
 allegations of molestation with Titus and said "I don't know, I
 
8Moreover, if R.C.'s mother had answered yes to the question, in other
words, that she did not believe the CW when she learned of the allegations,
this would have benefitted Shimabukuro by casting doubt on the CW's
credibility.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9
can't deny it,"  Shimbukuro's mother testified that Shimabukuro's
demeanor and tone was one of "disbelief." 
The Circuit Court,
 
however, struck that testimony and limited defense counsel to
 
eliciting testimony that Shimabukuro used a raised tone of voice. 
Shimabukuro's mother also testified that Shimabukuro did not tell
 Titus that Shimabukuro was "drunk all the time." Defense counsel
 elicited testimony from Shimabukuro's mother that when her son
 discussed the CW's allegations with R.C.'s mother and said things
 like "I can't deny it," he used a tone similar to the tone he
 used with Titus, which she described "[v]ery strong." 
We reject Shimabukuro's claim that his trial counsel's 
questioning of Shimabukuro's mother constituted ineffective assistance. 
"The calling of witnesses is a strategic decision 
that is generally left to defense counsel." Richie, 88 Hawai 'i at 
39, 960 P.2d at 1247. Here, trial counsel had strategic reasons for calling Shimabukuro's mother. Although trial counsel may not have been as successful as desired in fulfilling his strategic plan, we cannot say that counsel's actions constituted ineffective assistance. See State v. Magsayo, No. 28578, 2012 WL 
1071496, at *6 (Hawai
'i App. Mar. 30, 2012) ("That trial counsel 
may not have been completely successful in achieving her purpose with this line of questioning is not sufficient to show that she provided ineffective assistance.") 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
William H. Jameson, Jr. 
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
9Titus actually testified that Shimabukuro said, "I don't know, I can't
remember."
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sonja P. McCullen 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
15
 