NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001393
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN LANOZA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1116)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant John Lanoza (Lanoza) with one count of 
attempted murder in the second degree. The charge arose from an incident in which Lanoza attacked a taxi driver, cutting him in the neck, arm, and shoulder with a blade, after the taxi driver had given Lanoza a ride. Lanoza opted for a bench trial and raised the affirmative defense of lack of penal responsibility "as a result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect" under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 704-400 (2014).
1 At trial, 
1HRS § 704-400 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person is not responsible, under this Code, for conduct if
at the time of the conduct as a result of physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect the person lacks substantial capacity either to
appreciate the wrongfulness of the person's conduct or to conform  the
 
person's conduct to the requirements of law.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Lanoza and the State called mental health experts to testify on
 
the question of Lanoza's penal responsibility at the time of the
 charged offense. At the close of the evidence, the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit (Circuit Court),
2
 based on its assessment of
the credibility and weight of the expert testimony presented,
 found that Lanoza had failed to prove his affirmative defense of
 lack of penal responsibility by a preponderance of the evidence. 
The Circuit Court further found that the State had proved beyond
 a reasonable doubt that Lanoza had committed the charged offense
 of attempted second-degree murder. The Circuit Court sentenced
 Lanoza to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole, and
 it filed its Judgment on December 3, 2014.
 
On appeal, Lanoza contends that the Circuit Court
 
clearly erred in finding that he failed to prove the affirmative
 defense under HRS § 704-400 of lack of penal responsibility as a
 result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect. In
 particular, Lanoza argues that the Circuit Court erred in relying
 on the State's experts rather than his expert in finding that he
 failed to prove the affirmative defense. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
At about 1:00 a.m., Howard Kau (Kau), who was driving 
his taxi, saw Lanoza waving him over from the sidewalk. 
Lanoza 
asked Kau to drive to a park in Kaimuki so that Lanoza could meet "two girls . . . to party with." Upon arriving, however, Kau noticed that the park was dark and appeared to be closed. Kau and Lanoza were unable to locate the women Lanoza had mentioned. Lanoza then asked Kau to take him to the Mo
'ili'ili Jiffy Lube. 
When Kau arrived at the Jiffy Lube and parked the taxi, 
Lanoza used a blade to cut Kau on the right side of his neck. 
Kau pushed Lanoza's forearm away, and as Kau turned to release
 his seat belt, Lanoza cut Kau a second time on the right arm. As 
2 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kau exited the taxi, Lanoza cut him a third time on the left
 
shoulder. 
Kau tried to open the rear driver's side door to grab 
Lanoza. Lanoza attempted to cut Kau, and Lanoza closed the door
 and locked it. Kau walked to the adjacent Burger King parking
 lot to seek help, and someone called 911. 
Police officers responded to the scene and Kau gave
 
them a description of Lanoza. The police found Lanoza lying on
 his back under a Honda CR-V parked about 40 or 50 feet from Kau's
 taxi. An officer ordered Lanoza to come out from under the car. 
Lanoza did not immediately comply and appeared to be trying to
 hide his hands and "reaching his hands up" into the undercarriage
 of the car. After Lanoza came out, the police searched under the
 CR-V and recovered a blade from the undercarriage of the car near
 the CR-V's right rear tire. DNA analysis revealed that the DNA
 profile obtained from the blade matched Kau's DNA profile.
 
Kau was taken by ambulance to Queen's Medical Center. 
The physician who treated Kau noted a deep, ten-centimeters-long
 laceration on Kau's neck near his carotid artery and jugular
 vein; a long and continuous laceration from near Kau's right
 armpit towards his elbow; and a deep laceration on Kau's back. 
The physician opined that the injuries Kau suffered created a
 substantial risk of death. In particular, the physician opined
 that "the extensive blood loss as a result of the injuries caused
 a hemorrhagic shock and a substantial risk of death for Kau." 
Lanoza "[t]ested positive for crystal methamphetamine"
 
shortly after he was arrested. Lanoza later reported that he had
 smoked crystal methamphetamine and marijuana and had drank about
 a quart of beer about two to three hours before the alleged
 offense.
 
II.
 
Prior to trial, the Circuit Court appointed
 
Psychiatrist Kosta Stojanovich, M.D. (Dr. Stojanovich),
 Psychologist Duke E. Wagner, Ph.D. (Dr. Wagner), and Psychologist
 Alex Lichton, Ph.D. (Dr. Lichton), to determine Lanoza's fitness
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to proceed to trial and his penal responsibility at the time of
 
the charged offense. All three mental health experts agreed that
 Lanoza was fit to proceed to trial, but they did not all have the
 same opinion with respect to his penal responsibility at the time
 of the charged offense. 
Lanoza asserted the defense of lack of penal
 
responsibility under HRS § 704-400, which provides that 
[a] person is not responsible, under [the Hawaii Penal]
Code, for conduct if at the time of the conduct as a result
of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect the
person lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the
wrongfulness of the person's conduct or to conform the
person's conduct to the requirements of law.
 
Lack of penal responsibility under HRS § 704-400 is an
 
affirmative defense that the defendant has the burden of proving
 by a preponderance of the evidence. HRS § 704-402 (2014); State
 v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai
'i 442, 456, 60 P.3d 843, 857 (2002); HRS 
§ 701-115(2)(b) (2014). The Hawaii Penal Code also generally provides that "[s]elf-induced intoxication is prohibited as a defense to any offense[.]" HRS § 702-230(1) (2014). 
At trial, Lanoza called Dr. Wagner. Dr. Wagner 
opined that Lanoza's cognitive capacity (capacity to appreciate
 the wrongfulness of his conduct) was not impaired at the time of
 the incident, but that his volitional capacity (capacity to
 conform his conduct to the requirements of the law) "may have
 been significantly impaired[.]" Dr. Wagner acknowledged that
 impairment of Lanoza's volitional capacity may have been affected
 to a degree difficult to quantify by Lanoza's crystal
 methamphetamine substance abuse. However, Dr. Wagner stated that
 he considered other factors besides Lanoza's substance abuse in
 opining that Lanoza's volitional capacity "may have been
 significantly compromised at the time of the alleged offense[] by
 the totality of his conditions." 
The State called Drs. Lichton and Stojanovich in
 
rebuttal. Dr. Lichton testified that in evaluating Lanoza's
 penal responsibility at the time of the charged offense, Dr.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Lichton interviewed Lanoza, analyzed tests he gave to Lanoza, and
 
reviewed relevant records, including Lanoza's medical and mental
 health records and records relating to his criminal history.
 After considering a variety of factors, Dr. Lichton opined that
 Lanoza did "appear to be penally responsible" at the time of the
 charged offense. At trial, Dr. Lichton explained the factors he
 analyzed and relied upon in reaching his opinion.
 
Dr. Stojanovich's testimony at trial vacillated and was
 
somewhat contradictory. However, he ultimately appeared to
 maintain the opinion he expressed in his written evaluations that
 it was "[m]uch more likely" that Lanoza was penally responsible
 at the time of the charged offense.
 
III.
 
After hearing the evidence, the Circuit Court found
 
that Lanoza had failed to prove his affirmative defense of lack
 of penal responsibility, and it explained its ruling as follows:
 
Now, the defendant relies on the affirmative defense
of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding
penal responsibility, which he has the burden of proving by
a preponderance of the evidence. I find, however, that the
defendant has failed to prove the defense by a preponderance
of the evidence. I do so primarily in reliance on the
testimony of Dr. Alex Lichtin [sic], which I find credible
and really the most persuasive of any of the expert
testimony I heard at the trial in this case. I have also
 factored into my decision Dr. Wagner's belief that the
defendant's cognitive functioning was not substantially
impaired at the time of the offense, [h]is testimony that
the defendant's volitional capacity may have been rather
than was impaired, and the qualifications he placed on that
opinion, in his own words, the hedging regarding the effect
on the defendant's volitional capacity of substance
dependence and/or substance abuse relative to the other
possible contributing factors. 
Lastly, I note that Dr. Stojanovich's testimony,
although ill prepared and at times confused, was in the
final -- final analysis consistent with Dr. Lichtin's [sic]
position on the issue of penal responsibility. Accordingly,
I find the defendant guilty as charged.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Lanoza contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in relying on Dr. Lichton's and Dr. Stojanovich's testimonies and
 
by rejecting Dr. Wagner's testimony. Based on this contention,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Lanoza argues that there was insufficient evidence to support the
 
Circuit Court's finding that he failed to prove his affirmative
 defense of lack of penal responsibility by a preponderance of the
 evidence. We conclude that Lanoza's argument is without merit.
 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution to determine whether substantial evidence exists to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. State v. Romano, 114 Hawai
'i 1, 
6-7, 155 P.3d 1102, 1107-08 (2007). "Substantial evidence means credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to reach a conclusion." State v. Agard, 113 Hawai
'i 321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 
805 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We will affirm the Circuit Court's finding that Lanoza failed to prove the affirmative defense of lack of penal responsibility under HRS § 704-400 as long as there was substantial evidence to support the finding. See State v. Young, 93 Hawai
'i 224, 231, 
999 P.2d 230, 237 (2000). 
Lanoza argues that the Circuit Court erred in relying 
on Dr. Lichton's and Dr. Stojanovich's testimonies rather than on Dr. Wagner's testimony. However, "[m]atters of credibility and the weight of the evidence and the inferences to be drawn are for the fact finder." Romano, 114 Hawai
'i at 8, 155 P.3d at 1109; 
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) 
("An appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge."). 
As the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: 
The findings of an expert are always entitled to serious
consideration by the trier of fact, but the weight the
factfinder gives to expert evidence is dependent upon its
own assessment of the facts upon which the expert's opinion
is predicated, upon the validity of the expert's
assumptions, upon the reliability of the diagnostic and
analytical processes by which the expert arrived at his
determinations, and upon all other facts and circumstances
bearing upon the issue.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Young, 93 Hawai 'i at 231-32, 999 P.2d 237-38 (block quote format 
altered and citation omitted). 
Here, Dr. Lichton, Dr. Stojanovich, and Dr. Wagner were
 
all qualified as experts, and they each explained the basis for
 
their respective opinions regarding Lanoza's penal
 responsibility. The various factors cited by Lanoza on appeal
 for why he contends Dr. Wagner's opinion was more credible were
 presented to the Circuit Court and were before the Circuit Court
 when it rendered its decision. The Circuit Court evaluated the
 conflicting evidence, and based on its own assessment of the
 credibility of the witnesses and its evaluation of the weight to
 be given to the evidence, the Circuit Court found that Lanoza had
 failed to prove the affirmative defense of lack of penal
 responsibility by a preponderance of the evidence. We conclude
 that there was substantial evidence to support the Circuit
 Court's finding, and we affirm the Circuit Court's determination
 that Lanoza had failed to meet his burden of proving the
 affirmative defense of lack of penal responsibility.
 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka, LLLC, AAL)for Defendant-Appellant 
Brandon H. Ito 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
7
 