NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000463
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF L CHILDREN
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 14-00220)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Reifurth, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Mother-Appellant (Mother) and Father-Appellant (Father)
(collectively, Parents) separately appeal from the Order
Terminating Parental Rights (TPR Order), entered on May 23, 2017,
in the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1  Among
other things, Parents contest the family court's findings that
they are unwilling and unable to provide their children, JL and
GL (collectively, Children), with a safe family home, even with
the assistance of a service plan, and will not become willing or
able to do so in the reasonably foreseeable future.
On appeal, Mother contends that there was insufficient
evidence that her substance-abuse problem compromised Children's
safety, and that she was not given a reasonable opportunity to
reunify with Children.
Father contends that the family court clearly erred in
terminating his parental rights because (1) he completed all
services, except for domestic violence classes, which he believed
1  The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
were inappropriate and had not been recommended in his
psychological evaluation; (2) although he admitted to driving
Children one block while drinking alcohol, there was no evidence
that he was legally intoxicated when this occurred, and all of
his urinalysis results were negative; (3) the court reversibly
erred by holding a meeting with Children outside of his presence
and failing to make a transcript of the meeting available to him;
and (4) the court erroneously failed to await the outcome of his
criminal trial, which would have shown he was a fit parent,
before terminating his parental rights.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Parents' respective points of error as follows.
I.
Mother argues that there was insufficient evidence that
her substance-abuse problem compromised Children's safety.  We
infer from Mother's argument that she contests Findings of Fact
(FOFs) 68,2 123, and 124,3 and Conclusions of Law (COLs) 9 and 104
in the family court's July 25, 2017 Findings of Fact and
2  FOF 68 provides, "Mother does not believe that abusing illegal drugs
impacts her ability to care for the Children.  This shows lack of insight into
how her illegal drug use negatively impacts her ability to care for the
Children and make good decisions."  
3  FOFs 123 and 124 provide:
123.  Mother is not presently willing and able to
provide the Children with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan.
124.  It is not reasonably foreseeable that Mother
will become willing and able to provide the Children with a
safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed two
years from the Children's date of entry into foster care.
4  COLS 9 and 10 provide:
9.  [Parents] are not presently willing and able to
provide the Children with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan.
10.  It is not reasonably foreseeable that [Parents]
will become willing and able to provide the Children with a
safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan, within a reasonable period of time.  
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Conclusions of Law (FOF/COL).5
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-7(a)(7) (Supp.
2017) ("Safe family home factors") provides that when determining
whether to terminate parental rights, the family court must take
into consideration "[w]hether there is a history of substance
abuse by the child's family[.]"  Based on the plain language of
the statute, a parent's substance abuse is a safety concern.  See
In re Doe, 100 Hawai #i 335, 343 n.12, 60 P.3d 285, 293 n.12
(2002) (block quotation format and citations omitted) ("Where the
language of a statute is plain and unambiguous, our only duty is
to give effect to the statute's plain and obvious meaning.").
Thus, the family court did not err in finding that Mother's
substance-abuse problem posed a risk of harm to the Children.
 Mother also maintains that she was not given a
reasonable opportunity to reunify with Children but presents no
discernible argument to this point, and thus it is waived.  See
HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
We conclude that the family court did not err in
determining that Mother was not willing and able to provide
Children with a safe family home and that it was not reasonably
foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide
the Children with a safe family home within a reasonable period
of time.  Therefore, FOFs 68, 123, and 124 are not clearly
erroneous, and COLs 9 and 10 are not wrong.
II.
Father contests FOFs 111, 116, 119, 124, 125,6 126,7
128, 134,8 and 141.  With the exception of FOFs 125, 126 and 134,
5  Counsel for Mother is cautioned to refer to the specific findings of
fact(s) and conclusion(s) of law related to each issue on appeal.  See Rule
28(b)(4)(C) of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) and Rule
11(a)(3)(B) of the Rules Expediting Child Protective Appeals (RECPA).
6  FOF 125 provides, "Under the circumstances presented in this case,
Father was given every reasonable opportunity to effect positive changes to
provide a safe family home and to reunify with the Children."
7  FOF 126 provides, "Father is not presently willing and able to
provide the Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan.
8  FOF 134 provides, "Under the circumstances presented by the instant
case, [Department of Human Services (DHS)] has exerted reasonable and active
efforts to avoid foster placement of the Children."
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Father does not argue these points, and therefore, they are
waived.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).  Conversely, although Father
does not argue that FOFs 88,9 127,10 135,11 and 13812 are clearly
erroneous or COLs 9 and 10 are wrong, we infer from his arguments
that he contests them.13
Father appears to contend that the family court clearly
erred in finding that he had an unresolved alcohol-abuse problem
because although he admittedly drove Children a short distance
while under the influence of alcohol, there is no evidence he was
legally intoxicated at the time (FOF 88).  He adds that all of
his urinalysis results were negative.  We disagree.
Regardless of whether Father violated the law when he
drove with Children while intoxicated, the incident showed that
he had not resolved his alcohol-abuse issue, which continued to
pose a risk of harm.  Further, as the court found, and Father
does not dispute, Father failed to appear for two urinalysis
appointments, with an understanding that nonappearances were
deemed positive results.  Based on the foregoing, we conclude
that FOF 88 is based on sufficient evidence and not clearly
erroneous.
Father argues that the family court clearly erred in
terminating his parental rights where he completed all services,
except domestic violence education, which he believed was
inappropriate and which was not recommended in his psychological
9  FOF 88 provides, "Father suffers from . . . unresolved alcohol abuse
issues."  
10  FOF 127 provides, "It is not reasonably foreseeable that Father will
become willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time not
to exceed two years from the Children's date of entry into foster care."
11  FOF 135 provides, "Under the circumstances presented by the instant
case, DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts to reunify the children
with [Parents] by identifying necessary, appropriate, and reasonable services
to address the identified safety issues, and making appropriate and timely
referrals for these services."
12  FOF 138 provides, "Each of the service plans offered by DHS and
ordered by the Court was fair, appropriate, and comprehensive."
13  Counsel for Father is cautioned to refer to the FOF(s) and COL(s)
related to each issue on appeal.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C) and RECPA Rule
11(a)(3)(B).
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
evaluation.  This argument appears to concern FOFs 134, 135, and
138.  The record reveals that Father did not complete all DHS-
recommended services.  Further, the psychologists who evaluated
him recommended that he address the domestic violence issue, and
the family court found that his refusal to do so compromised his
ability to provide a safe home.  See HRS §§ 587A-7(a)(5) (Supp.
2017), (6) (Supp. 2017), (8) (Supp. 2017), (12) (Supp. 2017), &
(13) (Supp. 2017).  Based on the foregoing, we conclude that FOFs
134, 135, and 138 are not clearly erroneous. 
Father appears to argue that the family court
reversibly erred by terminating his parental rights based in part
on the family court's May 10, 2017 meeting with Children
(Meeting), which was held outside of his presence and without
making the transcript of the Meeting available to him.  The
record reflects that Father and his counsel were present at the
hearing on May 3, 2017, when the Children's Guardian Ad Litem
asked if the family court would entertain meeting with the
Children, and the family court agreed, set the date and time for
the Meeting, and discussed the fact that the court recorded such
meetings.  The record does not reflect that Father ever objected
to the Meeting, nor does the record reflect or Father argue that
he made any effort to obtain transcripts from the Meeting and,
thus, this argument is waived.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) (a party
must indicate in the points of error section of the opening brief
where an alleged error was objected to, and "[p]oints not
presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded.").
Father appears to argue that the TPR Order is based on
insufficient evidence because the family court erroneously failed
to await the outcome of his criminal trial before issuing it.
However, he does not explain how the outcome of the trial would
have shown he was able and willing to provide a safe home or
would become able and willing to do so within a reasonable amount
of time.  This point is waived.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
Regardless, assuming arguendo that the family court
erred by failing to consider the outcome of the trial, the error
was harmless.  Even omitting the evidence, there was sufficient
evidence to support the TPR Order.  See In re Doe, 95 Hawai #i
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (a family court's conclusions
regarding a child's care, custody, and welfare must stand on
appeal if supported by the record and not clearly erroneous). 
Therefore, we conclude that FOFs 125-127 are not clearly
erroneous and COLs 9 and 10 are not wrong.
III.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
Terminating Parental Rights, entered on May 23, 2017, in the
Family Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Father-Appellant.
Jacob G. Delaplane,
for Mother-Appellant.
Asami M. Williams,
Julio C. Herrera and
Jay K. Goss,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6