     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000311 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
DIXON Q.H. DUNG,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
SHELLY EUROCARS, LLC, DBA BMW OF HONOLULU,
A DOMESTIC LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY,
Defendant-Appellee,
and 
DOE INDIVIDUALS; DOE ENTITIES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENT ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0126) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
This appeal arises from an alleged violation of the 
Hawai
#i Whistleblowers' Protection Act (HWPA). 
Plaintiff-Appellant Dixon Q.H. Dung (Dung) appeals from the 
March 8, 2018 Final Judgment, entered by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (circuit court).  The Final Judgment was entered 
pursuant to the order granting summary judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee Shelly EuroCars, LLC dba BMW of Honolulu, a 
Domestic Limited Liability Company (BMW), entered on the same 
day. 1
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dung argues that the circuit court erred in granting 
summary judgment because it erroneously concluded that: (1) Dung 
did not engage in any protected activity that would trigger a 
violation of the HWPA; and (2) Dung failed to demonstrate a 
causal connection between his complaints to management and his 
employment termination. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve this appeal as follows and affirm. 
We review a circuit court's grant of summary judgment 
de novo using the same standard applied by the circuit court. 
Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 
338, 418 P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). 
Under HRS ยง 378-62 (2015), the HWPA provides: 
An employer shall not discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee regarding the employee'scompensation, terms, conditions, location, or privileges ofemployment because: 
(1) The employee, or a person acting on behalf of the
employee, reports or is about to report to the employer, orreports or is about to report to a public body, verbally orin writing, a violation or a suspected violation of: 
(A) A law, rule, ordinance, or regulation, adoptedpursuant to law of this State, a politicalsubdivision of this State, or the United States; or 
(B) A contract executed by the State, a politicalsubdivision of the State, or the United States, 
unless the employee knows that the report is false; or 
(2) An employee is requested by a public body to
participate in an investigation, hearing, or inquiry held by
that public body, or a court action. 
To prevail on an HWPA claim, an employee must prove the 
following elements: (1) the employee engaged in protected conduct 
under the HWPA; (2) the employer took an adverse employment 
action against the employee; and (3) a causal connection exists 
between the employee's protected conduct and the employer's 
adverse action (i.e., the employer's action was taken because the 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employee engaged in protected conduct; the employee has the 
burden of showing that the protected conduct was a "substantial 
or motivating factor" in the employer's decision to take the 
employment action). See Crosby v. State Dep't of Budget & Fin., 
76 Hawai# i 332, 341-42, 876 P.2d 1300, 1309-10 (1994). Only the 
first and third elements of an HWPA claim are at issue in this 
case. 
The employer carries the burden of negating causation 
only after the employee first demonstrates a prima facie case of 
causal connection. Id. at 342, 876 P.2d at 1310. "Once the 
employee shows that the employer's disapproval of [the employee's protected activity] played a role in the employer's action 
against him or her, the employer can defend affirmatively by 
showing that the termination would have occurred regardless of 
the protected activity." Id. (original brackets, internal 
quotation marks, and citation omitted). "[I]f the employer rebuts the prima facie case, the burden reverts to the [employee] 
to demonstrate that the [employer's] proffered reasons were 
'pretextual.'" Adams v. CDM Media USA, Inc., 135 Hawai# i 1, 14, 
346 P.3d 70, 83 (2015) (quoting Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai# i 368, 379, 14 P.3d 1049, 1060 (2000)) (describing the 
similar burden-shifting analysis that 
Hawai# i courts use when 
analyzing a claim of age discrimination that relies on 
circumstantial evidence); see also Crosby, 76 Hawai# i at 342, 876 
P.2d at 1310 (concluding that the HWPA follows the same burden of proof used in "traditional labor management relations discharge 
cases"). 
"Although Crosby reviewed a ruling entered after a 
jury-waived trial, this court and the United States District Court for the District of Hawai# i have applied the HWPA burden-
shifting analysis at summary judgment." Dobbs v. Cty. of Maui, 
No. CAAP-16-0000577, 2019 WL 762407, at *2 (Haw. App. Feb. 20, 
2019) (SDO). 
Dung was employed by BMW as a shuttle driver until his 
employment was terminated on June 6, 2014. 
Dung's termination 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
report stated that Dung was terminated because he was sleeping on 
the job on June 3, 2014, in the customer lounge with a television 
remote in his hand. Dung, however, filed suit asserting that his 
termination was in retaliation for complaints he previously made 
to management. The complaint at issue is a January 13, 2014 
letter to the office manager, in which Dung related his concerns 
that Mark Hironaka (Hironaka), Dung's immediate supervisor, 
violated Dung's constitutional right to privacy by making remarks 
to other employees regarding a January 9, 2014 meeting that 
occurred between Dung, Hironaka, the office manager, and other 
managers, regarding an incident with a customer. In the letter, 
Dung asserted that after the meeting, Hironaka "blatantly bragged 
to [other employees] how he covered and countered everything that 
[Dung] said [at the meeting.]" Dung alleged that the complaint 
he made in the letter was a substantial or motivating factor in 
the decision to terminate him. 
As to the first element, Dung argues that his complaint 
to management was protected conduct that triggered the HWPA 
because he reported a violation of his right to privacy and his 
right not to be placed in a false light. 
The January 9, 2014 meeting stems from a December 2013 
incident involving Dung and an African-American customer he was 
supposed to pick up. The customer had expected to be picked up 
at his house but Dung asked the customer to instead walk to a 
different location where Dung was already waiting. Dung 
eventually picked up the customer and returned to the store. 
After dropping the customer off at the store, Hironaka approached 
Dung and made a statement to the effect of "you have to watch out 
what you say" and the customer "might go and see [the president 
of the company.]" Dung interpreted Hironaka's comments to mean 
that Dung had made a remark to the customer that offended him and 
that if the customer was not happy with his ride, he could make a 
complaint to the president of the company. Dung wrote a letter 
to the office manager, expressing his concern that Hironaka was 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accusing him of making racially insensitive remarks or engaging 
in discriminatory conduct. The office manager then scheduled the
January 9, 2014 meeting to discuss the matter.  
According to the office manager, the purpose of the 
January 9, 2014 meeting was to discuss the December 2013 incident 
with the customer: 
I recall that it started because [Hironaka] made a remark to
[Dung] about [the customer] being black, and [Dung], hedidn't want [the customer] to explain to [the president ofthe company]. And so because he said that, [Dung] wasconcerned about that and made a complaint. He wanted to know why [Hironaka] made that statement, so that was whatthe meeting was about. 
Dung similarly believed that the purpose of the January 9, 2014 
meeting was to "clear the air regarding the [December 2013 
conversation with Hironaka] . . . as far as what had happened 
with [the customer's] pickup[.]" Dung stated that there was no 
agreement during the meeting that the discussions were to be kept 
confidential, but he thought it was a private meeting because it 
pertained to personnel issues. 
Dung was later informed by another employee that, after 
the meeting, Hironaka had discussed with two other employees what 
occurred at the meeting and "bragged" about countering everything 
Dung said. Dung then wrote the January 13, 2014 letter to the 
office manager asserting that Hironaka had violated Dung's right 
to privacy and defamed him. 
Dung concedes that "defamation is a wholly separate 
common law tort that has no constitutional basis." However, Dung 
argues that his January 13, 2014 letter was a report of a 
violation of his right not to be placed in a false light, which 
has its basis in the constitutional right to privacy. 
The constitutional right to privacy is recognized under 
article I, section 6 of the Hawai# i State Constitution. Haw. 
Const. art. 1, ยง 6 ("The right of the people to privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed without the showing of a 
compelling state interest."). 
The privacy right in article I, 
section 6 "concerns the possible abuses in the use of highly 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
personal and intimate information in the hands of government or 
private parties[.]" Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 15, in 1 
Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of 1978, 
at 1024 (emphasis added). In discussing the creation of the 
right to privacy "as it relates to privacy in the informational 
and personal autonomy sense" under article I, section 6, the 
standing committee report of the 1978 Constitutional Convention 
of Hawai# i stated: 
Your Committee believes that the right of privacy
encompasses the common law right of privacy or tort privacy.This is a recognition that the dissemination of private andpersonal matters, be it true, embarrassing or not, can causemental pain and distress far greater than bodily injury.For example, the right can be used to protect an individualfrom invasion of his private affairs, public disclosure ofembarrassing facts, and publicity placing the individual ina false light. 
Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 69, in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional 
Convention of Hawaii of 1978, at 674. The supreme court has 
recognized a tort claim for false light invasion of privacy, 
thereby recognizing "false light" as a type of tort under the 
common law right to privacy. Chung v. McCabe Hamilton & Renny 
Co., Ltd., 109 Hawai# i 520, 534-35, 128 P.3d 833, 847-48 (2006). 
The supreme court cited Restatement (Second) of Torts ยง 652E 
(1997) for the definition of the tort of false light invasion of 
privacy as follows: 
One who gives publicity to a matter concerning another that
places the other before the public in a false light issubject to liability to the other for invasion of hisprivacy, if 
(a) the false light in which the other was placed would be
highly offensive to a reasonable person, and 
(b) the actor had knowledge of or acted in reckless
disregard as to the falsity of the publicized matter and thefalse light in which the other would be placed. 
Chung, 109 Hawai# i at 534 n.18, 128 P.3d at 847 n.18. 
Dung stated that he believed the discussions during the 
January 9, 2014 meeting were of a private nature. To the 
contrary, the record reflects that the meeting discussions simply 
revolved around determining the facts of the December 2013 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incident. Even if Dung's allegations of Hironaka's bragging were 
true, Hironaka's comments did not place Dung in a false light for 
purposes of violating the constitutional right to privacy. There 
was no "highly personal [or] intimate information" involved in 
the January 9, 2014 meeting itself or in Hironaka's purported 
bragging and therefore no violation of Dung's constitutional 
right to privacy. 
The circuit court therefore correctly concluded that 
Hironaka's alleged wrongful conduct did not fall within the 
constitutional right of privacy and that Dung's January 13, 2014 
letter therefore did not, as a matter of law, constitute a report 
of a violation or a suspected violation of state or federal law 
sufficient to support a claim under the HWPA. 
Even assuming arguendo that Dung engaged in protected 
activity under the HWPA, Dung failed to raise genuine issues of 
material fact as to whether there was a causal connection between 
his alleged protected conduct and the termination of his 
employment. 
Dung asserts that the temporal proximity between his 
complaint letter and his termination would permit a trier of fact 
to infer a causal connection between the two. Dung wrote the 
letter to the office manager on January 13, 2014, and was 
terminated June 6, 2014. The relative temporal proximity of his 
termination to his alleged protected conduct may amount to 
circumstantial evidence of causation or an inference of such, for 
a prima facie case. See Tagupa v. VIPdesk, Inc., 125 F. Supp. 3d 
1108, 1122 (D. Haw. 2015) ("Given a relatively short time, however, between at least some of her protected activity 
[(occurring in March and August 2011)] and her termination 
[(occurring September 2011)] . . . , questions of material fact 
exist as to whether Tagupa's actions were a 'substantial or 
motivating factor' in her termination." (citation omitted)); but 
see Aoyagi v. Straub Clinic & Hosp., Inc., 140 F. Supp. 3d 1043, 
1060 (D. Haw. 2015) ("As an initial matter, courts generally 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reject causation for purposes of retaliation claims where the 
alleged adverse action by the employer occurs months or years 
after the alleged protected activity." (citing Clark Cty. Sch. 
Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273-74 (2001) (per curiam) 
(stating that where "mere temporal proximity between an 
employer's knowledge of a protected activity and an adverse 
employment action [is] sufficient evidence of causality . . . the 
temporal proximity must be very close," and noting that courts 
have rejected causation where there are three- or four-month time 
gaps), and Manatt v. Bank of Am., NA, 339 F.3d 792, 802 (9th Cir. 
2003) (holding that a nine-month gap between protected activity 
and adverse employment action "suggests no causality at all")). 
However, aside from the mere fact of relative temporal proximity, 
Dung has not shown that his alleged protected conduct was a 
"substantial or motivating factor" in BMW's decision to terminate 
his employment. 
Even if Dung established a prima facie claim based on 
temporal proximity, BMW maintains that Dung's termination would 
have occurred regardless of his alleged protected activity. In 
support of its motion for summary judgment, BMW produced evidence 
that on May 9, 2014, Dung received a written warning from Al 
Roberts (Roberts), the service manager, stating: "[Dung] was 
reported sleeping in the customer lounge. 2nd complaint of this 
in 2 weeks. First one was sleeping while a customer was waiting 
in lounge for a shuttle. Nightshift. This incident was not 
documented prior nor addressed." Dung was instructed not to use 
the customer lounge or private offices for breaks and instructed 
to instead use break rooms. In the "Employee Statement" portion 
of the warning form, Dung checked off the box stating "I agree 
with Employer's statement" and handwrote "as stated by customer" 
next to the checked statement. Dung did not deny that he was 
sleeping. Dung signed and dated the form to indicate that he 
read and understood the warning. 
Despite the May 9, 2014 warning, Roberts was informed 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Dung was again observed to have been sleeping on the job on 
June 3, 2014. This incident resulted in his termination on 
June 6, 2014. In his deposition, Roberts testified that he did 
not recall the employee that first notified him of this incident 
and explained: "I was walking in front of the parts department, 
. . . and there were many people approaching me on it, right. I 
thought the person was our in-house janitor, that's who I recall 
made the first comment, so that's what I thought and that's what 
I documented." Roberts further stated: "[P]eople came to me, 
service advisers, talking about a customer, that was sitting next 
to [Dung] or in the area with him, that was upset because he was 
waiting for a shuttle." Roberts testified that he terminated 
Dung's employment "[f]or sleeping in [the] customer area, 
disrupting customer service. After I talked to him about it, I 
expect people to pay attention and he didn't pay attention[.]" 
Dung recounted his termination meeting as follows: 
[A] . . . And as I walked in [to Roberts's office], I
recall him, like, holding a piece of paper in the air and
shaking it and he says I'm sorry, he says, I'm going to haveto let you go. I'm sorry. He said someone else saw yousleeping again. 
. . . . 
Q 
So what did Al Roberts say to you and what did you
say to him? 
A Well, he had the form already filled out. And he 
told me that like I say, when I first walked in, he saysI'll give you two choices. You either have the right toresign or I can terminate you. And I said I'm not going toresign. He said okay, I'm just going to sign the dismissalform. 
Q And did he tell you why you were being terminated? 
A Well, like I say, he said in his statement as he
was holding the paper he said someone else saw you sleeping
again. And so that's, I assume, is why he was terminatingme. 
(Emphasis added.) Dung agreed that he was in the customer lounge 
watching television that evening. 
Dung did not offer any evidence that BMW's proffered 
reasons for his termination were pretextual. See Adams, 135 
9            
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i at 14, 346 P.3d at 83. Notably, Roberts did not begin 
his employment at the BMW of Honolulu store in this case until 
April 1, 2014, months after the January 13, 2014 letter and the 
incidents leading up to the letter.2 Roberts testified that the 
decision to terminate Dung was entirely his, that he did not discuss the decision with anybody else in management, and that he 
was unaware of Dung's previous complaints. Dung did not put 
forth any evidence that Roberts knew about Dung's complaints in 
the January 13, 2014 letter, which Dung alleges was protected 
conduct under the HWPA. 
Having brought forward no evidence of a causal 
connection between his alleged protected activity and his 
termination or that the proffered reasons for his termination 
were pretextual, Dung failed to raise a genuine issue of material 
fact regarding his HWPA claim. The circuit court therefore did 
not err in concluding that BMW was entitled to summary judgment 
as a matter of law. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the March 8, 2018 
Final Judgment, entered by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 28, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge Richard C. DeWaele,for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Richard M. Rand,(Marr Jones & Wang),for Defendant-Appellee. 
2 Prior to April 1, 2014, Roberts had worked at BMW of Honolulu
between 2003 and 2007 and then worked at BMW of San Antonio. 
10 