NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0001091
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARVIN L. McCLOUD, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
WAHIAWA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1P2110000411)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Marvin L. McCloud (McCloud) appeals
 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on
 
December 6, 2012, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
1
Wahiawa Division (district court).  After a bench trial, the
 
district court found McCloud guilty of Disorderly Conduct as a
 petty misdemeanor, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 711-1101(1)(a) and (3) (2014).
2
  
1 The Honorable Paula Devens presided.
 
2
 HRS § 711-1101 provides in pertinent part:
 
§711-1101 Disorderly conduct.  (1) A person commits
the offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause
physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of
the public, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, the
person:
 
(a)	 Engages in fighting or threatening, or in
violent or tumultuous behavior[.]
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, McCloud argues that the district court
 
wrongly convicted him based on insufficient evidence. Upon
 
careful review of the record and the briefs submitted by the
 parties and having given due consideration to the arguments
 advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the
 relevant statutory and case law, we resolve McCloud's appeal as
 follows and affirm.
 
We review the sufficiency of evidence on appeal as
follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution when the appellate court passes on
the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or jury.
The test on appeal is not whether guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to
 support the conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241
(1998) (quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938
P.2d 559, 576 (1997)). "'Substantial evidence' as to everymaterial element of the offense charged is credible evidencewhich is of sufficient quality and probative value to enablea person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion."Id. (citation omitted). 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai 'i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010). 
On December 3, 2011, at 10:30 p.m., Officer Reginald
 
Manoa (Manoa) responded to an argument in a residential
 
neighborhood, on Ehoeho Avenue, in Wahiaw a, on O 'ahu. The 
neighborhood consisted of single-family dwellings and an
 apartment complex with numerous apartments, and no businesses in
 the immediate area. 
When Officer Manoa arrived at the scene, he saw two
 
groups of people on each side of a gate that went across the
 
2
 (...continued)
. . . .

 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it is
the defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or
 
serious inconvenience, or if the defendant persists in
disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request to
desist. Otherwise disorderly conduct is a violation.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
driveway of a residence.3 McCloud, as well as another man and
 
woman (collectively, the McCloud group), were outside of the
 
gate, yelling and screaming at someone inside the house to come
 out and saying that they wanted to go in and get the person. At
 least three people inside the gate were holding the gate closed,
 telling the McCloud group they could not enter. A man standing
 outside the gate was trying to talk the McCloud group into going
 home. McCloud aggressively responded, "Tell him to come out." 
There was no other noise in the area, except that which was
 coming from the groups at the gate. 
Because McCloud appeared to be the aggressor, Officer
 
Manoa stepped between the two groups, faced McCloud, and told him
 to back off. McCloud did not move, and the officer physically
 turned McCloud around and walked him back about five paces. 
McCloud nonetheless re-joined the McCloud group and aggressively
 resumed yelling at the people inside the house to come out. 
Officer Manoa stepped between the two groups again, trying to
 separate them and diffuse the argument, and yelled at the McCloud
 group to step back. McCloud continued to yell, appearing angry
 and ignoring the officer.
 
About four other officers arrived, and moved the
 
McCloud group back onto a street nearby. McCloud continued
 yelling at the people in the house to come out. 
According to Officer Manoa, over fifty people from
 
apartment buildings across the street and residences nearby came
 out onto the street, forming a large group. 
At least ten to fifteen more officers were then at the
 
scene and moving the McCloud group away. While the police were
 arresting another man, McCloud appeared near the man and said,
 "You cannot do this" and "You fuckin' cops. You guys cannot do
 that." Then, McCloud yelled to a woman in the large crowd, "The
 cops not going protect you." 
3
 Per Officer Manoa's testimony, the gate was a "sliding chain link
fencing that they pull across the driveway to block off the [] driveway."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When Officer Michael Olmstead (Olmstead) arrived on the
 
scene, McCloud was yelling at the officers, from about twenty to
 
twenty-five feet away, "[Y]ou like arrest me?" and "Yeah, I like
 see that." McCloud was walking backwards with a group of people
 that were being moved up the street by police officers and
 "mouthing off," making comments about how the officers could not
 "do this." He then broke off from the group and started walking
 away from the group and not being compliant, while still being
 verbal. At this point, Officer Manoa believed that McCloud was
 the problem that created the entire situation and that McCloud
 created an environment that was not safe, and thus Officer Manoa
 ordered Officer Olmstead to arrest McCloud for disorderly
 conduct. 
McCloud first contends that the State failed to adduce
 
sufficient evidence showing that he was engaged in fighting or
 threatening. We conclude that McCloud was "fighting" or
 "threatening" within the context of HRS § 711-1101(1)(a) when he
 continually and aggressively asserted himself against the people
 behind the gate, kept yelling at people both outside and in the
 house, including angrily demanding that someone inside the home
 come out, and yelled at a woman in the crowd that "[t]he cops not
 going protect you." See Webster's II New College Dictionary 425,
 
1176 (3d ed. 2005) (defining "fight" in part as "[t]o argue" and
 "threaten" in part as "[t]o express a threat against" and "[t]o
 serve as a threat to: ENDANGER").
 
McCloud argues in the alternative that the State failed
 
to show that he acted "with intent to cause physical
 inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public; or
 recklessly create a risk thereof[.]" HRS § 711-1101(1). We
 disagree. McCloud's conduct occurred in a residential
 neighborhood, consisting of single-family dwellings and an
 apartment complex with numerous apartments, beginning at around
 10:30 at night. The neighborhood was initially quiet, except for
 the noise created by the groups at the gate, and particularly
 McCloud's aggressive yelling. When McCloud was yelling by the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gate of the residence and in the street, including when he
 
persisted in aggressively yelling even after Officer Manoa told
 him to back off, McCloud recklessly created a risk that his
 conduct would alarm a member or members of the public. See State
 
v. Kilborn, No. 29801, 2010 WL 2030613, 123 Hawai
'i 134, 230 P.3d 
434 (App. May 24, 2010) (SDO); State v. Spencer, No. 29176, 2009 WL 1888943, 121 Hawai
'i 31, 211 P.3d 89 (App. July 2, 2009) 
(SDO); cf. State v. Faulkner, 64 Haw. 101, 637 P.2d 770 (1981); State v. Leung, 79 Hawai
'i 538, 904 P.2d 552 (App. 1995). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of
 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on December 6, 2012, in the
 District Court of the First Circuit, Wahiaw
a Division, is
 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 10, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Harrison L. Kiehm 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brandon H. Ito Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5

 