NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000021
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOHN WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 15-1-0175)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant John Williams (Williams) appeals
from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, Notice of Entry"
entered on December 16, 2016 in the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit (circuit court).1  The State of Hawai #i (State) charged
Williams with one count of Burglary in the First Degree in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-810(1)(c),2 one
count of Assault in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 707-
1The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
2HRS § 708-810 (2014) provides in relevant part:
§ 708-810 Burglary in the first degree .  (1) A person
commits the offense of burglary in the first degree if the
person intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a
building, with intent to commit therein a crime against a
person or against property rights, and:
. . . .
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
712(1)(a),3 and two counts of Terroristic Threatening in the
Second Degree in violation of HRS §§ 707-715(1)4 and -717(1).5
After a jury trial, Williams was found guilty as charged.  The
circuit court sentenced Williams to a term of imprisonment of ten
years.
On appeal, Williams contends that the circuit court (1)
violated Williams' constitutional right to self-representation,
and (2) erred in refusing to give a jury instruction on Williams'
ignorance or mistake of fact defense.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
(1) In his first point of error, Williams contends that
the circuit court violated his constitutional right to self-
representation when it vacated Williams' right to proceed pro se
based upon factual findings that were clearly erroneous.
Specifically, Williams argues that the following two findings of
fact by the circuit court are clearly erroneous:  i) "Defendant
3HRS § 707-712 (2014) provides in relevant part:
§ 707-712 Assault in the third degree .  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the third degree if the
person:
(a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes
bodily injury to another person;
. . . .
4HRS § 707-715 (2014) provides in relevant part:
§ 707-715 Terroristic threatening, defined .  A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening if the person
threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to
another person or serious damage or harm to property,
including the pets or livestock, of another or to commit a
felony:
(1) With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless disregard
of the risk of terrorizing, another person;
. . . .
5HRS § 707-717 (2014) provides in relevant part:
§ 707-717 Terroristic threatening in the second
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the second degree if the person commits
terroristic threatening other than as provided in section
707-716.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
cannot focus on the issues before this Court," and ii) "Defendant
is unable to follow all technical rules, and substantive,
procedural, and evidentiary law, and to conduct himself in a
manner so as not to disrupt the trial."
In reviewing the circuit court's findings of fact, we
note that
[i]t is for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the
credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of
fact; the judge may accept or reject any witness's testimony
in whole or in part.  As the trier of fact, the judge may
draw all reasonable and legitimate inferences and deductions
from the evidence, and the findings of the trial court will
not be disturbed unless clearly erroneous.  An appellate
court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with
respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of
the evidence, because this is the province of the trial
judge.
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai #i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996)
(citations omitted).  "A finding of fact is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the
finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the
finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite
and firm conviction that a mistake has been made."  State v.
Okumura, 78 Hawai# i 383, 392, 894 P.2d 80, 89 (1995) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).
Here, there is substantial evidence in the record that
Williams was unable to focus on the issues before the court and
follow the rules due to his misunderstanding of the law, the role
of the prosecutor, and the role of the judge as an impartial
decision-maker.  For example, when the judge asked Williams
whether he was going to plead guilty or not guilty, Williams
responded:  "Okay.  If you think I'm guilty, if [the prosecutor]
thinks I'm guilty I guess I must be guilty, right, because it
doesn't matter what the truth is.  Only matters what he thinks.
Right?  Only matters what you think.  Right?  The truth doesn't
really matter.  Only matters what the two of you think.  Right?"
Despite insisting upon his innocence, Williams stated that he was
"pleading guilty to whatever [the judge] think[s] I've done
wrong, whatever [the prosecutor] thinks I've gone [sic] wrong."
Williams also appeared to misunderstand the purpose of going to
trial when he stated that he wanted to go to trial to show how
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
the judge was wrong and how the judge "ha[s] been guilty."  When
the circuit court warned Williams that if he represented himself
at trial, the likelihood of his non-success would be very high
and severe, Williams responded that he had "already won."
Williams also used inappropriate language and interrupted the
judge and the prosecutor several times.  Therefore, we conclude
that the two findings of fact disputed by Williams are not
clearly erroneous.
Accordingly, we reject Williams' argument that because
the circuit court's findings of fact are clearly erroneous, the
circuit court erred in concluding that Williams "is unable to
follow all technical rules, and substantive, procedural, and
evidentiary law, and to conduct himself in a manner so as not to
disrupt the trial," and thus violated Williams' constitutional
right to represent himself at trial.6
(2) In his second point of error, Williams contends
that the circuit court erred in refusing to give a jury
instruction on Williams' "ignorance or mistake of fact" defense
pursuant to HRS § 702-218 (2014).7  Specifically, Williams had
requested that Hawai #i Pattern Jury Instructions –- Criminal No.
7.13 be given.
6[A] criminal defendant's right to self-representation
is not absolute.  A trial court may not only insist on
standby counsel to provide appropriate assistance in
the first instance, but may also "terminate
self-representation by a defendant who deliberately
engages in serious and obstructionist misconduct"
because "[t]he right of self-representation is not a
license to abuse the dignity of the courtroom."
[Faretta v. Calfornia, 422 U.S. 806, 834 n. 46]
(citation omitted).
State v. Hutch , 75 Haw. 307, 323, 861 P.2d 11, 19–20 (1993).
7HRS § 702-218 provides:
§ 702-218 Ignorance or mistake as a defense.   In any
prosecution for an offense, it is a defense that the accused
engaged in the prohibited conduct under ignorance or mistake
of fact if:
(1) The ignorance or mistake negatives the state of
mind required to establish an element of the
offense; or
(2) The law defining the offense or a law related
thereto provides that the state of mind
established by such ignorance or mistake
constitutes a defense.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
7.13 IGNORANCE OR MISTAKE OF FACT
In any prosecution for an offense, it is a defense
that the Defendant engaged in the prohibited conduct under
ignorance or mistake of fact if the ignorance or mistake
negates the state of mind required to establish an element
of the offense.
[Thus, for example, a person is provided a defense to
a charge based on an intentional or knowing state of mind,
if the person is mistaken (either reasonably, negligently,
or recklessly) as to a fact that negates the person's state
of mind required to establish an element of the offense;
however, a reckless mistake would not afford a defense to a
charge based on a reckless state of mind.]
[Although ignorance or mistake would otherwise afford
a defense to the offense charged, the defense is not
available if the Defendant would be guilty of another
offense had the situation been as the Defendant supposed. 
In such a case, the Defendant may be convicted of the
offense of which the Defendant would be guilty had the
situation been as the Defendant supposed.]
The burden is upon the prosecution to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the Defendant was not ignorant or
mistaken as to a fact that negates the state of mind
required to establish an element of the offense.  If the
prosecution fails to meet its burden, then you must find the
Defendant not guilty.
"When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading."  State v.
Sawyer, 88 Hawai #i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998).
"Our cases have firmly established that 'a defendant is
entitled to an instruction on every defense or theory of
defense having any support in the evidence, provided such
evidence would support the consideration of that issue by
the jury, no matter how weak, inconclusive, or
unsatisfactory the evidence may be.'"  [State v. Kaiama, 81
Hawai#i 15, 24, 911 P.2d 735, 744 (1996)] (quoting State v.
Maelega, 80 Hawai #i 172, 178–79, 907 P.2d 758, 764–65 (1995)
(citation omitted)) (emphasis in original); see also  State
v. Russo , 69 Haw. 72, 76, 734 P.2d 156, 158 (1987) (citation
omitted).  However, this court has also noted that "where
evidentiary support for [an] asserted defense, or for any of
its essential components, is clearly lacking, it would not
be error for the trial court to refuse to charge on the
issue or to instruct the jury not to consider it."  State v.
Moore, 82 Hawai #i 202, 210, 921 P.2d 122, 130 (1996)
(citation omitted); see also  Russo, 69 Haw. at 76, 734 P.2d
at 158; [State v. Warner , 58 Haw. 492, 498–99, 573 P.2d 959,
963 (1977)].
Id. at 333, 966 P.2d at 645.
At the hearing settling the jury instructions, Williams
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
had argued that the "ignorance or mistake of fact" defense jury
instruction should be given because it went to Williams' "belief
that he had the authority to enter the building due to his belief
in his citizenship of the lawful Hawaiian Kingdom and his
affiliation with them.  And his belief that the foreclosure had
been illegal."  The State argued against the instruction because
"whether or not the Defendant believed he could enter the
property because it was unlawfully taken, is actually a mistake
of law, not a mistake of fact."  The circuit court agreed with
the State's reasoning and refused to give Williams' requested
instruction.
We agree with the circuit court that a mistake of fact
instruction is not warranted based upon Williams' belief in his
citizenship of the Hawaiian Kingdom.  Under HRS § 708-810, it is
a defense to Burglary in the First Degree if the defendant did
not intentionally enter or remain unlawfully8 in a building.
However, Williams mistakenly believing that he was entering or
remaining in the "Gingerbread House" lawfully because he owned it
under the rules of the Hawaiian Kingdom is a mistake of law,9 not
8HRS § 708-800 (2014) provides that
 
"Enter or remain unlawfully" means to enter or remain in or
upon premises when the person is not licensed, invited, or
otherwise privileged to do so. A person who, regardless of
the person's intent, enters or remains in or upon premises
which are at the time open to the public does so with
license and privilege unless the person defies a lawful
order not to enter or remain, personally communicated to the
person by the owner of the premises or some other authorized
person. A license or privilege to enter or remain in a
building which is only partly open to the public is not a
license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the
building which is not open to the public.
9HRS § 702-220 (2014) provides:
§ 702-220  Ignorance or mistake of law; belief that conduct
not legally prohibited.  In any prosecution, it shall be an
affirmative defense that the defendant engaged in the
conduct or caused the result alleged under the belief that
the conduct or result was not legally prohibited when the
defendant acts in reasonable reliance upon an official
statement of the law, afterward determined to be invalid or
erroneous, contained in:
(1) A statute or other enactment;
(2) A judicial decision, opinion, or judgment;
(3) An administrative order or administrative grant of
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
a mistake of fact.  See State v. Fergerstrom , 106 Hawai #i 43, 55,
101 P.3d 652, 664 (App. 2004) (holding that "the State of Hawai# i
was, on February 9, 2002, and is now, a lawful government" and
"[p]ersons claiming to be citizens of the Kingdom of Hawai# i and
not of the State of Hawai #i are not exempt from the laws of the
State of Hawaii[.]"). #
Although not argued before the circuit court, on
appeal, Williams also argues that the "ignorance or mistake of
fact" defense instruction should have been given because of
"Williams' mistaken belief that he was entitled to enter and
remain in the house due to the request and permission of [lawful
occupant of the Gingerbread House, Bonny Evans (Evans)]," who had
given Williams a key to the Gingerbread House so that he could
pick up Evans' belongings.  Again, we disagree, as the evidence
does not show that Williams was mistaken about any material fact.
Williams testified that Evans gave Williams a key to the
Gingerbread House to pick up Evans' belongings, and this fact was
corroborated by Evans and undisputed by the State.  The only
"mistake" claimed by Williams under this argument was that he
believed that he was legally authorized to enter or remain in the
Gingerbread House.  However, a mistake concerning whether, under
certain circumstances, a person is authorized under the law to
enter and remain upon premises is a mistake of law, and
therefore, the "ignorance or mistake of fact" defense would not
apply.  See, e.g., Territory v. Lo Kam
, 13 Haw. 14, 16 (Haw.
Terr. 1900) (holding that defendant made a mistake as to whether
he had "lawful authority" to remain on the premises); cf. State
v. Stenger, 122 Hawai# i 271, 282, 226 P.3d 441, 452 (2010)
(holding that a mistake of fact instruction was warranted where
permission; or
(4) An official interpretation of the public officer or
body charged by law with responsibility for the
interpretation, administration, or enforcement of the
law defining the offense.
The Supplemental Commentary on HRS § 702-218 provides that "[HRS]
§ 702-220 . . . provid[es] a defense . . . in the case of honest and
reasonable belief ('no matter how incorrect such a belief might be') that
another law . . . afforded a defense . . . ."
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
there was evidence that the defendant was "mistaken as to certain
factual matters" regarding whether defendant's daughter had moved
out of defendant's home permanently, causing defendant to
misreport this information to DHS); State v. Locquiao, 100
Hawai#i 195, 205-09, 58 P.3d 1242, 1252–56 (2002) (holding that a
mistake of fact instruction was warranted where the defendant
testified at trial that he was unaware that the "glass material"
was an "ice pipe" containing illegal methamphetamine).
We therefore hold that an "ignorance or mistake of
fact" defense instruction was not supported by the evidence.  See
HRS § 701–115(2) (2014) ("No defense may be considered by the
trier of fact unless evidence of the specified fact or facts has
been presented.").  Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court
did not err in its decision not to instruct the jury as such.
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence, Notice of Entry" entered by the circuit court on
December 16, 2016 is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 25, 2018.
On the briefs:
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Mitchell D. Roth,
Prosecuting Attorney, and
Lucas C. Burns,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
8