

 


 



 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000794 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
 
v.
 
 
GENE ANGEL MANCIA, Defendant-Appellant
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
 
(FC-CR NO. 11-1-0364)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
(By: 
Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ., with
Fujise, Presiding Judge, dissenting.)
 
 
Defendant-Appellant Gene Angel Mancia (Mancia) appeals
 
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on April 2,
 
 
2014, in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (family court).1
 
  
After a bench trial, the family court found Mancia guilty of
 
 
committing the offense of Abuse of Family or Household Member, in
 
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906 (2014).2
 
  
On appeal, Mancia contends that (1) the family court
 
 
erred in failing to conduct an on-the-record colloquy with Mancia
 
 
1
 The Honorable Lloyd Van De Car presided, except where otherwise
indicated.
 
2
 HRS § 709-906 provides in relevant part:
 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or
in concert, to physically abuse a family or household
member or to refuse compliance with the lawful order
of a police officer under subsection (4).
  
 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 


 



 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding his waiver of a jury trial, such that his conviction
 should be vacated; and (2) the family court erred in excluding
 relevant evidence in violation of Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 
Rule 609 and 609.1. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Mancia's
 points of error as follows, and we vacate and remand.
 
This case arises from an incident that took place in 
P
apa'ikou, Hawai 'i between Mancia and the complaining witness 
(CW). On November 23, 2011, the State of Hawai 'i (State) filed a 
Complaint alleging that "[Mancia], did intentionally, knowingly or recklessly physically abuse, [CW], a family or household member[.]" Mancia requested a jury trial and the case was transferred from the family court to the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).
3 
On April 23, 2012, a "Stipulation to Remand Case to
 
Hilo Family Court; Waiver of Trial by Jury; Order" (Stipulation
To Remand) was filed. The stipulation states that it is based on
 
Mancia's "Waiver of Right to Trial by Jury" (Waiver Form), dated
 
April 18, 2012, which was attached thereto and incorporated. 
After a bench trial, the family court found Mancia
 
guilty as charged and sentenced him.
(1) Validity of Waiver of Jury Trial 
Mancia contends that the family court failed to obtain 
a valid waiver of jury trial, citing Hawai 'i Supreme Court cases 
indicating that a trial court should conduct an oral colloquy in 
court to ensure that a waiver of jury trial is knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily given. See State v. Baker, 132 
Hawai
'i 1, 6, 319 P.3d 1009, 1014 (2014); State v. Gomez-Lobato, 
130 Hawai 'i 465, 469, 312 P.3d 897, 901 (2013). 
3
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 


 

 

 

 

 








 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State, in turn, responds that a proper written 
waiver is sufficient to waive jury trial, largely relying on the 
plain language of Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
4
5(b)(3)  and State v. Beard, No. CAAP–10–0000205, 2012 WL 3030809
 
(Haw. App. July 25, 2012), an unpublished decision by this court
 issued prior to Baker and Gomez-Lobato.
 
We review questions of constitutional law, such as the 
validity of a criminal defendant's waiver of his right to a jury trial, de novo under the right/wrong standard, with the appellate court exercising its own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai
'i 
63, 67, 996 P.2d 268, 272 (2000).
 As an initial matter, the issue of whether Mancia 
validly waived his right to a jury trial was not raised before the trial court. Nevertheless, Mancia requests that we recognize plain error because the "family court's failure to colloquy Mancia and obtain a valid waiver of his fundamental right to a jury trial constitutes reversible error[.]" See HRPP Rule 52(b). 
As recognized by the supreme court, a trial court's failure to obtain a valid waiver of jury trial constitutes plain error that can be considered for the first time on appeal. See Gomez-
Lobato, 130 Hawai
'i at 469 n.4, 312 P.3d at 901 n.4. 
We consider "the validity of a defendant's waiver of
 
his/her right to a jury trial under the totality of the
 
4
 HRPP Rule 5(b)(3) provides in relevant part: 
(3) Jury Trial Election. In appropriate cases, the
defendant shall be tried by jury in the circuit court
unless the defendant waives in writing or orally in
open court the right to trial by jury. If the
defendant does not waive the right to a trial by jury
at or before the time of entry of a plea of not
guilty, the court shall commit the defendant to the
circuit court for trial by jury.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the
 
 
defendant's background, experience, and conduct." Baker, 132
 
 
Hawai'i at 6, 319 P.3d at 1014 (quoting Friedman, 93 Hawai 'i at 
70, 996 P.2d at 275).
 
 
Mancia's Waiver Form, attached to and filed with the
 
 
Stipulation To Remand, states:
 
 
I, GENE MANCIA, have been informed by my
 
attorney, Deputy Public Defender BELINDA CASTILLO
 
HALL, that I have the right to have a trial by jury 

because the maximum penalty upon conviction for the 

offense that I am charged with is one year in jail and 

a $2,000 fine. 

I understand that in a trial by jury, twelve men 

and women from my community are chosen by a selection 

process, in which I can be involved, to become my 

jurors. I understand that the job of these twelve 

jurors is to listen to the evidence presented at trial 

and, based on that evidence, determine whether I am 

guilty or not guilty of the offense charged. I 

understand that the verdict of the twelve jurors must 

be unanimous. 
 
 
I hereby WAIVE (give up) my right to a 

jury trial and agree to a disposition of my case by 

the COURT (the Judge) without a jury. 

I make this waiver of my own free choice

and with a clear mind. 
Dated: Hilo, Hawaii, 04/18/2012 
 
 
[signature] 

Gene Mancia

 
Defendant 

There is no indication in the record that a hearing was held
 
 
regarding Mancia's waiver of jury trial or that an on-the-record
 
 
colloquy was conducted with either of the trial courts. 
 
Moreover, the State does not point to anything in the record
 
 
regarding the circumstances as to Mancia's background, experience
 
 
and/or conduct. 
 
In Baker, the defendant filled out a waiver form to
 
 
waive his right to a jury trial. 132 Hawai 'i at 3, 319 P.3d at 
1011. The defendant signed his initials next to each paragraph
 
 
in the waiver, except for the paragraph that stated: "I am
 
 
entering this waiver of my own free will after careful
 
 
consideration. No promises or threats have been made to me to
 
 
4

 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 



 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
induce me to waive my right to a jury trial." Id. at 6, 319 P.3d
 
at 1014. In addition to the waiver, the court conducted an in-
court colloquy with the defendant but the record was silent with
 respect to voluntariness. Id. The supreme court held that the
 
lower court failed to adequately ensure that the defendant's
 waiver was valid because the defendant did not initial next to
 the paragraph addressing voluntariness, and the court's on-the­
record colloquy did not address whether the defendant voluntarily
 signed the waiver form given the lack of initials next to that
 specific paragraph. Id. at 5-7, 319 P.3d at 1013-1015. 
The State argues that Baker is distinguishable because
 
"the written waiver of jury trial was fundamentally flawed as
 there was no indication by the defendant that his waiver was not
 a result of threats or duress." The State also points to HRPP
 Rule 5(b)(3) which states that the "defendant shall be tried by
 jury in the circuit court unless the defendant waives in writing
 or orally in open court the right to trial by jury." (Emphasis
 added.) The State argues that "[n]owhere in Rule 5 is the
 Defendant required to waive jury trial in writing and orally in
 open court." Further, as noted, the State relies on the
 unpublished decision in Beard.
 
In Beard, the State raised the question of whether the
 
lack of an in-court colloquy regarding the defendant's waiver of
 jury trial was a basis to overturn his conviction. Beard, 2012
 
WL 3030809, at *1. In addressing the defendant's contention that
 he had received ineffective assistance of counsel, the Office of
 Public Defender (OPD) took the position that, "as to the State's
 
contention that an in-court colloquy is required to obtain a
 
valid waiver of the right to jury trial where Defendant–Appellant
 executed a written waiver, the OPD respectfully disagrees." Id
.
 
This court stated that "[a]lthough a colloquy is no doubt
 advisable, it is not required for every waiver of a jury trial." 
Id. 
5

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Recent supreme court cases, however, indicate that a 
court should engage in an on-the-record oral colloquy to ensure 
that a waiver of jury trial is made knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily, even when a written waiver is executed. Baker, 132 
Hawai
'i at 6, 319 P.3d at 1014; Gomez–Lobato, 130 Hawai 'i at 469, 
312 P.3d at 901. In 2013, the supreme court held in Gomez-Lobato that "while the defendant may execute a written waiver form, the court should also engage in an oral colloquy with the defendant to establish that the waiver was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary." Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai
'i at 469, 312 P.3d at 901 
(emphasis added). In 2014, in Baker, the supreme court noted that although HRPP Rule 5(b)(3) states that a waiver of jury trial may be given in writing or orally in court, HRPP Rule 23(a) requires that a defendant's waiver of jury trial be approved by the trial court, and in turn, "the trial court has an obligation to ensure, through an appropriate oral colloquy in court, that the waiver was knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily given." 132 Hawai
'i at 6, 319 P.3d at 1014 (emphasis added). 
Here, Mancia signed the Waiver Form on April 18, 2012. 
The Waiver Form itself contains only Mancia's signature. The
 Stipulation To Remand, to which the Waiver Form was attached, was
 signed by Mancia, the deputy public defender, the deputy
 prosecuting attorney, and approved by signature of the circuit
 court. However, there was no hearing or colloquy in court
 between Mancia and any trial court regarding his waiver of jury
 trial. Further, as noted above, the State does not reference
 anything in the record regarding Mancia's background, experience,
 or conduct relevant to whether his waiver was made knowingly,
 intelligently and voluntarily. 
In light of Gomez-Lobato and Baker, and the totality of
 
the circumstances in this case, we cannot say that Mancia's
 waiver of jury trial was entered into knowingly, intelligently,
 and voluntarily. Consequently, we must vacate the judgment in
 this case.
 
6
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Evidentiary Hearing
 
Given the above, we need not address Mancia's
 
contention that the family court erred in excluding certain
 
evidence during the bench trial.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, entered on April 2, 2014, in the Family
 Court of the Third Circuit, is vacated. The case is remanded to
 the family court for further proceedings consistent with this
 Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 6, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Sylvia Wan,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
7

 