 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST 'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
NO. CAAP-22-0000260 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
DYLAN RIVER JAMES, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 5CPC-20-0000051)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Chan, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of 
Hawai‘i (State) appeals 
from the March 28, 2022 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and 
Order (
FOFs/COLs) Granting Motion to Suppress Text Messages 
(Order Granting Motion to Suppress); and the April 4, 2022 Order Denying State's Motion to Reconsider Ruling on Motion to Suppress Text Messages (Order Denying Reconsideration),  both filed by the 
1
We do not have appellate jurisdiction over the Order Denying
Reconsideration, and thus do not address the State's fifth point of error
regarding this order. The appeal is from a pre-trial suppression order underHawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 641-13(7). In civil cases, a notice of
appeal is "deemed to appeal the disposition of all post-judgment motions that
are timely filed after entry of the judgment or order." Hawai ‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3). There is no similar provision 1   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).2 In the 
underlying case, Defendant-Appellee Dylan River James (James) was 
charged with five counts of first-degree sexual assault against the complainant (CW) that occurred on July 2, 2015. 
This appeal concerns the suppression of text messages 
that were exchanged between James and CW, in which James made admissions that he had sex with CW. On appeal, the State contends that the Circuit Court: (1) erred by finding in FOF 7 that CW, "induced [James] via text message to admit that he had sexually assaulted her"; (2) that "[e]ven assuming that [CW] was in effect a government agent when she texted [James],"
3 erred by 
concluding in COL 4 that the detectives violated James's Miranda rights where James was "not in police custody"; and (3) erred by ultimately granting the suppression of the text messages.
4 
Upon review of the record on appeal and relevant legal 
authorities, giving due consideration to the issues raised and arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve the points of error as follows, and affirm. 
deeming the inclusion of all post-judgment motions for a notice of appeal in a
criminal case, under HRAP Rule 4(b) (pertaining to "Appeals in criminalcases"). Thus, this court does not have jurisdiction over the Order DenyingReconsideration and has appellate jurisdiction under HRS § 641-13(7) over theOrder Granting Motion to Suppress, only. 
2 
The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided. 
3 
On appeal, the State does not challenge the Circuit Court's
determination that CW was acting as a "government agent" under the directionof the detectives. 
4 
The State's points of error ( POE) do not comply with HRAP Rule
28(b)(4), which requires that the POEs be set forth in "separately numberedparagraphs." (Emphasis added). We have numbered POEs A, B, and D, as POEs 1,2 and 4, and we address these three POEs out of the five POEs raised. In light of our resolution infra, it is not necessary to address POE 3, whichdeals with whether James's right to counsel was violated. We also do not address POE 5 because we lack jurisdiction over the Order DenyingReconsideration. 
2   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On December 21, 2021, James filed a Motion to Suppress 
Text Messages (Motion to Suppress) requesting that the July 2, 
20155 text messages between James and CW be suppressed on grounds 
that CW, as a government agent, violated James's right to privacy and "induce[d]" James to respond, and that the detectives were required to obtain a waiver of those rights prior to CW contacting James. James attached the following exhibits to the Motion to Suppress: (1) a partial transcript of the detectives' July 2, 2015 interview of CW; (2) July 2, 2015 text messages between CW and James; and (3) a partial transcript of CW's testimony at the March 11, 2020 grand jury proceeding. 
On February 4, 2022, the State filed its opposition to 
the Motion to Suppress (Opposition), in which it argued, inter alia, that even if CW was a government agent, James was not "subjected to a search and seizure, nor a custodial interrogation," and there was no "active deception or attempt to circumvent [James]'s rights." 
At the February 24, 2022 hearing on the Motion to 
Suppress, no witnesses were called to testify. While the exhibits attached to the Motion to Suppress were not entered into evidence at the hearing, it is undisputed that the Circuit Court considered the exhibits as constituting the evidentiary record for the motion, and the parties do not contend otherwise.
6 This 
record reflects the following. 
5 
July 2, 2015 is also the date of the charged offenses. 
6 
At the February 24, 2022 hearing on the Motion to Suppress, the
Circuit Court indicated that it had reviewed the motion and the attached 
exhibits. The FOFs/COLs refer to statements in these exhibits, i.e. FOFs 4-6(restating CW's and the detectives' statements in the July 2, 2015 interviewtranscript); FOF 7 (referring to the July 2, 2015 text messages between CW andJames); and FOF 8 (quoting CW's testimony from the March 11, 2020 grand jurytranscript). 
3  
 
 
 
 
 
             
     
            
     
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 2, 2015, Kaua‘ i Police Department detectives 
Ray M. Takekawa (Detective Takekawa) and Darren Rose (Detective 
Rose) (collectively, Detectives) interviewed CW, who alleged that James had sexually assaulted her. That same day, CW also had an exam done by a nurse. After the interview, the Detectives instructed CW to contact James, and CW asked the Detectives, "So, like, first I should just, like, get him to admit that we, like, had sex and then after that be, like, well, I was like – [sic]." CW attempted to call James twice, but James did not pick up. Detective Takekawa stated: "You want to try a text?" Detective Rose stated: "Give it a few minutes, about five minutes, and we'll try one more time." CW testified before the grand jury that at the "direction of Detective Takekawa," she texted James, and that "the detective told me just to try to get some sort of comment – comment on what had happened out of him, so I texted him that I was thinking about the night before." The following text messages were exchanged between CW and James:
7 
[CW:] Sup,[]8 just thinking about the other night haha. 
[James:] Lol,[]9 that was fun [(winking face emoji)10] 
[CW:] Haha what part, the bonfire? Lol 
[James:] Yeah, that too 
7 
The text messages are quoted verbatim with footnotes throughout to
clarify terms, abbreviations, and symbols used, as may be necessary. 
8 
"Sup" is an "informal greeting equivalent to 'What's up?'" Sup, Merriam-Webster , https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/sup (last visited Apr. 6, 2023). 
9 
"Lol" is an abbreviation for "laugh out loud." LOL, Merriam-Webster , https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/LOL/ (last visited Mar. 24, 2023). 
10 
"Emoji" is defined as "various small images, symbols, or icons
used in text fields in electronic communication . . . to express the emotional
attitude of the writer, convey information succinctly, [or] communicate amessage playfully without using words[.]" Emoji, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/emoji (last visited Mar. 24, 2023).Each emoji has a different meaning and can be found at the following site.freeCodeCamp, https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/all-emojis-emoji-list-for-copy-and-paste/ (last visited Mar. 23, 2023).
4             
   
   
            
  
   
             
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And the skinny dippin [sic] 
And something else crazy happened, tryin [sic] to remember
wat [sic] it was... 
[CW:] Hahahah hmmm... Seems like there were two other 
things... Got a little rough [(winking face emoji)] doesthat ring a bell? 
[James:] Hmmm its kind of coming back to me... I do remember
it being very rough [(smirking face emoji)] 
[CW:] Tell me your favorite part [James:] How bout [sic] I show you some time soon [(winking
emoji)] 
[CW:] Hahaha not too soon though, I'm still sore lol Just tell me your favorite part in the mean time to tide me
over [(winking face with tongue emoji)] 
[James:] Sore!? That was just a warm up! And it was that you did what I told you to do... What was
yours? 
[CW:] The semi public locations haha. Never done that in a
hamock [sic] before lol. I mean mostly sore from the partwhere I was screaming and trying to crawl away... You reallydon't take no for an answer lol. So idk
[]11 I feel kinda 
wierd [sic] about that part. 
[James:] Woah! I couldnt [sic] tell if you were serious or
no [sic] to be honest... Thought it was some kind of 'roleplayin' or something? Sorry about that, i [sic] was a lil
[] 12
confused about that as well [(flushed face emoji)] 
Not* [CW:] Wait during which part? [James:] When you were screaming and crawling away by the
lifeguard tower... Couldnt [sic] tell if you were serious orwat [sic] was goin.
[]13 [sic] I was pretty confused... And
sorry to put you in that situation, wasnt [sic] my intentionat the time [(flushed face emoji)] 
11 
"Idk" is an abbreviation for "I don't know." Idk, Merriam-Webster , https://www.merriam -
webster.com/dictionary/IDK/ (last visited 
Mar. 23, 2023). 
12 
"Lil" is an abbreviation of the word "little." Lil, Dictionary.com , https://www.dictionary.com/e/slang/lil/
(last visited 
Mar. 23, 2023). 
13 
"Goin" is an abbreviation for the word "going." Goin, NoSlang.com , https://www.noslang.com/search/goin (last 
visited Mar. 23, 2023). 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Footnotes added). 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Circuit Court 
orally ruled that CW was acting as a "government agent" and that 
James's rights were violated: 
So in this case the Court finds that the police
actively recruited the complaining witness. The Court also
finds that the police directed the complaining witness. Andpart of the reason for that is they were telling her what todo, including when the phone -- when phone calls weren'tanswered, why don't you send a text and that type ofdetailed direction. The complaining witness didn't receivepayment for services. 
So when you look at the factors, the three remaining
factors from Boynton -- because I'm taking out themotivation factor pursuant to the cases that the Court read-- the Court finds that the complaining witness was actingas a government agent. And so because the complainingwitness was acting as a government agent, then there were aviolation of the rights of Mr. James. 
And so the Court is going to grant the motion to
suppress text messages. 
On March 28, 2022, the Circuit Court filed its 
FOFs/COLs, in which the Circuit Court made the following 
pertinent FOFs and COLs: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
1. The incident in this case is alleged to have occurred on
July 2, 2015. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. On July 2, 2015, commencing at 5:55 p.m., Kauai Police
Department Detective Ray M. Takekawa and Detective DarrenRose conducted an interview of the [CW]. 
3. At the conclusion of the interview, Detective Takekawa
and Detective Rose directed CW to contact [James] and todiscuss the incident upon which this case is based with him. 
4. In the transcript of a recording designated "[CW]
Pretext," CW is recorded as stating, "Wait. So, like, firstI should just, like, get him to admit that we, like, had sexand then after that be, like, well, I was like –" 
5. James did not answer CW's first call. In the transcript
of a recording designated "[CW] Pretext Call 2," CW calls[James]'s phone and when the voicemail comes on CW asks thedetectives, "Do I leave a message?" Detective Takekawaresponded, "You want to try a text?" and Detective Roseadds, "Give it a few minutes, about five minutes, and we'lltry one more time." 
6. In the transcript of a recording designated as "[CW]
Pretext 2," CW makes another call to James and the voicemailagain comes on. 
7. Subsequently CW contacted [James] via text message.
Pursuant to the detectives' directions when she attempted tocall [James], CW induced [James] to acknowledge that theyhad sex and that it was "rough" as well as other statementsabout the incident. 
8. At the Grand Jury CW was asked by the deputy prosecuting
attorney "And after the incident, did you text message[James]?" CW responded "Yes, at the direction of DetectiveTakikawa [sic]." CW then went on to state "Well, thedetective told me just to try to get some sort of comment –comment on what had happened out of him, so I texted himthat I was thinking about the night before." 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
. . . . 
3.
 Under the totality of the circumstances, the governmental
involvement in this case was significant and extensiveenough to render CW an instrumentality of the State, i.e. agovernment agent, when she called and texted [James].
Kahoonei, 83 Hawai ‘i at 132, 925 P.2d at 302. In 
particular, CW was actively recruited by the detectives to
call and then text [James]. Further, CW was directed by thedetectives to text [James] and to induce him to discuss theincident. After CW was unable to reach [James] via a phonecall, the detectives asked CW if she wanted to text [James].The detectives then told CW to induce James to admit that they had sex. CW did not receive compensation from thedetectives. 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. At the point when CW called and texted [James], he was
the only suspect and the investigation had focused on him.If the detectives had sought to question [James] at thatpoint they would have been required to advise him of hisrights, including his right to remain silent and his rightto an attorney, and obtain a waiver of those right [sic]prior to proceeding with the questioning. Miranda v. 
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602 (1966); State v.Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 266, 492 P.2d 657, 665 (1971). 
5. As CW was acting as a government agent when she called
and texted [James], the actions of the detectives violatedJames['s] right to an attorney under the Sixth amendment tothe U.S. Constitution and article I, section 14 of the 
Hawai ‘i Constitution and [James]'s right to remain silent
under the Fifth Amendment and article I, section 10. 
6. Due the violation of [James]'s rights under both the U.S.
and Hawai ‘i constitutions, [James]'s statements are
inadmissible in the instant case. State v. Eli, 126 Hawai ‘i 
510, 521, 273 P.3d 1196, 1207 (2012). 
This appeal followed. 
(1) The State argues that the finding in FOF 7, that 
"CW induced [James] to acknowledge they had sex" was clearly 
erroneous because there was no finding or evidence that CW "had power over [James] to induce him to acknowledge, against his free will, that they had sex . . . ." 
The State's argument presumes, without support in the 
record, that the word "induce," as used by the Circuit Court, meant that CW "had power" over James to overcome "his free will[.]" However, "induce" means "to move by persuasion or influence[,] to call forth or bring about by influence or stimulation[.]" Induce, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/induce (last visited Mar. 24, 2023). "Government inducement" may involve "threats, coercive tactics," and may include "persuasion, fraudulent representations . . . ." United States v. Mack, 53 F.Supp.3d 179, 187 (D.D.C. 2014) (citation omitted). 
A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, despite
evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left
with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing theentire evidence that a mistake has been committed. A finding 
8  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of fact is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding. 
Birano v. State, 143 Hawai‘ i 163, 181, 426 P.3d 387, 405 (2018) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
Unchallenged 
FOFs and COLs are binding. See State v. Rodrigues, 145 Hawai‘ i 
487, 494, 454 P.3d 428, 435 (2019) (citation omitted); Kelly v. 
1250 Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai‘ i 205, 227, 140 P.3d 985, 1007 
(2006). 
Here, the Detectives "directed CW to contact [James] and 
to discuss the incident . . . ." FOF 3. 
In unchallenged COLs 3 
and 5, the Circuit Court determined that CW was a government 
agent. The transcripts of the recordings show that CW also asked for and received direction and clarification from the Detectives about what she was supposed to "get him [(James)] to admit," whether she should leave a message on James's voicemail, whether she should attempt a text message, and whether she should try one more time to call James. FOFs 4-6. Viewing the full context of the Circuit Court's findings in FOFs 3-6, where all of CW's actions to contact James and to obtain an admission from him were orchestrated by the Detectives, there was substantial evidence to support FOF 7's specific finding that when CW "induced" James to admit that they had sex, it was "[p]ursuant to the detectives' directions[.]" Thus, FOF 7 was not clearly erroneous. See 
Birano, 143 Hawai‘ i at 181, 426 P.3d at 405. 
(2) The State argues that COL 4 was wrong because James 
was not entitled to Miranda warnings prior to CW text messaging James, where James was not "in custody." The State asserts that James cannot be "in custody" when he "was nowhere near" the Detectives physically during the text messaging. The State also urges that the existence of probable cause does not dispositively entitle a suspect to Miranda warnings pursuant to State v. 
9  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14 Sagapolutele-Silva, 151 Hawai‘ i 283, 287, 511 P.3d 782, 786 
(2022), recently overruled by State v. Hewitt, 
No. SCWC-16-0000460, 2023 WL 2523652 (Mar. 15, 2023).14 The 
State's argument lacks merit. 
"Whether an accused's right against self-incrimination 
under the Hawai‘ i constitution was protected through the use of a 
Miranda warning is a question of constitutional law, which this 
court reviews de novo
 under the right/wrong standard." State v. 
Kazanas, 138 Hawai‘ i 23, 33, 375 P.3d 1261, 1271 (2016) (citing 
State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai‘ i 87, 100, 997 P.2d 13, 26 (2000)). 
Miranda warnings are required when the defendant is (1) 
under interrogation and (2) in custody. State v. Ah Loo, 
94 Hawai‘ i 207, 210, 10 P.3d 728, 731 (2000) (citation omitted). 
In Hewitt, the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court recently held that the 
"Ketchum rule remains in effect: Miranda warnings are required 
by article I, section 10 of the Constitution of the State of 
Hawai
‘i when probable cause to arrest has developed." 2023 WL 
2523652, at *10 (citing Ketchum, 97 Hawai‘ i at 126, 34 P.3d at 
1025). 
COL 4 provides: 
4. At the point when CW called and texted [James], he was
the only suspect and the investigation had focused on him.
If the detectives had sought to question [James] at thatpoint they would have been required to advise him of hisrights, including his right to remain silent and his rightto an attorney, and obtain a waiver of those right [sic]prior to proceeding with the questioning. . . . 
In Sagapolutele-Silva, the Hawai ‘i Supreme Court overruled State 
v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai ‘i 107, 34 P.3d 1006 (2001) and held that "the existence
of probable cause [was] relevant, [but was] not dispositive in every case."
151 Hawai ‘i at 291, 511 P.3d at 790. Rather, the courts were required to
"consider the totality of the circumstances." Id.On March 20, 2023, the
State filed a statement of supplemental authority, stating that the supreme
court "overruled" Sagapolutele-Silva in Hewitt, where the supreme court"reaffirmed the 'bright-line' rule articulated in" Ketchum that Mirandawarnings are required when probable cause to arrest has developed. 2023 WL 2523652, at *10. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State does not dispute that the text messages constituted 
"interrogation" under the circumstances of this case. The State does not challenge the factual finding within COL 4 that James "was the only suspect" and the investigation had "focused on him." Thus, at the point the text messages were sent by the Detectives' agent, CW, the Detectives had probable cause to arrest James; and Miranda warnings were required before the Detectives could question James. See Hewitt, 2023 WL 2523652, at 
*10. Instead, however, the Detectives covertly engaged in an un-Mirandized interrogation of James, by having CW send suggestive text messages to James, using her personal mobile device to elicit intimate details of the incident. 
The State's position that the text messages should not 
be suppressed because James received the text messages through CW rather than law enforcement is inconsistent with the purposes of 
Hawai‘i's exclusionary rule:  "(1) judicial integrity, (2) the 
protection of individual privacy, and (3) deterrence of illegal police misconduct." State v. McKnight
, 131 Hawai‘ i 379, 398, 
319 P.3d 298, 317 (2013) (citation omitted). Allowing the 
circumvention of 
Miranda warnings by permitting law enforcement 
to engage in the 
undercover interrogation of suspects by 
directing the sending of, and dictating the content of, text messages using a government agent's personal mobile device does not preserve judicial integrity, protect individual privacy, and deter illegal police misconduct. See id.
We conclude that the Circuit Court was not wrong in COL 
4 that James's constitutional rights were violated when, after he was the focus of the investigation, he was interrogated through text messages sent by CW, a government agent, without Miranda 
warnings. See Kazanas, 138 Hawai‘ i at 33, 375 P.3d at 1271. 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) In light of our disposition, the Circuit Court's 
suppression of the text messages as inadmissible evidence for 
trial was also not erroneous. See id.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the March 28, 2022 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Motion to Suppress Text Messages, filed by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, April 20, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge Tracy Murakami, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
David M. Hayakawa,
for Defendant-Appellee. 
12 