 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000101 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
LEONARD SPORIK, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
KÂNE# OHE
 DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-03076) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Leonard Sporik (Sporik) appeals 
from the Amended Judgment and Notice of Entry of Amended 
Judgment, filed on December 11, 2019,1/  and the Notice of Entry 
of Judgment and/or Order and Plea Judgment, filed on January 28, 2020,
2/ in the District Court of the First Circuit, Kâne# ohe 
Division (District Court).3/ 
Sporik was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii 
1/ The Honorable Philip Doi presided. 
2/ The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided. 
3/ The judgments entered on December 11, 2019, and January 28, 2020,
together constitute the District Court's judgment in this case.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2020).4/  
On appeal, Sporik contends the District Court did not 
apply the beyond a reasonable doubt standard when finding alcohol 
he consumed contributed to his inability to drive.    5/
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Sporik's point of error as follows and affirm. 
Contrary to Sporik's claim, the District Court applied 
the proof beyond a reasonable doubt standard when finding him guilty of OVUII. Sporik points to the District Court's reference to "could" in its pronouncement of guilt as an indication it did not apply the proof beyond a reasonable doubt standard. The District Court stated, in relevant part: 
There were no questions and therefore no answers
regarding other days when Mr. Sporik took those samethree medications. And but -- but I do have one question and one answer regarding taking thosemedications with alcohol. I've got a lot of questionsabout solely one and solely -- solely medication andsolely alcohol, but only one on alcohol in addition tothose, and that was Dr. McAndrews, and he said even asmall amount of alcohol could have a -- a -- a -- a notable increase in the effects. The words "in an amount sufficient to impair" have been defined in caselaw as to mean that it does not have to be the sole cause. All it has to be is a factor. 
And so as to the OVUII, given the testimony, there --
there ab-- absolutely was alcohol involved in this.All it has to be is a contributing factor to the 
4/ HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) states: 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of anintoxicant . (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the personoperates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
5/ In his Reply Brief, Sporik raises a new argument that there was
insufficient evidence to convict him. Arguments raised for the first time inthe reply brief on appeal are waived. State v. Mark, 123 Hawai #i 205, 230,
983 P.3d 478, 503 (2010) (citing In re Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai #i 
 
1, 14 n. 5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n. 5 (1994) and Rule 28(d) of the Hawai #i Rule 
of Appellate Procedure). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
impairment, Mr. Sporik. I find that the State has 
borne its burden. I am convinced beyond a reasonable
doubt that you were impaired at least in part byalcohol, and I find you guilty on that count. 
(Emphases added). 
Sporik claims that his over-prescribed medication was 
the sole cause of his behavior in this case. However, the 
context of the District Court using the word "could" in its ruling is in reference to the testimony of Sporik's expert witness, Dr. McAndrews, who Sporik admits stated a general proposition that it was possible for alcohol to enhance the effects of medication that Sporik claimed he took prior to the incident. In this regard, Dr. McAndrews testified: 
Q. So what -- what is the effect here? So why -- if you have
low blood pressure, why do you experience these problems? 
A. If you have low blood pressure, your vital organs aren't
getting perfused properly with oxygen from your blood andvital organs, includes the brain, so that's why you wouldexperience those side effects. 
Q. If -- if you had taken, say, a drink of alcohol, could 
that increase these effects, or how might that interact with
the symptoms of low -- that you've already describedrelating to low blood pressure? 
A. I would say so because alcohol is also a central nervous
system depressant. You know, even a small amount could 
compound the effects, and you could see, you know, drastic
confusion, lethargy, dizziness, fatigue, incoherence. 
(Emphases added). 
We further note that Sporik misleadingly argues, 
multiple times, that Dr. McAndrews specifically testified that 
alcohol "did not contribute" to Sporik's behavior, that "alcohol was not a factor in enhancing the effects of overmedication" suffered by Sporik, that "alcohol had nothing to do with the symptoms and behavior exhibited by Sporik on the date of the accident[,]" and that "alcohol was not a factor in this case[.]" To support these assertions, Sporik quotes one particular part of Dr. McAndrews' testimony, but without providing the question he was answering. The relevant testimony, including the question, is as follows: 
Q. [defense counsel] Two glasses of bourbon and Coke, say
two just prior to driving, do you have a opinion based on a 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether or
not all of these problems that we've just described to the
degree that he was having them could've been caused solely
by his having drunk those two alcoholic beverages? 
. . . 
THE WITNESS: I do have an opinion. 
Q. [defense counsel] And what is that? A.
 My opinion is that based on the degree of severity of the
symptoms that he exhibited, I don't believe that those
symptoms could've been caused by the two alcoholic beveragesthat you mentioned. 
(Emphases added). 
The District Court correctly noted alcohol need only be 
a contributing factor to the diminished capacity to drive safely. 
In State v. Vliet, 91 Hawai# i 288, 293, 983 P.2d 189, 194 (1999), 
the Hawai# i
 Supreme Court interpreted HRS § 291-4 (1993 & Supp. 
1998), the predecessor statute for driving under the influence of an intoxicating liquor, and held proof that alcohol contributed to diminishing the defendant's capacity to drive safely was sufficient. The Hawai# i Supreme Court explained: 
As for Vliet's claim that the prosecution failed to adduce
"any evidence that [his] condition was due to alcohol, [and]not his epilepsy or his Neurontin," this contention ispatently meritless insofar as Vliet himself admitted attrial that he had consumed two beers on the night inquestion. It appears, however, that Vliet is attempting toargue a more complex proposition, namely, that, in order[to] be convicted of DUI under HRS § 291–4(a)(1), theprosecution was required to prove that his condition on thenight in question was caused exclusively by intoxicatingliquor (and not by a combination of his Neurontin andalcohol). This position is untenable. 
As previously indicated, HRS § 291–4(a)(1) plainly and
simply provides that a person commits DUI if "[t]he personoperates or assumes actual physical control of the operationof any vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor ... in an amount sufficient to impair  the person's
normal mental faculties or ability to care for oneself and
guard against casualty [.]" (Underscoring and bold emphasesadded.) Nothing in the statute requires that alcohol be thesole or exclusive cause of a defendant's impairment. Rather,what is required is proof beyond a reasonable doubt thatliquor contributed to the diminishment of the defendant'scapacity to drive safely. 
Id. (Emphasis in original and added). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended 
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Amended Judgment, filed on 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
December 11, 2019, and the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or 
Order and Plea Judgment, filed on January 28, 2020, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Kâ ne#ohe Division, are 
affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 25, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Samuel P. King, Jr.,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5 