 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
    
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000498 21-JAN-2025 08:24 AM Dkt. 66 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000498  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
THE ESTATE OF MARY N. LUCAS, Deceased  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1LP000026685)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
Appellant/Respondent/Beneficiary Carol Cassiday Orr 
(Orr), appeal s from the (1) Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law, and Order Granting Petition for Instructions Regarding 
Certain Children ( Order), and (2) Judgment Pursuant to Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Petition for 
Instructions Regarding Certain Children (Judgment ), both of 
which were entered on August 9, 2021 by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (Probate Court).1 The Appellees/Respondents/ 
1 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided.   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Beneficiaries in this matter are Casey Cassiday (Casey) and 
Alanna Cassiday (Alanna). 
I. BACKGROUND 
The record reflects that  the Last Will and Testament 
of Mary N. Lucas  (Will) was  executed on July 2, 1954, and later 
amended by First Codicil on July 23, 1956.   The Will was 
admitted to probate in April 1965. In August 1969, the residue 
of the estate was distributed to the two daughters of Mary N. 
Lucas (Lucas): Harriet Lucas Cassiday and Mary Lucas Pflueger.   
The Will created a trust ( Trust). This action arises 
from the use of the terms "lawful issue" and "surviving issue"  
in the Trust.   Article Fifth of the Will provides that income 
generated  prior to the Trust's termination shall be paid to, as 
relevant here, the "lawful issue of any deceased children" of Lucas' daughters:  
(a) My Trustee shall pay one -half (1/2) of the net 
income to or use and apply the same for the benefit and 
account of my daughter, MARY PFLUEGER , and her children . . 
. [and] pay the other one -half (1/2) of the net income to 
or use and apply the same for the benefit and account of my 
daughter, HARRIET CASSIDAY , and her children . . . for and 
during her lifetime, and from and after her death in equal 
shares to her children who shall be from time to time 
surviving and the lawful issue of any deceased children , 
said issue to take per stirpes and not per capita. If all 
of the children and their surviving issue of either 
daughter shall die before the trust termination, then from 
and after the death of such last survivor of such children 
and issue my Trustee shall pay all of the net income in 
equal shares to the surviving children and the lawful issue 
of any deceased children , said issue to take per stirpes 
and not per capita [.] 
(Emphasis added .) 
2   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Trust also provides that, upon termination of the 
Trust, the Trust estate shall be distributed to, as relevant 
here, the "surviving issue" of Lucas' daughters : 
(b) This trust shall cease and determine upon the 
death of the last survivor of the children of my daughters , 
HARRIET CASSIDAY and MARY PFLUEGER , who shall be living at 
the date of my death, and the property then comprising the 
trust estate, together with the accumulated, accrued and 
undistributed income, shall at that time vest in and shall 
be transferred, conveyed and delivered by my Trustee, 
absolutely and in fee simple, free and clear of any trusts, 
to the then surviving issue of said children , per stirpes 
and not per capita [.] 
(Emphasis added.) 
Orr and Orr's brother, Benjamin B. Cassiday III 
(Trip), are great -grandchildren of Lucas, and beneficiaries of 
the Trust through their grandmother , Harriet Lucas Cassiday, and 
their father , General Benjamin B. Cassiday, Jr. Trip is the 
father of Casey and Alanna. This appeal arises out of a March 
2020 petition filed by acting successor co -trustees of the Trust 
for instructions regarding the rights and interests of Trip's 
children, and, specifically, whether Casey and Alanna were 
"issue" and "lawful issue" pursua nt to the Trust. Orr responded 
to the petition, contending that Casey and Alanna should not be 
treated as "issue" or "lawful issue," as doing so would violate 
Lucas' intent and the Trust's terms. 
The record reflects that Casey and Alanna were born in 
the Philippines in 2001 and 2002 , respectively . Trip was not 
married to Casey and Alanna's mother. In May 2008, shortly 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before Trip passed away in  June  2008, Trip filed a Verified 
Petition for Paternity ( Verified Petition ), in which he 
acknowledged his paternity of Casey  and Alanna, and requested 
formal recognition as their legal and natural father.   A genetic 
test report, included in the Verified Petition, confirmed  that 
Trip is Casey and Alanna's  biological father.  
Trip passed away in June 2008. The parties do not 
dispute that Trip's Verified Petition was never adjudicated 
prior to his passing, and that no formal court order was issued 
to judicially resolve the issue of Trip's paternity. 
Trip's Last Will and Testament acknowledges Casey and 
Alanna as being his "two children." 
The Probate Court heard the matter in February 2021, 
and subsequently issued its Order, in which it made the 
following relevant findings of fact and conclusions of law: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
. . . . 
12. Article FIFTH (a) of the Will provides for the 
distribution of Trust income to "the lawful issue of any deceased 
children". 
13. Article FIFTH (b) of the Will instrument provides for 
final distribution of the Trust estate to "then surviving issue 
of said children". 
14. The Trust has not terminated because Paul R. Cassiday, 
Sr., the last surviving child of Harriet Cassiday, is living. 
The persons entitled to have final distribution of the Trust 
estate cannot be known at this time.[2] 
2 The record reflects that Paul R. Cassiday , Sr. passed after entry 
of the Probate Court's Order. P ursuant to the terms of the Will, the Trust 
must therefore be terminated and final distributions determined. 
4   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15. Petitioners requested the instructions of this Court 
as to whether Casey and Alanna are entitled to current income 
distributions from the Trust, and if they survive, to share in 
the final distribution of the Trust. 
16. By [Verified Petition] filed in the Family Court of 
the First Circuit, State of Hawaii, on May 16, 2008 . . . , 
[Trip] acknowledged that he was the father of each of Casey and 
Alanna and prayed, inter alia , that he be adjudged their legal 
and natural father. 
17. The [Verified Petition] was signed by [Trip's] counsel 
and was accompanied by a verification executed and sworn by 
[Trip] on May 15, 2008. The matter was not adjudicated before 
[Trip's] death less than three weeks later. 
18. Casey and Alanna are the children of [Trip] and 
therefore, through him, the "issue," "lawful issue," and 
"surviving issue" of General Cassiday, entitled by the terms of 
the Will to share in the net income of the Trust and, if they 
survive to Trust termination, to share in the final distribution 
of the Trust. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
 . . . . 
10. Casey and Alanna are for all purposes under the Will 
the "issue," "lawful issue" and "surviving issue" of General 
Cassiday by his pre -deceased son [Trip]. 
11. As such, they are entitled to share in the net income 
of the Trust and , if they survive to Trust termination, in the 
final distribution of the Trust. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Probate Court issued the Judgment, and Orr timely 
appealed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Orr contends on appeal that, 
The Probate Court erred when it found that Casey and 
Alanna, "for all purposes under the Will, are the 'issue', 
'lawful issue' and 'surviving issue ". See  Dkt 1253 at 5. 
The Probate Court failed to conduct a full and thorough 
legal analysis into the testator's inten t  and whether the 
retroactive application of the previous statute  [Revised 
Laws of Hawaii ( RLH)  §  4815]  should be limited.  
5   
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Orr's 
contention as follows : 
We review the Probate Court's construction of the 
Trust de novo under the right/wrong standard. Tr. Created Under 
the Will of Damon , 76 Hawaiʻi 120, 123 —24, 869 P.2d 1339, 1342 —43 
(1994). On this record, we conclude that the Probate Court was 
right in determining that Casey and Alanna are "surviving 
issue," but that it was wrong in summarily concluding, without 
sufficient findings of fact, that Casey and Alanna are "lawful 
issue." We therefore affirm in part and vacate in part. 
With regard to the question of whether Casey and 
Alanna are "surviving  issue" and/or "lawful issue," Hawai ʻi 
courts  must look to Lucas' intent at the time she created the 
Trust. See  In re Medeiros Testamentary Tr. & Life Ins. Tr., 
105  Hawaiʻi 284, 291, 96 P.3d 1098, 1105 (2004).   "The duty of 
the court is to interpret, not to construct [a will]." In re 
Est.  of Campbell, 33 Haw. 799, 802 (Haw. Terr. 1936). When 
construing a will, "the intention of the testator controls and must be given effect unless it be contrary to some [positive] 
rule of law or against public policy." Id.  at 801—02.  
Courts must determine the testator's intent based on 
"a sound and reasonable construction of the words [that were] 
6   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
used," and "not by speculation or conjecture as to what the 
testator may  have intended." Tr. Created Under the Will of  
Damon, 76 Hawaiʻi at  127, 869 P.2d at  1346  (emphasis added). 
Courts  may, however, consider extrinsic evidence with respect to 
the circumstances surrounding the execution of the will and the testator's conception of any ambiguous words "for the purpose of 
aiding the court  in construing the instrument to determine [the 
testator's] intent." In re Tr. Est. of Dowsett, 38 Haw. 407, 409—10 (Haw. Terr. 1949).  
The plain language of the Trust reflects that Lucas 
used "lawful issue" to specify beneficiaries of the Trust 
income, and "surviving issue" to specify beneficiaries of the 
final Trust distributions. We conclude that Lucas' use of these 
two separate terms, to designate two different sets of 
beneficiaries , was purposeful. Lucas could have, but did not, 
use the same term in both provisions. 
"Issue," "surviving issue," and "lawful issue" are not 
defined in the Trust. However, t he Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has 
long held that "[t]he term 'issue,' shorn of any and all 
judicial constructions and taken in its ordinary and popular 
sense[,] . . . is definitely a gener al term synonymous with 
children, progeny, offspring, descendants, etc." O'Brien v. 
Walker, 35 Haw. 104, 109 (Haw. Terr. 1939) . The term "issue," 
has generally been understood to include both marital and 
7   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nonmarital children. Id.  at 115 (noting that courts have 
construed  "issue" as "children of the blood" absent contrary 
surrounding circumstances"). The record contains  a  genetic test 
report, indicating a  99.99%+ probability that Trip is Casey and 
Alanna's biological father. The Probate Court was therefore not 
wrong in finding that Casey and Alanna, who have survived Trip, 
were "shown to be the natural children of [Trip]," and therefore 
"surviving issue."  
Unlike the word "issue," the phrase "lawful issue" 
does not appear to have a plain and unambiguous meaning. 
Ambiguities exist where there is "any doubt or controversy . . . 
as to the meaning of the language used in a trust[.]" In re 
Lock Revocable Living Tr., 109 Hawaiʻi 146,  153—54,  123 P.3d 
1241, 1248—49  (2005)  (cleaned up). The court will only turn to 
rules of construction when the "intention of the testator cannot 
be fairly and reasonably ascertained" due to the ambiguity of 
the language.  In re Est.  of Campbell, 33 Haw. at  802.    
In determining that Casey  and Alanna were "lawful 
issue," the Probate Court referenced the unadjudicated Verified Petition and found only that,  
16. By [Verified Petition] filed in the Family Court 
of the First Circuit, State of Hawaii, on May 16, 2008 . . 
. , [Trip] acknowledged that he was the father of each of 
Casey and Alanna and prayed, inter alia , that he be 
adjudged their legal and natural father. 
17. The [Verified Petition] was signed by [Trip's] 
counsel and was accompanied by a verification executed and 
sworn by [Trip] on May 15, 2008. The matter was not 
8   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
    
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adjudicated before [Trip's] death less than three weeks 
later. 
18. Casey and Alanna are the children of [Trip] and 
therefore, through him, the "issue," "lawful issue," and 
"surviving issue" of General Cassiday, entitled by the 
terms of the Will to share in the net income of the Trust 
and, if they survive to Trust termination, to share in the 
final distribution of the Trust. 
The Probate Court's finding that Trip "acknowledged that he was 
the father" of Casey and Alanna does not, without more, support 
the Probate Court's conclusion that Casey and Alanna were 
"lawful issue." (Emphasis added.) The Probate Court, for 
example, references Trip's unadjudicated Verified Petition, but 
does not make any findings or articulate its reasoning as to how 
the Verified Petition establishes the legal conclusion that 
Casey and Alanna are "lawful issue."3 
In the absence  of sufficient findings, this court 
cannot discern whether the Probate Court was right or wrong in 
concluding that Casey  and Alanna are "lawful issue."   See  In re 
Elaine Emma Short  Revocable Living Tr. Agreement Dated July 17, 
1984, 147 Hawaiʻi 456,  467, 465 P.3d 903,  914  (2020). "[W]hen  
the lower court has failed to issue the requisite findings of fact to enable meaningful appellate review, it is not the 
function of the appellate court to conduct its own evidentiary 
3 The Probate Court did not specify what extrinsic evidence , if 
any, it relied upon to discern Lucas' intent, and whether, notwithstanding 
the lack of a court order establishing paternity, the genetic evidence that 
Casey and Alanna are the biological children of Trip establishes that they 
are "lawful issue" pursuant to H awaii Revised Statutes chapter 584 or 
otherwise . 
9   
 
 
  
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
analysis." Id.  at 465, 465 P.3d at 912;  see also  In re Genaro 
Louis Perez Tr. Dated October 19, 2015, No. CAAP-19-0000464, 
2024 WL 1577317, at *3 (Haw. App. Apr. 11, 2024) (SDO).  
We therefore vacate the Probate Court's Order in part, 
and remand with instructions for the Probate Court's  
"identification and findings of facts in support of a conclusion as to the [testator's]  intent."  In re Genaro Louis Perez, 2024 
WL 1577317, at *3; see also  In re Elaine Emma Short, 147 
Hawaiʻi 
at 465—67, 465 P.3d at 912—14.    
III. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we  vacate the Probate 
Court's Judgment, and we affirm in part and vacate in part the 
Order. We remand for further proceedings consistent with this 
summary disposition order.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, January 21, 2025. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone,  
Margery S. Bronster,  Presiding Judge  
Sunny S. Lee,   
for Respondent/Beneficiary- /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen,  
Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Philip W. Miyoshi,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry,  
for Respondents/  Associate Judge 
Beneficiaries-Appellees.  
10 