NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000097
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THOMAS GRANDE, Appellant-Appellee, v. HENRY ENG, DIRECTOR,
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU DEPARTMENT OF PERMITTING AND
 
PLANNING; CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOULULU, DEPARTMENT OF PERMITTING
AND PLANNING, Appellees-Appellees, and MIGUEL RAMIREZ AND
VALERIE RAMIREZ; STATE OF HAWAII DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL
RESOURCES, Appellees-Appellants, and JOHN DOES 1-10,
JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1604-08 (KKS))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Appellees/Defendants-Appellants Miguel and Valerie
 
Ramirez (the Ramirezes) and the State of Hawai 'i Department of 
Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) (collectively, Appellants)
 
appeal from the Amended Judgment in favor of Appellant/Plaintiff-
Appellee Thomas Grande (Grande) and against Appellants (Amended
 
Judgment), which was filed on January 18, 2013, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
1

 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
DLNR is the owner of agriculturally-zoned property in
 
Waimanalo, Hawai 'i, that is leased to the Ramirezes. The 
Ramirezes filled and graded an approximately 5,000 square foot
 
section of the property (the Graded Area or Landfill), allegedly
 
without obtaining proper grading permits. Grande, a makai
 
neighbor, believes that the graded area poses a danger to his
 home. On November 26, 1999, pursuant to a formal complaint by
 Grande against Appellants, the City and County of Honolulu (the
 City) Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) issued a Notice
 
of Violation to the Ramirezes and DLNR for, inter alia, grading
 
without a permit. On January 21, 2000, DPP designated the
 subject violations as "corrected" by virtue of Miguel Ramirez
 becoming a "cooperator" with Windward Oahu Soil and Water
 
2
Conservation District (WOSWCD).  In the meantime, the Ramirezes
 
reportedly continued to fill and grade the Graded Area without
 
2
 Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 14-13.5(d) allows the
department (here, the DPP) enforcing the Honolulu Grading Ordinance to cede
regulatory jurisdiction over the ordinance to soil and water conservation
districts, under certain circumstances. Specifically, ROH §§ 14-13 to 14-16
do not apply to: 
Land which is being managed in accordance with soil

conservation practices acceptable to the applicable
soil and water conservation district directors, and
that a comprehensive conservation program is being
actively pursued for the entire area in the program
and that the conservation program with appropriate
modification is reviewed and accepted by the soil and
water conservation district directors periodically but
not less than once every five years and shall be made
available to the city and county; provided, however,
that no grading which, in the opinion of the chief
engineer, endangers abutting properties or which
alters the general drainage pattern with respect to
abutting properties shall be commenced or performed
without a grading permit[.]
 
ROH § 14-13.5(d) (1983). 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
obtaining a permit. Grande again contacted DPP, as well as
 
WOSWCD, to determine which of the two agencies had regulatory
 jurisdiction. According to Grande, DPP claimed that WOSWCD had
 
jurisdiction, but WOSWCD informed him that they "are not a
 
regulatory agency" and that their "relationships are built on a
 system of voluntary compliance and cooperation." 
On November 25, 2003, Grande filed a lawsuit in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit, Grande v. Fonoimoana, Civil
 No. 03-1-2352-11 (Grande v. Fonoimoana), seeking declaratory and
 
injunctive relief to require DPP to, inter alia, assume
 
regulatory jurisdiction over the Graded Area. DLNR, Ramirezes,
 DPP, and WOSWCD were all named defendants. Grande attests that,
 
at a December 13, 2003 meeting, DPP informed Grande that it
 
intended to seek dismissal of the suit on the grounds that Grande
 failed to exhaust administrative remedies (i.e., consideration by
 the Director of DPP). On December 18, 2003, Grande submitted a
 "formal complaint" to DPP, which included opinion letters from
 two engineers in support, and asked DPP to enforce pertinent
 grading ordinances and to otherwise give immediate attention to
 the illegal dumping and grading of the subject property. On
 December 23, 2003, Deputy Corporation Counsel for the City, Lori
 Sunakoda (Sunakoda or Corporation Counsel), wrote to Grande
 
informing him that his complaint would be treated as a petition
 
for a declaratory ruling and processed in accordance with the DPP
 Part 1 - Rules of Practice and Procedure (initially effective
 October 24, 1993, with various amendments) (DPP Procedural Rules)
 
governing declaratory rulings. On January 21, 2004, Grande wrote
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to DPP confirming that the City would be treating his complaint
 
as a petition for declaratory relief, but asserting that this
 treatment is "not a waiver of any rights [he] may have against
 the City and County in the pending litigation or in any other
 proceeding." 
On February 18, 2004, Acting Deputy Director of DPP
 
Kathy Sokugawa, signing on behalf of DPP Director Eric G. Crispin
 (Crispin), issued a decision on the complaint, finding
 
"insufficient information" for DPP to conclude that the Landfill
 
endangers abutting properties or alters general drainage patterns
 with respect to abutting properties, and stating that,
 accordingly, the grading activity in connection with the Landfill
 is subject to the jurisdiction of WOSWCD. On March 19, 2004,
 Grande requested reconsideration under the DPP Procedural Rules
 Rule § 4-3(b). On August 19, 2004, Crispin sent Grande another
 letter decision denying his request for reconsideration.
 
On September 20, 2004, Grande timely submitted an
 
appeal of the DPP Director's February 18, 2004 decision and the
 DPP Director's August 19, 2004 denial of reconsideration to the
 Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), citing the City's Department of
 
Land Utilization (DLU) Part 3 Rules of the Zoning Board of
 
3
Appeals (ZBA Rules) Rule 22-1.  On October 29, 2004, DPP moved
 
to dismiss Grande's appeal on jurisdictional grounds. 
In a
 
November 24, 2004 declaration, Grande informed the ZBA that
 
Corporation Counsel had initially told him that an appeal was to
 
3
 It appears that these administrative rules still reference the
DLU, rather than the DPP, notwithstanding the departmental reorganization
discussed in Section III.B., below.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be made before the ZBA, but subsequently informed him that the
 
City's Rules of the Engineering Division for Drainage, Flood and
 Pollution Control, and Grading, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
 Programs of the Department of Public Works (adopted September 16,
 1994) (DPW Engineering Rules) would apply, and that a DPP
 
hearings officer would be appointed to consider Grande's appeal.
4
  
On April 7, 2005, the ZBA granted DPP's motion to dismiss on the
 
grounds that the ZBA's jurisdiction is limited to ROH Chapters 21
 (zoning) and 22 (subdivision).
5
 
On May 23, 2005, Sunakoda wrote to the presiding judge
 
in Grande v. Fonoimoana , informing the court that, pursuant to an
 
agreement between Grande and Sunakoda:
 
Grande previously granted the City an open-ended extension
of time to file its Answer to the Complaint, based upon the
City's representations that if [Grande] were to submit a
request to the [DPP] Director requesting an administrative
declaratory ruling, and (depending on the outcome of
[Grande]'s request for declaratory ruling), if [Grande]
wished to challenge such ruling, pursuant to DPP's
administrative rules governing Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu 1990 Chapter 14, that [Grande] would be afforded
the remedy consisting of a contested case hearing, provided
for in DPP's administrative rules. As communicated
 previously to [Grande], DPP has been moving forward with the
necessary arrangements for funding, selection and retention
of a hearings officer to preside over the contested case
hearing.
 
4
 It is undisputed that, after the DPP Director's letter decisions,
discussions took place between Corporation Counsel and Grande regarding the
available administrative remedy for challenging the letter decision, and the
City determined that Grande's remedy would be via a petition for appeal and
contested case hearing, pursuant to the DPW Engineering Rules.
 
5
 The City's Grading Ordinances are found in ROH chapter 14, which
is available at
 http://www.honolulu.gov/rep/site/ocs/roh/ROH_Chapter_14a10_19.pdf.
 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
6
On July 20, 2007,  DPP moved to dismiss the City
parties from Grande v. Fonoimoana, based on Grande's failure to
 
exhaust administrative remedies. The Ramirezes joined in the
 motion to dismiss, noting that "[m]atters of enforcement of
 grading ordinances [are] in the exclusive province of the [DPP]
 and that appeal should be permitted to 'run its course' prior to
 judicial review." On October 16, 2007, the court dismissed the
 City parties from Grande v. Fonoimoana, without prejudice to
 refiling the claims after a contested case hearing.
 
After the DPP hearings officer was engaged, on February
 
4, 2008, the Ramirezes and DLNR sought to intervene in the
 contested case hearing, citing § 00-01-15 of the DPW Engineering
 
7
Rules, as their "interest in the subject administrative
proceedings and contested case hearing is clearly distinguishable
 from that of the general public." The hearings officer granted
 their request for intervention and the Ramirezes and DLNR
 actively participated in the proceeding, attended all hearings,
 and submitted briefs on legal matters. On April 1, 2008,
 Hearings Officer Ryan K. Harimoto (Harimoto or DPP Hearings
 
Officer), sua sponte, raised the issue of subject matter
 jurisdiction. All parties submitted memoranda on the issue;
 
6
 It appears from the record that, on May 3, 2006, the City agreed
to the Director's review of supplemental information from Grande in support of
his request for reconsideration, thereby putting the contested case hearing
proceedings on hold. On October 23, 2006, the new DPP Director, Henry Eng,
found that the supplemental information failed to raise any new concerns and
was insufficient to warrant reconsideration of the DPP's prior positions and
decisions. 
7
 DPW Engineering Rules § 00-01-15(c)(1) grants intervention to "an
applicant who demonstrates that such applicant will be so directly and
immediately affected by an adverse decision that such applicant's interest in
the proceeding is clearly distinguishable from that of the general public." 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
however, the DPP Director took no position. On July 3, 2008,
 
Harimoto entered Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 Regarding Jurisdiction (Dismissal Order), concluding that:
 
1. Petitioner's December 18, 2003 letter to DPP,
along with his March 19, 2004 request for reconsideration,
constituted a request for declaratory ruling, inasmuch as he
asked DPP to issue a Notice of Violation citing Intervenors
Ramirez for grading without permit or to reinstate a
previously rescinded Notice of Violation, and noted therein
a "Necessity of Immediate Action";
 
2. There is nothing in the record to indicate that
Petitioner objected to DPP's treatment of his December 18,
2003 letter as a petition for declaratory relief or that he
was an unwilling participant in those proceedings;
 
3. The DPP's February 18, 2004 and August 19, 2004
responses were separate orders disposing of Petitioner's
petition for declaratory relief pursuant to HRS § 91-8;
 
4. Once DPP disposed of Petitioner's petition for
declaratory relief, any appeal of such disposition would be
properly before the Circuit Court, State of Hawaii, pursuant
to HRS §§ 91-8 and/or 91-14;
 
5. Unlike decisions and orders arising from
contested case hearings (HRS § 91-12), orders disposing of
petitions for declaratory relief need not include written
findings of fact and conclusions of law;
 
6. IT IS THUS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND
DECREED, that the Hearings Officer does not have
jurisdiction over the instant matter and Petitioner's
related "appeals" of the DPP's February 18,2004, August 19,
2004, and October 23, 2006 decisions, respectively.
 
On August 6, 2008, Grande filed a notice of appeal in
 
the Circuit Court, challenging the Dismissal Order, as well as
 
8
the February 14 [sic], 2004,  August 19, 2004, and October 23,
2006, actions of the DPP Director. On April 15, 2009, Grande
 moved to bifurcate the appeal, requesting that only the first
 issue, which he referred to as Count I, be considered in the
 first instance. On September 1, 2009, the Circuit Court granted
 in part and denied in part Grande's motion to bifurcate, ordering 
8
 The correct date is February 18, 2004.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the parties to submit briefs addressing Counts I and II on
 
jurisdictional issues only. 
After further briefing and oral argument, on January
 
13, 2011, the Circuit Court entered its Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law and Order Vacating, Reversing and Remanding
 Appellee Henry Eng, City and County of Honolulu Department of
 Planning and Permitting's July 3, 2008 Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order Regarding Jurisdiction
 (Jurisdiction Order), concluding, inter alia, that Hearings
 
Officer Harimoto's Dismissal Order was in error and ordering DPP
 
to hold a contested case hearing. The Jurisdictional Order
 reversed the DPP Hearings Officer's Dismissal Order and ordered,
 inter alia, that "the DPP shall hold a contested case hearing as
 agreed to by the DPP and [Grande] and that DPP shall appoint a
 hearings officer other than Mr. Harimoto to conduct the contested
 case hearing."
 
On March 28, 2012, Circuit Court entered judgment in
 
favor of Grande and against Ramirezes, generally, and in favor of
 Grande and against the City for attorney's fees in the amount of
 $19,430.15. The March 28, 2012 judgment expressly states that
 "[a]ny and all remaining claims, if any, are dismissed without
 prejudice, including any claims currently pending in [
Grande v.
 
Fonoimoana]." 
On July 27, 2012, Grande moved to amend the March 28, 
2012 judgment, pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 60(a) & (b), to correct the judgment to state: "Any 
and all remaining claims, if any, are dismissed without 
8
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prejudice. This Judgment does not affect any claims currently
 
pending in [Grande v. Fonoimoana]." Grande stated that his 
inartful drafting of the Judgment to allow for an erroneous
interpretation to dismiss claims in Civil No. 03-1-2352-11
was a clerical error, was inadvertent and/or was a mistake.
The Judgment as drafted does not accurately reflect the
ruling of the court in this case, which was limited to
claims pending in Civil No. 08-1-1604-08. In addition, this
court does not have jurisdiction to dismiss claims pending
before another court in a separate, though related, action.
 
Appellants opposed the motion, arguing that Grande was
not entitled to relief pursuant to HRCP Rule 60. On October 9,
 
2012, the court granted Grande's motion, stating, inter alia:
 
 
The Court finds, following a fresh review of the
record, that none of the parties in the instant agency
appeal moved this court for dismissal of the separate case
Grande et al. v. Fonoimoana et al.  (Civil No. 03-01-2352-1).
The Court takes judicial notice that Judge Karen T. Nakasone
is still presiding over that case.
The Court finds that it is therefore inappropriate for
either party to move for dismissal of 
Grande et al. v. 
Fonoimoana et al., because the matter of dismissal was never
raised before the Court and was, therefore, not within the
Court's contemplation.
 
Appellants' motion for reconsideration was denied. The
 
Amended Judgment was entered on January 18, 2013.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL

 
Appellants raise three points of error on appeal,
 
contending:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in entering the Amended
 
Judgment against the Ramirezes and DLNR because they are not
 "appropriate parties" because they are not "implicated" by the
 Jurisdiction Order and they should be dismissed;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in entering the
 
Jurisdiction Order because it reversed the hearings officer's
 no-jurisdiction order based on insufficiently comprehensive facts 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
regarding the "agreement of the parties" jurisdictional
 
underpinnings; and
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in amending the judgment
 
because it relieved Grande from the results of his inartful

 
drafting, it was based on findings beyond the bounds of reason,
 and it was contrary to the limitations of HRCP Rule 60.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW

 
Review of a decision made by a court upon its review
of an administrative decision is a secondary appeal. The
 
standard of review is one in which this court must determine
 whether the court under review was right or wrong in its
decision. 
To determine if the decision under review is right or
wrong, we apply the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g) to
the agency's decision. 
Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm'n of Kauai, 133 Hawai 'i 141, 
163, 324 P.3d 951, 973 (2014) (citation omitted; format altered). 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91–14(g) (2012)
 
provides: 

(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
Additionally, 
[i]t is well settled that in an appeal from a circuit
court's review of an administrative decision the appellate
court will utilize identical standards applied by the
circuit court. The clearly erroneous standard governs an
agency's findings of fact. An agency's findings are not
clearly erroneous and will be upheld if supported by
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reliable, probative and substantial evidence unless the
reviewing court is left with a firm and definite conviction
that a mistake has been made. The courts may freely review
an agency's conclusions of law. 
Kauai Springs,  133 Hawai 'i at 164, 324 P.3d at 974 (citation 
omitted; format altered).
 
An appellate court reviews a circuit court's
determination of an HRCP Rule 60 motion for an abuse of
 discretion. An abuse of discretion occurs where the trial
 court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Buscher v. Boning , 114 Hawai 'i 202, 211, 159 P.3d 814, 823 (2007) 
(citations, quotations, and brackets omitted)
 
IV. DISCUSSION

 
A. Appellants' First and Third Points of Error
 
With respect to their first point of error, Appellants
 
contend that the Amended Judgment is "in error" because it
 "wrongly fails to identify claims, it takes judgment against the
 wrong parties, it wrongly fails to take judgment against the
 'appropriate parties,' it wrongly fails to dismiss parties and
 claims not disposed of, and it wrongly creates exposure for
 uninvolved parties in contravention of contract and rulemaking
 laws." With this argument, Appellants assert that the Amended
 Judgment is defective because it does not identify "Count II."
 
Appellants' primary arguments disregard the nature of
 
the proceedings before the Circuit Court in this case. As
 detailed above, Grande sought administrative relief from the DPP
 Director's rulings against him by way of a contested case
 hearing. The Ramirezes and DLNR sought to intervene in the
 contested case, their request was granted, and they actively
 participated in the contested case proceedings. When the DPP
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hearings Officer sua sponte raised the issue of subject matter
 
jurisdiction, the Ramirezes and DLNR argued that the contested
 case should be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. The DPP
 Hearings Officer agreed and ruled in their favor, concluding that
 he did not have jurisdiction to conduct a contested case hearing.
 Grande appealed that ruling to the Circuit Court. In their
 briefs to the Circuit Court, the Appellants again argued that the
 DPP Hearings Officer did not have jurisdiction and that his
 ruling should be affirmed.
 
Where the only issue decided on the appeal to the
 
Circuit Court (other than the attorney's fees award against the
 City) was whether the DPP Hearings Officer had jurisdiction to
 conduct a contested case hearing, and the Ramirezes and DLNR
 appeared and made arguments on that issue in the agency
 proceedings and the Circuit Court proceedings, we find no error
 in the Circuit Court's entry of judgment against them. 
Appellants cite no legal authority to the contrary. Given
 Appellants' intervention before the DPP based on their arguments
 that the case would have a "direct impact" on them and they would
 be "immediately affected by an adverse decision," Appellants'
 argument on this appeal that they were "totally uninvolved,
 absolutely nominal parties" in the proceedings before the DPP
 Hearings Officer appears to be disingenuous. Indeed, under the
 applicable DPW Engineering Rules, "'[p]arty' means each person or
 agency properly seeking and entitled to be admitted as a party in
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a hearing[9] . . . and any intervenor who has complied with
 
Section 00-01-15 and has been admitted by the Hearings Officer as
 
a party to the hearing." DPW Engineering Rules § 00-01-03. 
Appellants' argument that the Amended Judgment is
 
fatally defective because it does not specifically identify
 "Count II" is equally without merit as the Amended Judgment
 expressly states that any and all remaining claims, if any, are
 dismissed without prejudice. 
Appellants' third point of error, that the Circuit 
Court erred in amending the March 28, 2012 judgment, is also without merit. HRCP Rule 60(a) provides that "[c]lerical mistakes in judgments, orders or other parts of the record and errors therein arising from oversight or omission may be corrected by the court at any time of its own initiative or on the motion of any party and after such notice, if any, as the court orders." "Rule 60(a) is used 'to make the judgment or record speak the truth and . . . to make it say . . . what originally was pronounced.'" Whitman v. Whitman, 91 Hawai
'i 468, 
470, 985 P.2d 659, 661 (1999) (citing 11 Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice & Procedure: Civil 2d § 2854, at 241 (1995)). Here, the March 28, 2012 judgment incorrectly stated that it dismissed "any claims currently pending in [Grande v. Fonoimoana]," when in fact the dismissal or other disposition of Grande v. Fonoimoana was not 
9
 Under the DPW Engineering Rules, "Hearing" is a contested case
 
hearing and is defined as "a proceeding for the determination of the legal
rights of specific parties which is authorized by law or rules in a manner
which is initiated by action taken or to be taken by the department." DPW
 Engineering Rules § 00-01-03. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before the Circuit Court in this case. The Amended Judgment
 
correctly states that it "does not affect any claims currently
 pending in [Grande v. Fonoimoana]." As Grande submitted, and the
 Circuit Court agreed, the correction in the Amended Judgment was
 necessary and appropriate to reflect the truth of the court's
 ruling, which did not purport to affect the other law suit. 
B. The Jurisdictional Issue
 Appellants argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
entering the Jurisdiction Order "based on insufficiently
 comprehensive facts regarding the 'agreement of the parties'
 jurisdictional underpinning." As is clear from the record, the
 Circuit Court's order reflected the court's concern about how the
 City proceeded in this case, and in the related case, with
 respect to Grande's claim that his home was endangered by the
 unpermitted grading on Appellants' property. With respect to
 Grande v. Fonoimoana, the City took the position that Grande's
 complaint should be dismissed for failure to exhaust his
 administrative remedies. So, as detailed above, based on the
 City's representations to Grande and to the court in Grande v.
 Fonoimoana as to what those remedies were, Grande sought
 administrative relief from the DPP Director and agreed,
 essentially, to hold that suit in abeyance.
10 When the DPP
 
Director declined to take any action and denied reconsideration,
 it appears that the City's Corporation Counsel confirmed to
 Grande that the ZBA had jurisdiction to hear an appeal. However,
 
10
 Based on the City's representations and arguments, that case was
ultimately dismissed, without prejudice, because Grande had not yet exhausted
his administrative remedies.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after Grande filed his appeal to ZBA, the City's attorney then
 
took the position that ZBA did not have jurisdiction, and moved
 (successfully) for dismissal of the ZBA appeal. 
The City's attorney then clarified and agreed that
 
Grande was instead entitled to a contested case hearing, as
 provided for in the applicable administrative rules, and that DPP
 was moving forward with the arrangements for the contested case
 hearing. The assigned DPP Hearings Officer then raised the issue
 of jurisdiction (with the City taking no position at the time),
 and dismissed the contested case hearing for lack of
 jurisdiction. Finally, on the appeal to the Circuit Court, the
 City actively argued that the DPP Hearings Officer had no
 jurisdiction and that his Dismissal Order should be affirmed. It
 was on this record that the Circuit Court noted its concern about
 the apparent changes in the City's legal position and the City's
 failure to keep its agreement to hold the contested case hearing,
 and ordered the City to pay Grande for attorney's fees accrued in
 responding to the City's arguments, as well as reversed the
 Hearings Officer's Dismissal Order.
 
However, the singular focus on that aspect of the
 
Circuit Court's rulings disregards that the DPW Engineering Rules
 provide for a contested case hearing under the circumstances
 presented here, as the City's attorney represented and agreed
 when it informed Grande that a hearings officer would be
 appointed. In addition, as the Circuit Court noted, nothing in
 the DPP Procedural Rules precludes a contested case hearing,
 although the regulatory framework could be clearer and more user­
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
friendly. This complexity may stem in part from a reorganization
 
of the City's departments.
 
Effective July 1, 1998, the development permitting
 
functions from the City's former Building Department, the
 Department of Public Works (DPW), and the Department of
 
Wastewater Management, along with various other functions, were
 
transferred into the former DLU for the purpose of forming a
 newly titled Department of Planning and Permitting (i.e., the
 DPP).
11 See Departmental and Agency Reports of the City and
 
County of Honolulu for the Fiscal Year July 1, 1998 - June 30,
 1999 (1999 Departmental Reports) at 280. As part of this
 
reorganization, DPP added a new Civil Engineering Branch, which
 
came from the former DPW. Id. at 294. 
With the reorganization (and subsequent actions), the
 
various matters within the DPP's administrative mandate have
 become subject to a wide-ranging list of administrative rules,
 which are identified (and hyperlinked) on the DPP's website as
 follows:
 
Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP)
Administrative Rules
 1. RULES OF THE BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
 2. PART 1 - RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE 
3. PART 2 - RULES RELATING TO SHORELINE SETBACKS AND THE
 
SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA
 4. PART 3 - RULES OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
 5. RULES RELATING TO ADMINISTRATION OF CODES
 6. RULES OF THE ENGINEERING DIVISION
 7. RULES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING FOR
 
PROCESSING AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL PLAN
 8. PART 4 - PROCEDURES FOR REVISING THE PUBLIC
 
INFRASTRUCTURE MAP
 9. RULES FOR PROCESSING AMENDMENTS TO THE DEVELOPMENT
 
PLANS AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES PLANS
 10. PROCEDURES FOR THE AMENDMENT OF STATE LAND USE
 
11
 On January 1, 1999, the functions of the former Planning
Department were also merged into the new DPP. 1999 Departmental Reports at
280.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
 11. AFFORDABLE HOUSING RULES FOR UNILATERAL AGREEMENTS
 12. RULES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
 13. SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
 14. RULES RELATING TO STORM DRAINAGE STANDARDS
 15. RULES RELATING TO SOIL EROSION STANDARDS AND
 
GUIDELINES
 
See City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and
 
Permitting, http://www.honoluludpp.org/AboutDPP/WhatWeDo/
 
AdministrativeRules.aspx (last visited Jan. 3, 2007).
 
In 1999, for example, DPP's Civil Engineering Branch

 
adopted the set of rules numbered "15," the new Rules Relating to
 Soil Erosion Standards and Guidelines (adopted February 26, 1999)
 (Soil Erosion Rules). An examination of the Soil Erosion Rules,
 
however, confirms that these rules are of a technical nature and
 
are focused specifically on soil erosion standards and erosion
 control practices; they do not purport to address any sort of
 proceedings before the DPP or procedures related thereto. 
Notably, the Soil Erosion Rules expressly repeal the prior
 standards and guidelines. Soil Erosion Rules § 1-6. 
In addition, in October of 1999, the DPP amended the
 
DPP Procedural Rules, which had been the DLU's Rules of Practice
 and Procedure prior to the departmental reorganization. As
 discussed further below, Chapter 3 of the DPP Procedural Rules
 provides a means to seek a determination, i.e., a declaratory
 ruling, concerning the applicability of a statute, ordinance, or
 rule relating to the DPP, in accordance with HRS § 91-8. DPP
 Procedural Rules § 3-1. The DPP Procedural Rules, however, do
 not set forth a general means for review of agency decisions.
 However, Chapter 4 of the DPP Procedural Rules provides for
 reconsideration of the Director's decision to "approve or deny an
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
application." DPP Procedural Rules § 4-1. Other parts of the
 
collection of DPP rules provides other means of review, including
 the ZBA Rules (which are still denominated as DLU rules) and the
 DPW Engineering Rules (which are still denominated as DPW rules).
 
Notably, it does not appear that the DPW Engineering
 
Rules were repealed, amended or renamed subsequent to the City's
 departmental reorganization.
12 Rather, they have been retained
 
by the DPP, as set number "6" of the DPP's administrative
 rules.
13 Pursuant to this court's post-hearing order entered on
 
February 12, 2016, the City, Grande, and the Appellants all
 reported to the court that there are no records or evidence to
 suggest that the DPW Engineering Rules have been amended or
 repealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in HRS § 91­3 (2012). Accordingly, with respect to the matters at issue in
 this case, we conclude that the DPW Engineering Rules remain in
 effect, as part of the DPP's administrative rules. 
Subchapter 3 of the DPW Engineering Rules, entitled
 
Procedure for Appeal from Action of the Chief Engineer, and
 Subchapter 4 of the DPW Engineering Rules, entitled Hearing,
 provide for an appeal through a contested case hearing for any
 person who is "specially, personally and adversely affected" by
 
12
 Similarly, the ZBA Rules are still entitled "Department of Land
Utilization Part 3 Rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals." In contrast, on
October 12, 2004, DPP repealed the "Rules of the Building Department Governing
the Enforcement of Codes and Regulations by the Building Department of the
City and County of Honolulu" (1999) and adopted "Rules Relating to
Administration of Codes of the Department of Planning and Permitting," which
appears as Part 4 of the DPP's Administrative Rules.
 
13
 See City and County of Honolulu Department of Planning and
 
Permitting, http://www.honoluludpp.org/AboutDPP/WhatWeDo/
AdministrativeRules.aspx (last visited Jan. 3, 2007).
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of action of the Director and Chief Engineer of the DPW, whose
 
authority and duties were assumed by the DPP Director with the
 City's departmental reorganization. Pertinent provisions of the
 DPW Engineering Rules include the following:
 
§ 00-01-12 Petition. (a) Any person who is
specially, personally and adversely affected by an action of
the Chief Engineer may submit a written petition to the
[DPW] setting forth.
(1)	 The petitioner's name, mailing address, and
telephone number.
(2)	 Identification of the location of the violation
 or discharge by street address.
(3)	 The petitioner's interest in the property or if
the petitioner has no property interest, state
how the petitioner is adversely affected by the
action appealed.
(4)	 Designation of the specific applicable provision
of the ordinance or rule or regulation
(5)	 The action of the Chief Engineer and the date
said action was taken.
 
(6)	 All pertinent facts.
(7)	 Reasons for the appeal, including a statement as
to why the petitioner believes that the Chief
Engineer's action was based on an erroneous
finding of a material fact, and/or that the
Chief Engineer acted in an arbitrary or
capricious manner, or manifestly abused his or
her discretion.
 . . . .
 § 00-01-14 Pre-hearing Procedure. (a) Within ten
days after receipt of a petition, the department shall
forward copies of the petition to all interested parties, if
any, if they are not the petitioner.
(b) The department shall, upon consultation with the
parties, set the date for the hearing on the appeal and the
public hearing, and if written briefs are to be submitted,
schedule the dates on which are due the opening brief,
answering brief, and reply brief. . . .
(c) Motions to the Hearings Officer and supporting,
opposing, and reply memoranda may be submitted by the
parties as they deem appropriate, except that the Hearings
Officer will not accept any motion or memorandum submitted
less than seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date for
the appeal.
. . . .
 
§ 00-01-15 Intervention
. (a) The Hearings Officer
shall consider and act upon applications to intervene.
. . . .
  
(c)
	 Applications to intervene shall be disposed of
as follows:
 
(1)	 Intervention shall be granted to an applicant
who demonstrates that such applicant will be so
directly and immediately affected by an adverse
decision that such applicant's interest in the
proceeding is clearly distinguishable from that
of the general public.
(2)	 Intervention may be denied in the sound
discretion of the Hearings Officer when it
appears that the position of the applicant is
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantially the same as that of a party
already admitted to the proceeding.
. . . .

 
§ 00-01-17 Procedure
. (a) The hearing shall be
conducted in conformity with the applicable provisions of
Sections 91-9, 91-10, and 91-11, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
(b) The hearings before the Hearings Officer shall
be open to the public in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
(c) The hearings shall be conducted as a contested
case under Chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as it may be
amended.
 
While these rules refer to an appeal from an action of
 
the "Chief Engineer," a pragmatic reading of the General
 
Provisions in Chapter 1 of the DPW Engineering Rules, in light of
 the City's departmental reorganization, makes clear that the DPP
 Director's actions in this case were taken in his role as
 successor to the Chief Engineer of the former DPW. Chapter 1 of
 the DPW Engineering Rules provides, inter alia:
 
§ 00-01-01 Purpose of Subchapter; Statement of
Policy. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
procedures on the implementation and enforcement of permits
by the department for drainage, flood, pollution control;
grading, soil erosion and sediment control programs; and
provisions for the public and others [to have] the
opportunity for participation.
. . . .
 
§ 00-01-03 Definitions
. As used in this Chapter:
 
"Action of the Chief Engineer" means a decision
rendered on an enforcement order or a permit pursuant to the
Drainage, Flood and Pollution Control Ordinance, Chapter 14,
Article 12, or the Grading, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Ordinance, Chapter 14, Articles 13 through 16, [ROH]
(hereinafter "Drainage, Flood and Pollution Control
Ordinance" and "Grading, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance").
 
"Chief Engineer" means the Director and Chief
Engineer, Department of Public Works, City and County of
Honolulu, or his duly authorized agent.
. . . .
 "Hearing" means a proceeding for the determination of
the legal rights of specific parties which is authorized by
law or rules in a manner which is initiated by action taken
or to be taken by the department.
 
"Hearings Officer" means the person who hears and
decides an appeal of the Chief Engineer's decision. . . .
 
Here, the Notice of Violation issued to the Ramirezes
 
and DLNR for, inter alia, grading without a permit, was issued by
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Milton T. Kono (Kono) for the DPP Director and cited violations
 
of Chapter 14, ROH, Section 14-14.1(a) and 14-13.5(f). Kono also
 
signed the designation of the violations as "corrected" based on
 the notation that "Miguel Ramirez, is now a cooperator with the
 [WOSWCD]," clearly in reference to the exclusion stated in ROH
 § 14-13.5(d). See, supra, n.2. After Grande's attempt to get
 
judicial relief in Grande v. Fonoimoana was rejected on the
 grounds of failure to exhaust administrative remedies, Grande's
 December 18, 2003 letter to the DPP Director sought enforcement
 action by the DPP based on alleged violations of over thirty
 requirements of the City's grading ordinance, ROH Chapter 14,
 Articles 13-16. 
Although characterized by the City as a request for
 
declaratory ruling pursuant to Chapter 3 of the DPP Procedural
 Rules, Grande was clearly seeking action by the DPP, not solely a
 declaration. Chapter 3 of the DPP Procedural Rules, which was
 repeatedly referenced by the City, is entitled "Declaratory
 Rulings" and provides in part:
 
§ 3-1 Who may petition. Any interested person may
petition the director for a declaratory ruling as to the
applicability of any statute or ordinance relating to the
department, or of any rule or order of the department.
 
There was, arguably, no question or controversy as to
 
whether the subject ordinances applied to the grading of the
 
Landfill by the Ramirezes. Grande's letter complaint is replete
 with citations to applicable ordinances, as well as his requests
 that DPP enforce them and the factual grounds for enforcement. 
Indeed, the February 18, 2004 decision on behalf of the DPP
 Director assumes the applicability of the ordinances and
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
addresses the facts, determining, inter alia, that "there is
 
insufficient information for the City to conclude that the
 landfill endangers abutting properties or alters the general
 drainage pattern with respect to abutting properties" and that
 the grading of the Landfill is subject to the jurisdiction of
 WOSWCD in accordance with ROH Chapter 14, Article 13. Grande's
 March 19, 2004 request for reconsideration similarly requested
 action by the City, i.e., that the City assume jurisdiction over
 the Landfill and undertake enforcement action, based on
 additional evidence submitted by Grande. The DPP Director's
 August 19, 2004 decision denying reconsideration again determined
 that the evidence was insufficient and refused to take any
 enforcement action, deferring to WOSWCD, pursuant to the
 applicable ordinance.
14
 
The DPP Director's October 23, 2006 rejection of any
 
further reconsideration of Grande's original complaint, based on
 supplemental information provided by Grande, explained that
 "[t]he City has a long-standing practice of considering a grading
 Notice of Violation (NOV) moot, if Section 14-13.5 Exclusions
 (City revised ordinances) is [sic] or can be made to be
 applicable to a situation" and informed Grande that the City
 "rendered Mr. Ramirez's NOV moot and the file closed."
 
In light of the above, we conclude that the DPP
 
Director's decision rejecting Grande's request for enforcement of
 
14
 As the Hearings Officer did not reach the merits of the DPP
Director's decision, we express no opinion as to whether the requirements set
forth in either the first part or the second part of the applicable ordinance,
ROH § 14-13.5(d), have been met.
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ROH Chapter 14 was an action of the DPP Director in his role as
 
the successor to the Chief Engineer, as described in DPW
 Engineering Rules § 00-01-03, even if it also could be construed
 as a declaratory ruling. In addition, we conclude that the
 contested case hearing procedures set forth in Subchapters 3 and
 4 of the DPW Engineering Rules, on the petition of "[a]ny person
 who is specially, personally and adversely affected by [such]
 action," were intended to provide an administrative remedy to
 persons such as Grande under the circumstances of this case. 
DPW Engineering Rules §§ 00-01-01, 00-01-03, and 00-01-12. 
Indeed, the DPW Engineering Rules also provide for the
 intervention by "an applicant who demonstrates that such
 applicant will be so directly and immediately affected by an
 adverse decision that such applicant's interest in the proceeding
 is clearly distinguishable from that of the general public." 
DPW Engineering Rules § 00-01-15. Notably, Appellants argued
 that this provision applied to them and they were granted
 intervenor status in the contested case hearing pursuant to this
 provision.
 
We conclude that the Hearings Officer erred when he
 
disregarded the administrative remedies provided in the DPW
 Engineering Rules for a person who is adversely affected by an
 action of the DPP Director exercising his powers as the successor
 to the Director and Chief Engineer of the DPW, and focused solely
 on the City's treatment of Grande's complaints as petitions for
 declaratory relief, while ignoring or rejecting the City's
 treatment of the DPP Director's decision, as an action subject to
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the contested case hearing rules. Thus, we also conclude that
 
the Hearings Officer erred when he concluded that he did not have
 jurisdiction to review the DPP Director's decision – as set forth
 in his February 18, 2004, August 19, 2004, October 23, 2006
 letters – not to assume jurisdiction over the Landfill and
 undertake enforcement action.
 
Appellants' arguments to the contrary are unavailing. 
Appellants argue that there could be no "agreement of the
 parties" regarding a contested case hearing because they were
 parties and they did not agree. This argument ignores, however,
 that the contested case was initiated, pursuant to DPW
 Engineering Rules §§ 00-01-12 and 00-01-14, prior to their
 intervention, pursuant to DPW Engineering Rules § 00-01-15. 
While the City and Grande "agreed" to the conduct of a contested
 case hearing to review the DPP Director's actions concerned
 alleged grading violations, the treatment of this remedy as an
 "agreement" is overemphasized, as it fails to acknowledge that
 the DPW Engineering Rules provide for a contested case hearing.
15
 
Appellants further argue that there is no rule recognizing the
 existence of a contested case hearing procedure following a
 declaratory ruling. While apparently recognizing the DPP
 Director as the successor to the DPW Chief Engineer in otherwise
 administering, enforcing, and interpreting ROH Chapter 14,
 Appellants do not acknowledge or accept the continued
 applicability of the DPW Engineering Rules. Appellants cite no
 
15
 Accordingly, we need not address Appellants' argument that this
"agreement" is not enforceable pursuant to the law of contracts.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority barring administrative review of an agency decision by 
contested case hearing pursuant to duly promulgated rules, even if the decision is in the nature of a declaratory ruling, and we find none. Arguably, absent proceeding in accordance with the DPW Engineering Rules providing for a contested case hearing, Grande would have failed to exhaust all available administrative remedies. See Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals of Honolulu, 114 Hawai
'i 184, 196-97, 159 P.3d 143, 155­
56 (2007); Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group By & Through Serrano v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 91-92, 734 P.2d 161, 167-68 (1987). 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
correctly concluded that the Hearings Officer erred in his
 determination that he lacked subject matter jurisdiction, albeit
 for different reasons. See Survivors of Medeiros v. Maui Land &
 
Pineapple Co., 66 Haw. 290, 293, 660 P.2d 1316, 1319 (1983).
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons set forth above, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's January 18, 2013 Amended Judgment; as ordered by the
 Circuit Court, this case is remanded to the DPP for the conduct
 of a contested case hearing before a new hearings officer.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 20, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Thomas R. Grande 
for Appellant-Appellee Presiding Judge 
Allan F. Suematsu for Appellees-Appellants 
Associate Judge 
Winston K.Q. WongDeputy Corporation Counselfor Appellees-Appelles 
Associate Judge 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
26
 