
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000452
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MAUI MUSCLE SPORTS CLUB KAHANA, LLC, A HAWAI 'I
 
 
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
 
v.
 
 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF VALLEY ISLE RESORT,
 
A HAWAI 'I NON-PROFIT CORPORATION; JOHN DOES 1-50,
 
JANE DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50,
 
AND DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants-Appellees
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0925(1))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Maui Muscle Sports Club Kahana, LLC
 
(Maui Muscle) appeals from the: 
(1) "Order Granting Defendant Association of Apartment
 
Owners of Valley Isle Resort's Motion for Summary Judgment,"
 
filed March 28, 2012 (Summary Judgment Order);
 
(2) "Order Denying [Maui Muscle's] Motion for
 
Preliminary Injunction," filed December 13, 2012 (Preliminary
Injunction Order);
 
(3) "Order Granting Defendant Association of Apartment
 
Owners of Valley Isle Resort's Motion for Order to Show Cause Why
 
[Maui Muscle] and John G. Horak, Esq. Should Not Be Held in
 
Contempt for Violation of the Court's Oral Ruling on December 6,
 
2012," filed February 7, 2013 (Contempt Order);
 
(4) "Order Amending February 7, 2013 Order Granting
 
Defendant Association of Apartment Owners of Valley Isle Resort's
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 


 

 


 

 


 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion for Order to Show Cause Why [Maui Muscle] and John G.
 
Horak, Esq. Should Not Be Held in Contempt for Violation of the
 
Court's Oral Ruling on December 6, 2012," filed March 28, 2013
 
(Amended Contempt Order); and
 
(5) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Association of Apartment Owners of Valley Isle Resort's Motion
 
for Mandatory Injunction," filed April 26, 2013 (Mandatory
Injunction Order). All orders were filed in the Circuit Court of
 
1
the Second Circuit  (circuit court).
 
Maui Muscle contends the circuit court erred by:
 
 
(1) 
adjudicating the merits of the case in the
 
Preliminary Injunction Order without giving parties notice; 
(2) misconstruing the Preliminary Injunction Order as
 
enjoining Maui Muscle from making representations to County of
 
Maui officials (County); 
(3) imposing sanctions on Maui Muscle based upon the
 
misconstrual via the Contempt Order; 
(4) concluding that Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
Chapter 514B clearly and ambiguously governed the parties'
 
governing documents;
 
(5) concluding that no genuine issue of material fact
 
existed regarding the extent of the parties' ownership interests
 
in subject properties; 
(6) concluding Defendant-Appellee Association of
 
Apartment Owners of Valley Isle Resort (AOAO) was responsible for
 
"common elements" of the properties; and
 
(7) concluding AOAO had the sole right and
 
responsibility to perform repairs, maintenance, rebuilding, and
 
reinstatement of those common elements. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This appeal arises out of a dispute concerning the
 
extent of the parties' respective ownership and control over a
 two-story building located in the vicinity of the Valley Isle
 
Resort Condominium Project (Project). The Project is situated on
 
land that was submitted to a condominium property regime, and
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 
2
  
 







 





 



 





 



 




 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defined in the Second Restatement of Declaration of Horizontal
 
 
Property Regime for the Valley Isle Resort Condominium, as
 
 
amended (Declaration). 
 
The Project was built in 1973 and consists of a twelve
 
 
story building with 120 living units (the Tower), a two-story
 
 
commercial facilities building covering 10,745 square feet, (the
 
Commercial Unit), a covered walkway area, a parking lot, and
 
 
other service areas, all located at 4327 Lower Honoapi 'ilani 
Road, Lahaina. 
 
The Declaration was recorded on December 1, 1994 in the
 
 
State of Hawai 'i Bureau of Conveyances as Document No. 94-197003, 
as thrice amended.2
 
 
Maui Muscle's business is located in the Commercial
 
 
Unit building. Under section 4 of the Declaration, the entire
 
 
two-story building is considered "one commercial apartment[.]" 
 
Section 4(a) of the Declaration specifies: 
 
(a) Limits of Apartments . The apartment shall not be deemed
to include the undecorated or unfinished surfaces of the perimeter

walls or of the interior load-bearing walls, the floors and
perimeter ceilings surrounding each unit, or any pipes, wires,
ducts, conduits, or other utility or service lines running through
such unit which are utilized for or serve more than one unit, all
of which are limited common elements . . . .
 
The Declaration includes an easement for owners of
 
 
residential apartments in the Commercial Unit:
 
 
10. The two-story commercial building shall be used
for such commercial purposes as determined by its owner;
provided, however, that if such use is not contemplated by
the statement of design intention in Section 3 of this
Declaration, as amended, the use thereof shall not be such
 
2 The Declaration was first amended by Amendment to the Declaration
of Horizontal Property Regime and By-Laws of Valley Isle Resort, recorded on
October 30, 2000 as Document No. 2000-153091.
 
On April 29, 2011, the Second Amendment to the Second Restatement
of Declaration of Horizontal Property Regime for Valley Isle Resort
Condominium was recorded as Document No. 2011-070512 (amending the Declaration
such that HRS Chapter 514B would govern and approval requirements were reduced
from 75% to 67%).
 
On August 15, 2011, the Third Amendment to the Second Restatement
of Declaration of Horizontal Property Regime for Valley Isle Resort
Condominium was recorded as Document No. 2011-129536 (
Third Amendment ). The
 
Third Amendment effectuated section 3.1 of a settlement agreement between Maui
Muscle and AOAO, discussed infra, whereby the original lobby easement area
would be expanded favoring the Tower units and AOAO would pay for expenses
related to certain limited common elements of the Commercial Unit. The Third
 Amendment also referred to a Tower Easement Area, identified as the lobby,
manager's office, and the porte cochere easement area, and schematized in a
map appended as Exhibit A to the Third Amendment.
 
3
  
 
 
 







 

 

 

 





 







 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as might interfere with the enjoyment of their units by
residential apartment owners unless the Association's Board
of Directors shall have consented to such use. However, the
owners of residential apartments shall have an easement to
utilize the lobby and manager's office space in the two-
story building [(
Lobby Easement )] with an easement of entry
and access thereto [( Porte Cochere Easement )], such
 
easements to be used exclusively by the Association of Unit
 
Owners for the purpose of managing the operation of the 12­

story building for the owners of residential apartments, for
 
the maintenance of the project as a whole, and for such
 
other related uses as shall be consistent with the operation
 
of such projects in its present zoning under the ordinances
 
of the [County]. Such easements shall be nontransferable
 
 
apart from the apartments to which they are appurtenant and
 
are granted to the apartment owners of the 12-story building
 
in consideration of their continued obligation to pay all
 
expenses of the grounds maintenance, external lighting, and
 
security for the common areas.
 
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Administration of the Project is vested in the
"Association of Unit Owners" (Association) and each owner of a
 
 
residential apartment is a member of the Association. 
 

 
Section 6 of the Declaration provides:
 
6. The common elements shall include each of the
 
elements which is mentioned in [HRS] Chapter 514A and which
is actually constructed or provided on the land described
above, and specifically includes, but is not limited to the
following: 
a. 
Said land described in Exhibit "A"
;3  
b. Parking area for 143 cars and driveways; 
c. Sewage disposal system; 
d. All pipe and equipment relating to the
distribution of water, except as designated herein as
limited common elements.
 
e. Primary electrical switch gear and
transformer vaults. 
If any common element encroaches upon any apartment or
limited common elements, or if any apartment encroaches upon
any other apartment or common element, a valid easement for
such encroachment and the maintenance thereof, as long as it
continues, does and shall exist.
 
Under section 7 of the Declaration, parts of the
"common elements" are designated "limited common elements" and
 
 
are set aside and "reserved for the exclusive use of the [Tower]
 
 
and the [Commercial Unit]." The "limited common elements" set
 
 
 
3
 Exhibit A consists of a metes and bounds description of the land
upon which the Project is located. HRS § 514A-13, titled "Common elements[,]"
was amended in 2004. HRS § 514-13 (Supp. 2004).
 
4
  
 
 
 
 
 





 

 

 




 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 








 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
aside for the Commercial Unit are specified as: 
(i) All foundations, columns, girders, beams,
supports, bearing walls, roofs, passageways, lobbies,
hallways, stairs, walkways, elevators, entrances and exists
of said two-story building;
 
(ii) Refuse area for the said two-story
 
building;
 
(iii) All ducts, electrical equipment, wiring,
piping and other appurtenant installations for services,
including power, water, light, refuse and telephone for the
two-story building;
 
(iv) All other elements and facilities in use or
necessary to the existence, upkeep and safety of the said
two-story building.
 
Maui Muscle became the fee owner of the Commercial Unit
 
pursuant to a Warranty Deed and Assignment of Sublease to Maui
 
Muscle from Leon Roger Richards and Mary Virginia Richards,
 
recorded on January 7, 2000 (Warranty Deed). Maui Muscle is a
 
public gym and fitness center, organized as a limited liability
 
corporation and manager-managed by Dale L. Smith (Smith).
 
Maui Muscle's Warranty Deed was subject to the
 
Declaration and the Restatement of Bylaws of the Association
 
(Bylaws) recorded on November 16, 1992. Article V, section 4 of
 
the Bylaws provides: 
Section 4. Maintenance and Repair of Common Elements.
Except as may otherwise be provided in the Declaration, all
maintenance, repairs and replacements of the common
elements, whether located inside or outside of the
apartment, shall be made only by or at the direction of the
Board [of the Association] and be charged to all the Owners
as a common expense . . . .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On July 7, 2011, Maui Muscle, AOAO, and others entered
 
into a settlement agreement (Settlement Agreement) disposing of
 
claims litigated in Maui Muscle Sports Club Kahana, LLC v.
 
Association of Apartment Owners of Valley Isle Resort, et al.,
 
Civ. No. 09-1-0321(1) and Association of Apartment Owners of
 
Valley Isle Resort v. Maui Muscle Sports Club Kahana, LLC, et
 
al., Civ. No. 07-1-0452(2). The Settlement Agreement defines the
 
Commercial Unit as the "commercial facilities building covering
 
approximately 10,745 square feet . . . identified as [TMK] (2) 4­
3-010-004 and as more particularly described in the Declaration.
 
On September 3, 2012, a fire destroyed much of the
 
5
 
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Commercial Unit. The instant case arises from disputes
 concerning which party could control the demolition and
 
rebuilding of the Commercial Unit. 
By letter dated October 2, 2012, AOAO wrote to Maui
 
Muscle and Robert H. Joslin (Joslin), Maui Muscle's insurance
 
claims adjuster, to assert in part AOAO's obligation to repair
 
and maintain common and limited common elements in the Commercial
 
Unit and its right to access units for such purpose.
 
By letter dated October 4, 2012, AOAO's authorizing
 
agent notified the County Department of Public Works (DPW) and
 
Environmental Management that Michael Wright & Associates, Inc.
 
(MWA) was authorized to act on AOAO's behalf for all necessary
 
permit applications and supporting documentation in reference to
 TMK (2) 4-3-010:004 (the Commercial Unit).
 
On November 14, 2012, AOAO obtained a demolition/
 
building permit, Permit No. B 2012-1417 (Permit 1417), from the
 
County for the Commercial Unit.
 
On November 26, 2012, Maui Muscle filed a complaint
 
alleging AOAO was trespassing on Maui Muscle's property, the
 
Commercial Unit, and requested declaratory and injunctive relief. 
On November 27, 2012, Maui Muscle filed a motion for a
 
preliminary injunction to enjoin AOAO from obtaining a
 
demolition/building permit from the County to complete work on
 
the Commercial Unit and entering the Commercial Unit. Maui
 
Muscle alleged that AOAO and its representatives had repeatedly
 
entered the Commercial Unit after the fire loss, removed Maui
 
Muscle property, and brought contractors onto the site to perform
 
demolition work. These actions, according to Maui Muscle, would
 
impair efforts to preserve evidence for insurance adjustment
 
purposes and thus result in irreparable harm to "Maui Muscle's
 
rights to recover for their considerable loss from the blaze." 
Maui Muscle further alleged that the burnt premises had been
 
"deemed hazardous due to asbestos content and may only be
 
disturbed by . . . trained and licensed hazmat crews." AOAO's
 
contractors are allegedly not licensed to remediate asbestos and
 
therefore AOAO's "improper demolition" exposed Maui Muscle to
 
liability.
 
6
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 






 









 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A declaration by Smith was attached to the preliminary
 
injunction motion. Smith declared he witnessed AOAO, under the
 direction of its on-site management firm, Hawaiian Management,
 
and their contractors dismantling protective fencing that Maui
 
Muscle installed around the burnt property and performing
 
contracting work, including demolition work.
 
A declaration by Joslin was also attached to Maui 
Muscle's preliminary injunction motion. Joslin stated Smith had 
contacted him on the morning of the September 3, 2012 fire and 
that evening the Maui County Fire Department relinquished the 
commercial building site to Maui Muscle and Joslin's employer, 
Hawai
'i Public Adjusters. 
The circuit court granted Maui Muscle's motion and
 
issued a temporary restraining order (TRO). The TRO ordered AOAO
 
and its representatives, pending the hearing on Maui Muscle's
 
preliminary injunction motion, be restrained from
 
(1) . . . entering upon the commercial improvements owned
by Maui Muscle, except the areas [known] as the Lobby
easement and Porte Cochere easement as set forth and
 described in [the Settlement Agreement] and to the extent
that [AOAO] is or may be responsible for repair, maintenance
or improvements in those specified areas or such other areas
as that agreement or any other agreement between the parties
provides . . . without a written approval from Dale Smith,
owner and principal for Maui Muscle.
 
(2) FURTHER ORDERED that [AOAO and their representatives]
are restrained from obtaining a demolition and/or building
permit from the [County] to complete work on the Premises,
except the areas [known] as the Lobby Easement and Porte
Cochere Easement . . . and to the extent that [AOAO] is or
may be responsible for repair, maintenance or improvements
in those specified areas or such other areas . . . without
written authorization from [Smith], owner and principal for
Maui Muscle.
 
On December 4, 2012, AOAO filed their opposition to
 
Maui Muscle's preliminary injunction motion, to which AOAO
 
attached six declarations and exhibits A through X. AOAO's
 
opposition requested Maui Muscle's preliminary injunction motion
 
be denied and the TRO be dissolved. AOAO stated it had informed
 
Joslin that it had engaged a licensed asbestos contractor, but
 
Joslin still objected to AOAO's efforts to perform any work
 
without Maui Muscle's approval.
 
7
 
 






 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the December 6, 2012 hearing on Maui Muscle's
 
 
preliminary injunction motion, Maui Muscle's counsel, John Horak
 
 
(Horak), asserted that Maui Muscle needed 
 
to document and record and inventory evidence of its
insurance loss that's covered by a number of policies on the
site. Any entry into the entire building alters those
aspects . . . and because of that situation, there needs to
be an order enjoining any activities there while –
preliminarily while this evidence is being documented.
 
Maui Muscle did not call any witnesses to testify at
 
the December 6, 2012 hearing. Horak stated that there was
 
"enough supporting documentation in the moving papers with the
 
attachments and the opposition to the motion and the exhibits for
 
the [circuit court] to make its ruling on a preliminary
 
injunction." Horak inquired into the necessity of taking direct
 
testimony from witnesses to admit exhibits that were attached to
 
motions and submitted with declarations because those exhibits
 
and declarations were already on the record and before the
 
circuit court.
 
The circuit court stated it was "used to hearing
 
evidence from witnesses and so on and so forth" in preliminary
 
injunction hearings and 
having heard from [Horak] today, that he's basically relying
on the motion that he filed and the declaration attached to
 that particular motion; and hearing [AOAO counsel's]
argument, that [Maui Muscle] has not met its burden, the
[circuit court] is going to go ahead and grant [AOAO's]
motion to dismiss.
 
Presumably, the circuit court's reference to AOAO's
 
"motion to dismiss" referred to AOAO's opposition to Maui
 
Muscle's preliminary injunction motion. The circuit court also
 
dissolved the TRO against AOAO. These actions apparently
 
constitute the circuit court's December 6, 2012 oral order (Oral
 
Order), which is at issue in this case.
 
On December 6, 2012, subsequent to the hearing, Horak
 
and Joslin met, and according to a declaration by Horak, Joslin
 
was going to meet with the County's permitting department
 
processing Maui Muscle's commercial tenant improvements in the
 
same parcel location and building subject to AOAO's demolition
 
8
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and alteration permits. AOAO's permit depicted partial
 
demolition and alteration at the parcel identified as TMK 24-3­
010:004-0121. Horak and Joslin met with County officials that
 
day and according to Horak's declaration he "understood that the
 
County was going to review the various permits for the commercial
 
building."
 
In a declaration submitted by Joslin, he stated that as
 
an agent for Maui Muscle, he was required to determine the scope
 
of work necessary to rebuild Maui Muscle's commercial building
 
according to current standards, ordinances, and laws, including
 
those of the County. At the December 6, 2012 meeting, Joslin
 
asked the DPW Director (Director), to identify the responsible
 
party in a permit application for construction activities. 
Joslin declared the Director's response was that property owners
 
are required to authorize such permit applications and must
 
submit a Property Owner's Authorization letter to DPW. DPW then
 
determined Maui Muscle and not AOAO was the proper applicant for
 
Permit 1417.
 
A declaration from Michael Wright (Wright) of MWA
 
stated the Director contacted him on December 6, 2012 regarding
 
AOAO's Permit 1417. Wright declared he was advised that Joslin
 
and Horak "represented that the AOAO had no authority to apply
 
for Permit 1417 without [Smith's] written authorization because
 
[Maui Muscle], not the AOAO, was the owner of the property for
 
which Permit 1417 was obtained[.]" According to Wright, Joslin
 
and Horak's statements caused the Director to become concerned
 
that Permit 1417 was improperly issued and therefore the County
 
intended to rescind the permit.
 
On December 7, 2012, the County posted a stop-work
 
warning sign that stated Permit 1417 was suspended until further
 
notice. By letter dated January 3, 2013, the County also denied
 
Maui Muscle's permit application, citing failures to conform to
 
building code provisions and to obtain energy code certification. 
On December 10, 2012, Maui Muscle objected to AOAO's
 
proposed order denying Maui Muscle's motion for preliminary
 
9
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injunction. On December 13, 2012, the circuit court entered the
 
 
order as proposed by AOAO, which provided: (1) AOAO was not
 
 
prohibited from entering upon commercial improvements owned by
 
 
Maui Muscle "if such entry is in accordance with that certain
 
 
[Declaration]"; (2) AOAO was not restrained from obtaining a
 
 
demolition and/or building permit from the County to complete
 
 
work on the premises; (3) written approval from Maui Muscle was
 
 
not required for AOAO to take the aforementioned actions unless
 
 
required by the Declaration; and (4) AOAO would be awarded
 
 
attorney's fees and costs.
 
 
On December 17, 2012, AOAO filed an answer to Maui
 
 
Muscle's November 26, 2012 Complaint, denying all allegations. 
 
On December 19, 2012, AOAO filed a motion for an order to show
 
 
cause why Maui Muscle and Horak should not be held in contempt of
 
 
court (Motion for Order to Show Cause). On January 16, 2013,
 
 
Maui Muscle filed its opposition to AOAO's Motion for Order to
 
 
Show Cause. On January 24, 2013, the circuit court held a
 
 
hearing on AOAO's Motion for Order to Show Cause and orally
 
 
granted the motion stating:
 
 
As far as holding [Maui Muscle] in contempt, [circuit
 
court] finds, first of all, that during the hearing on
 
December 6, 2012, that the [circuit court] specifically
 
ruled that [Maui Muscle] had not met its burden for
 
preliminary injunction.
 
 
The reason why the [circuit court's] order was so
 
simple was because there was no evidence presented to the
 
[circuit court]. That's why it was -- it was a fairly
 
straightforward, simple order, which [AOAO's counsel]
 
prepared promptly. And I gave you time to file an
 
opposition to it, and you filed your own order, Mr. Horak.
 
And the [circuit court] ended up signing [AOAO's counsel's]
 
approximately a week later.
As such,  the [circuit court] did dismiss [Maui
 
Muscle's] restraining order, denied the motion for
 
preliminary injunction. I believe at that time your client,
 
though maybe not present in the courtroom, was right outside
 
getting ready to testify. So obviously the [circuit court]
 
considers that you folks were present for the hearing, not
 
only yourself but your clients as well.
 
 
 
 
[The circuit court] finds that it was clear and
 
unambiguous from the [circuit court's] December 6th oral
 
ruling that Defendants should not have been prevented from
 
obtaining demolition and/or building permits for the
 
purposes of completing the renovation work.
 
 
10
 

 
	 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The [circuit court] also finds that sometime after the
 
hearing on December 6, 2012 -- whether it be two hours or
 
later on that afternoon -- apparently yourself and your
 
clients met with the [Director] or someone of authority at
 
the [DPW] for the [County].
 
 
And apparently you and your clients – and I don't find
 
anything in here that you deny that yourself and your client


made misrepresentations to the [Director] that the AOAO had
 
no authority to apply for Permit 1417 without Dale Smith's
 
written authorization because [Maui Muscle], not the AOAO,
 
was the owner of the property for which Permit 1417 was
 
issued.
 
 
I guess this resulted in the County putting this stop work
order that went out
, I think, on December 7th, the next day, 2012.
 
The [circuit court] finds that you and your clients, Mr.
 
Horak, violated the [Oral Order] of the [circuit court]. You
 
 
provided false representations to the [Director] for the County.
 
This is in direct contravention of the [circuit court's] order.
 
 
I don't know what you didn't understand about December 6th.
 
This noncompliance, I think, is clear under the LeMay test. I
 
think the [circuit court] has found by clear and convincing
 
evidence that you did not diligently attempt to comply with the
 
[circuit court's] order in a reasonable manner.
 
 
I think [AOAO's counsel's] arguments are well founded,
 
and I'm surprised that he had to file a motion with the
 
[circuit court] because I thought you folks would be in
 
thcompliance from December 6 .
 
 
The AOAO had the green light prior to this. The [circuit
 
court] denied that motion, and unfortunately you folks decided to
 
blatantly disregard the [circuit court's] order, and that's why
 
we're in court today.
 
 
So what I think is a proper sanction is, first of all,
 
apparently you were able to undo the green light that
 
[AOAO's counsel] had that very afternoon, so I'm ordering
 
that you go ahead and undo what you have done, so that the
 
AOAO does have the green light today.
 
 
That needs to be done today. You need to go over to the
 
County, and you need to fix this. And once it's fixed, whatever
 
written order you get from the County needs to be sent to [AOAO's
 
counsel's] office today prior to 4:30.
 
 
(Emphases added.)   The circuit court further stated that Horak
 
 
would be sanctioned $1,000 for each day after the hearing that he
 
 
failed to undo the stop work warning from the County. 
 
On February 7, 2013, the circuit court filed its
 
 
Contempt Order, holding Maui Muscle and its counsel, Horak, in
 
 
contempt of court. The Contempt Order, stated in part: 
 
1.	 [Maui Muscle] . . . and Horak . . . took actions,
including on or about December 6, 2012 after the
hearing on [Maui Muscle's] Motion for Preliminary
 
11
  
 



 
	 

 
	 



 
	 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Injunction, to cause [DPW] to issue a Stop Work
Warning ("Stop Work Warning") with respect to [Permit
1417] previously issued to the AOAO for work at the
premises described therein;
 
2.	 Said actions taken by [Maui Muscle and Horak] were in
direct contravention of the [Oral Order];
 
3.	 As a result of these actions of [Maui Muscle and
Horak], [DPW] issued the Stop Work Warning on December
7, 2012, preventing the AOAO from performing the work
authorized by the [Permit 1417];
 
4.	 These actions of [Maui Muscle and Horak] were taken in
contempt and in violation of (1) the [circuit court's
Oral Order] and (2) the [circuit court's] [Preliminary
Injunction Order.]
 
The Contempt Order further ordered that Maui Muscle and Horak
 
would be sanctioned $1,000 for every calendar day that the AOAO
 
was "prevented from commencing work under [Permit 1417] due to
 
[Maui Muscle and Horak's] failure to cause the County to rescind
 
the Stop Work Warning."
 
On March 12, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
AOAO's January 23, 2013 motion for summary judgment and Maui
 
Muscle's February 25, 2013 motion for leave to file an
 
interlocutory appeal from the Preliminary Injunction Order. The
 
circuit court found Maui Muscle's motion for leave to file an
 
interlocutory appeal was untimely and that appeal of the
 
Preliminary Injunction Order would cause further unnecessary
 
delay and denied the motion. The circuit court also sua sponte
 
issued findings clarifying its Contempt Order. On March 28,
 
2013, the circuit court entered its Summary Judgment Order and
 
its Amended Contempt Order.
 
The Amended Contempt Order provided: (1) Maui Muscle
 
produced sufficient evidence that it had taken actions to cause
 
the County to retract and/or rescind the stop-work order on
 
February 7, 2013, thirteen days after January 24, 2013; (2) the
 
total sanction amount against Maui Muscle would be $13,000; (3)
 
the $13,000 should be paid to AOAO's counsel; and (4) Maui Muscle
 
and Horak were jointly and severally liable for the sanction
 
amount.
 
On April 26, 2013, the circuit court filed its
 
12
 
 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mandatory Injunction Order, granting in part and denying in part
 
AOAO's motion for mandatory injunction and ordering inter alia
 
that Maui Muscle remove its personal and/or business property
 
from the Commercial Unit or it should be deemed abandoned. Maui
 
Muscle filed a notice of appeal from five of the circuit court's
 
interlocutory orders that same day.
II. DISCUSSION
 
AOAO contends this court lacks jurisdiction over Maui
 
Muscle's appeal because the circuit court has not entered a final
 judgment and Maui Muscle failed to obtain leave to pursue appeal
 
of the interlocutory orders. We conclude we have appellate
 
jurisdiction only with regard to the appeal from the Amended
 
Contempt Order.
There is no final judgment pursuant to Jenkins v. Cades 
Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 869 P.2d 1334 (1994), 
and thus we have no appellate jurisdiction unless an exception to 
the finality requirement applies. Three exceptions to the finality requirement are: (1) if the circuit court allows an appeal to be taken from an interlocutory order pursuant to HRS § 641-1(b) (1993); (2) the collateral order doctrine; or (3) the Forgay doctrine. See HRS § 641-1(b); Abrams v. Cades, 
Schutte, Fleming & Wright, 88 Hawai
'i 319, 321, 966 P.2d 631, 633 
(1998) (regarding the collateral order doctrine); Forgay v. Conrad, 47 U.S. 201 (1848); Ciesla v. Reddish, 78 Hawai
'i 18, 20, 
889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995) (addressing the Forgay doctrine). 
The circuit court did not certify any of the
 
interlocutory orders for an appeal, and thus there is no
 appellate jurisdiction pursuant to HRS § 641-1(b).
 
Further, the Forgay doctrine does not apply. See 
Ciesla, 78 Hawai
'i at 20, 889 P.2d at 704 ("The Forgay doctrine 
is an exception to the finality requirement for appeals and it allows an appellant to immediately appeal a judgment for execution upon property, even if all claims of the parties have not been finally resolved."). 
The collateral order doctrine, however, applies with
 
13
 
 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
respect to the Amended Contempt Order. Under the collateral 
order doctrine, appellate jurisdiction extends to interlocutory orders that "finally determine claims of right separable from, and collateral to, rights asserted in the action, too important to be denied review and too independent of the cause itself to require that appellate consideration be deferred until the whole case is adjudicated." Abrams, 88 Hawai
'i at 321, 966 P.2d at 633 
(citations and internal quotation mark omitted) (block quote format altered). Orders fall under the collateral order doctrine if they: "[1] conclusively determine the disputed question, [2] resolve an important issue completely separate from the merits of the action, and [3] be effectively unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment." Abrams, 88 Hawai
'i at 322, 966 
P.2d at 634 (citations and internal quotation mark omitted) (block quote format altered). 
In Harada v. Ellis, 60 Haw. 467, 480, 591 P.2d 1060, 
1070 (1979), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that an interlocutory 
order not directly related to the merits of the case that directed payment of an assessed sum and was immediately enforceable through contempt proceedings satisfied the requirements of an appealable collateral order. The Amended Contempt Order in this case concerned Maui Muscle's conduct in obstructing the AOAO's permit from the County and allegedly disobeying the circuit court's rulings, rather than addressing the merits regarding ownership and control of the damaged property. Further, the Amended Contempt Order assessed $13,000 in sanctions against inter alia Maui Muscle, to be paid on or before 4:30 p.m. on April 12, 2013, and thus Maui Muscle was in immediate jeopardy of being found in contempt of court if it did not comply. The Amended Contempt Order thus satisfies the requirements for an appealable collateral order. 
We therefore restrict our review to Maui Muscle's

 
contentions regarding the Amended Contempt Order. 
AOAO contends Maui Muscle violated the circuit court's
 
 
Oral Order issued on December 6, 2012. On December 6, 2012, the
 
 
14

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court granted AOAO's "motion to dismiss" Maui Muscle's
 
preliminary injunction motion, dissolved the TRO against AOAO,
 
and invited AOAO to file for attorney's fees and costs. AOAO's
 
opposition to Maui Muscle's preliminary injunction motion
 
requested Maui Muscle's preliminary injunction motion be denied
 
and the TRO be dissolved.
 
In its Contempt Order, the circuit court found
 
contemptible actions taken by Maui Muscle and its representatives

 
that "cause[d] the [DPW] to issue a Stop Work Warning" in
 violation of the circuit court's Oral Order and Preliminary
 
Injunction Order. Maui Muscle's alleged contemptible actions
 
occurred on December 6, 2012, however, and therefore could not
 
have violated the December 13, 2012 Preliminary Injunction Order. 
AOAO did not claim that Maui Muscle violated the Preliminary
 
Injunction Order. Instead, AOAO's Motion for Order to Show
 
Cause, which gave rise to the Amended Contempt Order, specified
 
that Maui Muscle and Horak should be held in contempt of the
 
circuit court's Oral Order. Both the Contempt Order and the
 
Amended Contempt Order specify that Maui Muscle and Horak should
 
be held in contempt of the Oral Order.
4
 
The Amended Contempt Order included findings that Maui 
Muscle had not "cure[d] their contempt" until February 7, 2013, 
thirteen days after the January 24, 2013 hearing on AOAO's motion 
for the contempt order. We review the circuit court's Amended 
Contempt Order under an abuse of discretion standard. LeMay, 92 
Hawai'i at 620, 994 P.2d at 552. 
[I]n order to hold a party in civil contempt, a movant must
establish that: (1) the order with which the contemnor
failed to comply is clear and unambiguous; (2) the proof of
noncompliance is clear and convincing; and (3) the contemnor
has not diligently attempted to comply in a reasonable
manner.
 
4
 The Contempt Order also found Maui Muscle and Horak in contempt of
the Preliminary Injunction Order, which was erroneous because allegedcontemptible acts occurred on December 6, 2012 prior to the PreliminaryInjunction Order filed December 13, 2012. Maui Muscle and Horak could not have been clearly and unambiguously subject to orders in "the four corners" ofa document that did not exist on December 6, 2012. LeMay v. Leander, 92 
Hawai'i 614, 625, 994 P.2d 546, 557 (2000). 
15
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
LeMay, 92 Hawai 'i at 625, 994 P.2d at 557 (citations omitted and 
emphases added). 
The Oral Order dissolved Maui Muscle's TRO and granted 
AOAO's motion to dismiss Maui Muscle's preliminary injunction 
motion. "[T]o hold a party in civil contempt, there must be a 
court decree that sets forth in specific detail an unequivocal 
command that the contemnor violated, and the contemnor must be 
able to ascertain from the four corners of the order precisely 
what acts are forbidden." LeMay, 92 Hawai 'i at 625, 994 P.2d at 
557 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). The December 6, 2012 Oral Order was not reduced to a written document 
with "four corners" until the circuit court filed its Preliminary 
Injunction Order on December 13, 2012. Id. 
Parties point to no authorities in this jurisdiction 
indicating that an "oral order" may satisfy the requirements of a 
"clear and unambiguous" order under LeMay. Id. Assuming 
arguendo that the transcript of the Oral Order constitutes an order with "four corners" under LeMay, we proceed to review the 
remaining LeMay requirements. LeMay, 92 Hawai
'i at 625, 994 P.2d 
at 557. 
The Oral Order's denial of Maui Muscle's preliminary
 
injunction motion meant the circuit court found Maui Muscle did
 not carry its burden of meeting the standard for a preliminary
 
injunction, but such a conclusion did not clearly and
 
unambiguously constitute an order that Maui Muscle refrain from
 
asserting its allegations of ownership to the Commercial Unit.
 
The Oral Order dissolving the TRO did not prevent Maui
 
Muscle from raising a dispute as to whether AOAO was the proper
 
permit applicant to County officials. Dissolution of the TRO
 
allowed AOAO to apply for a County demolition and/or building
 
permit on the subject property. The Oral Order dissolving the
 
TRO did not "clear[ly] and unambiguous[ly]" enjoin Maui Muscle
 
and its representatives from alleging to the County that its
 
ownership rights in the Commercial Unit should prevent AOAO from
 
entering that property.
 
16
 
 


 

 


 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There was no "clear and convincing" proof of Maui 
Muscle's noncompliance with the Oral Order. LeMay, 92 Hawai 'i at 
625, 994 P.2d at 557. The circuit court stated that "apparently 
[Maui Muscle] met with the [Director] of the [DPW] or someone of 
authority at the [DPW] for the [County]," and that it was 
apparent Maui Muscle "made misrepresentations" to the Director 
that they were the owner of the Commercial Unit property. The 
circuit court "guess[ed that] this resulted in the County putting 
this stop work order . . . ." 
The Oral Order did not order Maui Muscle to refrain
 
from alleging its ownership rights in the commercial property. 
The circuit court's finding that Maui Muscle violated the Oral
 
Order constituted an abuse of discretion that is reversible on
 
appeal. 
Because we conclude the circuit court abused its 
discretion by determining that AOAO clearly and convincingly 
established the first two LeMay factors, and because AOAO was 
required to establish all three factors, we need not determine 
whether AOAO established that Maui Muscle had "not diligently 
attempted to comply in a reasonable manner." LeMay, 92 Hawai 'i 
at 625, 994 P.2d at 557. 
III. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, Maui Muscle's appeal from
 
the following orders of the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
 
is dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction: 
(1) "Order Granting Defendant Association of Apartment
 
Owners of Valley Isle Resort's Motion for Summary Judgment,"
 
filed March 28, 2012;
 
(2) "Order Denying Maui Muscle Sports Club Kahana,
 
LLC's Motion for Preliminary Injunction," filed December 13,
 
2012;
 
(3) "Order Granting Association of Apartment Owners of
 
Valley Isle Resort's Motion for Order to Show Cause Why Maui
 
Muscle Sports Club Kahana, LLC and John G. Horak, Esq. Should Not
 
Be Held in Contempt for Violation of the Court's Oral Ruling on
 
17
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
December 6, 2012," filed February 7, 2013; and
 
(4) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Association of Apartment Owners of Valley Isle Resort's Motion
 
for Mandatory Injunction," filed April 26, 2013.
 
We also vacate the Circuit Court of the Second
 
Circuit's "Order Amending February 7, 2013 Order Granting
 
Defendant Association of Apartment Owners of Valley Isle Resort's
 
Motion for Order to Show Cause Why Plaintiff Maui Muscle Sports
 
Club Kahana LLC and John G. Horak, Esq. Should Not Be Held in
 
Contempt for Violation of the Court's Oral Ruling on December 6,
 
2012," filed March 28, 2013, and remand this case for proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 23, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Tom Pierce
 
 
Peter N. Martin
 
 
(Tom Pierce, Attorney at Law) 
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
 Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge 
 
Michael L. Lam

 
Lauren Sharkey
Lisa K. Johnson (Case Lombardi & Pettit)
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
18
 