 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000185
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
LAWRENCE CRILLEY, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION

 
(Case No. 2DTA-12-00734)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment, entered on February 19, 2013 in the District Court
 of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (District Court)
1
 
dismissing with prejudice this criminal traffic case against
 Defendant-Appellee Lawrence Crilley (Crilley) for a violation of
 Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48.2 
1 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.
 
2
 HRPP Rule 48 states, in pertinent part,
 
Rule 48. DISMISSAL.
 
(a) By prosecutor. The prosecutor may by leave of
court file a dismissal of a charge and the prosecution shall
thereupon terminate. Such a dismissal may not be filed
during the trial without the consent of the defendant.
 
(b) By court. Except in the case of traffic offenses
that are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on
motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without
prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced
within 6 months:
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2(...continued)
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set or from the
filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, on any offense
based on the same conduct or arising from the same criminal
episode for which the arrest or charge was made; or
 
(2) from the date of re-arrest or re-filing of the
charge, in cases where an initial charge was dismissed upon
motion of the defendant; or 
(3) from the date of mistrial, order granting a new
trial or remand, in cases where such events require a new
trial.
 
Clauses (b)(1) and (b)(2) shall not be applicable to
any offense for which the arrest was made or the charge was
filed prior to the effective date of the rule.
 
(c) Excluded periods. The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:
 
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by collateral or other proceedings concerning the
defendant, including but not limited to penal
irresponsibility examinations and periods during which the
defendant is incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions,
interlocutory appeals and trials of other charges;
 
(2) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by congestion of the trial docket when the
congestion is attributable to exceptional circumstances;
 
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by a continuance granted at the request or with
the consent of the defendant or defendant's counsel;
 
(4) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by a continuance granted at the request of the
prosecutor if:
 
(i) the continuance is granted because of the
unavailability of evidence material to the
prosecution's case, when the prosecutor has exercised
due diligence to obtain such evidence and there are
reasonable grounds to believe that such evidence will
be available at a later date; or
 
(ii) the continuance is granted to allow the
prosecutor additional time to prepare the prosecutor's
case and additional time is justified because of the
exceptional circumstances of the case;
 
(5) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by the absence or unavailability of the
defendant;
 
(6) the period between a dismissal of the charge by
the prosecutor to the time of arrest or filing of a new
charge, whichever is sooner, for the same offense or an
offense required to be joined with that offense;
 
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
On December 9, 2011, in district court case No. 2DTA­
11-01115, Crilley was charged by Complaint with Operating a
 
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant, in violation of
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61 (Supp. 2011), Consuming
 or Possessing Intoxicating Liquor While Operating a Motor Vehicle
 or Moped, in violation of HRS § 291-3.1 (2007), and Inattention
 to Driving, in violation of HRS § 291-12 (Supp. 2013). The
 charges stemmed from Crilley's arrest and release on bail on
 November 10, 2011.
 
The State's motion to dismiss these charges without
 
prejudice was granted on August 14, 2012.
3
 
On August 16, 2012, in the instant case, the State
 
again charged Crilley with the same three offenses by filing the
 Complaint and Summons that was docketed as 2DTA-12-00734.
 
On September 25, 2012, Crilley's counsel appeared and
 
claimed that Crilley was not properly served because only a copy
 of the summons, without a copy of the complaint, was served. 
The Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment
 filed on September 25, 2012 reflects that, "No action taken by
 court until proper service made." The Complaint and Summons were
 served on Crilley on October 31, 2012.
 
On February 5, 2013, after a number of delays due to
 
Crilley's non-appearance and continuances, Crilley filed a Motion
 to Dismiss for Violation of Rule 48 (Motion to Dismiss). Crilley
 alleged that, for Rule 48 purposes, 186 days had elapsed between
 his arrest and the filing of the Motion to Dismiss. Pertinent to
 this appeal, Crilley argued that the period between September 25,
 2012 to November 27, 2012, during which time he was not properly
 
2(...continued)
 
(7) a reasonable period of delay when the defendant is
joined for trial with a codefendant as to whom the time for
trial has not run and there is good cause for not granting a
severance; and
 
(8) other periods of delay for good cause.
 
3
 The State argued, in its memorandum in opposition to Crilley's
Motion to Dismiss in the instant case that this dismissal was due to the Hawai'i Supreme Court's decision in State v. Nesmith, 127 Hawai' i 48, 276 P.3d
617 (2012), that was rendered on April 12, 2012. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
served with the charges against him, should be included in the
 
computation of time. Although Crilley argued at the hearing on
 his motion that the dismissal should be with prejudice, he did
 
4
not explicitly argue how the Estencion  factors supported such a
result.
 
The State argued that the six-month time limit had not
 
been exceeded and if the District Court found to the contrary,
 
5
using a Barker v. Wingo  analysis, any dismissal should be
without prejudice. The State also argued that there was no
 deliberate attempt to delay the trial, as the dismissal of the
 original charges was to comply with Nesmith, and additional time
 was taken to re-serve Crilley with the new complaint after court
 personnel had advised the prosecution that the original service
 with the summons alone was sufficient, although it acknowledged
 the original service was improper under HRPP Rule 9.
6 The State
 
also pointed out that multiple continuances were obtained or
 acquiesced-to by Crilley and that he had made no showing of
 prejudice due to the delay.
 
On February 19, 2013, the District Court granted
 
Crilley's motion and dismissed the charges against Crilley with
 prejudice. While acknowledging that court staff, in the midst of
 developing new forms and procedures in connection with electronic
 filing, provided incorrect instructions to the prosecutor's
 office, the District Court ruled that delay caused by these
 instructions "can't be held against the defendant[,]" and granted
 the motion with prejudice. In its Findings of Fact and
 Conclusions of Law Regarding Defendant's Motion to Dismiss for
 Violation of Rule 48 dated March 25, 2013 (Order), the District
 
4
 In State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 269, 625 P.2d 1040, 1044 
(1981), the Hawai' i Supreme Court adopted the analysis codified in the Federal
Speedy Trial Act, 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(1) (Supp. 1980), in deciding whether to
dismiss with or without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48(b). 
5
 Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514 (1972).
 
6
 HRPP Rule 9(b)(2) provides in pertinent part that, "The summons
shall be in such form as may be prescribed in the issuing court and shall (i)
contain the name of the defendant; (ii) describe the offense alleged in the
charge . . . ." It appears that the summons in this case did not consist of
the court's preprinted form, but in any event did not contain the offenses
contained in the Complaint.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court reasoned as follows regarding the decision to dismiss the
 
case with prejudice:
 
If this case is dismissed without prejudice the State
may charge the Defendant a third time for offenses
arising from the same conduct which resulted in his
[arrest] on November 10, 2011. In that instance there
 will be further litigation, most likely another motion
to dismiss for violation of HRPP Rule 48, which motion
must necessarily be granted. In view of the impact of
such a reprosecution on the administration of this
chapter and on the administration of justice and in
consideration of avoidance of needless time and
 expense being expended by the Defendant the Court
concludes that dismissal with prejudice is the
appropriate remedy.
 
THEREFORE IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that case number 2DTA­
12-00734 is dismissed with prejudice.
 
From this Order, the State timely appeals.
 
II.
 
The State contends that the District Court erred by (1)
 
including the period between September 25, 2012 and November 27,
 
2012 in its computation of the 180-day limit imposed by HRPP Rule
 
7
48, (2) failing to adequately state on the record its analysis
of the 
Estencion factors justifying dismissal of the charges with
 
prejudice, and (3) concluding that the charges should be
 dismissed with prejudice.
 
A.
 
The District Court did not err in concluding the delay
 
from September 25, 2012 to November 27, 2012 should not be
 excluded for "good cause." HRPP Rule 48(c)(8). "A general 'good
 cause' ground is provided in Rule 48(c)(8) to take care of
 unanticipated circumstances and is recognized expressly as a
 residual discretionary power in the trial judge." State v.
 
Gillis, 63 Haw. 285, 288, 626 P.2d 190, 192 (1981) (citing
 Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040). "As a general rule, good
 cause means a substantial reason which affords a legal excuse." 
State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 368, 742 P.2d 369, 373 (1987)
 (citing Estencion, 63 Haw. at 267, 625 P.2d at 1042) (internal
 
The six-month time limit provided in HRPP Rule 48 has been
construed as 180 days. State v. Jackson, 81 Hawai' i 39, 50, 912 P.2d 71, 82
(1996). 
5
 7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
quotation marks omitted). "Rule 48(c)(8) is not to be used to
 
excuse a lack of diligence on the part of the government to
 comply with Rule 48." Gillis, 63 Haw. at 288, 626 P.2d at 193. 
Rule 48(b)'s sanction of dismissal in criminal cases not
tried within the prescribed time frame, unless excludable
delay is shown, creates an incentive for trial courts to
design and implement efficient and fair procedures to
decrease the potential for delay caused by chronic
congestion and for the legislature to supply the necessary
resources to ensure prompt processing of all criminal cases.
Additionally, Rule 48's speedy trial requirement also gives
the prosecutor an incentive to design screening procedures
to ensure that as much as possible those cases that may be
disposed of by means other than trial are removed from the
criminal justice system as quickly as possible.
 
Jackson, 81 Hawai 'i at 53, 912 P.2d at 85 (quoting State v. 
Kahawai, 9 Haw. App. 205, 210-11, 831 P.2d 936, 939 (1992)). 
The State's only challenge to the District Court's Rule
 
48 computation is to the inclusion of the delay caused when the
 
summons served on Crilley did not comply with HRPP Rule
 9(b)(2)(ii), insofar as it did not contain a description of the
 charges, and the State was required to re-serve Crilley. The
 State does not argue that it complied with HRPP Rule 9(b)(2)(ii)
 and does not challenge the District Court's Conclusion of Law No.
 9 which held that "The Summons contains no description whatsoever
 of the offense(s) alleged in the charge." Instead, the State
 argues that good cause under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) existed to excuse
 the State's failure to serve a conforming summons upon Crilley. 
The State argues that, because it received incorrect instructions
 
8
from court personnel that it could serve "only the summons"  upon
Crilley, the delay that was caused by this error should be
 excluded for good cause. We disagree.
 
As explained by the State in its opposition papers,

 
although the State filed the Complaint and Summons with the
 court, due to the court's transition to an electronic filing
 system, the prosecution was unable to serve file-marked
 complaints with the summonses and was instructed by court
 personnel to serve only the summons on Crilley. The District
 
8
 Apparently the standard language contained in the summons does not
include a description of the charge it relates to, but rather refers to the
complaint, which is usually attached, to provide the description of the charge
required in HRPP Rule 9(b)(2)(ii).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court acknowledged as much at the hearing on the Motion to
 
Dismiss: 
So, this Court is familiar with the background in this case,
so I am taking judicial notice of its records and files.
 
I will say that I believe that the agreed upon facts
is, in fact, what happened. We're in the midst of doing new
forms, doing new procedures in connection with our JIMS Crim
Program, and E-filing. And I am aware that the
 administrative staff of the Court did provide incorrect
instructions to the prosecutor's office.
 
It's unfortunate that incorrect information was given,
and the Court will take the blame for that. We did, in
fact, give that incorrect information -­
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I think what was given
to them was to issue just the penal summons.
 
THE COURT: That's right.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Right, but now, it didn't tell
them to tear off page three and issue that. It told them to
 
issue a penal summons. And if they had just captioned it
penal summons, and put driving under the influence, et
cetera, et cetera, I think that meets Rule 9. So I don't
 believe there's -­
THE COURT: We may be in the process of having to redo
that form so that -- it can be served in that fashion, but
the summons that went out doesn't comport with the rule, and
we can not -- the Court can't be giving -- I mean even
though the information came from the Court, that was wrong ­- that was wrong instruction. And so that can't be held
 against the defendant. That would be prejudicial.
 
The State's reliance upon instructions from court
 
personnel regarding service of a summons pursuant to HRPP Rule 9
 
was unwarranted. The plain language of HRPP Rule 9(b)(2)(ii)
 requires that the summons "describe the offense alleged in the
 charge[.]" It does not require the State to provide a file
 stamped copy of the Complaint with a summons. Thus, the
 availability of a file stamped Complaint was not necessary to
 comply with HRPP Rule 9, and thus did not amount to a legal
 excuse qualifying as "good cause." Therefore, under these
 circumstances, reliance upon court personnel instructions was
 unwarranted under the circumstances and the State failed to
 demonstrate good cause under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) due to its non­compliance with HRPP Rule 9. 
Even if the prosecutor's reliance upon the court's
 
instructions was justified, delay caused by the court is not
 excludable under HRPP Rule 48. The time is still included for
 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purposes of HRPP Rule 48 because it is also the court's burden to 
satisfy the speedy trial requirements. State v. Soto, 63 Haw. 
317, 320, 627 P.2d 279, 281 (1981) ("the prosecutor, the court and the accused share responsibility for carrying out the speedy-trial requirements of Rule 48."), overruled on other grounds by State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai
'i 17, 881 P.2d 504 (1994). 
Therefore, the District Court did not err by concluding
 
that there was no good cause to exclude the period from
 September 25, 2012 to November 27, 2012. The State did not
 challenge any other included time period for purposes of HRPP
 Rule 48. Thus, 186 days elapsed between Crilley's arrest and the
 filing of his Motion to Dismiss. Accordingly, the District Court
 was obligated to dismiss the charges against Crilley for
 violation of HRPP Rule 48.
 
B.
 
The State next contends that the District Court failed
to adequately articulate its analysis of the three Estencion 
 
factors to determine whether to dismiss a charge with or without
 prejudice.
 

 
In determining whether to dismiss the case with or without
prejudice, the court shall consider, among others, each of
the following factors: the seriousness of the offense; the
facts and the circumstances of the case which led to the
 dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on the
administration of this chapter and on the administration of
justice.
 
Estencion, 63 Haw. at 269, 625 P.2d at 1044 (citation omitted). 
"[I]n determining whether to dismiss a charge with or
 
without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48(b), the trial court must not
 
only consider the Estencion factors, but must also clearly
 articulate the effect of the Estencion factors and any other
 factor it considered in rendering its decision." State v. Hern,
 
— Hawai
'i —, — P.3d — , CAAP-11-0000644 and CAAP-12-0000528, 2013 
WL 1233543 at *5 (App. March 27, 2013). "The trial court's explanation of its consideration of the Estencion factors and the basis for its decision will permit meaningful appellate review." Id. However, "[e]ven if the trial court's findings are 
deficient, where the record is sufficient for the appellate court 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to make a determination of whether the trial court abused its
 
discretion, the appellate court may elect, at its option, to
 resolve the appeal on the merits." Id. at *6.
 
The District Court did not mention the seriousness of
 
the offenses when determining that the charges should be
 dismissed with prejudice. We analyze the reasons cited by the
 District Court as follows.
 
The District Court appeared concerned about the
 
prospect of Crilley being recharged a third time for the same
 offenses and speculated, without explanation, that if Crilley was
 reprosecuted, it would result in another motion to dismiss being
 filed "which motion must necessarily be granted." The District
 Court also noted that the impact of reprosecution on the
 administration of justice weighed in favor of dismissal with
 prejudice because Crilley would suffer "needless" additional time
 and expense in defending himself. 
However, as HRPP Rule 48 allows for a dismissal without
 
prejudice, it would be circular reasoning to use this fact as a
 basis to bar reprosecution. Crilley did not argue, nor did the
 District Court find, that the delay so far had caused him
 prejudice. It is also unclear why the District Court was
 convinced that a subsequent prosecution would result in another
 Rule 48 motion that would be granted. Where, by operation of the
 rule, the new charge would restart the six-month deadline, there
 was nothing in the record to support the notion that a new Rule
 48 motion would be brought and granted. Finally, there was
 nothing on this record to support the District Court's conclusion
 that a subsequent prosecution would result in "needless"
 additional expense. 
Given the lack of support in the record for the reasons
 
it articulated as justifying a dismissal with prejudice, the
 District Court's decision cannot stand, but the case must be
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
remanded for the District Court to properly consider the
 
Estencion factors.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the judgment
 
dismissing Crilley's charges with prejudice, and we remand the
 case with instructions that the District Court (1) consider the
 Estencion factors in determining whether to dismiss the charges
 with or without prejudice and (2) make findings that clearly
 articulate the effect of the Estencion factors and any other
 factor it considered in rendering its decision.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 28, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 David A. Sereno,

for Defendant-Appellee. 
10
 