FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–

 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
ANTHONY ANDREW LOCKEN, Defendant-Appellant
 
CAAP-11-0000568
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 09-1-1549)

 
NOVEMBER 28, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Anthony Andrew Locken (Locken) by felony 
information and non-felony complaint with second-degree assault against Larsen Kaneda (Kaneda) (Count 1) and third-degree assault against Karinne Wong (Wong) (Count 2). Kaneda went to high school with and was friends with brothers Konrad Bruesehoff (Konrad) and Hans Bruesehoff (Hans), who were Locken's roommates, and Kaneda knew Locken through the brothers. Wong was Kaneda's girlfriend. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The charges stem from an alleged assault that occurred
 
after a group of people, which included Locken, Kaneda, Wong,
 
Konrad, and Hans, had gone out for the evening. The group then
 went to Konrad's and Hans' house and got into an argument over
 how Locken had behaved while they were out. Wong alleged that
 during the argument, Locken grabbed her and kicked her, causing
 her to feel pain and cry. Kaneda alleged that when he came to
 his girlfriend's defense, Locken kicked him, causing the
 dislocation of his right shoulder and an indentation fracture in
 the bone socket. Locken presented contrary evidence though
 witnesses who testified that Locken did not grab Wong and did not
 kick Wong or Kaneda.
 
After a jury trial, Locken was found guilty of the
 
lesser included offense of third-degree assault on Count 1 and
 guilty as charged of third-degree assault on Count 2. The
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced
Locken to concurrent terms of probation for one year on each
 count.
 
Locken appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and

 
Probation Sentence" (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court on
 July 11, 2011. On appeal, Locken contends that: (1) the Circuit
 Court erred in allowing the introduction of Locken's "prior bad
 act," which involved a prior incident where Locken caused a fight
 that resulted in injury to Konrad; (2) the Circuit Court erred in
 issuing a "blanket" restriction on defense counsel's cross-
examination that precluded him from asking witnesses if they were
 lying; (3) the Circuit Court erred in denying defense counsel's
 request to recall a defense witness to ask a question counsel
 forgot to ask, and that defense counsel's failure to ask the
 question constituted ineffective assistance of counsel; and (4)
 the Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury on self-defense. 
As explained below, we affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The main people involved in this case and their 
relationship to each other are as follows. Locken was a roommate 
of brothers Hans and Konrad. Kaneda went to the same high school as Hans and Konrad, was classmates with Konrad, and was friends with both brothers. Wong was Kaneda's girlfriend and was friends with the brothers. Kaneda and Wong knew Locken through the brothers. Locken and Konrad, along with Sean Diaz (Diaz) and Mike Rubino (Rubino), were classmates at a California State university maritime academy. After graduating from the academy, Locken moved to Hawai
'i to work and began residing with Konrad 
and Hans. At the time of the charged incident, Diaz and Rubino resided in California, but were visiting Locken and Konrad in Hawai
'i and were staying with Locken, Konrad, and Hans at the 
brothers' house. The brothers' mother and the mother's boyfriend, Mark Murray (Murray), lived next door. 
On the night of the charged incident, a group of eight
 
people, consisting of Locken, Konrad, Hans, Kaneda, Wong, Diaz,
 Rubino, and Ryan Katahara (a high school classmate of Kaneda and
 Konrad), went to Dave & Buster's. The group left Dave & Buster's
 after being there for about two hours. Outside of Dave &
 Buster's, Locken got into a dispute with a "local guy" and
 challenged the local guy and his friends to a fight. Wong
 intervened to break up the confrontation, saying "we don't want
 any trouble[.]" The potential altercation was averted and the
 group of eight drove to the brothers' house.
 
II. 
At trial, the testimony of the State's witnesses and
 
the defense witnesses about what happened at the brothers' house
 diverged sharply. The State called Kaneda and Wong, who
 testified as follows.
 
At the brothers' house, Wong asked Locken why he wanted
 
to "cause a scene or cause trouble" and place the people with him
 at risk of getting hurt. Hans, who had been with the group that
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
evening, was disabled; Hans had a pacemaker in his heart and
 
three artificial discs in his back. Wong had been present less
 than six months before, when Locken was involved in a similar
 incident in which Konrad had been "falsecracked" by a "local guy"
 that Locken wanted to fight.
 
Wong asked Locken if he was going to pick himself and
 
his pride over his friends' well-being. When Locken responded
 that he would pick himself, Hans joined the conversation and
 asked Locken why Locken would say something like that. Locken
 became aggressive, put up his hands, and challenged Hans to a
 fight. This angered Hans, who argued with Locken. Konrad
 blocked and restrained Locken and Rubino blocked and restrained
 Hans to keep Locken and Hans apart. However, Locken continued to
 call out Hans, saying he "could take [Hans] down[.]"
 
Wong tried to calm Locken, telling him that because of
 
Hans' condition with a pacemaker in his heart and artificial
 discs in his back, Hans could get hurt or die if pushed the wrong
 way. In response, Locken asked Wong if she wanted to fight too. 
As Konrad was trying to restrain Locken, Locken grabbed Wong's
 arm twice and kicked her in the right thigh, causing her to begin
 crying.
 
Kaneda got between Locken and Wong and asked Locken,
 
"What are you doing hitting a girl?" Locken started "wheeling
 kicks" at Kaneda and landed three or four kicks to Kaneda's right
 shoulder. Murray, the boyfriend of the brothers' mother, came
 over to break things up. Locken challenged Murray to a fight,
 saying, "You want to go too, old man?" The brothers' mother then
 came over and finally separated everyone, with the brothers,
 Kaneda, Wong, and Katahara going to the mother's house.
 
The State also called Hans and Murray as witnesses. 
Hans and Murray corroborated the testimony provided by Kaneda and
 Wong.
 
The State presented medical evidence from Dr. Elizabeth
 
Ignacio (Dr. Ignacio), an orthopedic surgeon. Dr. Ignacio
 testified that Kaneda sustained "an anterior inferior shoulder
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
dislocation," associated tissue damage, and an "indentation
 
2
fracture" or "impaction fracture"  of his shoulder ball joint,
and that the injury was "recent" when she examined him. The
 
State also introduced pictures of Wong taken two days after the
 incident that showed a large bruise on her leg, as well as
 bruises on her arm.
 
III.

 
3
The defense called Diaz and Rubino,  Locken's
classmates from the maritime academy, as witnesses. Dias and
 Rubino presented a markedly different picture of what occurred at
 the brothers' house. According to their testimony, Wong and Hans
 were "acting drunk" and were angry at Locken for what had
 happened earlier that evening. Wong yelled hysterically at
 Locken, who ignored Wong or told Wong to mind her own business. 
In response, Wong lunged at Locken and tried to scratch or strike
 him. Kaneda tried to pull Wong away, and Konrad pushed Locken
 back into a chair and kept him from getting up. Diaz and Rubino
 testified that Locken did not grab Wong and did not kick or
 strike Wong or Kaneda. Locken did not testify at trial.
 
DISCUSSION

 
I.
 
Locken contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
permitting the State to introduce evidence of the prior incident in which a "local guy," whom Locken wanted to fight, "falsecracked" Konrad. Locken claims that the Circuit Court erred in permitting this "prior bad act" evidence pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence Rule 404(b). We disagree. 
HRE Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2013) provides, in relevant
 
part:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show action
 
2Dr. Ignacio explained that this type of fracture is not what most
people think of as a fracture -- when a bone is broken in two pieces -- but
described the fracture as like an indentation in a ping pong ball. 
3Rubino's testimony was presented through a video deposition.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident.
 
(Emphasis added.) Under HRE Rule 404(b), evidence of "other
 
crimes, wrongs, or acts" is admissible when: (1) it is relevant
 to any fact of consequence other than the defendant's propensity
 to commit the crime charged; and (2) its probative value is not
 substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. 
State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31–32, 828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992). A
 trial court's determination that evidence is relevant turns on
 
4
the application of HRE Rule 401 (1993)  and is reviewed under the
right/wrong standard. State v. Cordeiro
, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 
P.3d 692, 706 (2002). The trial court's decision in balancing probative value against unfair prejudice involves the application 
5
of HRE Rule 403 (1993)  and is reviewed for abuse of discretion.
Id.

 
The list of permissible purposes for the admission of 
"other bad acts" set forth in HRE Rule 404(b) is not intended to be exhaustive. State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
'i 289, 300, 926 P.2d 
194, 205 (1996). Under HRE Rule 404(b), any purpose for which bad-acts evidence is introduced is a proper purpose as long as the evidence is not offered solely to prove the defendant's 
4HRE Rule 401 defines "relevant evidence" as follows: 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency to make the
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination
of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.
 
5HRE Rule 403 provides:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value
is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
criminal propensity. Id. at 301, 926 P.2d at 206 (citing United
 
States v. Miller, 895 F.2d 1431, 1436 (D.C. Cir. 1990)). 
Here, the prior incident involving Locken was 
introduced to place in context Wong's conduct in questioning 
Locken about his behavior earlier that evening, when Locken had challenged a "local guy" and the local guy's friends to a fight. It explained why Wong was so concerned that Locken's actions had placed the safety of others in the group at risk and why she asked Locken whether he would pick his pride over his friends' safety. The prior incident was relevant to showing the context for the questions directed at Locken by Wong and Locken's reaction to those comments. It also showed that Wong had good reason for questioning Locken's behavior that evening and thereby assisted the jurors in assessing Wong's credibility. We conclude that the prior incident was relevant and admissible under HRE Rule 404(b). See Clark, 83 Hawai
'i at 300–03, 926 P.2d at 205–08 
(concluding that prior incidents of domestic violence were admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to show the context of the relationship between the defendant and the alleged victim); State v. Iaukea, 56 Haw. 343, 348–54, 537 P.2d 724, 729–32 (1975)
 (concluding that evidence of the defendant's prior crimes, which
 explained and placed in context the complaining witness's
 statements and actions, was admissible).
 
In addition, the Circuit Court gave the jury a limiting 
instruction, which prohibited the jury from using evidence of the prior incident to determine that Locken was a person of bad character. The jury is presumed to follow a trial court's instruction, and the limiting instruction served to mitigate any unfair prejudice resulting from the evidence of the prior incident. State v. Kazanas, 134 Hawai
'i 117, 129, 336 P.3d 217, 
229 (App. 2014). We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in admitting evidence of the prior incident. 
II.
 
Locken argues that the Circuit Court erred in issuing a
 
"blanket" restriction on defense counsel's cross-examination that
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
precluded him from asking witnesses if they were lying. A
 
question that accuses a witness of lying may be argumentative and
 may be precluded on that ground. However, asking a witness if he
 or she is lying is not always an impermissible question, and
 therefore, a blanket prohibition against this question is
 unwarranted. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred to the
 extent that it imposed a blanket prohibition on defense counsel's
 asking witnesses whether they were lying. However, under the
 circumstances of this case, we conclude that any improper
 restriction imposed by the Circuit Court on defense counsel's
 cross-examination did not affect Locken's substantial rights and
 constituted harmless error.
 
A.
 
The issue arose during defense counsel's cross-
examination of Kaneda. On direct examination, Kaneda testified
 that he sustained an injury to his right shoulder as the result
 of Locken's kicks. However, Kaneda admitted that when he first
 went to see Dr. Samuel Kim (Dr. Kim) for the injury shortly after
 the incident, he told Dr. Kim that his right shoulder had been
 injured after he fell down some steps and landed on the shoulder. 
Kaneda explained that he lied to Dr. Kim because "I just felt so
 ashamed of -- because for me, as a boyfriend for [Wong,] I was
 not there in time for her because it all happened so fast that I
 could not be able to help her in time. The damage was already
 done, so -- and I was just ashamed of saying that." Kaneda
 testified that he later went back and told the doctor what
 actually happened because the information might help the doctor
 diagnose and treat his injury.
 
On direct examination, Kaneda also testified that he
 
did not immediately report the incident to the police because he
 was scared -- he lived only a few blocks away from Locken and was
 afraid Locken would retaliate if Kaneda filed a police report. 
In describing the argument between Locken and Hans that preceded 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Locken's assault of Wong, Kaneda stated that Hans was frustrated
 
and talking loudly to Locken. Kaneda further testified: 
Q. Okay. And how did [Locken] respond to that?
 
A. [Locken] took it negative. He -- I saw him
 
becoming aggressive. He actually ran toward -- he was
trying to run towards Hans.
 
Q. Okay. . . . how far apart were they?
 
A. Let's see. About seven feet, eight feet.
 
Q. Okay. So they were sort of trying to get at
each other?
 
A. Yes, within that room.
 
Kaneda then stated that when Hans and Locken were trying to come
 
at each other, Konrad intervened and pushed Locken down into a
 sofa and Rubino held Hans back.
 
On cross-examination, defense counsel impeached Kaneda
 
with his prior inconsistent statements to his treating doctors
 about the cause of the injury. Kaneda admitted that he had lied
 to his doctors when he told them the injury occurred when he fell
 down some steps.
6 Kaneda also admitted that he did not tell Dr.
 
Kim that he had been injured by being kicked in the shoulder
 until after Kaneda had reported the incident to the police. 
Defense counsel also impeached Kaneda with his prior statements
 to the police, getting Kaneda to acknowledge that his trial
 testimony included information he did not tell the police.
 
In defense counsel's cross-examination of Kandea about
 
his testimony regarding the argument between Locken and Hans that
 preceded Locken's assault of Wong, the following colloquy took
 place:
 
By Mr. Wilkerson [(Defense counsel]): 
Q. When Hans got over to [Locken], [Locken] was
standing in front of the chair?
 
A. [Locken] or Hans didn't get to [Locken], though.
Mike Rubino actually held him back -- held Hans back.
 
6Kaneda testified that he had lied to Dr. Kim and Dr. Wong about having
fallen down steps, but not to Dr. Ignacio.
 
9
 --FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. [Locken] never got out of his chair, did he?
 
A. No, he was trying to.
 
Q. And he was trying to get out of his chair. He
 
never got out of his chair, right?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Why did you tell the jury earlier that [Locken]
took eight steps toward Hans? That's what you said, right?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Yet that's not true, is it?
 
A. No.
 
Q. You lied, right?

 
MS. YOO [(Deputy Prosecutor)]: Objection, Your Honor -­
THE WITNESS: Yes.
 
MS. YOO: -- argumentative.
 
THE COURT: Sustained.
 
BY MR. WILKERSON:

 
Q. May the record reflect that the witness just
said that he lied.
 
THE COURT: 
Sustained. That is an argumentative
question.
 
MR. WILKERSON: 
May I approach?
 
THE COURT: 
Yes.
 
(The following proceedings held at the bench:)

 
THE COURT: 
Mr. Wilkerson.
 
MR. WILKERSON: 
Judge, I'm moving for a mistrial. The
 
prosecutor continually interrupts my legitimate
cross-examination with this witness. Just because the Court
 believes it's argumentative, the prosecution believes it's
argumentative. It's not argumentative. I am asking
questions. They're leading questions and if -- just because
the prosecution doesn't like my questions does not mean that
they're argumentative. This witness just told the jury that
 
THE COURT: 
Keep your voice down.
 
MR. WILKERSON: 
The witness just told the jury that -­
the witness just told the jury that he lied to them right
now -- right now on the stand.
 
THE COURT: 
No, I don't have a problem -­
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
MR. WILKERSON: And that somehow -­
THE COURT: Wait. I don't have a problem with your
cross. I don't have a problem with leading questions. My
problem is with the word "lied." 
I don't think either of
 
you can use it. That is, to me, a conclusory judgment call
that the jury has to make. You can be mistaken. We can
 misspeak or we can lie. It's up to the jury to decide. You
 can't say, "you're lying, aren't you?" You can't say that.
 
MR. WILKERSON: The witness agreed that he lied.

 
THE COURT: Who knows what he -- I don't know.
 
MR. WILKERSON: I know what he said and I -­
THE COURT: And you can bring it out that "didn't you
just say he walked several steps toward the other fellow and
that's not what happened, is it?" 
You can ask him, "why'd
you say that?" Maybe you don't wanna ask him that but give
him a chance to explain. But you cannot use the word "lied"
and neither can Ms. Yoo.
 
MR. WILKERSON: I'm moving for -­
THE COURT: That is argumentative. 
You may move
for mistrial, I'm gonna deny it because I think your
client can get a fair trial. 
I don't have any problem
with that. I don't have any question about that. I'm
 telling you, please, do not use the word "lied"
because it is an argumentative question -- word to
use.
 
MR. WILKERSON: I'm moving for a mistrial. 
The
 
prosecution continues to violate Mr. Locken's right to
confront this witness. 
This is the State's star witness
 
with regards to a felony charge; continually interrupted
with very inappropriate objections.
 
THE COURT: All right. Well –­
MR. WILKERSON: Not only -- not only –- not only

in my cross-examination of this witnesses but in my
opening statement as well.
 
THE COURT: All right. Well, Ms. Yoo, I would expect
you to object when you have a -- you feel you have a
reasonable and good faith basis to object. I do not want to
 see objections from anybody just to interrupt, whether -­and that would be an objection and I don't care if it's
overruled or sustained -- I just wanna -- I just wanna
interrupt somebody. So that goes for everybody here.
 
Shortly after defense counsel resumed his cross-
examination, the following took place:
 
Q. Mr. Kaneda, now based on what you just told us
[that when you tell someone something that is not true, it's
a lie], how many times have you lied to the jury today?
 
MS. YOO:
 
Objection, Your Honor.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Sustained. I will -- I will strike that
 
question. 
It is totally inappropriate. The jury will
disregard it. Next question please.
 
The following day, during a bench conference called in
 
relation to defense counsel's cross-examination of Kaneda about
 
whether he was drunk during an incident Kaneda testified occurred
 after the charged incident, the following discussion occurred:
 
THE COURT: No, I think what we'd like to do as well
is to make clear that, you know, we're not supposed to be

using argumentative terms during questioning. I know this
 
is cross, and I know that, you know, you want to establish
certain things which is fine, as long as it's relevant. But
 to –­
MR. WILKERSON: Judge, asking a witness if he is drunk
is not argumentative.

 
THE COURT: I'm not saying it is. 
I think I'm
 
thinking of the use of terms liberally yesterday like
"lied," and that is just not done.

 
MR. WILKERSON: Asking a witness if he lied?

 
THE COURT: That is not done. You can argue that at
closing.
 
MR. WILKERSON: That is done, Judge.
 
THE COURT: This is the establishment of evidence;
it's not argument. Your argument, as I think most lawyers
know, comes at closing, and I have no problem with that at

that point to say look at what he said, he lied. But to say
are you lying now -­
MR. WILKERSON: Judge -­
THE COURT: -- is improper, and I've already said

that, okay? That's the way this Court sees it, and that's
the way it's going to be.

 
MR. WILKERSON: If I may, Judge. 
It's more
 
objectionable for me to argue to the jury that witnesses are
liars than for me to ask the witness are you a liar and have
the witness say yes, in fact, and that is what I did
yesterday.
 
THE COURT: And I've said I think you should take that
up, you know, that's fine with me. Okay, so that's the
ruling of the Court.
 
B.
 
Given the record, it is not entirely clear the extent
 
to which the Circuit Court's rulings were based on (1) a
 
determination that defense counsel's questions to Kaneda
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
regarding whether he was lying were argumentative in the manner
 
and context in which they were posed, or (2) a belief that asking
 a witness whether he or she is lying is per se improper and
 should always be prohibited. The former would be a permissible
 basis for the Circuit Court's rulings, while the latter would
 not.
 
A criminal defendant's "right to confront and to 
cross-examine is not absolute and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodate other legitimate interests in the criminal trial process." Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284, 295 (1973); 
State v. El'Ayache, 62 Haw. 646, 649, 618 P.2d 1142, 1144 (1980); see Michigan v. Lucas, 500 U.S. 145, 149 (1991) (concluding that a criminal defendant's "right to present relevant testimony is not without limitation" (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)); State v. Pond, 118 Hawai
'i 452, 463, 193 P.3d 368, 379 
(2008). Under HRE Rule 611 (1993), the trial court "shall exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of interrogating witness and presenting evidence so as to (1) make the interrogation and presentation effective for the ascertainment of the truth, (2) avoid needless consumption of time, and (3) protect the witness from harassment or undue embarrassment." The trial court's authority to control the mode of interrogating witnesses and presentation of evidence includes the discretion to prohibit counsel from asking argumentative questions. See Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i at 420, 56 P.3d 692, 722 
(2002); State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai 'i 517, 531-32, 923 P.2d 934, 
948-49 (App. 1996); State v. Peseti, 101 Hawai 'i 172, 180, 65 
P.3d 119, 127 (2003); United States v. Wood, 695 F.2d 459, 464-65 (10th Cir. 1982); Price v. State, 347 S.E.2d 365, 366 (Ga. Ct. App. 1986). The Circuit Court therefore had the authority to sustain an objection to defense counsel's asking Kaneda if he was lying if it determined that the question was argumentative. 
C.
 
On the other hand, we conclude that there is no per se
 
or blanket prohibition against counsel asking a witness if he or
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
she is lying. In State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai 'i 20, 108 P.3d 974 
(2005), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the prosecution, "may 
not ask a defendant to comment on another witness's veracity." 
Maluia, 107 Hawai 'i at 24, 108 P.3d at 978. The court explained 
that: 
Such questions, referred to as "were-they-lying" questions,
are improper for the following reasons: (1) they invade the
province of the jury, as determinations of credibility are
for the jury; (2) they are argumentative and have no
probative value; (3) they create a risk that the jury may
conclude that, in order to acquit the defendant, it must
find that a contradictory witness has lied; (4) they are
inherently unfair, as it is possible that neither the
defendant nor the contradictory witness has deliberately
misrepresented the truth; and (5) they create a "no-win"
situation for the defendant: if the defendant states that a
 contradictory witness is not lying, the inference is that
the defendant is lying, whereas if the defendant states that
the witness is lying, the defendant risks alienating the
jury (particularly if the contradictory witness is a law
enforcement officer).
 
Id. Based on this reasoning, the court held that it was
 
prosecutorial misconduct for the prosecutor to ask Maluia
 
questions, the "practical effect" of which was to ask Maluia "to
 comment on the veracity of the prosecution's witnesses." Id. at
 
25, 108 P.3d at 979. 
In this case, however, the Circuit Court sustained
 
objections to questions posed by defense counsel to Kaneda
 concerning whether Kaneda himself was lying. This is much
 different than the situation presented in Maluia. The policy
 concerns articulated in Maluia regarding the unfairness of asking
 one witness to comment on the veracity of another witness's
 testimony and its effect on invading the jury's province to
 determine credibility does not arise when the witness is asked to
 comment on his or her own credibility. Certainly, the witness is
 competent to render an opinion on his or her own veracity, and
 the witness's answer to the question "Are you lying?" would be
 relevant to the jury's assessment of the witness's credibility. 
We therefore conclude that there is no per se prohibition against
 asking a witness if he or she is lying and that a blanket
 prohibition against such question is unwarranted. Green v.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State, 532 S.E.2d 111, 115 (Ga. Ct. App. 2000) ("To ask the
 
defendant if he himself is lying serves the important function of
 testing his veracity and credibility and so is well within the
 appropriate scope of cross-examination."); United States v.
 Freitag, 230 F.3d 1019, 1024 (7th Cir. 2000) ("[W]e are not
 troubled by the prosecutor asking a witness to remark on the
 truthfulness of her own testimony because the witness's reaction
 and response are proper fodder for the jury's credibility
 determinations."); State v. Crislip, 796 P.2d 1108, 1115 (N.M.
 Ct. App. 1990) ("It is not error per se to ask a witness if he is
 lying."), overruled on other grounds by Santillanes v. State,
 849 P.2d 358, 368 n.7 (N.M. 1993) and State v. Belanger, 210 P.3d
 783, 792 & n.1 (N.M. 2009).
 
D.
 
We hold that the Circuit Court erred to the extent that
 
it imposed a blanket prohibition on counsel asking witnesses
 whether they were lying. We further hold, however, that under
 the circumstances of this case, such error was harmless because
 any improper restriction imposed by the Circuit Court on defense
 counsel's cross-examination did not affect Locken's substantial
 rights. 
As the Circuit Court noted, there are other ways to
 
impeach a witness's testimony and attack his or her credibility
 besides asking whether the witness is lying, and the Circuit
 Court did not preclude defense counsel from pursuing these other
 methods. The only witness that defense counsel asked if he or
 she was lying was Kaneda; Locken does not cite to any other
 witness to whom defense counsel posed (or sought to pose) the
 "Are you lying?" question, and Locken does not describe how the
 inability to pose the question adversely affected his defense. 
With respect to Kaneda, defense counsel was permitted
 
to thoroughly impeach Kaneda and attack Kaneda's credibility
 through cross-examination. Defense counsel was able to show that
 contrary to Kaneda's testimony at trial that his shoulder injury
 was inflicted by Locken, Kaneda initially told Dr. Kim and Dr.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wong from whom he sought treatment that his shoulder injury was
 
caused by his falling down stairs. Defense counsel elicited
 evidence that Kaneda did not tell Dr. Kim that he was injured in
 an assault until after he reported the alleged assault to the
 police. Defense counsel further elicited numerous differences
 between Kaneda's trial testimony and the information Kaneda had
 provided to the police.
 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court's 
restrictions on defense counsel's ability to ask whether the witness was lying did not affect Locken's substantial rights. See Maluia, 107 Hawai
'i at 27, 108 P.3d at 981 (concluding that 
although it was prosecutorial misconduct to ask Maluia to comment on the veracity of the prosecution's witnesses, such improper questions were harmless error); State v. White, 92 Hawai
'i 192, 
205-06, 990 P.2d 90, 103-04 (1999) ("When the trial court excludes evidence tending to impeach a witness, it has not abused its discretion as long as the jury has in its possession sufficient information to appraise the biases and motivations of the witness." (block quote format and citation omitted)). 
III.
 
Locken contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
defense counsel's request to recall Diaz, a defense witness, to
 ask a question counsel forgot to ask. He further argues that
 defense counsel's failure to ask the question entitles him to
 relief on the ground of ineffective assistance of counsel. We
 disagree.
 
A.
 
The background regarding defense counsel's request to
 
recall Diaz is as follows. Kaneda had previously testified that
 he went to the brothers' house two nights after the alleged
 assault, with his arm in a sling. In response to questions asked
 by defense counsel, Kaneda denied that anyone asked why he was
 wearing a sling and denied that he told anyone there that he had
 been hurt at work earlier that day. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Diaz was called after Kaneda completed his testimony,
 
and Diaz was the last witness to testify that day. After Diaz
 
was excused, the Circuit Court excused the jury. Counsel for
 both sides remained to discuss arrangements for the playing of
 the videotaped testimony of Rubino the next day. During that
 discussion, defense counsel asked for permission to recall Diaz
 to ask a question counsel forgot to ask. Defense counsel
 asserted that he wanted to recall Diaz to impeach Kaneda's
 previous testimony. Defense counsel proffered that Diaz would
 testify that he was present at the brothers' house when Kaneda
 came over a day after the alleged assault, that Diaz heard Konrad
 ask Kaneda why Kaneda was wearing a sling, and that Kaneda
 responded that he hurt himself at work.
 
The State objected to defense counsel's request to
 
recall Diaz, asserting that Diaz had already been excused and
 that even if he was still on the stand, the proposed questioning
 of Diaz was beyond the scope of the State's cross-examination. 
Defense counsel argued that if the Circuit Court did not allow
 him to recall Diaz, then Locken was denied the effective
 assistance of counsel. The Circuit Court denied defense
 counsel's request to recall Diaz.
 
B.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion in denying defense counsel's request to recall Diaz. HRE Rule 611 grants the trial court authority and discretion to "exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of interrogating witness and presenting evidence[.]" HRE Rule 611(a); see State v. Jackson, 81 Hawai
'i 39, 47, 912 P.2d 71, 79 
(1996). Under this rule, "redirect is properly limited to the development, correction and refutation of matters brought out for the first time on cross[.]" Jackson, 81 Hawai
'i at 47, 912 P.2d 
at 79 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). Defense counsel had a full and fair opportunity to examine Diaz. However, due to oversight, he forgot to ask Diaz a question that he had intended to ask. Under standard rules of trial practice, 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an attorney for a party is required to ask all desired questions
 
before a witness is excused. Moreover, as explained further
 below, Locken has not shown that he was substantially prejudiced
 by the Circuit Court's denial of his request to recall Diaz. 
Although the Circuit Court had the discretion to permit defense
 counsel to recall Diaz, we cannot say that it was an abuse of
 discretion to deny defense counsel's request.
 
C.
 
We also conclude that based on the existing record,
 
Locken has not established that his counsel's failure to ask the
 question for which he sought to recall Diaz constituted
 ineffective assistance counsel.
 
[T]he defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective
assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part
test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence;
and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). 
Locken has failed to show that defense counsel's error resulted 
in prejudice such that it resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. 
Defense counsel sought to recall Diaz to impeach 
Kaneda's testimony. However, as previously discussed, defense counsel, though his cross-examination of Kaneda, had already presented significant evidence to impeach Kaneda and attack his credibility. Defense counsel was able to impeach Kaneda's trial testimony that his shoulder injury was inflicted by Locken through Kaneda's prior inconsistent statements to Dr. Kim and Dr. Wong, who treated Kaneda. Defense counsel also elicited numerous differences between Kaneda's trial testimony and Kaneda's statements to the police. Thus, the additional impeachment of Kaneda sought through the recalling of Diaz was cumulative. See 
White, 92 Hawai
'i at 205-06, 990 P.2d at 103-04 (concluding that 
the trial court did not abuse its discretion in limiting the scope of defense counsel's cross-examination because the jury had 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
sufficient impeachment information to assess the witness's
 
credibility and motivation to fabricate testimony against the
 defendant). In addition, Diaz's proffered testimony would only
 have served to impeach Kaneda's testimony; it would not have
 impeached the trial testimony of Wong, Hans, or Murray, who all
 provided testimony supporting the assault charges against Locken.
 
Furthermore, based on the existing record, Locken has 
failed to show that the failure ask Diaz the impeachment question resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Although defense counsel proffered his understanding of Diaz's anticipated testimony, there is no affidavit or sworn statement by Diaz in the record. See Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 ("Ineffective 
assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses."). Thus, exactly what Diaz would have said if recalled remains unclear. 
More importantly, the record is not sufficiently
 
developed to determine how the State would have responded if the
 Circuit Court permitted defense counsel to recall Diaz and to
 evaluate the effect of the State's response. Kaneda testified
 that Konrad, Hans, Wong, and Aaron Mandiech (Mandiech) were all
 present at the brothers' house at the time that defense counsel
 asserted Diaz allegedly overheard Kaneda tell Konrad that he was
 wearing a sling because he had been injured at work. Even
 assuming that Diaz would have testified as proffered by defense
 counsel, the State may have been able to call Konrad, Hans, Wong,
 and Mandiech to refute or cast doubt on Diaz's testimony. Under
 the existing record, we do not know if the State would have been
 able to call these individuals or what they would have said. We
 also do not know how the State would have cross-examined Diaz if
 he testified as proffered. Under these circumstances, Locken has
 not satisfied his burden of establishing ineffective assistance
 of counsel.
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
Locken argues that the Circuit Court committed plain
 
error in instructing the jury on self-defense. The Circuit Court
 
instructed the jury on self-defense as follows:
 
Self-defense is a defense to the charges of, in
Count I, Assault in the Second Degree and its included
offense of Assault in the Third Degree; and in Count
II, Assault in the Third Degree.
 
The burden is on the prosecution to prove beyond
a reasonable doubt that the force used by the
defendant was not justifiable. If the prosecution
does not meet its burden, then you must find the
defendant not guilty.
 
The use of force upon or towards another person
is justified if the defendant reasonably believes that
such force is immediately necessary to protect himself
on the present occasion against the use of unlawful
force by the other person.
 
The reasonableness of the defendant's belief
 
that the use of such protective force was immediately
necessary shall be determined from the viewpoint of a
reasonable person in the defendant's position under
the circumstances of which defendant was aware or as
 the defendant reasonably believed them to be.
 
The defendant may estimate the necessity for the
use of force under the circumstances as he reasonably
believed them to be when the force is used without
 retreating.
 
"Force" means bodily impact, restraint or
confinement, or the threat thereof.
 
"Unlawful force" means force which is used
 
without the consent of the person against whom it is
directed, and the use of which would constitute an
unjustifiable use of force.
 
Self-defense is not available for the offenses
 
of, in Count I, Assault in the Second Degree based
upon the requisite state of mind of recklessness or
its included offense of Assault in the Third Degree
based upon the requisite state of mind of
recklessness; or . . . In Count II, Assault in the
Third Degree based upon the requisite state of mind of
recklessness, 
if the prosecution proves that: 
 
1) the defendant was reckless in believing that
he was justified in using force against the other
person; or
 
2) the defendant was reckless in acquiring or
failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which was
material to the justifiability of his use of force
against the other person.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Locken contends that the instruction was plainly and
 
prejudicially erroneous because it used the phrase "if the
 
prosecution proves that" in discussing the availability of self-
defense for assaults based on a reckless state of mind, instead
 of saying "if the prosecution proves beyond a reasonable doubt
 that." We disagree. 
"When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
 
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and
 considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially
 insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." 
State v.
 
Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006). 
Here, as Locken acknowledges, the self-defense
 
instruction begins by instructing the jury that "[t]he burden is
 on the prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
 force used by the defendant was not justifiable." In addition,
 other instructions provided to the jury confirmed and left no
 doubt that the prosecution's burden of proof was beyond a
 reasonable doubt. The jury was instructed:
 
You must consider all the instructions as a whole and
 
consider each instruction in the light of all of the others.
Do not single out any word, phrase, sentence or instruction
and ignore the others. No word, phrase, or instruction is
more important just because it is repeated in these
instructions.
 
You must presume the defendant is innocent of
charges against him. This presumption remains with
the defendant throughout the trial of this case,
unless and until the prosecution proves the defendant
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The presumption of innocence is not a mere slogan, but
an essential part of the law that is binding upon you. It
 
places upon the prosecution the duty of proving every
material element of the offenses charged against the
defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
You must not find the defendant guilty upon mere
suspicion or upon evidence which only shows that the
defendant is probably guilty. What the law requires before
the defendant can be found guilty is not suspicion, not
probabilities, 
but proof of the defendant's guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 

. . . .
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
If, after consideration of the evidence and the law, you
have a reasonable doubt of the defendant's guilt, then the
prosecution has not proved the defendant's guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt, and it is your duty to find the defendant not
guilty.
 
If, after consideration of the evidence and the law,
you do not have a reasonable doubt of the defendant's guilt,
then the prosecution has proved the defendant's guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt, and it is your duty to find the
defendant guilty.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
When read and considered as a whole, we conclude that 
the instructions plainly and correctly advised the jury that the 
prosecution was required to prove the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, including with respect to negating a claim of self-defense for assaults based on a reckless state of mind. Indeed, the only standard of proof set forth in the instructions with respect to the prosecution is proof beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, it is difficult to see how the jury could have been misled into believing that a different standard of proof applied. We conclude that Locken has not shown that the instruction on self-defense was "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." See Nichols, 111 
Hawai
'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981. 
We also note that the test for self-defense contains 
both a subjective and an objective prong. "Under the subjective prong the jury is required to evaluate the use of force from the defendant's perspective. . . . [T]he focus is on the circumstances known to the defendant, thus directing the jury to consider the actions of a 'reasonable person in the defendant's position under the circumstances as he believed them to be.'" Pond, 118 Hawai
'i at 491, 193 P.3d at 407 (brackets, emphasis, 
and citation omitted). "Under the objective prong, emphasis is placed on the reasonable person standard so the defendant's use of force must be 'determined from the point of view of a reasonable person.'" Id. (brackets and citation omitted). 
In this case, Locken did not testify and therefore
 
there is no direct evidence of his subjective intent. The
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State's witnesses provided ample and consistent evidence that
 
Locken assaulted Kaneda and Wong and that he was not acting in
 self-defense. The defense witnesses testified that Locken did
 not grab, kick, or strike Kaneda or Wong. The evidence
 supporting a claim of self-defense was therefore weak at best. 
Accordingly, assuming arguendo that the Circuit Court's self-
defense instruction was erroneous, any error in the instruction
 would not have contributed to the outcome of the case or affected
 Locken's substantial rights.
 
CONCLUSION

 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment. 
On the briefs:

 
Samuel P. King, Jr.
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Donn Fudo
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
23
 