 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000749 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ISAAC K. TANGONAN, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-00818) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Isaac K. Tangonan (Tangonan) 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment, entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court
), on September 13, 
2018.   Following a bench trial, Tangonan was convicted of one 
count of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant(OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-
61(a)(1) (Supp. 2017).
 2/1/
 
1/ The Honorable Michelle N. Comeau presided. 
2/ HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides, in relevant part: 
Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of operating
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Tangonan contends that the District Court 
erred in denying his motion for a judgment of acquittal because 
the evidence adduced at trial established his entrapment defense as a matter of law. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Tangonan's point of error as follows: 
We apply the following standard in reviewing a trial 
court's denial of a motion for a judgment of acquittal: "whether, upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the [trier of fact], a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 528, 
865 P.2d 157, 164 (1994) (citing State v. Nakoa, 72 Haw. 360, 363, 817 P.2d 1060, 1062 (1991)). 
In this case, Tangonan sought a judgment of acquittal 
based on his defense of entrapment. As relevant here, HRS § 702-237(1)(b) (2014) states: 
(1) In any prosecution, it is an affirmative defense
that the defendant engaged in the prohibited conduct or
caused the prohibited result because the defendant wasinduced or encouraged to do so by a law enforcement officer,. . . who, for the purpose of obtaining evidence of thecommission of an offense, . . . : 
. . . . 
(b) Employed methods of persuasion or inducementwhich created a substantial risk that the offense would be committed by persons other thanthose who are ready to commit it. 
In addition, HRS § 701–115(2)(b) (2014) provides: 
(2) No defense may be considered by the trier of fact
unless evidence of the specified fact or facts has beenpresented. If such evidence is presented, then: 
. . . . 
(b) If the defense is an affirmative defense, thedefendant is entitled to an acquittal if thetrier of fact finds that the evidence, whenconsidered in light of any contrary prosecutionevidence, proves by a preponderance of theevidence the specified fact or facts whichnegative penal liability. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
See State v. Anderson, 58 Haw. 479, 484, 572 P.2d 159, 163 (1977) 
("entrapment is an affirmative defense for which the defendant bears the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence" (citing People v. Tewksbury, 544 P.2d 1335 (Cal. 1976))). 
Here, Tangonan argues that the evidence established as 
a matter of law that he was entrapped into committing the prohibited conduct by a police officer. "In other words, [he] contend[s] that no reasonable mind might fairly conclude that the evidence failed to prove more probably than not that [he was] entrapped." State v. Timas, 82 Hawai# i 499, 510, 923 P.2d 916, 
927 (App. 1996). 
Based on our review of the record, as further 
explained below, we conclude the evidence permitted a reasonable mind to fairly conclude that Tangonan did not sustain his burden of proving entrapment. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court applies an objective test for 
determining whether a defendant was entrapped. 
As the court has 
explained: 
In enacting HRS § 702–237, the legislature adopted the
approach of the Model Penal Code which endorsed theobjective test of the entrapment defense. Under the objective test . . . , "the focus of inquiry is not on thepredisposition of the defendant to commit the crime charged,but rather is on the conduct of the law enforcement 
officials.
" 
State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 192–93, 830 P.2d 492, 499 (1992) 
(quoting Anderson, 58 Haw. at 483, 572 P.2d at 162). The court further stated that under this objective test, the dispositive question is whether the actions of the police were "so extreme that it created a substantial risk that persons not ready to commit the offense alleged would be persuaded or induced to commit it." Id. at 193, 830 P.2d at 499 (quoting Anderson, 58 
Haw. at 483, 572 P.2d at 162) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also State v. Tookes, 67 Haw. 608, 614, 699 P.2d 983, 987 (1985) ("Allegations of entrapment require more than that the police provide an opportunity for commission of a crime. A mere solicitation of criminal activity by the police is not a sufficient inducement." (citations omitted)). 
At trial, Officer Joshua Wong (Officer Wong) of the 
Honolulu Police Department testified to the following: On 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 18, 2018, he was on patrol, on Ala Wai Boulevard, in 
Waikiki, when he noticed a Toyota pickup truck in the parking lane, on the far right-hand side of the road. Next to the parking lane, separated by a solid, white line, was a bicycle lane. The front and rear tires of the driver's side of the truck were protruding about one foot into the bicycle lane. Sticking out of the front, driver's side of the truck were a man's legs and half of his torso. Officer Wong circled around and drove back onto Ala Wai Boulevard. His intention was "to go back around to see if the person inside the vehicle was planning on parking the vehicle and leaving it like that or if they were going to exit and move on. So [he] wanted them to at least move over and straighten out the vehicle so that it's not blocking the bicycle lane." 
Officer Wong further testified as follows: He pulled 
up alongside the truck and saw the same person, now with his hands on the hood of the vehicle directly behind the truck. Officer Wong stopped and asked the man (later identified as Tangonan) if the vehicle he had his hands on was his. Officer Wong asked the question because he "wanted to make sure that [Tangonan] wasn't committing any kind of like property damage or doing something illegal to somebody else's property . . . ." Tangonan responded that it was not his car. Officer Wong then asked Tangonan if the truck in front of him was his truck because he "was going to ask [Tangonan] if he could move his truck a little further up into the parking stall that he was in and straighten it out so it wouldn't [be] protruding into the bike path so it wouldn't push any other bicycles further into the roadway." After Tangonan responded that the truck was his, Officer Wong "asked him if he could straighten his truck out so it wasn't blocking the bicycle path." Tangonan "said he could straighten it out[,]" and Officer Wong waited in his patrol vehicle for Tangonan to do so. 
Officer Wong continued his testimony as follows: 
Tangonan "got in his truck, started it up, and then proceeded to make an immediate left turn[,] going across three lanes[,] and ended up driving the wrong way on Nahua Street[,]" a one-way 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
street about fifteen to twenty feet away. There was a clear and 
unobstructed one-way sign on Nahua Street, visible from Ala Wai Boulevard, pointing northbound from Nahua onto Ala Wai Boulevard. Officer Wong turned on his vehicle's lights and siren to stop Tangonan's truck from going further down Nahua Street. Tangonan stopped on the right-hand side of the street. Officer Wong stopped his vehicle behind Tangonan's truck, then walked up to the driver's side of the truck and told Tangonan he was stopped because he was driving the wrong way down the street. The driver's side window was down, and Officer Wong observed the following: 
[W]hen I'm talking to [Tangonan], his speech appeared kind
of heavily slurred. He had a really strong odor of alcoholcoming from his breath when I was talking to him. And when he was speaking to me after I told him why he was beingstopped, I could detect the odor of alcohol coming from hisbreath. And when I looked at his face, his eyes appearedkind of red and bloodshot. 
After making these observations, Officer Wong asked Tangonan for 
his driver's license, insurance, and registration. Tangonan produced the registration and insurance, but could not find his driver's license. "So he opened his door and jumped out of the vehicle and attempted to look for it again . . . on the driver's side of the truck." Tangonan looked for his driver's license for about three to four minutes but was unable to find it. 
Another officer arrived, gave Tangonan a preliminary 
alcohol screening, and then placed Tangonan under arrest for OVUII. 
On cross-examination, defense counsel asked Officer 
Wong, "did it pop into your mind this guy might have been drinking," when he saw Tangonan's truck parked partially into the bike lane, with Tangonan laying on his side and his legs sticking out. Officer Wong responded, "[i]t was one possibility." He further testified, however, that when he first pulled his car up and talked to Tangonan, he (Officer Wong) "got out and stayed kind of by the driver's side area of my . . . car." From about five feet away, Officer Wong "didn't notice [Tangonan's] red, bloodshot eyes yet" and "didn't smell any alcohol yet," and Tangonan "wasn't slurring yet." 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Following the State's case-in-chief, defense counsel 
moved for a judgment of acquittal based on Tangonan's entrapment 
defense. The District Court took the matter under advisement, and at a continued hearing ruled as follows: 
So I've had the opportunity to review the relevant law, the
statute and then the case law, so thank you for that,including [State v. Powell, 68 Haw. 635, 726 P.2d 266(1986)]. And then I think, you know, looking at thecommentary for Section 702-237, it says the basis for thedefense of entrapment is to deter improper conduct on thepart of law enforcement officials. And I think I see that in [State v. Anderson, 58 Haw. 479, 572 P.2d 159 (1977)] aswell. 
So I think that's the real question here is whether or
not the officer's purpose in asking the defendant to movehis car was to get a foundation and the basis to obtainevidence for the commission of the offense of OVUII. 
So I 
think the Powell case, I don't feel that applies herebecause in that case it was clearly a sting, you know, toget people to provide evidence of pick-pocketing. And then the question is did it amount to entrapment in terms oftheir actual conduct and not in terms of what the officers wanted to do. 
So here . . . I don't think that the defense has 
proven entrapment by a preponderance of evidence. I think that I'm not persuaded that the officer knew that thedefendant was intoxicated based on their limited interaction prior to the officer asking the defendant to move his car.And so I'm going to deny the motion[.] 
The trial continued, and Tangonan testified in relevant 
part as follows: After attending a party in Waikiki, he returned 
to his truck, drunk, and threw up a couple of times. Officer Wong pulled up and told Tangonan he had to move his truck, and Tangonan told the officer he was drunk. Tangonan was sure the officer had seen him throwing up. The officer repeatedly told him to move his truck or he would be arrested, and he told the officer he was drunk and did not want to get behind the wheel. Tangonan continued: "I was parked right in front and there was a car right behind me . . . . [I]t was a nice parking. But I went out and just did what I did. And I was just too drunk to even drive but I just had to listen to him." 
Following the close of Tangonan's case, the District 
Court denied his renewed motion for judgment of acquittal and found him guilty of OVUII, stating in part: 
I'm going to stand by my prior ruling. I don't think that 
based on the brief interaction that you've proven by a
preponderance of the evidence that the officer was aware, or 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
a reasonable officer should have been aware, if that's how
you're phrasing it, that the defendant was intoxicated. If he had, that would be a different situation. But that's how I see the evidence. 
. . . I'm not going to credit the testimony of the
defendant that he told the officer he was drunk. . . . I think the officer's testimony on that point regarding thenature of the interaction is credible. So I'm going to findthe defendant guilty based on the totality of thecircumstances. There doesn't seem to be any dispute as tothe fact that he was indeed drunk and so . . . I'm not goingto review the SFST in that regard. 
On appeal, Tangonan argues that the District Court was 
wrong to credit Officer Wong's testimony to the effect that, when 
he first spoke with Tangonan and asked him to move his truck, Tangonan did not appear to be intoxicated. We decline, however, to pass upon issues regarding the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, which are within the province of the trier of fact – here, the District Court. See Alston, 75 Haw. 
517, 528, 865 P.2d 157, 164; State v. Scalera, 139 Hawai# i 453, 
460, 393 P.3d 1005, 1012 (2017) ("appellate courts are required to 'give full play to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility'" (quoting State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai# i 465, 471, 24 
P.3d 661, 667 (2001))). 
Upon review of the record, we cannot 
conclude that the actions of the police were "so extreme that it created a substantial risk that persons not ready to commit the offense alleged would be persuaded or induced to commit it."
3/ 
Agrabante, 73 Haw. at 193, 830 P.2d at 499 (quoting Anderson, 58 Haw. at 483, 572 P.2d at 162) (internal quotation marks omitted). Rather, we conclude that the evidence permitted the District Court to fairly conclude that Tangonan did not sustain his burden of proving entrapment and, accordingly, the District Court did not err in denying Tangonan's motion for judgment of acquittal on that basis. 
3/ Tangonan also relies on State v. Powell, 68 Haw. 635, 726 P.2d 266
(1986), in support of his contention that the evidence established his
entrapment defense as a matter of law. However, the facts here are clearlydistinguishable from Powell, where the police essentially manufactured ratherthan detected the crime, i.e, by setting up "'drunk decoy' operations [that]were expressly designed to ensnare anyone who would commit theft when 'baitmoney' [was] placed in plain view and within easy reach." Id. at 638, 726
P.2d at 268; see Agrabante, 73 Haw. at 194, 830 P.2d at 500 (describing thepolice conduct in Powell). The evidence here established no similar scheme. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered by the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, on September 13, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 18, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Jonathan Burge
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
8 