NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000780
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ANASTASIA Y. WALDECKER, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
JOHN O'SCANLON, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRSTCIRCUIT
 
(UCCJEA NO. 14-1-0002)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Petitioner-Appellant Anastasia Y. Waldecker (Waldecker
 
or Mother) appeals from the Order Denying Petitioner's Motion to
 
Change Custody; Order Granting in Part Motion to Enforce Custody
 
and Education Provisions of Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law
 and Decree of Divorce and to Modify Child Support, filed on April
 2, 2014 (Order Denying Change in Custody), in the Family Court of
 
1
, and challenges certain parts
 the First Circuit (Family Court)  
of the Family Court's Findings of Fact (
FOF), Conclusions of Law
 
(COL) and Order, which were entered on May 19, 2014.
 
On appeal, Waldecker raises seven points of error, 
which are woefully noncompliant with Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(4), but which nevertheless have been considered by this court. Waldecker contends that the Family Court erred when it: (1) failed to make any finding that its 
1
 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"anticipated change of custody" was in the best interests of the
 
minor child (Child); (2) failed to make any finding that its
 
"anticipated change of visitation" was in the best interests of
 
the Child; (3) failed to address Waldecker's alleged changes of
 circumstances in the FOFs and COLs; (4) enforced the custody
 provisions in the parties' Nevada divorce decree; (5) allegedly
 found Waldecker's relocation to be a change of circumstances for
 visitation and child support purposes, but not for custody; (6)
 
2
"fail[ed] to declare the provision that Father's  adult children
shall have complete authority to choose the minor child's school
 upon Father's death to be unenforceable and invalid;" and (7)
 entered COLs 11, 17, and 19.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Waldecker's points of error as follows:
 
Waldecker essentially argues that, notwithstanding that 
she had been represented by counsel, agreed to the terms of the parties' May 13, 2010 State of Nevada Decree of Divorce (Divorce 
Decree) and did not file an appeal from the Divorce Decree, the 
Family Court should disregard a key custody provision, based on 
the alleged best interest of the child and a material change in circumstances, i.e., Waldecker's anticipated relocation from Hawai
'i to Florida. The Divorce Decree provides, in relevant 
part: 
Husband and Wife shall have the joint legal and
physical care, custody and control of [Child]. Shared
 
custody and visitation shall be on a week-on/week-off basis,
commencing May 15, 2010. No provision is made for
visitation during holidays or school breaks such that the
week-on/week-off cycle will continue except to the extent
that the parties agree otherwise.
 
. . . It is contemplated that both Husband, Wife and
the minor child will initially be residing on the island of
Oahu, Hawaii. If in the future either party relocates to a
residence beyond a 200-mile radius of Oahu or San Francisco,
modification of custody shall automatically occur then
changing to the other party remaining having primary
 
2
 Respondent-Appellee John O'Scanlon is referred to as Father or
 
O'Scanlon.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
physical custody of said minor child, at the option of the
remaining party.
 
Importantly, Waldecker neither acknowledges nor 
challenges FOFs 10-15, which find that both parents love Child, 
there is no evidence that either parent will harm or be dangerous to Child, Child is bonded to both, Child is doing well in school, enjoying a variety of extracurricular activities, and has a strong network of friends in Hawai
'i. See Wisdom v. Pflueger, 4 
Haw. App. 455, 459, 667 P.2d 844, 848 (1983) ("If a finding is not properly attacked, it is binding; and any conclusion which follows from it and is a correct statement of law is valid."). 
Thus, Waldecker's only remaining assertions of best
 
interest of Child and/or material change in circumstances stem
 from her anticipated relocation to Florida. The Family Court did
 not err in concluding that, although relocation is generally
 considered a material change in circumstances, that is not the
 case where, as in this case, there is a provision in the divorce
 decree that specifically addresses the issue of relocation. See
 
Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 119-120 861 P.2d 754, 758-59
 (1993). The Family Court's COLs are properly grounded in its
 FOFs, which are sufficient to allow meaningful review by this
 court, and the lack of additional and/or particular FOFs does not
 warrant reversal in this case.
 
Waldecker's challenge to the Family Court's
 
modification of visitation and child support, which is triggered
 only upon her actual relocation, is without merit. Waldecker
 makes no specific argument concerning the terms of her allowed
 visitation with Child, which appear to provide her with nearly a
 maximum possible amount of time and contact with Child, short of
 granting her physical custody. Similarly, Waldecker makes no
 specific argument concerning the child support determination. 
The gravamen of Waldecker's challenge is that, if there is no
 material change in circumstances warranting a change in the
 custody provision of the Divorce Decree, then the Family Court
 could not find a material change in circumstances warranting
 modification of visitation and child support – thus, the Family
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court should have found a material change in circumstances
 
warranting a change in custody. We reject this flawed logic.
 
Finally, Waldecker's contention that the Family Court 
erred when it "fail[ed] to declare the provision [in the Divorce Decree] that Father's adult children shall have complete authority to choose the minor child's school upon Father's death to be unenforceable and invalid" appears to be raised for the first time on appeal.
3 See HRS § 641-2 (Supp. 2013); see also, 
e.g., Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) ("Legal issues not 
raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal.") (citations omitted). In any case, notwithstanding the 
4
questionable enforceability of this provision,  as the record
reflects that O'Scanlon is alive, this issue is premature and we
 decline to address it.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's April 2, 2014
 
Order Denying Change in Custody is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 23, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Michael A. Glenn 
for Petitioner-Appellant Presiding Judge 
A. Debbie Jew (Ogawa Lau Nakamura & Jew)for Respondent-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
3
 Waldecker's points of error contain no citations to the record on
appeal. Upon review of the record, we discovered no argument or even mention
of this issue.
 
4
 The death of a custodial parent would clearly constitute a
material change in circumstances and, under such circumstances, it seems
highly unlikely that a family court would, without a further examination of
the facts and circumstances then existing, grant "complete authority to choose
the minor child's school" to one or more unspecified adults based on this
provision.
 
4
 