NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000801
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SELVIN SAMAEL DAVILA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 15-1-0965(1))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Selvin Samael Davila (Davila)
appeals from the Judgment Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment)
entered on September 16, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the Second
Circuit (Circuit Court ).1  After a jury trial, Davila was found
guilty of one count of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under
the Age of Fourteen Years, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 707-733.6 (2014), and sentenced to twenty years of
incarceration with credit for time served.2
1The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.
2HRS § 707-733.6 provides in relevant part: 
§ 707-733.6  Continuous sexual assault of a minor
under the age of fourteen years.  (1) A person commits the
offense of continuous sexual assault of a minor under the
age of fourteen years if the person:
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Davila contends that the Circuit Court's
failure to strike certain inadmissible testimony of Dr. Alexander
Bivens (Dr. Bivens) related to the dynamics of child sex abuse
denied Davila of a fair trial.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Davila's point of error as follows:
During testimony regarding common behavior of child sex
abuse victims, Dr. Bivens testified:
There is a phenomenon called incomplete initial disclosure,
sometimes also called partial disclosure, which refers to
the frequently observed pattern whereby a child who has some
sexual abuse to talk about will begin to talk about it
tentatively at first. The word 'touching' is most frequently
used, even when the abuse involves much more elaborate kinds
of sex.  
Davila objected.  A bench conference was held, and the
following exchange occurred: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Again, he's insinuating that -- for
instance, this complaint -- well, what the State wants the
jury to understand is that this complainant -- I guess, they
think that she disclosed piecemeal.  He's saying that they
disclose piecemeal and they start with 'touching' but
something probably worse happened and so the jury is going
to use that against my client assuming something worse has
happened. 
[THE STATE]:  The Court has already ruled based on our
motion in limine that piecemeal disclosure -- and I am --
and partial disclosure, which is the same thing, is a
permitted area.  He is discussing that in general.  He knows
nothing about the case and he knows nothing about the
specific facts of this case.  He's describing what a child's
experience is and how a child discloses. 
2(...continued)
(a) Either resides in the same home with a minor
under the age of fourteen years or has recurring
access to the minor; and
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexual
penetration or sexual contact with the minor
over a period of time, while the minor is under
the age of fourteen years.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
He did use the word 'touching.'  Then he talks about
how -- is explaining the possibility that even if it's a
penetration offense, they're using a more benign word.
That's something that is within the purview of the jury.
This is piecemeal disclosure defined.  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  But the jury knows the facts they heard
so far and the prosecutor is tailoring her questions to
specifically fit the facts. 
THE COURT:  Sustain the objection. 
[THE STATE]:  I asked -- okay. How can I ask him to describe
'piecemeal disclosure'? 
THE COURT:  I'm not going to tell you how to ask your
questions. 
[THE STATE]:  Okay. I'll just ask it again. Thank you, your
Honor.
Although the court sustained Davila's objection at the
bench, the defense did not move to strike Dr. Bivens's testimony
and the court did not sua sponte strike the testimony or instruct
the jury to disregard the testimony.  Subsequently, the State
rephrased its question and continued in the same line of
questioning, without further objection. 
On appeal, Davila argues that Dr. Bivens's testimony
suggested that "more elaborate kinds of sex" occurred in this
case and that this suggestion was powerful and misleading, that
it prejudiced Davila, and that it improperly bolstered the
credibility of the complaining witness ( CW) and discredited
Davila.
On appeal, the State argues, in part, that this issue
is waived because Davila did not move to strike the testimony or
seek a curative instruction.  See State v. Hashimoto , 46 Haw.
183, 195, 377 P.2d 728, 736 (1962) (noting that, when there is no
motion to strike an unresponsive or improper answer to a proper
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
question, the appellate court will generally not consider whether
the answer was prejudicial).
We conclude, however, that even assuming arguendo that
the Circuit Court erred in failing to sua sponte  strike Dr.
Bivens's testimony regarding more elaborate sex, that such error
was harmless.
"In determining whether improper remarks made by a
witness constitutes reversible error, the appellate court will
consider:  (1) the nature of the misconduct; (2) the promptness
of a curative instruction, or lack of it; and (3) the strength or
weakness of the evidence against the defendant."  State v.
Webster, 94 Hawai# i 241, 248, 11 P.3d 466, 473 (2000) (citing
State v. Samuel , 74 Haw. 141, 148–49, 838 P.2d 1374, 1378 (1992)
(internal quotation marks omitted)).  In Webster, a witness
inadvertently made an inadmissible reference to a polygraph
examination of another witness.  Id.  at 247, 11 P.3d at 472.  The
defendant argued that this bolstered the other witness's
testimony.  Id. at 248, 11 P.3d at 473.  The Hawai #i Supreme
Court ruled that the error was harmless because (1) the nature of
the misconduct was inadvertent, (2) the trial court promptly
cautioned the jury to disregard the statement, and (3) the
evidence was ample to sustain a conviction.  Id. at 248–49, 11
P.3d at 473–74. 
Here, Dr. Bivens did not comment on the evidence in
this case or the credibility of the witnesses.  Rather, Dr.
Bivens testified that he had never met, seen, interviewed, or
evaluated the child in this case, that he did not know any of the
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
details of the case, and that he had not seen any evidence from
this case.  The brief reference to more elaborate kinds of sex,
as opposed to touching, was later restated by Dr. Bivens, without
objection, as follows:  "[O]nly upon subsequent interviews and
after some time has passed . . . are [children] able to disclose
in more detail . . . much more of what kinds of sexual abuse was
done to them."  Dr. Bivens's testimony did not constitute
intentional misconduct and did not suggest any particular sexual
conduct by Davila.  Nor did it tend to prove that the alleged sex
abuse occurred or bolster CW's testimony regarding the alleged
acts.  In this case, CW testified to both sexual contact and
sexual penetration, whereas Davila denied any such contact. 
Under HRS § 707-733.6, the charged offense involves three or more
acts of sexual penetration or  sexual contact with a minor while
the minor is under the age of fourteen years.  Thus, sexual
contact, i.e., touching of the minor's sexual parts, was
sufficient for conviction and Dr. Bivens's testimony regarding
more elaborate kinds of sex was harmless.
Regarding the second factor, there was no curative
instruction to the jury.
However, the evidence in this case was ample to sustain
a conviction.  CW testified in detail as to three separate
incidents in which Davila sexually abused her at the home he
shared with CW's grandmother, once on the couch and twice in a
spare bedroom.  The State's impeachment of the defense's
witnesses through demonstration of inconsistences and other
weaknesses strengthened the prosecution's case.  In addition,
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CW's mother testified that CW had informed her of the incidents,
CW's mother confronted the grandmother with what CW had reported,
and that she, CW's mother, had hoped that her discussions about
them with the grandmother would "take care of it." 
Considering the above, and the entire record in this
case, we conclude that it is not reasonably possible that the
error complained of contributed to Davila's conviction.  See
State v. McDonnell, No. SCWC-14-0000355, 2017 WL 3700812 at *17-
18 (Haw. Aug. 28, 2017); State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai #i 493,
505, 193 P.3d 409, 421 (2008).
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's September 16, 2016
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6