NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.NO. CAAP-15-0000398
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
JAMES MUSCARELLA, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STAR BEACH BOYS, INC., Defendant-Appellant, and
JOHN DOES 1-5; JANE DOES 1-5; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5; DOE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 1-5;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-1712)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant James Muscarella (Muscarella)
appeals from the Judgment entered against him and in favor of
Defendant-Appellee Star Beach Boys, Inc. (Star ) on April 7, 2015
(Judgment), and challenges the March 23, 2015 Order Denying
Plaintiff James Muscarella's Motion to Identify John Doe 1
Defendant and to Amend Complaint filed on June 13, 2013 ( Order),
both of which were entered by the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit ( Circuit Court).1 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2On appeal, Muscarella contends that the Circuit Court
abused its discretion when it denied as untimely his motion to
identify John Doe 1 Defendant and to file an amended complaint.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Muscarella's point of error as follows: 
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 17(d)
(2000) provides, in relevant part: 
(d)  Unidentified defendant.
(1)  When it shall be necessary or proper to make a
person a party defendant and the party desiring the
inclusion of the person as a party defendant has been unable
to ascertain the identity of a defendant, the party desiring
the inclusion of the person as a party defendant shall in
accordance with the criteria of Rule 11 of these rules set
forth in a pleading the person's interest in the action, so
much of the identity as is known (and if unknown, a
fictitious name shall be used), and shall set forth with
specificity all actions already undertaken in a diligent and
good-faith effort to ascertain the person's full name and
identity. 
. . . .
(3)  Any party may, by motion for certification, make
the name or identity of the party defendant known to the
court within a reasonable time after the moving party knew
or should have known the name or identity of the party
defendant.  The motion shall be supported by affidavit
setting forth all facts substantiating the movant's claim
that the naming or identification has been made in good
faith and with due diligence
.  When the naming or
identification [of an unknown defendant] is made by a
plaintiff, it shall be made prior to the filing of the
pretrial statement
 by that plaintiff, or within such
additional time as the court may allow .  The court shall
freely grant reasonable extensions
 of the time in which to
name or identify the party defendant to any party exercising
due diligence
 in attempting to ascertain the party
defendant's name or identity. 
(Emphasis added.)
The primary purpose of this rule is to "toll the
statute of limitations with respect to Doe defendants who cannot
be identified prior to the running of the statute."  Wakuya v.
Oahu Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd. , 65 Haw. 592, 596, 656 P.2d 84,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
388 (1982).  Here, Muscarella's complaint was filed on June 13,
2013, the last day before the running of the statute of
limitations, and it stated claims against Doe Defendants who "are
persons, organizations or entities whose identities at the
present time are unknown to Plaintiff despite the exercise of due
diligence."  The complaint further stated, inter alia: 
"Investigation as to the true identities was conducted by
Plaintiff.  Investigation as to the identity of DOE DEFENDANTS
continues[.]"  However, the complaint explicitly alleged that
Plaintiff was struck or punched by Star employees.  In sum, the
complaint alleged that Muscarella was assaulted and injured by
Star employees whose specific identities were unknown to
Muscarella when the complaint was filed.
HRCP Rule 17(d)(3), as set forth above, states that the
naming or identification of a Doe defendant must be made prior to
filing of the plaintiff's pretrial statement or "within such
additional time as the court may allow."  The supreme court has
repeatedly held:
As the use of the word "may" implies, the circuit court has
discretion to grant extensions of time, and thus we review
its orders in this regard for abuse of that discretion.  See
State v. Kahawai,
 103 Hawai# i 462, 465, 83 P.3d 725, 728
(2004) ("The term 'may' [used] in describing the court's
power ... denotes discretion.").  See also Wakuya v. Oahu
Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd.,
 65 Haw. 592, 597, 656 P.2d 84,
88 (1982) (holding that "the matter of extensions is
addressed to the sound judgment of the trial court").
Tri-S Corp. v. Western World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai# i 473, 489, 135
P.3d 82, 98 (2006).  "[U]nless the circuit court has extended the
time for the filing of the [pretrial] statement or the court has,
even after its filing, extended the time for identifying the Doe
defendants, the plaintiff must submit his identifications withinNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4a reasonable time following the expiration of the . . . period
imposed by [the rules] for the filing of the plaintiff's
[pretrial] statement."  Wakuya, 65 Haw. at 597, 656 P.2d at 88
(emphases added).  HRCP Rule 17(d)(3) also makes clear that,
although reasonable extension requests should be freely granted,
it is nevertheless the plaintiff's burden to set forth facts
substantiating his or her claim that the identification was made
in good faith and with due diligence.  
Here, Muscarella's motion to identify was filed nearly
one year after, not prior, to the filing of his pretrial
statement.   At no time did Muscarella file a motion for
extension of time to file either the pretrial statement or the
motion to identify.  Muscarella's claim that his request for
identification of John Doe 1 Defendant was timely was supported
only by his counsel's declaration stating that:
On January 14, 2015, he attended the [Court-Annexed
Arbitration Program (CAAP)] Arbitration of Plaintiff and
based upon the testimony and evidence presented, he believes
that Isaac Scharch [(Scharch)], not previously identified,
was an employee of [Star] who was involved in the attack on
Plaintiff and may also be liable for the injuries, damage or
loss thereby sustained by [Muscarella].  Therefore, John DOE
1 Defendant should be identified as [Scharch], and a First
Amended Complaint be filed. 
The record of this case nevertheless demonstrates a
complete lack of due diligence to identify Muscarella's alleged
assailants prior to the CAAP arbitration hearing and/or prior to
Star's motion for summary judgment on all claims against it,
which motion Muscarella conceded was well-founded and agreed
should be granted.  At the time of the alleged assault,
Muscarella described his assailants as all wearing Star (uniform)
shirts and being Star employees.  He reiterated in the complaintNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5that they were Star employees.  Muscarella's May 13, 2014 answers
to Star's interrogatories included the following:
10. Specify all the steps you took to identify the alleged
perpetrators in the incident.
ANSWER: I have not been able to take any steps to identify
them because I could not and as far as I know, neither have
the police.  The owner of Defendant obviously knows who was
working for him that day as does the Hawaiian man who
approached me after the attack stating that he saw the whole
thing, said he knew the Beachboys guys, and would call the
owner on his cell phone, and that the guys would be fined. 
He even encouraged me to prosecute the guys. 
Yet, according to sworn statements by Star's manager
and Scharch, Muscarella never made any inquiries to Star or
Scharch (who was identified by Star as a witness to the incident)
concerning the identity of the alleged attacker(s).  Muscarella
never attempted to make any discovery requests, either written
interrogatories or depositions, concerning the identity of his
alleged assailants.  While Muscarella correctly notes that
discovery may be limited during the pendency of a CAAP
arbitration pursuant to Rule 14 of the Hawai #i Arbitration Rules,
he does not assert that he sought or that the CAAP arbitrator
disallowed discovery concerning the identity of his alleged
assailant.
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, we
cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
determining that Muscarella's motion to identify John Doe 1
defendant was untimely.  Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err
in denying Muscarella's request to identify Scharch as a
defendant in the case.  
Because the Doe identification was untimely, the
statute of limitations had otherwise run, and summary judgmentNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6had been entered against Muscarella on all of his other claims
(against Star), Muscarella's request to file a first amended
complaint was futile.  Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion in denying Muscarella's request for leave to
file a first amended complaint for the purpose of pleading claims
against Scharch.  See Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. State, 110
Hawai#i 338, 364-66, 133 P.3d 767, 793-95 (2006) (holding that a
court may deny a motion for leave to amend a complaint when the
amendments are futile).
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 7, 2015
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Charles H. Brower,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.Chief Judge
Michael Jay Green,
(Law Office of Michael Jay Green),
and
Earl I. Anzai,
(Law Office of Earl I. Anzai),
for Defendant-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge