 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000480
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
ROBIN J. BENEDICT, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM, STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-0024)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant, Robin J. Benedict (Benedict) 
appeals from the Order Granting Appellee's Motion to Dismiss 
Appeal Filed March 16, 2016 (Order), and the Final Judgment 
(Judgment) entered against her on May 26, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
Following Benedict's appeal to the Circuit Court from a 
denial of her application for service-connected disability 
retirement benefits with the Employees' Retirement System of the State of Hawai' i (ERS), the ERS filed a motion to dismiss the 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal as untimely under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14(b)
 
(2012)2 and Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 72(b),3 
which the Circuit Court granted.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Benedict was employed with the State of Hawai' i 
Department of Human Services from 1989 to 2002 as an Income
 Maintenance Worker III. On January 3, 1997, Benedict was injured
 at work when she slipped on a wet floor while trying to maneuver
 the drawer of a file cabinet in her office. In July 2012,
 following a number of surgeries and a worsening of her condition,
 Benedict applied for service-connected disability retirement
 benefits with the ERS. 
Following a contested hearing on April 1, 2015, the
 
Hearing Officer recommended denial of Benedict's application. 
2 HRS § 91-14 provides in relevant part:
 
§ 91-14 Judicial review of contested cases.  (a)
Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in
a contested case . . . is entitled to judicial review
thereof under this chapter....
(b) Except as otherwise provided herein,
proceedings for review shall be instituted in the
circuit court within thirty days after the preliminary
ruling or within thirty days after service of the
certified copy of the final decision and order of the
agency pursuant to rule of court[.]
 
3 HRCP Rule 72 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 72. Appeal to a Circuit Court.
(a) How taken. Where a right of redetermination
or review in a circuit court is allowed by statute, any
person adversely affected by the decision, order or
action of a governmental official or body other than a
court, may appeal from such decision, order or action by
filing a notice of appeal in the circuit court having
jurisdiction of the matter.
. . . 
(b) Time. The notice of appeal shall be filed
in the circuit court within 30 days after the person
desiring to appeal is notified of the rendering or
entry of the decision or order, or of the action
taken, in the manner provided by statute. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board of Trustees to the ERS (Board) adopted the
 
recommendation as its Proposed Decision on November 23, 2015
 
(Proposed Decision). Benedict, through counsel, received the
 
Proposed Decision on November 25, 2015. 
On January 27, 2016, Benedict filed a notice of appeal
 
to the Circuit Court, "appeal[ing] from the Proposed Decision
 
from the Board of Trustees of the [ERS] . . . dated November 23,
 2015," and requesting that the Circuit Court reverse the Board's
 Proposed Decision. 
On March 16, 2016, the ERS filed a motion to dismiss
 
Benedict's appeal for lack of jurisdiction because it was
 untimely under HRS § 91-14(b) and HRCP Rule 72(b). Benedict
 
opposed the motion, arguing that the Proposed Decision was not a
 
"final" decision or order under agency rules and that, even
 assuming arguendo that the decision was final, equitable tolling,
 based on the "extraordinary circumstances" of a serious car
 accident in which Benedict was involved on December 29, 2015,
 permitted untimely filing.
 
On April 29, 2016, the Circuit Court heard argument on
 
the motion. On May 26, 2016, the Circuit Court issued the Order,
 in which it granted the ERS's motion and dismissed the appeal for
 lack of jurisdiction as untimely. The Circuit Court found that
 "[Benedict] filed this appeal more than thirty days after the
 Board's Proposed Decision became its Final Decision" and that
 "[Benedict]'s claim that the jurisdictional filing deadline of
 [HRS § 91-14(b)] is subject to equitable tolling is not supported
 by the legal precedent or the circumstances cited." The Judgment
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was filed the same day. On June 21, 2016, Benedict filed her
 
notice of appeal to the ICA. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Benedict asserts four points of error,
4
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in finding that the
 Proposed Decision was "final" and "by refusing to apply the
 doctrine of 'equitable estoppel' to toll the limitation period to
 file an appeal." 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The question of whether a court has jurisdiction over a 
case is a question of law reviewed under the right/wrong standard. Rivera v. Dep't of Labor and Indus. Relations, 100 
Hawai'i 348, 349, 60 P.3d 298, 299 (2002) (citation omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Benedict contends that the Circuit Court misinterpreted
 
the ERS's administrative rules by allowing the Proposed Decision
 to "transform into a 'final decision or order' by the mere
 passage of time." The ERS counters that Benedict's failure to
 file exceptions to the Proposed Decision rendered it "final and
 appealable fifteen days" after the date she received the Proposed
 Decision.
5
 
4
 Although Benedict styles the points of error section of her brief
under four separate headings, her argument is structured in accordance with
the two points of error outlined above.
 
5
 The ERS also asserts that Benedict waived her right to appeal
because she did not file exceptions to the Proposed Decision. This argument
is without merit. Benedict presented evidence and argument prior to the
issuance of the Proposed Decision. The applicable rules do not require that a
petitioner file exceptions to a proposed decision in order to perfect an
appeal from a final decision.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The right to appeal from an administrative agency
 
decision following a contested agency hearing is governed by HRS
 
§ 91-14, pursuant to which "[a]ny person aggrieved by a final
 decision and order in a contested case . . . is entitled to
 judicial review thereof under this chapter." HRS § 91-14(a). A
 "final order" for these purposes is "an order ending the
 proceedings, leaving nothing further to be accomplished. 
Consequently, an order is not final if the rights of a party
 involved remain undetermined or if the matter is retained for
 further action." Gealon v. Keala, 60 Haw. 513, 520, 591 P.2d
 
621, 626 (1979). 
The ERS's regulations governing the finality of a
 
proposed decision provide that:
 
(a) Within fifteen days after receipt of a copy of the
board's proposed decision, any party may file with the board
exceptions to any part thereof and request review by the
board. 
. . . 
(c) If no exceptions and request for review are filed within
the time specified, the proposed decision shall become
final, unless the board on its own motion orders further
proceedings to be held. 
Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 6-23-19 (effective 2009) 
(emphasis added). 
Thus, under the standard set forth in Gealon, the
 
Board's Proposed Decision, as it was received by Benedict on
 
November 25, 2015, was not a "final decision or order" for
 purposes of HRS § 91-14(a). 60 Haw. at 520, 591 P.2d at 626. 
Benedict's rights were not finally determined, and the Board
 retained the matter for potential further action, either by
 virtue of exceptions filed by the parties or upon its own
 authority for further proceedings. See HAR § 6-23-19(a) & (c). 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nonetheless, it is undisputed that Benedict did not file any
 
exceptions or request review within the specified period and the
 Board did not exercise its option to retain the matter for any
 further action, review, or proceedings. Accordingly, we conclude
 that the Proposed Decision became "final" fifteen days after
 Benedict received the Proposed Decision, i.e., on December 10,
 2015. Id.; see also Chapman v. Schmidt, No. 25630, 2005 WL
 1081463, *5 (Haw. May 6, 2005) (mem. op.) (recognizing that a
 notice of intent to revoke petitioner's insurance license "became
 a final agency order" upon petitioner's failure to "request a
 hearing in the time allotted by the Notice").
 
However, the period for filing an appeal from an agency 
decision is calculated from the date of service of the final decision, not the date of its finality. See HRS § 91-14(b) 
("[P]roceedings for review shall be instituted in the circuit court . . . within thirty days after service of the certified copy of the final decision and order of the agency pursuant to rule of court.") (emphasis added); HRCP Rule 72(b) ("The notice of appeal shall be filed in the circuit court within 30 days after the person desiring to appeal is notified of the rendering or entry of the decision or order . . . in the manner provided by 
statute.") (emphasis added); see also Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawai' i, Inc. V. Zoning Bd. Of Appeals of Honolulu, 9 
Haw. App. 298, 303, 837 P.2d 311, 314 (1992) (explanatory parenthetical), overruled on other grounds by Rivera, 100 Hawai' i 
at 352 n.7, 60 P.3d at 302 n.7 (Korean Buddhist) (addressing "the relationship between HRS § 91-14(b) and Rule 72(b)" and 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concluding that "the period for filing an appeal under HRS § 91­
14(b) beg[ins] on the date of mailing [of the agency's decision]"); Waikiki Marketplace Inv. Co. v. Chair of Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Honolulu, 86 Hawai' i 343, 352, 949 P.2d 183, 192 
(App. 1997) (referring to the holding in Korean Buddhist); Chapman, 2005 WL 1081463 at *5 ("[The period] for filing an appeal under HRS § 91-14(b) begins when a certified copy of a final agency or order is deposited in the mail." (citing Korean Buddhist, 9 Haw. App. at 305, 837 P.2d at 314-15)). 
Consequently, the deadline for an appeal in this case
 
depends upon the date that the ERS deposited in the mail a
 certified copy of the final decision (or certified letter
 incorporating by reference the Proposed Decision as final)
6 and
 
not the date upon which the Proposed Decision became final. We
 conclude, therefore, that the Circuit Court erred by dismissing
 Benedict's appeal as untimely on the basis that she "filed this
 appeal more than thirty days after the Board's Proposed Decision
 became its Final Decision[.]" 
The record includes no other mailing, delivery, or
 
service of any notification to Benedict of the finality of the
 Proposed Decision or of the entry of a final decision in her
 case. In addition, the Circuit Court did not make a factual
 finding regarding such a notification. Therefore, the record is 
6
 ERS reportedly uses such a letter to notify applicants that their
Proposed Decision " is now final as no exception was received by the specific
deadline." Indeed, ERS's letter to Benedict, accompanying the Proposed
Decision, states that "[a]fter the specified time has passed, you will be
notified whether exceptions and a request for review were filed." 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient for this court to determine whether Benedict timely
 
filed her appeal. 
Accordingly, we must vacate the Circuit Court's Order
 
and remand the case to the Circuit Court to determine the date
 that the ERS deposited in the mail a certified copy of the final
 decision (or certified letter incorporating by reference the
 Proposed Decision as final) as that is the date on which the
 period for filing an appeal under HRS § 91-14(b) began to run. 
Based on that determination, the Circuit Court can determine
 whether Benedict timely filed her appeal from the agency
 decision.
 
Because we remand on this basis, we need not reach the
 
issue of equitable tolling. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's May 26, 2016
 
Order and Judgment are vacated and this case is remanded to the
 Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 9, 2018. 
On the briefs: Ted H.S. Hong,
for Appellant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Patricia Ohara,Elmira K.L. Tsang,Brian Aburano,Deputy Attorneys General,Department of the Attorney General,for Appellee-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 