NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000039
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JARREN LUCAS, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DCW-16-0003773)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Jarren Lucas (Lucas) appeals from
the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on
December 27, 2016, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
Honolulu Division (District Court).1
After pleading no contest, Lucas was convicted of
Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง707-717 (2014).  Lucas was
sentenced to 1 year probation with 30 days jail as a special
condition of probation.
On appeal, Lucas contends the District Court erred in
relying upon uncharged conduct when sentencing him.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Lucas's point of error as follows:
Lucas contends that when the District Court referenced
uncharged conduct by Lucas that was contained in a presentence
1The Honorable Lanson Kupau presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
report, it impermissibly relied upon that uncharged conduct when
sentencing him.  He also contends that District Court "did not
even mention the gravity of the actual conduct when sentencing
the defendant."
The District Court was required to consider the
information in the presentence report prior to sentencing Lucas.
HRS ยง 706-601(b) (2014).  However, 
[W]hile a court has broad discretion in imposing a sentence,
and can consider the candor, conduct, remorse and background
of the defendant as well as the circumstances of the crime
and many other factors, a judge cannot punish a defendant
for an uncharged crime in the belief that it too deserves
punishment.
State v. Vellina , 106 Hawai #i 441, 450, 106 P.3d 364, 373 (2005)
(quoting State v. Nunes , 72 Haw. 521, 526, 824 P.2d 837, 840
(1992)).
Between the first and second court recess, the District
Court stated its inclination to sentence Lucas to prison based
upon the conduct in the instant case, citing Lucas's repeated
threats, encouraging the Complaining Witness "to kill herself, to
put a bullet in her head."  Therefore, Lucas's contention that
the District Court did not mention the gravity of his conduct
before imposing his sentence is without merit.
Prior to imposing a sentence, the District Court ruled
upon Lucas's request for a deferred acceptance of no contest
plea.  In denying the request, the District Court stated:
Based upon the presentence investigation report
[(PSI)], it seems like this type of conduct or domestic
abuse has been a pattern of conduct in past domestic abuse
between this couple, including one choking incident. And as
a result, this Court cannot in good conscience make that
determination that it appears that the defendant will not
likely engage in that type of criminal conduct.
As a result, the motion for deferred acceptance of no
contest is denied. I do accept your no contest plea. I find
you guilty.
With respect to sentencing, the Court will go and
sentence you to one year probation. As a condition of your
probation, you will serve 30 days in OCCC, mittimus to issue
forthwith. . . .
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
It appears that the District Court referenced a choking
incident by Lucas,2 conduct unrelated to this case, for the
purpose of determining whether the "defendant is not likely again
to engage in a criminal course of conduct," pursuant to HRS
ยง 853-1(a)(2) (2014).  The District Court clearly distinguished
the factors used in determining Lucas's request for a deferred
acceptance of no contest plea from his actual conduct related to
the crime for which he was sentenced.  Therefore, the District
Court did not impermissibly rely upon an uncharged crime when
sentencing Lucas.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and
Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on December 27, 2016, in the
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Jonathan Burge,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
2Lucas did not and does not challenge the accuracy of this
information in the PSI.
3