NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000069
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TOMMY W. BULLARD, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-01412)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise, J.;
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Tommy W. Bullard (Bullard) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on September 7, 2010, in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit (District Court).1 Bullard was
 
charged by complaint with operating a vehicle under the influence
 of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2009), as a first-time offender
 under HRS ยง 291E-61(b)(1) (Supp. 2009).
2 Prior to trial, Bullard
 
filed two motions to dismiss the complaint. Bullard filed a
 Motion to Dismiss Re: Failure to Allege an Essential Fact (Motion
 to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea), seeking to dismiss the OVUII
 charge on the ground that it was deficient for failure to allege
 
1 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided.
 
2 Bullard was also charged with driving without a license,
but that charge was dismissed upon proof that he had a valid
driver's license
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a mens rea. Bullard also filed a Motion to Dissmiss Re: Failure 
to Properly File a Written Complaint (Motion to Dismiss Regarding Signature), seeking to dismiss the complaint unless Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) could prove that it was 
properly signed by the prosecutor. The District Court denied the Motion to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea and the Motion to Dismiss Regarding Signature. After a bench trial, the District Court found Bullard guilty of the OVUII charge and imposed sentence. 
On appeal, Bullard argues that the District Court erred
 
in: (1) denying his Motion to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea because
 he claims the OVUII charge was defective for failing to allege
 that he committed the OVUII offense intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly; and (2) denying his Motion to Dismiss Regarding
 Signature because he claims that the State failed to meet its
 burden of proving that the complaint was properly signed by the
 prosecutor. We affirm.
 
I.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Bullard as follows:
 1. We conclude that the OVUII charge was not required 
to allege a mens rea in order to be sufficient, and we reject Bullard's challenge to the sufficiency of the OVUII charge. State v. Nesmith, No. CAAP-10-0000072, 2011 WL 2685719 (Hawai' i 
App. June 22, 2011) (holding that a complaint which did not allege a mens rea was sufficient to charge the defendant with OVUII in violation of HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3), as a first-time offender under HRS ยง 291E-61(b)(1)). Accordingly, the District Court properly denied Bullard's Motion to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea. 
2. At the time the complaint in this case was filed, 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court's "Third Amended Order Establishing 
Pilot Project for Submitting Written Criminal Complaints by Electronic Mail in the District Courts of the First[,] Third[,] and Fifth Circuits of the State of Hawai' i" (Pilot Project Order) 
was in effect. The Pilot Project Order allows duly authorized prosecutors to submit, and the clerks of the designated district 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
courts to accept, written criminal complaints in Adobe Portable
 
Document Format (Adobe PDF format) or locked Word format (locked
 Word complaint) transmitted by email as an attachment. The Pilot
 Project Order provides in pertinent part that:
 
An Adobe PDF or locked Word complaint submitted by
email that bears the facsimile signature of a prosecutor and
the prosecutor's attorney identification number has the same
force and effect as the prosecutor's handwritten signature
on any written complaint, provided the email by which the
complaint was submitted originates from an official email
address known to the Clerk. For purposes of this order and
any rules of court, the facsimile signature may either be an
image of a handwritten signature or the software printed
name of the prosecutor preceded by /s/.
 
The complaint against Bullard is valid on its face. 
The complaint contains the name and attorney identification 
number of Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Thomas C. Koenig and bears a facsimile signature in the form of the software printed name of "THOMAS C. KOENIG" preceded by "/s/." It is Bullard, and not the State, that bears the burden of setting forth a prima facie case showing that he is entitled to the dismissal of the charge. See 
State v. Almeida, 54 Haw. 443, 448, 509 P.2d 549, 552 (1973) (concluding that a defendant who files a motion to dismiss bears the burden of presenting a prima facie case showing that he or she is entitled to dismissal); State v. Layton, 53 Haw. 513, 516, 497 P.2d 559, 561-62 (1972) (noting that an indictment has a presumption of validity); State v. Rodrigues, 63 Haw. 412, 417, 629 P.2d 1111, 1115 (1981) ("In challenging the validity of an indictment, the defendant has the burden to establish prejudice."); State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 290, 295, 949 P.2d 130, 
135 (App. 1997) (stating that "the defendant bears the burden of proof when challenging an indictment"). 
In his Motion to Dismiss Regarding Signature, Bullard
 
did not provide any basis for believing that the facsimile
 signature that appears on the complaint failed to comply with the
 Pilot Project Order or was invalid. A facsimile signature of a
 prosecutor that complies with the requirements of the Pilot
 Project Order "has the same force and effect as the prosecutor's
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
handwritten signature on any written complaint[.]" Bullard
 
failed to meet his burden of setting forth a prima facie case 
that he is entitled to the dismissal of the complaint based on a
 claim that it was not properly signed. Accordingly, the
 District Court properly denied Bullard's Motion to Dismiss
 Regarding Signature.
 
II.
 
We affirm the September 7, 2010, Judgment of the
 
District Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 28, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Timothy I. MacMaster
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
4
 