      NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000616 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
DANIEL A. GONZALEZ, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2PC161000972) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Reifurth, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Daniel A. Gonzalez (Gonzalez) 
appeals from the July 24, 2018 "Order Granting Director of 
Health's Motion for Authorizing Treatment Over Patient's 
Objection" (Order Authorizing Involuntary Treatment) entered in 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court).1 
I. 
On July 28, 2015, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i 
(State) filed a complaint in the District Court of the Second Circuit (district court) charging Gonzalez with one count of 
burglary in the first degree, four counts of firearm-related 
offenses, and one count of terroristic threatening in the first 
degree. 
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
     
          
              
             
              
  
          
              
    On August 3, 2015, the district court2 filed an order 
suspending the proceedings for examination of Gonzalez pursuant 
to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 704-404 (2014). 
On February 5, 2016, the district court3 found Gonzalez 
unfit to proceed and committed Gonzalez to the custody of the 
Director of Health (Director) for detention, care, and treatment. 
On April 4, 2016, the Director filed a motion for an 
order authorizing the involuntary administration of medication 
for Gonzalez. The Director stated: 
DANIEL GONZALEZ has symptoms of a psychiatric disorder
and has behaved dangerously. Defendant has attempted to
assault another peer and his behaviors disrupt the milieu.Defendant's behavior is likely to worsen with the potentialescalation of violence towards others. As a result, theDirector of Health, and eventually the Director of PublicSafety, is unable to provide necessary services to theDefendant or ensure the safety of Defendant, other patientsand staff. 
On May 5, 2016, after a hearing, the district court granted the 
Director's motion for an order authorizing the involuntary 
administration of medication. 
On December 1, 2016, Gonzalez was found fit to proceed 
to trial. On December 5, 2016, Gonzalez waived preliminary 
hearing and the case was committed to the circuit court. 
On January 26, 2018, the circuit court4 filed a 
Judgment of Acquittal and Order of Conditional Release, "on the 
grounds of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect 
excluding responsibility." 
On April 16, 2018, the circuit court filed an Order for 
Temporary Hospitalization of Defendant, finding that Gonzalez had 
2 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided. 
3 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided. The order reflects that 
the order was entered in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit. However, this
appears to be a typographical error as the proceedings were in the district courtat this time and the Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano was a district court judge forthe Second Circuit. 
4 Upon commitment to the circuit court, the Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo
presided on this matter until May 3, 2018, when the case was reassigned to theHonorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
            
            violated the terms and conditions of his conditional release. 
Gonzalez was remanded to the custody of the Department of Health, 
pursuant to HRS § 704-413(1) (Supp. 2016). 
On July 19, 2018, the Director filed a motion for an 
order authorizing treatment over patient's objection (Motion for 
Authorization of Involuntary Treatment), seeking authority to 
involuntarily administer medications, including psychiatric 
medications, and to involuntarily administer laboratory studies, 
as clinically necessary, to Gonzalez. 
On July 24, 2018, the circuit court held an evidentiary 
hearing on the Motion for Authorization of Involuntary Treatment. 
Kenneth Booher, M.D. (Dr. Booher), a staff psychiatrist at the 
Hawai# i State Hospital (HSH) and Gonzalez's attending physician, 
was qualified, by stipulation, as an expert in medicine with a 
specialty in psychiatry. When questioned as to his diagnosis for 
Gonzalez, Dr. Booher testified: "Um, currently, it's psychosis, 
and I'll ask for the rule out or rule in for methamphetamine 
induced psychosis persistent type." Regarding Gonzalez's 
symptoms, Dr. Booher testified as follows: 
He makes odd statements that strongly suggest that he has
delusional thoughts. He occasionally will speak to NavySEAL, secret service agents. Um, he gives the impressionthat he has, ah, some degree of paranoia in the way hereacts to staff and (inaudible) -- when staff would setlimits within he tends to overreact. He's very guardedabout not wanting to talk about, ah, those -- those topics.
Ah, when I've asked on a number of occasions explain
what he means about the Navy SEALS, secret service, he says,ah, they don't want me to talk about that. 
Dr. Booher testified that Gonzalez generally behaved "pretty 
well" but there were instances when Gonzalez lost his temper and 
acted out violently, punching a fire extinguisher cabinet and the 
wall next to it. Dr. Booher also testified that Gonzalez cursed 
at and threatened the hospital staff on numerous occasions.5 
Dr. Booher testified that he also felt threatened by 
5 Dr. Booher testified that, for example, Gonzalez stated that he
would "bang [the hospital staff] up" if he saw them outside the hospital.
Gonzalez had also called an Asian nurse a "dead Jap" a few times. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
          
     Gonzalez and did not feel safe working with him.6 Dr. Booher 
requested that Gonzalez be transferred to a high acuity unit. 
Dr. Booher's request to transfer Gonzalez to another unit was 
based upon Dr. Booher's "Gestalt gut feeling" that Gonzalez could 
"lose his temper and become violent" towards Dr. Booher. Based 
upon Gonzalez's escalating behavior, Dr. Booher testified that he 
believed that Gonzalez was an imminent danger to himself or 
others. Dr. Booher further testified that there have been three 
or four emergency situations during which Gonzalez was given as 
needed medications because he showed signs of acute agitation and 
threatening behavior. 
Dr. Booher recommended that Gonzalez be given a "later 
generation antipsychotic medication" on a routine basis. Dr. 
Booher also testified that Gonzalez was "firmly opposed to taking 
any kind of medications" and Gonzalez had stated that he thought 
the hospital staff was trying to kill him by giving him 
medications. When questioned about the proposed treatment plan 
for Gonzalez, Dr. Booher testified that the goal for the 
treatment was to improve Gonzalez's thinking so that his 
judgment, sense of reality, and impulse control would be better, 
and his aggressive behavior would be reduced. When asked why 
medications were important as opposed to non-medication 
treatment, Dr. Booher testified that talk therapy generally does 
not work with delusional thinking. 
Dr. Booher testified that, according to Gonzalez's 
record from his previous admission at HSH, Gonzalez was given 
medication because of aggressive behavior after he reportedly 
swung at a patient. According to his medical records, after 
Gonzalez was given medication, his behavior improved to the point 
that Gonzalez was eventually discharged from the hospital. 
Dr. Booher concluded that the proposed medications were 
6 Recounting a meeting with Gonzalez that he had to terminate, Dr.
Booher explained, "[Gonzalez] was fairly angry and was making statements, he'd
like to see me in prison." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
        
            
  medically appropriate and there were no less intrusive 
alternatives available to treat Gonzalez. 
On cross-examination, Dr. Booher admitted that there is 
some uncertainty as to the cause of Gonzalez's psychosis --
whether his symptoms were the result of neurological damage due 
to years of methamphetamine use or a combination of that and a 
mild form of genetically based schizophrenia spectrum illness. 
However, Dr. Booher also testified that the antipsychotic 
medications are helpful with treating psychosis, regardless of 
the cause of the psychosis. After being questioned about the 
possible side effects of the proposed medication, Dr. Booher 
opined that the benefits of the medication outweigh the risks. 
Dr. Booher also reiterated that Gonzalez had responded to 
medications during his previous admission and that medications 
would likely help in the current instance with the issue of 
dangerous, threatening behavior. 
Additional testimony was given by Shannon Shimote 
(Shimote), a registered nurse at HSH. Shimote testified about 
instances during which Gonzalez made threatening statements to 
her and other nurses. 
The circuit court orally granted the Motion for 
Authorization of Involuntary Treatment. Gonzalez requested a 
stay of the order pending appeal, which the circuit court denied. 
Later the same day, the circuit court issued its Order 
Authorizing Involuntary Treatment. Gonzalez filed a timely 
notice of appeal. 
II. 
We first note that it appears, based on the record 
before us, that Gonzalez is no longer in the custody of the Director.
7 As such, we note that this appeal appears to be moot 
with regards to any remedy that could be provided to Gonzalez. 
7 On September 27, 2018, the circuit court filed an Order Terminating
Temporary Hospitalization of Defendant, releasing Gonzalez from the Director's
custody. The record does not contain any subsequent orders remanding Gonzalez tothe Director's custody. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Despite the apparent mootness of this appeal, Gonzalez argues 
that the issue presented in this case is likely to occur again. 
We thus first determine whether the "capable of repetition, yet 
evading review" exception to the mootness doctrine applies to the 
facts of this case. 
"The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the 
circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a suit 
previously suitable for determination." Wong v. Bd. of Regents, 
Univ. of Hawai# i
, 62 Haw. 391, 394, 616 P.2d 201, 203 (1980). 
"[A] case is moot if the reviewing court can no longer grant 
effective relief." Kaho# ohanohano  v. State, 114 Hawai# i 302, 332, 
162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007) (citations omitted). An exception to the mootness doctrine exists "[i]n cases involving a legal issue 
which is capable of repetition, yet evading review[.]" 
In re 
Thomas
, 73 Haw. 223, 226, 832 P.2d 253, 255 (1992) (citation 
omitted). The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated: 
The phrase, "capable of repetition, yet evading review,"
means that "a court will not dismiss a case on the groundsof mootness where a challenged governmental action wouldevade full review because the passage of time would preventany single plaintiff from remaining subject to therestriction complained of for the period necessary tocomplete the lawsuit." 
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem , 119 Hawai# i 1, 5, 193 P.3d 
839, 843 (2008). 
This case is an appeal from an order authorizing the 
involuntary administration of medication of a criminal defendant 
during the defendant's temporary hospitalization. 
The issue is 
likely to arise again for Gonzalez himself and for other criminal defendants admitted at HSH. The issue is likely to evade 
appellate review because, in cases of temporary hospitalization 
such as this, by the time an appellate court reviews the matter, 
it is likely that the defendant will no longer be involuntarily 
treated with medication and will already have left the custody of 
the Director. Therefore, this case falls within the "capable of 
repetition, yet evading review" exception to the mootness 
doctrine. We thus proceed to the merits of the case. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
             
           
           
             
             
        
           
           III. 
On appeal, Gonzalez argues that there was insufficient 
evidence in the record to support the circuit court's 
determination that Gonzalez met the four-part test for 
involuntary treatment as set forth in HRS § 334-161(a) (Supp. 
2017). HRS § 334-161 provides: 
[§334-161] Criteria for issuance of court or 
administrative order for treatment over the patient's
objection.  (a) A patient who has been committed to a
psychiatric facility for involuntary hospitalization or who
is in the custody of the director and residing in apsychiatric facility may be ordered to receive treatmentover the patient's objection, including the taking orapplication of medication, if the court, or administrativepanel through the administrative authorization processestablished pursuant to section 334-162, finds that:
(1) The patient suffers from a physical or mentaldisease, disorder, or defect;
(2) The patient is imminently dangerous to self orothers;
(3) The proposed treatment is medically appropriate;and 
(4) After considering less intrusive alternatives,treatment is necessary to forestall the dangerposed by the patient.
(b) For the purposes of this section, "imminently
dangerous to self or others" means that, withoutintervention, the person will likely become dangerous toself or dangerous to others within the next forty-five days. 
Specifically, Gonzalez contends that there was insufficient 
evidence of the third factor -- "proposed treatment is medically 
appropriate." Gonzalez does not challenge the circuit court's 
findings that the remaining three requirements were met. 
Gonzalez argues that there was no scientific basis to 
find that the administration of antipsychotic medication was 
medically appropriate for cases of methamphetamine induced 
psychosis. Gonzalez asserts that Dr. Booher's only basis for the 
appropriateness of this treatment was his "gut feeling."8 
8 Gonzalez also cites Frye v. United States , 293 F. 1013 (D.C. Cir.
1923) and Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc. , 509 U.S. 579 (1993), in arguing
that Dr. Booher's testimony was not supported by scientific methods that are
established and accepted in reliable treatises, texts, or published studies. To the extent that Gonzalez relies on Frye and Daubert and argues that "Dr. Booher
was not qualified as an expert in clinical research and testing of drugs orprotocols for establishment of manufacture[r]s' approved usage of drugsprescribed by practicing doctors such as himself[,]" we note that Gonzalez seemsto be challenging the admissibility of Dr. Booher's testimony. However, Gonzalez 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
         
          "Specialized knowledge which is the proper subject of 
expert testimony is knowledge not possessed by the average trier 
of fact who lacks the expert's skill, experience, training, or 
education." State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 51 
(1990). "'[S]pecialized knowledge' may be deemed reliable even if it is not empirically testable." State v. Fukusaku, 85 
Hawai# i 462, 473, 946 P.2d 32, 43 (1997). However, "under 
[ 
Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rules 702 and 703, a trial 
court may disallow expert testimony if it concludes that the proffer of specialized knowledge
 is based on a mode of analysis 
that lacks trustworthiness." State v. Maelega, 80 Hawai# i 172, 
182, 907 P.2d 758, 768 (1995) (emphasis in original). 
Upon review of the record, it appears that Dr. Booher's 
testimony of his "gut feeling" was in response to questioning 
regarding the reasoning behind Dr. Booher's request that Gonzalez 
be transferred to a higher acuity unit. When asked to clarify 
what the "gut feeling" was, Dr. Booher explained, "at the time I 
felt that, ah, he could lose his temper and become violent 
towards me." It does not appear that Dr. Booher's "gut feeling" 
was the basis for his diagnosis of Gonzalez nor was it the basis 
for his reasoning that antipsychotic medication was a medically 
appropriate proposed treatment. 
Notwithstanding Dr. Booher's testimony regarding his 
"gut feeling," we must determine whether there was sufficient 
evidence for the court to find that the administration of 
antipsychotic was medically appropriate for Gonzalez. 
A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when: "'(1) the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) 
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the 
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made.'" State v. Sanford, 97 
did not object to the admissibility of Dr. Booher's testimony regarding the
medical appropriateness of the proposed medication during the circuit courtproceedings and we therefore do not consider this issue on appeal. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i 247, 253, 35 P.3d 764, 770 (App. 2001) (quoting State v. 
Okumura, 78 Hawai# i 383, 392, 894 P.2d 80, 89 (1995)). 
"Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to reach a conclusion." State v. Pratt, 127 Hawai# i 206, 
223, 277 P.3d 300, 317 (2012) (quoting State v. Bui, 104 Hawai# i 
462, 467, 92 P.3d 471, 476 (2004)). 
On appeal, the appellate court's "task is not to 
determine whether the evidence was 'clear and convincing,' but, 
rather, whether there was sufficient evidence to enable a person 
of reasonable caution to arrive at the circuit court's [finding 
of fact]." State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai# i 319, 345, 984 P.2d 78, 104 
(1999). 
By enacting HRS § 334-161 in 2017, the legislature 
explicitly provided the trial courts with authority to issue an order permitting the involuntary administration of medication to 
a criminal defendant. Prior to the enactment of HRS § 334-161, 
the Hawai# i Supreme Court, in Kotis, interpreted HRS § 334E-
2(a)(9) (1993) and Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 11-175-45(b)(3) (1988) as contemplating such authority. Id. at 330-31, 
984 P.2d at 89-90. In Kotis, the expert witness, qualified in the fields of medicine and psychiatry, testified that, in his 
opinion, the proposed antipsychotic medications would "decrease 
mood swings" and render the defendant "more stable emotionally, 
which would greatly reduce the possibility of suicide." Id. at 
345, 984 P.2d at 104. The expert witness also testified that, based on the defendant's diagnosed condition of "schizoaffective 
disorder," characterized by anger, paranoid delusions, and 
extreme mood swings, id. at 324, 984 P.2d at 83, he believed the 
director's proposed treatment plan was medically appropriate and 
"standard." Id. at 345, 984 P.2d at 104. Citing this testimony, 
the supreme court determined that there was substantial evidence to support the circuit court's finding that the medication 
treatment plan was medically appropriate. Id.
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
   Here, Dr. Booher ultimately diagnosed Gonzalez with 
psychosis. Dr. Booher testified that Gonzalez may suffer from a 
possible dual disorder.9 The chemical component is likely 
methamphetamine-induced psychosis and the organic component of the dual disorder is likely delusion disorder, paranoid type. 
Dr. Booher testified that "medications keep a more normal balance 
in the chemicals in the brain" and can result in a "much slower 
progression or maybe even a stopping of [the] natural 
progression" of a psychotic disorder and its symptoms. Dr. 
Booher also testified that during Gonzalez's previous admission 
at the hospital, medication helped to reduce his aggressive 
behavior to the point where he was discharged. Based on 
Gonzalez's positive response to the medication during his 
previous admission, Dr. Booher opined that medication would 
similarly help with the issue of dangerousness in the instant 
matter. Dr. Booher also testified that, in his opinion and based 
on his experience, the proposed medications are often helpful for 
treating the psychosis that results from both organic psychiatric 
disorders and methamphetamine-induced disorders. Furthermore, 
Dr. Booher testified that the administration of medication was 
important in this case because other non-medicated modes of 
treatment are not effective with patients, like Gonzalez, who 
exhibit delusional thinking. Dr. Booher expressly testified that 
he believed the proposed medications to be medically appropriate. 
We conclude that Dr. Booher's expert testimony, like 
that of the expert witness in Kotis, provided substantial 
evidence to enable a person of reasonable caution to arrive at 
the circuit court's finding that the proposed medication was 
medically appropriate. See Pratt
, 127 Hawai# i at 223, 277 P.3d 
at 317. Accordingly, we reject Gonzalez's argument that there was insufficient evidence to support the circuit court's finding. 
9 A dual disorder consists of a chemical-induced disorder coupled with
an organic psychiatric disorder. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IV.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the July 24, 2018
"Order Granting Director of Health's Motion for Authorizing
Treatment Over Patient's Objection" entered in the Circuit Court
of the Second Circuit.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai#i, August 12, 2019.
On the briefs:
John F. Parker,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Diane K. Taira,
and Debbie L. Tanakaya,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
11