NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000751 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
THE HILO PROJECT, LLC; ROBERT AND PATRICIA FERAZZI; SUSAN MUNRO
AND KERRY GLASS; MARCUS G. SPALLEK AND ELAINE MUNRO,
Appellants-Appellants,
and
BRIDGET RAPOZA; RAQUEL DOW, Appellants, 
v.
COUNTY OF HAWAI #I WINDWARD PLANNING COMMISSION;
ZENDO KERN, in his official capacity as Chairman,
Appellees-Appellees,
and
HU HONUA BIOENERGY, LLC, Intervenor-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0238)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Appellants-Appellants The Hilo Project, LLC, Robert and
Patricia Ferazzi, Susan Munro and Kerry Glass, Marcus G. Spallek,
and Elaine Munro (collectively  Appellants ) appeal from the Final
Judgment, filed on March 10, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the
Third Circuit ( Circuit Court),1 entered in favor of Appellees-
Appellees County of Hawai #i Windward Planning Commission
(Planning Commission ), Gregory Henkel,2 in his official capacity
as Chairman, County of Hawai# i Windward Planning Commission
1  The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
2  Gregory Henkel is automatically substituted for Zendo Kern, who was
originally named in this case as Chairman of the Planning Commission.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(collectively County Appellees ), and Intervenor-Appellee-Appellee
Hu Honua Bioenergy, LLC ( Hu Honua).
On appeal, Appellants contend that the Circuit Court
erred when it (1) failed to consider the entire record made
before the Planning Commission by the Appellants; (2) failed to
consider certain arguments raised in Appellants' opening brief to
the Circuit Court; and (3) failed to properly apply the public
trust doctrine in assessing the probable adverse impacts of Hu
Honua's application to amend its Special Management Area (SMA )
permit.3
I. Background
On January 15, 2010, Hu Honua, after having obtained an
SMA permit for a coal storage and coal burning energy plant in
1985, filed an "Amendment to Special Management Area Permit No.
221" (SMA Permit Application) with the County of Hawai# i Planning
Department ( Planning Department ).  Hu Honua stated that it was
"proposing to convert the former Hilo Coast Power Company
("HCPC") coal-burning electric generating power plant into a
renewable electrical power generation facility fueled by locally
grown sustainable biomass."  To convert the power plant from coal
to biomass burning, Hu Honua would need to make some improvements
and additions to the facility equipment "namely the boiler and
air emissions control equipment, and support facilities require
refurbishment, construction, or repair."  Further, the existing
SMA permit "restricts the plant operator to using only washed
low-sulfur Class B sub-bituminous coal" and "[s]ubstitutions are
not allowed without approval from the State Department of Health
[(DOH)] and the [Planning Department]."
3  "'Special management area' means the land extending inland from the
shoreline as delineated on the maps filed with the authority[.]" Hawaii
Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 205A-22 (2001).  At the time of Hu Honua's
application, "Special management area use permit" was defined as "an action by
the authority authorizing development the valuation of which exceeds $125,000
or which may have a substantial adverse environmental or ecological effect,
taking into account potential effects."  HRS § 205A-22 (2001).  
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A six-day contested case hearing was held on October
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and 27, 2010.4  Appellants, as real property
owners located adjacent to the power plant, objected to the SMA
Permit Application and intervened in the contested case hearing.  
On June 7, 2011, the Planning Commission entered its
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order"
(Planning Commission Decision and Order).  The Planning
Commission approved the SMA Permit Application subject to sixteen
conditions.
On July 6, 2011, Appellants filed a Notice of Appeal to
the Circuit Court from the Planning Commission Decision and
Order.  Attached to the Notice of Appeal was a seventy-nine page
Statement of the Case, in which Appellants argued, among other
things, that: (1) the Planning Commission failed to resolve
conflicting evidence; (2) the Planning Commission failed to
follow its own rules; and (3) the public trust must be considered
because "[g]ranting or denying the SMA Use Permit can and will
affect the land on and around where the plant is being proposed,
the ocean waters of the Hamakua coastline, the [ ] quality of air
that Big Island residents are breathing, and the energy policy of
the State of Hawai# i."  In the Statement of the Case, the
Appellants also challenged nearly all ninety-five Findings of
Fact (FOF) from the Planning Commission Decision and Order, as
well as Conclusions of Law (COL ) 2 through 10.  The Appellants
requested that the Circuit Court remand the case back to the
Planning Commission or in the alternative reverse or modify the
Planning Commission Decision and Order. 
On July 26, 2011, the County Appellees filed an answer
to Appellants' Statement of the Case.
On October 4, 2011, after the Circuit Court granted its
motion to intervene, Hu Honua filed a response to Appellants'
Statement of the Case.  Hu Honua argued that Appellants'
Statement of the Case should be stricken because it violated
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 72(e) as, at
4  Robert J. Crudele presided as the Hearing Officer for the contested
case hearing.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
seventy-nine pages, it was not short and plain and it was
repetitive and confusing. 
On November 28, 2012, the Circuit Court filed a
Briefing Schedule, which ordered, inter alia , that the
Appellants' opening brief be filed by January 11, 2013.  The
order also provided:
Opening and Answering Briefs shall not exceed thirty-
five (35) pages in length.  Reply Briefs shall not exceed
ten (10) pages in length.
Briefs shall include, at a minimum, (1) a Statement of
the questions presented for decision, (2) a brief statement
of the facts (which need not duplicate the statement of the
case separately required under Rule 72 of the Hawaii Rules
of Civil Procedure), (3) a concise argument, and (4) a
conclusion specifying the relief sought.
Appellants failed to file their opening brief by the
January 11, 2013 deadline.  Hu Honua filed a motion to dismiss
for lack of prosecution, which the County Appellees joined.  In
turn, Appellants filed a motion seeking a new briefing schedule,
asserting that they first became aware of the briefing schedule
after the due date for the opening brief had passed. 
While Appellants' motion was pending before the Circuit
Court, and thus without leave of the court, Appellants filed a
nine-page opening brief on March 20, 2013.  The opening brief
states, in part: "Appellants incorporate by reference as though
fully set forth herein the Statement of the Case, including the
Statement of Points of Error and Exhibits A and B attached to and
filed in conjunction with Appellants' Notice of Appeal filed July
6, 2011."  In the Standard of Review section of the opening
brief, Appellants reference the public trust doctrine and state,
"[g]ranting or denying the SMA Use Permit can and will affect the
land on and around where the plant is being proposed, the ocean
waters of the Hamakua coastline, the air quality of air that Big
Island residents are breathing, and the energy policy of the
State of Hawai #i." 
In the last paragraph of page eight of their opening
brief, Appellants further argued:
The County's failure to follow the law dealing with
historic properties is consistent with its other failings
identified in the Statement of the Case, including the
Statement of Points of Error attached to the Notice of
Appeal, which include, inter alia , its failure to articulate
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
any analysis on the considerable conflicts and uncertainty
of the evidence, its failure to resolve conflicting
evidence, its failure to require environmental review under
Ch. 343, H.R.S., its failure to gain scientific, public
health, historical and other information necessary to make a
sound decision on whether the project is advisable as an
amendment to the SMA Use Permit, and its disregard of
uncontroverted evidence supplied by J.P. Michaud, Ph.D. that
the operation of the power plant enabled by the amended SMA
Use Permit will endanger the health of Appellants and
surrounding community and degrade the environment.
On March 27, 2013, County Appellees filed a Motion to
Strike Appellants' Opening Brief and/or to Dismiss Appeal. 
County Appellees argued that "Appellants' Opening Brief, with
'incorporated' points and arguments, far exceeds the 35-page
limit set by this honorable Court's Briefing Schedule filed on
November 28, 2012."  County Appellees further argued that the
opening brief was untimely filed and failed to include the
minimum content and organization that the Briefing Schedule
required.  On April 1, 2013, Hu Honua filed a Joinder to the
County Appellees' Motion to Strike Appellants' Opening Brief
and/or to Dismiss Appeal.
On May 10, 2013, the County Appellees filed their
answering brief.  County Appellees argued, inter alia, that the
public trust doctrine was not applicable to this case and
Appellants failed to "'cite any authority which supports the
application of the public trust doctrine, as set forth in Article
XI, section 1 of the Hawai #i Constitution' to the Appellees under
the circumstances of this case." (citing Hall v. Dep't of Land
and Nat. Res., 128 Hawai #i 455, 473, 290 P.3d 525, 543 (App.
2012)).5 
On May 14, 2013, Hu Honua filed its answering brief. 
On June 10, 2013, the Circuit Court filed an "Order
Granting in Part and Denying in Part [County Appellees'] Motion
to Strike Opening Brief and/or to Dismiss Appeal" ( Order Limiting
5  The County Appellees argue in the current appeal that the public
trust issues were waived because they were not raised before the Planning
Commission, but it does not appear from our record that this waiver argument
was made to the Circuit Court.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Review of Appellants' Opening Brief ).6  The Circuit Court
ordered, inter alia , the following:
Appellants' Opening Brief filed herein on March 20,
2013 is not stricken, but is considered filed under an
amended briefing schedule, except that the Court will not
address: (a) The arguments raised only in the Statement of
Case, including its Statement of Points of Error and
Exhibits A and B attached to and filed in conjunction with
Appellants' Notice of Appeal filed herein on July 6, 2011;
and (b) The points or issues raised in the last full
paragraph on page 8 of said Opening Brief[.]
The Circuit Court also denied Hu Honua's motion to dismiss.
Subsequently, the Circuit Court ordered a partial
remand to the Planning Commission to clarify two conditions in
its Decision and Order.  After further proceedings in the
Planning Commission and a supplemental decision by the Planning
Commission, the parties filed supplemental briefs in the Circuit
Court.
On January 15, 2014, the Circuit Court filed its
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Affirming the
Decision and Order and Supplemental Decision and Order of the
County of Hawai #i Windward Planning Commission" (Circuit Court
Decision and Order).7  The Circuit Court concluded, inter alia,
the following:
4.  Regarding the public trust doctrine, Appellants
rely on Article XI, Section 1, of the Hawai #i State
Constitution, which states as follows:
For the benefit of present and
future generations, the State and its
political subdivisions shall conserve and
protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all
natural resources, including land, water,
air, minerals and energy sources, and
shall promote the development and
utilization of these resources in a manner
consistent with their conservation and in
furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the
State.
6  The Order Limiting Review of Appellants' Opening Brief indicates that
a hearing was held on April 2, 2013, which addressed the Planning Commission's
Motion to Strike Opening Brief and/or To Dismiss Appeal.  However, the
transcript of the April 2, 2013 hearing does not appear to be in the record on
appeal to this court.
7  It appears from the Circuit Court Decision and Order that the Circuit
Court held hearings on June 14, 2013 and October 31, 2013.  However, the
transcripts of these hearings do not appear to be in the record before this
court. 
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
All public natural resources are
held in trust by the State for the benefit
of the people.
Article XI, Section 1, Hawai #i State Constitution.
5.  This constitutional provision protects public
natural resources.  Clearly, in this State, "the public
trust doctrine applies to all water resources without
exception or distinction."  In re Water Use Permit
Applications , 94 Hawai #i 97, 133 (2000).  However, this case
deals with land.  It appears that in order for land to be
considered a natural resource subject to the public trust
doctrine, the State must have title to the land.  See e.g.
King v. Oahu Railway & Land Co. , 11 Haw. 717 (1899); County
of Hawai #i v. Sotomura , 55 Haw. 176, 184 (1973).
6.  Therefore, in this case, the public trust doctrine
does not apply because the State does not have title to the
land which is the subject of this case.  Moreover, there is
an insufficient basis to find or conclude that the land
itself has such significance as a natural resource that it
can be considered a public natural resource.
The Circuit Court ordered that judgment be entered in favor of
the County Appellees and Hu Honua and against Appellants.
On March 10, 2014, the Circuit Court entered the Final
Judgment.
On April 9, 2014, Appellants timely filed their Notice
of Appeal from the Circuit Court's Final Judgment.
II. Standards of Review
A. Secondary Appeals
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.  The
standard of review is one in which this court must determine
whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its
decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g)
to the agency's decision.  This court's review is further
qualified by the principle that the agency's decision
carries a presumption of validity and appellant has the
heavy burden of making a convincing showing that the
decision is invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in
its consequences .
Curtis v. Bd. of Appeals , 90 Hawai #i 384, 392, 978 P.2d 822, 830
(1999) (citation omitted).
HRS § 91-14(g) (2012) provides:
(g)  Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
(1)
In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
B. Public Trust
Review of an agency decision under the public trust doctrine
requires additional rigor.  "Clarity in the agency's
decision is all the more essential 'in a case such as this
where the agency performs as a public trustee and is duty
bound to demonstrate that it has properly exercised the
discretion vested in it by the constitution and the
statute.'"
Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm'n of Cty. of Kauai , 133
Hawai#i 141, 164, 324 P.3d 951, 974 (2014) (citation omitted). 
"Questions of constitutional law require the court to 'exercise
its own independent judgment based on the facts of the case'
under the right or wrong standard."  Id. at 165, 324 P.3d at 975
(citation and internal brackets omitted).
III. Discussion
A. Appellants' Statement of the Case
Appellants challenge the Circuit Court's Order Limiting
Review of Appellants' Opening Brief, contending that the Circuit
Court misinterpreted HRS § 91-14(g) when it ordered it would not
address the arguments from the Appellants' Statement of the Case
that was attached to the Notice of Appeal to the Circuit Court. 
Appellants contend 
[i]n limiting its review to those portions of Appellants'
Opening Brief that did not include incorporated portions of
the Statement of the Case, the [Circuit Court] appears to
have interpreted the "review of the record" required by HRS
§ 91-14(g) to mean "review of the limited portion of the
record set out anew in the Opening Brief and excluding that
portion of the record incorporated by reference from the
Statement of the Case."
Appellants also argue that the Circuit Court misapplied HRCP Rule
72(e) because it failed to treat the Statement of the Case as an
original complaint.
HRS § 91-14(g) provides:
Upon review of the record  the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3)Made upon unlawful procedure ; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
(Emphasis added.)  The Legislature intended HRS § 91-14 to
conform with HRCP Rule 72.  Friends of Makakilo v. D.R. Horton-
Schuler Homes, LLC, 134 Hawai #i 135, 141, 338 P.3d 516, 522
(2014).  HRCP Rule 72 addresses appeals to the Circuit Court and
provides in pertinent part:
(d) Record on Appeal .
(1) DESIGNATION .  The appellant shall,
within the time provided for filing the notice
of appeal or within such further time, not to
exceed 30 days, as may be allowed by the court
for good cause shown, prepare and present to the
clerk of the circuit court a designation, which
shall specify the papers, transcripts, minutes
and exhibits which the appellant desires filed
in the circuit court in connection with the
appeal. . . . 
. . . .
(e) Statement of Case .  The appellant shall file in 
the circuit court concurrently with the filing of
appellant's designation, a short and plain statement of the
case and a prayer for relief. . . .  The statement shall be
treated, as near as may be, as an original complaint and the
provision of these rules respecting motions and answers in
response thereto shall apply.
(f) Briefs; oral argument .
(1) BRIEFS; DEADLINES.  The opening brief
shall be filed within 40 days after the filing
of the record on appeal.  The answering brief
shall be filed within 40 days after service of
the appellant's opening brief.  Within 14 days
after service of the appellee's answering brief,
the appellant may file a reply brief.  Reply
briefs shall be confined to matters presented in
the answering brief. . . . 
(2) REQUIREMENTS.  The opening, answering,
and reply briefs shall be subject to the page
limitations set forth in Rule 28(a) of the
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure and shall
include, at a minimum:
(A) a statement of the questions presented
for decision;
(B) a brief statement of the facts (that
need not duplicate the statement of the case
separately required under Rule 72(e));
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(C) a concise argument; and
(D) a conclusion specifying the relief
sought.8
(Emphasis added.)  Thus, HRCP Rule 72, inter alia , provides three
separate sections: (1) designation of the record on appeal; (2)
the notice of appeal, which includes a statement of the case; and
(3) the opening, answering, and reply briefs.
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 72(d)(1), the record is
designated as "papers, transcripts, minutes and exhibits[.]" 
Under a separate heading, HRCP Rule 72(e) provides that the
statement of the case consists of "a short and plain statement of
the case and a prayer for relief."  Thus, HRCP Rule 72
distinguishes the "record" from the "statement of the case." 
Further, HRCP Rule 72 distinguishes the opening brief as a
separate filing from the statement of the case.  See HRCP Rule
72(e) and (f).  The purpose of HRCP Rule 72(e) is to subject "the
statement of the case to the same kinds of motions, such as to
strike, for more definite statement, or to dismiss, as is a
complaint.  However, . . . the statement is only an outline by
appellant of the nature of the case and its progress through the
administrative machinery as indicated by the record[.]"  Costa v.
Sunn, 5 Haw. App. 419, 429, 697 P.2d 43, 50 (1985) (emphasis
added).  By contrast, pursuant to HRCP Rule 72, the opening brief
must contain a "statement of the questions presented for
decision"; "a brief statement of the facts ( that need not
duplicate the statement of the case separately required under
Rule 72(e)"; "a concise argument"; and "a conclusion specifying
relief sought."  HRCP Rule 72(f)(2) (emphasis added).
8  Prior to January 1, 2012, HRCP Rule 72(f) did not include details
regarding opening, answering, reply briefs and, rather, was merely marked as
"(Reserved)."  See Middleton v. State , No. CAAP-13-0002468, 2017 WL 663538, at
*1 (Haw. App. Feb. 17, 2017).  Appellants' Notice of Appeal to the Circuit
Court was filed on July 6, 2011, prior to the adoption of the current language
in HRCP Rule 72(f) on January 1, 2012.  However, the Circuit Court filed its
briefing schedule on November 28, 2012, after the adoption of the current
language of HRCP Rule 72(f), and the requirements set out in the briefing
schedule for opening, answering, and reply briefs mirror the language of HRCP
Rule 72(f).  Further, the opening brief deadline was set for January 11, 2013,
well after the adoption of the current language of HRCP Rule 72(f).  Thus, we
apply the current language of HRCP Rule 72(f) to this case.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Therefore, because a statement of the case pursuant to
HRCP Rule 72 is a separate filing made on appeal, and is not part
of the record made at the agency level, the Circuit Court did not
ignore parts of the record when it did not address the issues
from Appellants' Statement of the Case.
Both County Appellees and Hu Honua treated the
Statement of the Case like a complaint as required by HRCP Rule
72(e) by filing answers to the Statement of the Case as if it
were a complaint.  Thus, the Circuit Court did not violate HRCP
Rule 72(e) when it ordered that the Statement of the Case would
not be addressed as part of the opening brief.
In addition, the practice of incorporating by reference
arguments from other pleadings into an opening brief, and thus
exceeding the thirty-five page limit, has been rejected by the
Hawai#i Supreme Court based on the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP ) Rule 28(a).  Kapiolani Commercial Ctr. v. A & S
P'ship, 68 Haw. 580, 584-85, 723 P.2d 181, 184-85 (1986) ("[I]n
violation of our 35-page limitation set forth in HRAP Rule 28(a),
[cross-appellant] attempts to incorporate by reference in its
brief, the arguments made before the trial court.  Since this is
in violation of our rules, we will disregard those points."); see
also HRCP Rule 72(f)(2) ("The opening, answering, and reply
briefs shall be subject to the page limitations set forth in Rule
28(a) of the Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure[.]").
Here, Appellants' Statement of the Case is seventy-nine
pages, not including Exhibits A and B, and thus it far exceeded
the thirty-five page limit set for the opening brief. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not base its order
upon unlawful procedure under HRS § 91-14(g) when it ordered that
it would not address the arguments that were only raised in the
Statement of the Case filed in conjunction with Appellants'
Notice of Appeal.
B. The last full paragraph on page eight of the
opening brief.
Appellants challenge the Circuit Court's Order Limiting
Review of Appellants' Opening Brief contending that this court
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"should interpret H.R.S. § 91-14(g) de novo and hold that the
[Circuit Court] erred as a matter of law when it limited its
review and consideration of the record made before the Windward
Planning Commission to exclude [the last paragraph of page eight
of the opening brief to the Circuit Court]."
The last full paragraph of page eight of the opening
brief to the Circuit Court states:
The County's failure to follow the law dealing with historic
properties is consistent with its other failings identified
in the Statement of the Case, including the Statement of
Points of Error attached to the Notice of Appeal, which
include, inter alia , its failure to articulate any analysis
on the considerable conflicts and uncertainty of the
evidence, its failure to resolve conflicting evidence, its
failure to require environmental review under Ch. 343,
H.R.S., its failure to gain scientific, public health,
historical and other information necessary to make a sound
decision on whether the project is advisable as an amendment
to the SMA Use Permit, and its disregard of uncontroverted
evidence supplied by J.P. Michaud, Ph.D. that the operation
of the power plant enabled by the amended SMA Use Permit
will endanger the health of the Appellants and surrounding
community and degrade the environment.
As stated above, HRCP Rule 72(d)(1) designates the
record as "papers, transcript, minutes and exhibits[.]"  HRCP
Rule 72(f) provides that the opening brief is a separate filing
to the Circuit Court and therefore not part of the record. 
Insofar as the last paragraph of page eight appears to summarize
a reference to the Statement of the Case, and because the Circuit
Court did not violate HRS § 91-14(g) when it did not address the
Statement of the Case, it also did not violate HRS § 91-14(g)
when it did not address the last full paragraph on page eight of
the opening brief.
C. Public Trust Doctrine
Appellants contend that the Circuit Court Decision and
Order misapplies the public trust doctrine and thus the Circuit
Court erred when it concluded that the public trust doctrine does
not apply in this case.9
The Circuit Court's Decision and Order concludes in
pertinent part:
9 We do not address the County Appellees' argument that Appellants
waived any public trust issues, because the waiver argument does not appear to
have been raised in the Circuit Court.  As previously noted, the transcripts
from hearings before the Circuit Court are not in the record. 
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5. [Article XI, section 1] protects public natural
resources.  Clearly, in this State, "the public trust
doctrine applies to all water resources without exception or
distinction."  In re Water Use Permit Applications , 94
Hawai#i 97, 133 (2000).  However, this case deals with land. 
It appears that in order for land to be considered a natural
resource subject to the public trust doctrine, the State
must have title to the land.  See e.g. King v. Oahu Railway
& Land Co. , 11 Haw. 717 (1899); County of Hawai #i v.
, 55 Haw. 176, 184 (1973). Sotomura
6.  Therefore, in this case, the public trust doctrine
does not apply because the State does not have title to the
land which is the subject of this case.  Moreover, there is
an insufficient basis to find or conclude that the land
itself has such significance as a natural resource that it
can be considered a public natural resource. 
 
Appellants contend that under the SMA Permit
Application the proposed change to the power plant impacts the
water quality of the ocean.  Appellants contend that the public
trust doctrine applies to the SMA Permit Application "because the
operation of the power plant adjacent the shoreline has the
potential to adversely impact the State's coastal waters."  In
their reply briefs to both County Appellees and Hu Honua,
Appellants state "[t]he Record shows that [Hu Honua's] discharge
of tens of millions of gallons of water daily into the ocean and
[Hu Honua's] incomplete storm water discharge scheme have the
potential for adverse impacts on the nearshore marine
environment."10
Article XI, section 1 of the Hawai #i State
Constitution, known as the public trust doctrine, provides:
For the benefit of present and future generations, the State
and its political subdivisions shall conserve and protect
Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources, including
land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and shall
promote the development and utilization of these resources
in a manner consistent with their conservation and in
furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State.
10  With regard to the public trust doctrine, Appellants' opening brief
to the Circuit Court states in pertinent part: "[g]ranting or denying the SMA
Use Permit can and will affect the land on and around where the plant is being
proposed, the ocean waters of the Hamakua coastline, the air quality of air
that Big Island residents are breathing, and the energy policy of the State of
Hawai#i."  Transcripts are not included in this court's record on appeal and
thus it is unclear what the Appellants argued at the two oral arguments before
the Circuit Court.
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
All public natural resources are held in trust by the State
for the benefit of the people.
Haw. Const. art. XI, § 1 (emphasis added). 
"[T]he public trust doctrine applies to all water
resources without exception or distinction."  Kelly v. 1250
Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai #i 205, 222, 140 P.3d 985, 1002
(2006) (citation omitted).  The duty to "protect" and "promote"
established in article XI, section 1 of the Hawai #i State
Constitution, "includes the duty to 'ensure the continued
availability and existence of its water resources for present and
future generations" and "the duty to promote 'the development and
utilization of water resources in a manner consistent with their
conservation and in furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the
State."  Id.  at 223, 140 P.3d at 1003 (citations and brackets
omitted).  "[M]aximizing the water resource's social and economic
benefits includes the protection of the resource in its natural
state."  Id. (citation omitted).  In addition, "the plain
language of article XI, section 1 mandates that the County [has]
an obligation to conserve and protect the States's natural
resources."  Id. at 224-25, 140 P.3d at 1004-05 (brackets
omitted).  Further, "[a]rticle XI, section 7 [of the Hawai# i
Constitution] reiterates that '[t]he State has an obligation to
protect, control and regulate the use of Hawaii's water resources
for the benefit of its people.'" Kauai Springs, 133 Hawai# i at
171, 324 P.3d at 981 (emphasis added).
In Kauai Springs , the Hawai# i Supreme Court provided a
framework for how an agency should approach a proposed use of a
public trust resource.  The supreme court stated:
When an agency is confronted with its duty to perform as a
public trustee under the public trust doctrine, it must
preserve the rights of present and future generations in the
waters of the state.  An agency must take the initiative in
considering, protecting, and advancing public rights in the
resource at every stage of the planning and decision-making
process.  The agency measures the proposed use under a
"reasonable and beneficial use" standard, which requires
examination of the proposed use in relation to other public
and private uses.  The agency must apply a presumption in
favor of public use, access, enjoyment, and resource
protection.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 173, 324 P.3d at 983 (citing In re Water Use Permit
Applications, 94 Hawai# i 97, 9 P.3d 409 (2000)).  Further, the
supreme court stated that "it is manifest that a government body
is precluded from allowing an applicant's proposed use to impact
the public trust in the absence of an affirmative showing that
the use does not conflict with those principles and purposes [of
the public trust doctrine]."  Id. at 174, 324 P.3d at 984
(emphasis added).
In this case, Hu Honua affirmatively showed that it
would protect the ocean as a public trust resource because as
part of the operation of the power plant, Hu Honua must obtain a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ( NPDES) permit
from the DOH.[11]  The SMA Permit Application states:
Coastal Ecosystems  - Water quality from the facility will
not change significantly from previous power plant
operations.  The thermal discharge was the primary
controlled pollutant and will continue to be covered under
the future permit.  The water discharge point source permit
requires the facility to meet current water quality
standards and to conduct biological studies of the reef in
the area.
The application further states:
Non-contact cooling water for the steam condenser will be
discharged to surface water (Pacific Ocean) through the same
outfall on-site that was used for prior operations.  Up to
21.6 [million gallons per day] will be discharged, which is
based on the three existing pumps, each with a rated
capacity of 5,000 gallons per minute.  A new individual
NPDES permit will be obtained from the State DOH Clean Water
Branch to allow this discharge.12
11  In Kelly, the supreme court explained:
The United States Congress established and authorized the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
regulatory and permitting system under the Clean Water Act,
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251-1386.  See Molokai Chamber of Comm. v.
Kukui (Molokai), Inc. , 891 F. Supp. 1389, 1392-94 (D. Haw.
1995) (describing the federal and state NPDES system).  In
general, the federal government delegated to the State of
Hawai#i the authority to implement the NPDES system, subject
to federal statutes and regulations.
111 Hawai #i at 210 n.11, 140 P.3d at 990 n.11 (citation omitted).
12  Rules relating to NPDES permits obtained from the State Department
of Health are set forth in Hawaii Administrative Rules ( HAR) Title 11, Chapter
55.  Pursuant to HAR § 11-55-01 (2014), "cooling water" is defined as
water used for contact or noncontact cooling, including
water used for equipment cooling, evaporative cooling tower
(continued...)
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Further, in a supplemental report attached to the SMA Permit
Application, Hu Honua stated:
The project will not disturb more than one acre of soil
during construction; therefore, a [NPDES] Notice of Intent
for General Permit - Construction, is not necessary from the
Department of Health.  However, best management practices
(BMPs) will be instituted during plant upgrade and
construction.  These measures may include the following:
• Restoring and stabilizing disturbed areas, and
using hydro mulch, geotextiles, or binding
substances, as soon as possible after working;
• Placing structural controls including silt
fences, gravel bags, sediment ponds, check dams,
and other barriers in order to retard and
prevent the loss of sediment from the site;
• Minimizing disturbance of soil during periods of
heavy rain;
• Constructing a stabilized construction vehicle
entrance, with designated vehicle wash area that
discharges to a sediment pond;
• Maintaining BMPs; and
• Cleaning up significant leaks or spills and
disposal at an approved site, if they occur.
Hu Honua submitted several exhibits to the Hearing
Officer to support its assertion that it would obtain an NPDES
permit prior to any power plant operation and that the NPDES
permit would properly ensure protection to the ocean resources. 
In a letter dated January 26, 2010 to Hu Honua from the Planning
Department, the Planning Department requested that Hu Honua
provide detailed information as to the status of H û Honua's
permits regarding pollutant discharge elimination from DOH,
information regarding the reasons that a permit is required
and how these impacts are mitigated, description of
applicant's efforts and outcomes of reef monitoring (which
is required as a condition of these permits) and other
condition requirements of the permit.
Hu Honua responded to the Planning Department's request
in a letter dated March 1, 2010 stating, inter alia :
Hu Honua intends to conform to regulations and controls
required by the DOH and, as such, will be subject to the
following permits and issuance schedules:
1.Storm Water Notice of General Permit Coverage
(NGPC), Industrial Activity.  A NGPC for the
facility was issued on October 3, 2008 by the
DOH Clean Water Branch to cover storm water
discharges associated with the industrial
12(...continued)
makeup, and dilution of effluent heat content.  The intended
use of the cooling water is to absorb waste heat rejected
from the process or processes used, or from auxiliary
operations on the facility's premises.
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
activities, even though the existing facility is
not operating or producing electricity.  This
permit expires on October 21, 2012, unless a
Notice of Cessation (NOC) is submitted by the
facility.  Hu Honua intends to operate and
comply with this permit until the Individual
Permit covering storm water is issued for the
plant; expected before the current permit
expires.
2.Individual NPDES Permit, Non-contact cooling
water, Industrial Discharges and Storm Water .  A
new Individual NPDES permit will be required
before discharges commence for the renovated
facility.  The Permit will cover: (i) non-
contact cooling water from three on-site water
wells used for temperature control in the steam
condenser on the turbine, (ii) miscellaneous
plant maintenance water, and (iii) storm water
discharges.
The individual permit covering the former plant
required the completion of a yearly Bottom-
Biological study designed to assess the impact
of water discharged from the plant into the
ocean.  The results of these studies showed the
plant's water discharge did not significantly
impact the marine environment.  The renovated
plant will produce similar nature and quantity
of water as the former plant, and therefore,
will not have significant impact on the marine
environment.  Hu Honua expects it will be
required by the State to perform similar annual
marine monitoring as part of conditions of the
permit.
3.Storm Water NCPC - Construction Activity . 
Generally, a facility conducting construction
activity and disturbing more than one acre of
ground would need to submit a Notice of Intent
to discharge storm water and obtain a NGPC for
Construction Activity.  While Hu Honua does not
expect to disturb more than one acre, the
facility would be required at a minimum to
modify its existing Industrial Activity NCPC to
include the construction activities.  The
purpose of modifying the existing NGPC permit is
to assure an approved storm water pollution
control plan stipulates best management
practices for workers during construction. 
Modifications to the current NGPC and associated
storm water pollution control plan will be
required, approved, and put in place prior to
commencing construction. 
In a letter dated May 18, 2010, the DOH submitted
comments to the Planning Department regarding the SMA Permit
Application.  The DOH, inter alia, stated:
1. Any project and its potential impacts to State waters
must meet the following criteria:
a. Antidegradation policy (HAR, Section 11-54-1.1),
which requires that the existing uses and the
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
level of water quality necessary to protect the
existing uses of the receiving State water be
maintained and protected.
b. Designated uses (HAR, Section 11-54-3), as
determined by the classification of the
receiving State waters.
c. Water quality criteria (HAR, Sections 11-54-4
through 11-54-8).
2. An individual [NPDES] permit application shall be
required to be submitted for the proposed discharges
of non-contact cooling water, industrial discharges,
and storm water runoff from the proposed industrial
facility. . . .
3. The proposed site work at the facility may be required
to obtain a [NPDES] permit for the discharge of storm
water runoff associated with construction activity
into State surface waters . . . .
Further, Richard K. McQuain ( McQuain), the President of
Hu Honua, submitted written testimony and an affidavit dated
October 2, 2010.  The affidavit stated, inter alia , the
following:
17.  Existing NPDES Permit .  Questions and concerns
have arisen regarding water discharge into the ocean.  Most
of the concerns raised really relate to past operations
fueled with bagasse, a by-product of sugar cane, or coal,
and do not acknowledge that the proposed Hu Honua operation
will be fundamentally different from past operations.  The
new Hu Honua facility design dramatically reduces the amount
of waste water generated and incorporates new measures to
insure that the temperature of the cooling water discharge
is within the limits prescribed by current environmental
regulatory standards.  Hu Honua has an existing general
[NPDES] permit for the site governing storm water runoff. 
Hu Honua will apply for an individual NPDES permit that will
govern storm water runoff and non-contact cooling water
discharge prior to the operation of the plant.  The terms
and conditions of such permits will be in accordance with
what the [DOH] and the [Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA)] require to protect marine resources.  Hu Honua will
also comply with the appropriate Hawaii County Department of
Public Works requirements during construction.
With regard to the discharge of water into the ocean
from the power plant, the Planning Commission Decision and Order
states the following in pertinent part:
45.  Consideration No. 8 (Water Quality) .  The
facility will be required to operate within the parameters
set by the DOH to ensure safe operations and to minimize any
potential adverse impacts on water discharge.
46.  Hu Honua has an existing [NPDES] permit governing
storm water discharge for the Subject Property.  Hu Honua
will apply for an individual NPDES permit that will govern
storm water runoff and non-contact cooling water and other
water discharge prior to the operation of the Power Plant. 
The terms and conditions of such permits will be in
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
accordance with DOH and EPA requirements.  Further, any
impacts from soil erosion and runoff during site preparation
and construction phases will be adequately mitigated through
compliance with existing regulations and proper construction
practices required by the Department of Public Works.
47.  In order to further mitigate any potential
negative impacts on water quality, Hu Honua's facility
design will dramatically reduce the amount of waste water
generated by the facility.  This will be done through the
utilization of a drag chain system instead of water to
transport ash through the upgraded Power Plant. 
Additionally the upgraded Power Plant design incorporates
new measures to ensure that the temperature of the cooling
water discharged is within the limits prescribed by current
environmental regulatory standards.
48.  Pursuant to Conditions No. 4 and 16 of the
Planning Department Recommendation, Hu Honua's Amended SMA
Permit will be subject to revocation should Hu Honua be
unable to comply with applicable County, State and/or
Federal requirements relating to water quality and
discharge.
(Citations omitted).13  Thus, the Planning Commission approved
the SMA Permit Application subject to the condition that Hu Honua
obtain the appropriate state permits to discharge non-contact
cooling water and storm water into the ocean.
The Appellants do not point to any evidence in the
record that shows that an NPDES permit would not adequately
protect the ocean as a public trust resource.  Therefore, under
the facts of this case, Hu Honua made an affirmative showing that
once an individual NPDES permit is obtained and Hu Honua complies
with the requirements set forth by the DOH in the permit, the
power plant's discharge of non-contact cooling water and storm
13 Conditions 4 and 16, which are set forth in the "Hearing Officer's
Recommended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order"
dated March 23, 2011, provide:
4. Operation of the biomass facility shall comply with all
applicable County, State and Federal requirements related to
air quality, water quality and discharge, and noise.  Copies
of compliance reports and related correspondences shall be
submitted to the Planning Department concurrent with their
submittal to and receipt from the applicable County, State
and Federal agencies. 
. . . . 
16. Should any of the foregoing conditions not be met or
substantially complied with in a timely fashion, the
Planning Director may initiate procedures to revoke the
permit. 
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
water will not conflict with the principles and purposes of the
public trust doctrine.
Appellants also challenge the Circuit Court's COL 6
which states "there is an insufficient basis to find or conclude
that the land itself has such significance as a natural resource
that it can be considered a public natural resource[.]" 
Appellants point to the Coastal Zone Management Act, HRS § 205A-
21 (2001)14 to support that controls on developments within an
area along the shoreline are necessary. 
Article XI, section 1 provides in pertinent part that
"the State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and
protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources,
including land  . . . . All public natural resources are held in
trust by the State for the benefit of the people."  (Emphasis
added).  Further, the Hawai #i Supreme Court has held that land
along the shoreline below the high water mark of the ocean is a
natural resource, owned by the state, and held in trust for the
enjoyment of certain public rights.  Hawaii Cty. v. Sotomura , 55
Haw. 176, 183-84, 517 P.2d 57, 63 (1973).  Thus, the Circuit
Court's COL 6 is incorrect.
We thus consider Appellants' argument regarding
application of the public trust doctrine to the shoreline.  The
SMA Permit Application states that the power plant will not
restrict access to beaches or fishing grounds.  Further, "[a]ll
proposed structures will be situated approximately 200 feet at
the nearest point from the shoreline."  The application also
states:
the facility upgrades are being completed on existing and
former facility infrastructure.  As such the facility will
14    HRS § 205A-21 provides:
The legislature finds that, special controls on developments
within an area along the shoreline are necessary to avoid
permanent losses of valuable resources and the foreclosure
of management options, and to ensure that adequate access,
by dedication or other means, to public owned or used
beaches, recreation areas, and natural reserves is provided.
The legislature finds and declares that it is the state
policy to preserve, protect, and where possible, to restore
the natural resources of the coastal zone of Hawaii.
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not adversely affect the natural resources or shoreline
through exploitation or encroachment or damage.  Moreover,
no recreational resources will be impacted and public access
to fishing spots and the shoreline will be available through
existing established easements.
The written testimony of Dennis Poma (Poma ), who served
as an engineer, land use, and permitting consultant for Hu Honua
and prepared in large part the SMA Permit Application, testified
that the "Plant is situated atop a cliff, set back sufficiently
from the edge of the cliff, and not known to be in any sensitive
area."  Poma further testified regarding how the storm water and
non-contact cooling water are discharged into the ocean:
Outfall 001 was the primary outfall associated with former
operations and received the non-contact cooling water and
storm water from most areas of the facility.  The current
permit also allows discharge of storm water from Outfall
003, which receives storm water from the southern portion of
the facility and from the adjacent property which stored the
coal ash.  In light of recent subdivisions, the power plant
property was consolidated and the south property line was
moved north.  As a result of the property re-alignment,
Outfall 003 is no longer on Hu Honua Property.  Therefore,
storm water runoff from the entire facility will be directed
to Outfall 001 in the future.  The individual NPDES permit
will also include one other Outfall known as Outfall 004. 
This outfall simply conveys storm water into the ocean which
runs on the Property from offsite upstream locations and
which never comes into contact with industrial activities at
any time.  It should also be noted that the former flume at
Outfall 001 just recently collapsed due to its dilapidated
state.  The flume structure helped convey water from the
cliff to the water line (ocean).  The former flume will not
need to be replaced, and a new discharge pipe will be
installed from the existing concrete structure remaining on
top of the cliff to convey water into the ocean to prevent
potential shoreline erosion.
During cross-examination at the contested case hearing, Poma
testified that at the time that Hu Honua submitted its SMA Permit
Application, it did not plan on any construction on the shoreline
and requested a waiver of a shoreline survey.  However, the
application was completed before a portion of Outfall 001
collapsed.  Poma testified that the purpose of the outfall
extending out into the ocean is to have the discharge water reach
the ocean without eroding the cliff face, but the outfall broke
off at the cliff face.  Poma further testified that Hu Honua was
looking at different alternatives to repair the outfall, which
included possibly not using the outfall at all.  Poma testified
that alternatives to repairing the outfall may or may not involve
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
construction at the shoreline and Hu Honua was still in the
process of evaluating the situation.  Despite the status of the
outfall, Poma testified that he still believed there would be no
impact to the shoreline. 
Also on cross-examination at the contested case
hearing, McQuain testified that Poma was investigating several
alternatives to repairing Outfall 001 including replacing a
portion of the outfall structure that fell off.  McQuain
testified there are several ways to complete the replacement. 
McQuain also testified that Poma was investigating the potential
of using ejection wells to discharge water instead of using the
outfall.
With regard to construction on the shoreline, the
Planning Commission Decision and Order found the following:
58.  No Construction Within Shoreline Setback .  No new
construction or grading work will occur within the shoreline
setback area, and no new use is being proposed within the
shoreline setback area.
. . . . 
73.  Beach Protection .  The project is consistent with
the protection of beaches.  The Plant Site is not located
near any known public beach, the shoreline boundary of the
Plant Site is identified as steep cliffs, and the renovation
work proposed will be over 100 feet from the shoreline.
(Citations omitted).  The Planning Commission did not make any
specific FOFs or COLs about what, if any, impacts there would be
on the shoreline due to repairing or replacing Outfall 001. 
Further, the Planning Commission did not include, within its
sixteen conditions to approval of the amended permit, a condition
regarding Outfall 001.
In this instance, with regard to the impacts on the
shoreline, as a public trust resource, the testimony of Poma and
McQuain show that a portion of Outfall 001 collapsed and several
alternatives were being discussed.  Further, because the damage
to Outfall 001 was discovered after the SMA Permit Application
was completed, information regarding its repair is not included
in the application.  Despite Poma and McQuain's testimony
regarding Outfall 001, the Planning Commission did not address it
in its Decision and Order.
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Thus, because it is not clear what repairs or
replacements will take place with regard to Outfall 001, Hu Honua
did not make an affirmative showing that any work done will not
conflict with the principles and purposes of the public trust
doctrine.  Therefore, under HRS § 91-14(g), the Planning
Commission granted the amended SMA permit in violation of
constitutional provisions.
IV. Conclusion
Based on the above, the Final Judgment filed on
March 10, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
affirmed, except with respect to application of the public trust
doctrine to the shoreline.  Specifically, the case is remanded to
the Planning Commission to address the impacts on the public
shoreline with regard to repairing or replacing Outfall 001.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
Steven D. Strauss, 
for Appellants-Appellants. Presiding Judge
Gary G. Grimmer,
Ann C. Kemp, 
(Gary Grimmer & Associates)
for Intervenor-Appellee.Associate Judge
Laureen L. Martin,
Margaret K. Masunaga,
Danny B. Patel,
Deputies Corporation Counsel,
Office of the Corporation Counsel,
for Appellees-Appellees. Associate Judge
23