NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-11-0000043
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KAREN OSHIRO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0483)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Karen Oshiro (Oshiro) appeals from 
the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment) 
filed on December 23, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) charged Oshiro with knowingly or intentionally violating an injunction against harassment, in violation Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 604-10.5(h) (Supp. 2009). A jury found Oshiro guilty as charged. The Circuit Court sentenced Oshiro to one year of probation, subject to the special condition that she serve 150 days in jail. 
On appeal, Oshiro contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in admitting evidence which she
 characterizes as "prior bad acts"; (2) the Circuit Court plainly
 
1
 The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erred in failing to sua sponte give a limiting instruction
 
regarding that evidence; and (3) there was insufficient evidence
 to support her conviction. We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
The complaining witness (CW) and Oshiro were neighbors. 
The CW and his wife resided on property that had an easement over
 a driveway that provided access to two cottages behind their
 property. Oshiro lived in one of the cottages. The access
 easement was approximately 10 to 12 feet wide and ran past the
 CW's house to the back of his property. The CW's wife was a
 botanist and had cultivated a variety of plants, including plants 
that bordered along the access easement. Many of the plants
 grown by the CW's wife were edible and were used by the CW and
 his wife in their cooking.
 
On January 20, 2010, the CW and his wife as Petitioners
 
obtained an amended order granting their petition for injunction
 against harassment, which imposed restrictions on Oshiro for a
 three-year period. Under the injunction order, Oshiro was
 restrained and enjoined from contacting, threatening, or
 harassing the CW and his wife and from possessing any firearm or
 ammunition. In addition, the injunction order prohibited Oshiro
 from "touch[ing] any of Petitioners' plants which are planted
 along the access easement on Petitioners' property."
 
Prior to trial, Oshiro moved in limine to exclude
 
evidence of Oshiro's criminal record, other "bad acts," and acts
 that may not technically be considered bad acts but were
 irrelevant or unfairly prejudicial. The specific acts and
 evidence identified by Oshiro were: (1) cases in which Oshiro was
 the defendant or suspect; (2) references to a bench warrant being
 out for Oshiro's arrest; (3) the CW's statement to the police
 that he "was pretty certain that [Oshiro] will once again pull
 the plant along the easement"; (4) the transport of Oshiro to
 Queen's Hosptial; (5) references to Oshiro's mental health; (6)
 any prior instance of Oshiro using a knife to hurt herself; (7)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any conduct requiring the use of force by police; and (8) any
 
conduct resulting in the removal of Oshiro's silver blade knife. 
The Circuit Court granted Oshiro's motion in limine as to this
 evidence.
 
B.
 
The State presented evidence that on January 29, 2010,
 
Honolulu Police Officer Pete Jones (Officer Jones) served Oshiro
 with the amended order granting petition for injunction against
 harassment. Officer Jones testified that he did not read the
 terms of the injunction order word for word, but explained its
 terms to Oshiro. Officer Jones warned Oshiro not to touch the
 neighbors' plants. Oshiro indicated that she understood the
 terms of the injunction order and signed a document acknowledging
 her receipt of the injunction order.
 
The CW testified that on February 22, 2010, he saw
 
Oshiro walking towards his property as he was driving away from
 his residence. The CW drove around the block and returned to his
 residence. He saw Oshiro in the access easement "stretching out,
 yanking, and pulling down the plants . . . because one of the
 flowers, the edible flowers are right on top." When the CW drove
 up to Oshiro, she was pulling down a branch of an elderberry tree
 that was planted along the access easement. Oshiro saw the CW,
 and she let go of the branch and picked up her belongings. The
 CW saw a broken tree branch and surmised that Oshiro had been
 trying to reach the topmost branch, which contained edible
 flowers. The CW testified that there were no branches or vines
 hanging over the easement that were lower than 15 feet high.
 
On cross-examination, defense counsel asked the CW,
 
"But you don't know if [obtaining the farthest flower] was the
 reason why she was pulling down on the branch?" In response, the
 CW indicated that he did know this was the case "[f]rom previous,
 uh, history --." Defense counsel also asked the CW, "And you
 don't get along with Ms. Oshiro[,] correct?" In response, the CW
 stated that prior to early 2009, he and his wife had been on
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"very friendly" terms with Oshiro, but things changed after that
 
time and there were many reasons for the change.
 
On re-direct examination, the CW explained that his
 
once friendly relationship with Oshiro changed after the CW
 learned that Oshiro was shooting at birds on the CW's property
 with a blow gun and/or sling shot. The CW testified:
 
I noticed [Oshiro] having a blow gun and shooting it from
the driveway shooting at birds in our compound. So I
 confronted then asked her, "Why are you shooting at those
birds?" Because we were picking up dozens of beads, plastic
beads and pellets on our easement, in front of our vehicle,
on the easement, in the back yard, by the (inaudible) every
day.
 
So one day I observed her shooting and also using the
sling shot. So I told her on a number of occasions "Do not
 shoot those birds."
 
The CW stated that in response, Oshiro "started in
 
obscenities just coming at me." The CW related that he "had to
 
call the Humane Society" and that "[t]hey came down." The
 incident marked the turning point in their relationship, which
 went "downhill" from there. The CW testified that thereafter
 there were multiple unspecified incidents with Oshiro.
 
C.
 
Oshiro testified in her own defense at trial. Oshiro
 
acknowledged that a police officer had served her with a
 document. She testified that reading and writing were not her
 "forte" and that she had no idea what the officer had given her. 
Oshiro did not recall the officer reading the document to her or
 explaining its terms. 
According to Oshiro, on the day in question, she was
 
walking down the easement looking down when her hat got snagged
 on a vine, dislodging a pin from her hat. Oshiro pulled the vine
 out of her hat and tried to find the pin on the ground. When she
 saw the CW's car approaching, she grabbed leaves and rubble on
 the ground where she thought her pin had dropped. Oshiro stated
 that the vine that snagged her hat was in the elderberry tree and
 was hanging below 5 feet 8 inches. Oshiro testified that when
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
she grabbed the vine to untangle her hat, she was not aware that
 
there was an injunction order that prohibited her from touching
 the CW's plants. Oshiro denied that her relationship with the CW
 turned hostile after 2009. Oshiro stated that they got along
 "[i]n a way[,]" but "weren't really that friendly . . . I knew
 who he was, but I never talked to him."
 
II.
 
We resolve the issues raised on appeal by Oshiro as
 
follows:
 
A.
 1.
 
We reject Oshiro's claim that the Circuit Court abused
 
its discretion in admitting the following evidence which Oshiro
 characterizes as "bad act" evidence: (1) the CW's indication 
that he knew "[f]rom previous, uh, history" that Oshiro was
 pulling down the branch to get at the flowers on the top part of
 the tree; (2) Oshiro shot at birds with a pellet gun or
 slingshot; (3) Oshiro swore at the CW; (4) Oshiro was
 
2
 and (5) the CW and Oshiro
 investigated by the Humane Society;had been involved in multiple unspecified incidents.
 
2.
 
With respect to the CW's indication that he knew
 
"[f]rom previous, uh, history" why Oshiro was pulling down the
 branch, the CW's testimony was in direct response to defense
 counsel's question. 
Defense counsel elicited this testimony from
 
the CW by asking, "But you don't know if [obtaining the farthest
 flower] was the reason why she was pulling down on the branch?" 
Moreover, the CW's response did not refer to any "bad acts"
 committed by Oshiro and provided an explanation for the CW's
 interpretation of Oshiro's actions. We conclude that the Circuit
 
2
 The CW actually testified that he "had to call the Humane Society"
after observing Oshiro shooting at birds and that they responded to his call.
 
5  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Oshiro's motion to
 
strike the CW's response.3
 
3.
 
We also conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse
 
its discretion in admitting the remainder of the "bad act"
 evidence challenged by Oshiro on appeal. First, the record does
 not show that Oshiro specifically objected or moved to strike
 such evidence on Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b)
 (Supp. 2012) grounds.
4 HRE Rule 103(a) (Supp. 2012) provides
 
that in order to preserve a claim of error over the admission of
 evidence, a party must "stat[e] the specific ground of the
 objection, if the specific ground was not apparent from the
 context[.]" We conclude that it was not apparent from the
 context of Oshiro's general objection and motion to strike that
 she was objecting to the evidence on HRE Rule 404(b) grounds,
 rather than on some other basis such as relevance. Therefore,
 Oshiro did not preserve her claim that the challenged evidence
 was inadmissible under HRE Rule 404(b).
 
Second, assuming arguendo that Oshiro preserved her HRE 
Rule 404(b) challenge, Oshiro opened the door to the evidence by questioning the CW about his relationship with Oshiro. Defense counsel's inquiry opened the door to, and made relevant, the CW's explanation of the nature of his relationship with Oshiro, namely, that the CW had a very friendly relationship with Oshiro until the CW learned that Oshiro was shooting at birds on his property; Oshiro swore at the CW during an argument about Oshiro shooting at birds; the CW reported Oshiro's conduct to the Humane Society, who responded to the report; and the CW and Oshiro were involved in multiple subsequent incidents. See State v. McElroy, 
105 Hawai' i 352, 356-57, 97 P.3d 1004, 1008-09 (2004) (holding 
3
 We further conclude that the CW's cryptic response did not require a
sua sponte "bad act" limiting instruction. See also discussion infra.
 
4
 We note that a bench conference held after Oshiro moved to strike
 
was not transcribed, and Oshiro did not attempt to correct or supplement the
record with what transpired during the bench conference.
 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it was not prosecutorial misconduct for the prosecutor to 
question the defendant to develop an issue that the defendant himself broached); State v. Acker, No. 30205, 2012 WL 4857018, at *12-13 (Hawai' i App. Oct. 12, 2012) (Memorandum Opinion) 
(concluding that the defendant's questioning of a witness opened the door to the admission of "bad act" evidence), cert. granted, 2013 WL 656778 (Hawai' i Feb. 21, 2013); State v. Culbreath, 659 
S.E.2d 268, 272 (S.C. Ct. App. 2008) ("[A] defendant may open the door to what would be otherwise improper evidence through his own introduction of evidence or witness examination."). 
Third, the evidence of Oshiro's hostile relationship
 
with the CW at the time of the charged violation of the
 injunction order was relevant to show Oshiro's motive for
 deliberately violating the injunction order, her intent in
 touching the plants, and the absence of mistake or accident. In
 addition, the challenged evidence did not constitute character
 propensity evidence prohibited by HRE Rule 404(b). Oshiro's
 alleged conduct in shooting at birds and arguing with the CW over
 the shooting at birds would not show that she had the propensity
 to violate an injunction order by touching the CW's plants. 
The Circuit Court's admission of the evidence of
 
Oshiro's hostile relationship with the CW did not violate the
 notice provisions of HRE Rule 404(b). As noted, this evidence
 did not constitute character propensity evidence prohibited by
 HRE Rule 404(b). Moreover, there is no indication that the State
 intended to introduce this evidence at trial until Oshiro opened
 the door to the evidence by cross-examining the CW about his
 relationship with Oshiro. Under these circumstances, even if the
 evidence was considered as falling under HRE Rule 404(b), the
 Circuit Court would not have abused its discretion in finding
 good cause for excusing pretrial notification.
5
 
5See footnote 4, supra.
 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not commit plain
 
error in failing to sua sponte give a limiting instruction
 
regarding the challenged evidence relating to the reasons for
 Oshiro's hostile relationship with the CW. HRE Rule 105 (1993)
 provides: "When evidence which is admissible . . . for one
 purpose but not admissible . . . for another purpose is admitted,
 the court, upon request, shall restrict the evidence to its
 proper scope and instruct the jury accordingly." (Emphasis
 added.) Oshiro acknowledges that she did not request a limiting
 instruction from the Circuit Court.
 
For the reasons set forth in State v. Munson, No. 
30495, 2012 WL 5677857, at *4-5 (Hawai' i App. Nov. 15, 2012) 
(Memorandum Opinion), which relied upon the reasoning of the Hawai'i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. Cabagbag, 127 
Hawai'i 302, 277 P.3d 1027 (2012), we conclude that the Circuit 
Court was not required to sua sponte give a limiting instruction regarding the evidence concerning Oshiro's hostile relationship with the CW. HRE Rule 105 recognizes the defendant's prerogative to make strategic choices by only requiring the court to give a limiting instruction "upon request." See Munson, 2012 WL 
5677857, at *5. As a matter of legitimate trial strategy, Oshiro's trial counsel may have decided to forego requesting a limiting instruction to downplay and avoid drawing attention to the evidence concerning Oshiro's hostile relationship with the CW, which counsel may have viewed as painting Oshiro in a negative light. See id., 2012 WL 5677857, at *4-5. 
C.
 
Oshiro contends that there was insufficient evidence to
 
show that she (1) knew the injunction order prohibited her from
 touching plants that were planted along the access easement; and
 (2) intentionally or knowingly violated the injunction order by
 touching the plants. We disagree.
 
Officer Jones testified that he served the injunction
 
order on Oshiro; that he explained its terms to her and warned
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
her not to touch the neighbors' plants; and that Oshiro indicated
 
that she understood the terms of the injunction order and signed
 an acknowledgment that she received the injunction order. The CW
 testified that he saw Oshiro yanking and pulling down plants,
 while Oshiro was standing in the access easement; that when the 
CW drove up to Oshiro, she was pulling down the branch of an
 elderberry tree that was planted along the access easement; and
 that he saw a broken tree branch next to Oshiro. When viewed in
 the light most favorable to the State, there was substantial
 evidence to prove that Oshiro knew the injunction order
 prohibited her from touching plants that were planted along the
 access easement and that she intentionally or knowingly violated
 the injunction order. 
III.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Jennifer D.K. Ng
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 