NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000448
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MOANI J.K. THOMAS, Defendant-Appellant, and
THEODORE M. GATES, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-0450)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Moani J.K. Thomas (Thomas) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on January 22,
 
2014 (Judgment) in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court).  After a jury trial, Thomas was convicted of
 
Count I: Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the First
 Degree (Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-836.5 (2014)) and
 
Count III: Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree (HRS §
 
712-1243 (2014)).
 
On appeal, Thomas argues that the Circuit Court erred

 
in denying his Supplemental Requested Instructions Nos. 1 and 2,
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and by denying his Motion for Judgment of Acquittal as to Count
 
III. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Thomas's points of error as follows:
 
(1) 
Thomas's Requested Supplemental Jury Instruction
 
No. 1, which pertains to Count III, provided:
 
In any prosecution it is a defense that the conduct
alleged on the charged offense does not include a voluntary
act. A "voluntary act" means a bodily movement performed
consciously or habitually as the result of effort of
determination of the Defendant.
 
The burden is on the prosecution to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the Defendant's conduct as to the
 Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree and the
Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia charges included a
voluntary act. If the prosecution fails to meet its burden,
then you must find the Defendant not guilty of the charge.
 
This proposed instruction reflects the language of HRS
 
2 3
§ 702-200(1) (2014)  and HRS § 707-201 (2014).  Citing to State
 
v. Robinson, 82 Hawai 'i 304, 922 P.2d 358 (1996), overruled on 
other grounds by State v. Tafoya, 91 Hawai 'i 261, 982 P.2d 890 
(1999), Thomas argues that "[a] defendant 'is entitled to an 
instruction on every defense or theory of defense having any support in the evidence . . . no matter how weak, inconclusive or unsatisfactory the evidence may be.'" He argues that, because he testified that he did not "voluntarily" possess the methamphetamine, and because his co-defendant, Theodore M. Gates 
2
 HRS § 702-200(1) reads: "In any prosecution it is a defense that
the conduct alleged does not include a voluntary act or the voluntary omission
to perform an act of which the defendant is physically capable."
 
3
 HRS § 702-201 reads: "'Voluntary act' means a bodily movement
performed consciously or habitually as the result of the effort or
determination of the defendant."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Gates), testified that these items were his and that he had
 
placed them in the car, there was support in the evidence for
 
instruction on the voluntary act defense. 
We agree that the evidence could have supported a
 
finding that Thomas did not possess the methamphetamine
 "voluntarily," if the jury determined that he was not conscious
 or aware of the methamphetamine. Nevertheless, we conclude that
 the jury instructions given by the Circuit Court properly
 precluded the jury from finding Thomas guilty absent a finding
 that he committed a "voluntary" or conscious act in possessing
 the drug.
 
Thomas was charged and convicted under HRS § 712-1243:
 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree. HRS § 712­1243(1) provides that: "A person commits the offense of
 promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree if the person
 knowingly possesses any dangerous drug in any amount." HRS §
 702-202 (2014) states that: "Possession is a voluntary act if
 the defendant knowingly procured or received the thing possessed
 or if the defendant was aware of the defendant's control of it
 for a sufficient period to have been able to terminate the
 defendant's possession." The jury instructions in this case
 regarding Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree stated,
 in relevant part:
 
In Count 3 of the Complaint, the Defendant, Moani J.
K. Thomas, is charged with the offense of Promoting a
Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree.
 
A person commits the offense of Promoting a Dangerous

Drug in the Third Degree if he knowingly possesses
methamphetamine in any amount.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There are two material elements of the offense of
 
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, each of
which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
These two elements are:
 
1. That, on or about March 15, 2012, on the island of
Oahu, the Defendant possessed methamphetamine in any amount;
and
 
2. That the Defendant did so knowingly.
 
A person is in possession of an object if the person
knowingly procured or received the thing possessed or was
aware of his control of it for a sufficient period to have
terminated his possession. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Pursuant to these instructions, if the jury found 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Thomas was in possession of the 
methamphetamine as defined by the jury instructions, then it necessarily found that Thomas committed a voluntary act, as defined in HRS § 702-202. Conversely, if the jury had found that Thomas did not knowingly procure or receive the methamphetamine or was not aware of his control of it for a sufficient period to have terminated his possession, i.e. that he did not commit a voluntary act, then, following the jury instructions, it would have had to find Thomas not guilty. Thus, the instructions precluded the jury from finding Thomas guilty absent a finding that he committed a voluntary act as defined by statute, and they were not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent or misleading. See State v. Hironaka, 99 Hawai
'i 198, 206, 53 P.3d 
806, 814 (2002). 
(2) Thomas's Requested Supplemental Jury Instruction
 
No. 2 provided:
 
Where the actual possession of the item is not at
issue, the prosecution must prove a sufficient nexus between
the defendant and the item in order to establish
 constructive possession of the item.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Proof [of] the defendant's knowledge of the presence
of the items and the defendant's ownership or right to
possession of the place where the items were found, alone,
are insufficient to support a finding of the exercise of
dominion and control. Other incriminating circumstances
must be present to buttress the inference of knowing
possession and provide the necessary link between a
defendant and illegally.
 
The court's instruction to the jury stated, in relevant
 
part:
 
The law recognizes two kinds of possession: actual
possession and constructive possession.
 
A person who, although not in actual possession,
knowingly has both the power and the intention, at a given
time, to exercise dominion or control over a thing for a
sufficient period to terminate his possession of it, either
directly or through another person or persons, is then in
constructive possession of it. The fact that a person is
near an object or is present or associated with a person who
controls an object, without more, is not sufficient to
support a finding of possession.
 
Both Thomas's requested instruction and the court's
 
instruction are correct statements of the law. See State v.
 
Foster, 128 Hawai 'i 18, 26, 282 P.3d 560, 568 (2012); Hironaka, 
99 Hawai 'i at 206, 53 P.3d at 814. In Hironaka, the defendant 
requested an instruction that "mere proximity to an object, mere
 
presence or mere association with a person who does control an
 object, without more, is insufficient to support a finding of
 possession." Hironaka, 99 Hawai
'i at 202, 53 P.3d at 810 
(brackets and internal quotation marks omitted). Although
 recognizing that this proposed instruction was a proper statement
 of the law, the court stated that:
 
a proper jury instruction on constructive possession
precludes a finding of possession based on the defendant's
"mere proximity" to an object, inasmuch as it instructs the
jury, as did the circuit court in the present matter, that
the defendant must have both "the power and the intention
. . . to exercise dominion or control over" an object, in
order to find that he or she constructively possessed that
object. Naturally, "if a person is in mere proximity to
contraband, the person does not have the intention to
exercise dominion or control over it." Thus, it is
generally unnecessary to give a "mere proximity" instruction
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if the jury is otherwise properly instructed on the law of
constructive possession. . . .
 
In the present matter, the circuit court instructed
the jury regarding constructive possession as follows:
 
A person who, although not in actual possession,
knowingly has both the power and the intention, at a
given time, to exercise dominion or control over a
 thing for a sufficient period to have terminated his
possession, either directly or through another person
or persons is then in constructive possession of it.
 
(Emphases added.) Thus, the circuit court's instruction on
constructive possession clearly precluded the jury from
finding that Hironaka possessed the pipe, with its
methamphetamine residue, based merely on his proximity to
it, because, as instructed, the jury had to find both that
Hironaka knew that the pipe contained methamphetamine and
that he intended to exercise dominion or control over the
 drug in order to find that he constructively possessed it.
 
Id. at 206-207, 53 P.3d at 814-15 (citations and brackets
 
omitted). 
As in Hironaka, the court's instruction in this case
 
precluded the jury from finding Thomas guilty based solely on his
 knowledge of the presence of the methamphetamine or his ownership
 or right of possession of the place where it was found, without a
 "sufficient nexus" or "other incriminating evidence," because it
 properly required the jury to find that Thomas not only knowingly
 had the power to exercise dominion and control over the
 methamphetamine, but also that he intended to exercise such
 dominion and control. Thus, the court's jury instruction was
 sufficient.
 
(3) HRS § 712-1243 provides that: "A person commits
 
the offense of promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree if
 the person knowingly possesses any dangerous drug in any amount." 
Any substance which contains any quantity of methamphetamine,
 including its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers is a dangerous
 drug for the purposes of this statute. HRS § 712-1240 (2014);
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 329-16(e)(2) (2010). Thus, the sole issue with respect to
 
the HRS § 712-1243 charge was whether Thomas knowingly possessed
 (more specifically, constructively possessed) the methamphetamine
 found in his car. The supreme court has summarized the law of
 constructive possession in Hawai
'i as follows: 
The law, in general, recognizes two kinds of possession:
actual possession and constructive possession. A person who
knowingly has direct physical control over a thing at a
given time is then in actual possession of it. A person
who, although not in actual possession, knowingly has both
the power and the intention at a given time to exercise
dominion over a thing, either directly or through another
person or persons, is then in constructive possession of it.
 
. . . .
 Where actual possession of the item is not at issue, the
State must prove a sufficient nexus between the defendant
and the item in order to establish constructive possession
of the item: "To support a finding of constructive
possession the evidence must show a sufficient nexus between
the accused and the item to permit an inference that the
accused had both the power and the intent to exercise
dominion and control over the item. Mere proximity is not
enough." . . . 
[P]roof of the defendant's knowledge of the presence of the
items and the defendant's ownership or right to possession
of the place where the items were found, alone, are
insufficient to support a finding of the exercise of
dominion and control. Other incriminating circumstances
must be present to buttress the inference of knowing
possession and provide the necessary link between a
defendant and illegal items.
 
[The Hawai' i Supreme Court] has also since noted that it "is
correct that mere proximity to the item, mere presence, or
mere association with the person who does control the itemis insufficient to support a finding of possession." 
Foster, 128 Hawai 'i at 26-27, 282 P.3d at 568-69 (citations and 
brackets omitted, block quote format altered). 
Thomas first argues that his conviction for possessing
 
methamphetamine is inconsistent with the jury's finding that he
 
was not guilty of Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia.4 However,
 
4
 For the purposes of this argument, Thomas assumes that "[t]he
alleged items of paraphernalia were two pipes with residue or plastic bags,
one of which contained methamphetamine."
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 329-43.5 (2014): Prohibited acts related to drug
 
paraphernalia, provides that: "It is unlawful for any person to
 use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia. . . ." 
The "use" or "intent to use" requirements are absent in HRS §
 712-1243. Thus, a jury could have found that Thomas possessed
 drug paraphernalia but did not use or intend to use them. The
 acquittal under HRS § 329-43.5, therefore, was not necessarily
 inconsistent with the conviction under HRS § 712-1243.
 
Concerning whether there was sufficient evidence to
 
support a prima facie case under HRS § 712-1243, we have
 previously noted certain factors that have been considered by
 other courts as inferring a nexus between a defendant and the
 drugs found, including:
 
1) the defendant's ownership of . . . or right to possession
of the place where the controlled substance was found; 2)
the defendant's sole access to the place where the
controlled substance was found; 3) defendant under the
influence of narcotics when arrested; 4) defendant's
presence when the search warrant executed; 5) the
defendant's sole occupancy of the place where the controlled
substance was found at the time the contraband is
 discovered; 6) the location of the contraband . . . ; 7)
contraband in plain view; 8) defendant's proximity to and
the accessibility of the narcotic; 9) defendant's possession
of other contraband when arrested; 10) defendant's
incriminating statements when arrested; 11) defendant's
attempted flight; 12) defendant's furtive gestures; 13)
presence of odor of the contraband; 14) presence of other
contraband or drug paraphernalia, not included in the
charge; 15) place drugs found was enclosed.
 
State v. Moniz , 92 Hawai 'i 472, 476, 992 P.2d 741, 745 (App. 
1999) (citation and brackets omitted). Other relevant factors
 
include "the consistent presence of known narcotics users on the
 premises, the large quantity of drugs found, the presence of
 large sums of money, the fact that the defendant had previously
 sold drugs, or used drugs, and the fact that the drugs were found
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
among the defendant's personal belongings." Id. (citations,
 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). We have also
 
noted:
 
While the foregoing factors are helpful in the abstract in
evaluating whether constructive possession exists in a
particular factual situation, they are far more difficult to
apply in cases . . . where a defendant does not have
exclusive possession or control of the place where drugs are
found and no drugs are found on the defendant's actual
person.
 
Id. 
Here, several, but not all, of these factors were 
present. Thomas owned the car where the plastic bag of 
methamphetamine was found, he was in close proximity to the methamphetamine and had easy access to it, and the methamphetamine was found among his personal belongings, namely his driver's license and bank card. We note, however, that Thomas's ownership of the car and his close proximity to the drugs would, by themselves, be insufficient to establish constructive possession. Foster, 128 Hawai
'i at 26-27, 282 P.3d 
at 568-69. Indeed, as noted in Moniz, this is the type of case where constructive possession is difficult to prove because Thomas did not have exclusive control of the place where the drugs were found (since Gates was in the car with him and was driving) and no drugs were found on his person. In such situations, "it is necessary for the State to show facts that would permit 'a reasonable mind to conclude that the defendant had the intent and capability to exercise control and dominion over the drugs.'" Moniz, 92 Hawai
'i at 476, 992 P.2d at 745 
(citation and brackets omitted). 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the fact that the plastic bag of methamphetamine
 
was found in a gray zippered pouch containing Thomas's driver's
 
license and bank card, which itself was contained within a red
 zippered pouch in Thomas's glove compartment, would permit a
 reasonable mind to conclude that Thomas had both the capability
 and intent to exercise control and dominion over the
 methamphetamine. See State v. Tabaldi, 77 A.3d 1124, 1134 (N.H.
 
2013) ("Personal possessions of the defendant found in close
 proximity to the controlled substance may provide a sufficiently
 close nexus between the defendant and the substance to allow the
 jury to infer possession.") (citations, internal quotation marks,
 and brackets omitted). That the methamphetamine was in a small
 pouch contained within a larger pouch strongly suggests that it
 was not commingled with Thomas's cards by accident. Thomas's
 driver's license and bank card are very important personal items,
 which strongly suggests that they were not carelessly placed in
 the pouches and, thus, that Thomas knowingly and intentionally
 exercised dominion and control over them. We note that Gates
 testified that the methamphetamine was his and that he did not
 show it to Thomas. Thomas also testified that the
 methamphetamine was not his and he did not know how his cards
 came to be in the pouch. However, "[i]t is the jury's province
 
to determine the credibility of witnesses, weigh the evidence and
 
draw justifiable inferences of fact from that evidence." State
 
v. Chun, 93 Hawai
'i 389, 397, 4 P.3d 523, 531 (App. 2000) 
(citations omitted). Given the evidence in this case, in particular the commingling of Thomas's important personal 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identification and banking cards inside a pouch with illegal
 
drugs, inside of another pouch, in the glove compartment of
 Thomas's car, the jury was justified in disregarding Gates's and
 Thomas's testimony as not credible. 
Thus, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable
 
to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of
 jury as the trier of fact, we find that there was sufficient
 evidence to support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind
 might fairly conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that Thomas was
 guilty of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 22, 2014
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 29, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 