_________________________ FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
GOLD COAST NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.

STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Defendant/Appellant,
and

DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10, Defendants
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1122)

STATE OF HAWAI 'I, by its ATTORNEY GENERAL,
Plaintiff/Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.

TROPIC SEAS, INC.; THE ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT
OWNERS OF DIAMOND HEAD BEACH, INC.; DIAMOND HEAD APARTMENTS,
LTD.; CS APARTMENTS, LTD.; THE ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF
2987 KALAKAUA CONDOMINIUM; TAHITIENNE,
INCORPORATED; THE ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF 3003
KALAKAUA, INC.; and THE ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS
OF 3019 KALAKAUA, INC.,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and

OLIVIA CHEN LUM, Trustee of the Olivia Chen Lum
Revocable Living Trust; CLARENCE KWON HOU LUM, Trustee
of the Clarence Kwon Hou Lum Trust and Trustee under

the Will and Estate of Chow Sin Kum Lum; JEANNE S.J. CHAN
and HOWARD N.H. CHAN, Trustees of the Jeanne S.J. Chan
Trust; and THE DIAMOND HEAD AMBASSADOR HOTEL, LTD.,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellees,
and

JOHN DOES 1-20, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-20,
DOE ASSOCIATIONS 1-20, DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-20,
AND DOE ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0888)

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000472

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

June 30, 2015

FOLEY, PRESIDING J., LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.

OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J. 
This consolidated appeal arises from two cases that 
sought declaratory relief as to the ownership of a certain 
stretch of dilapidated seawalls at the Diamond Head end of Kalakaua Avenue in Waikiki on O
'ahu. Defendant/Plaintiff/ 
Appellant/Cross-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals from 
the (1) Final Judgment filed February 3, 2014 and (2) "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order" (FOFs/COLs/Order) filed 
November 29, 2013 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1 
(circuit court) Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant Gold Coast 
Neighborhood Association (Gold Coast) and Defendants/Appellees/ 
Cross-Appellants Tropic Seas, Inc. (Tropic Seas); The Association 
of Apartment Owners of Diamond Head Beach, Inc. (AOAO of DH 
Beach); Diamond Head Apartments, Ltd. (DH Apartments); CS 
Apartments, Ltd. (CS Apartments); The Association of Apartment 
Owners of 2987 Kalakaua Condominium (AOAO of 2987); Tahitienne, 
Incorporated (Tahitienne); The Association of Apartment Owners of 
3003 Kalakaua, Inc. (AOAO of 3003); and The Association of 
Apartment Owners of 3019 Kalakaua, Inc. (AOAO of 3019) 
(collectively, the Kalakaua Group) cross-appeal from the circuit 
court's "Order Denying Plaintiff Gold Coast Neighborhood 
Association Etal's Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed February 18, 2014" filed May 13, 2014 (Order Denying Fees and
Costs). 
On appeal, the State contends the circuit court lacked 
jurisdiction and erred on the merits, and the Kalakaua Group 
contends the circuit court erred by not awarding it attorneys' 
1

The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.

2

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fees and costs. 
 
I. BACKGROUND

Gold Coast filed a complaint, first amended complaint,

and second amended complaint against the State on June 22, 2007,

August 19, 2008, and September 13, 2010, respectively (Civil No.

07-1-1122).
2 Gold Coast alleged that it "is a non-profit

organization . . . comprised of individuals who own real property

along Kalakaua Avenue on the Waikiki coastline . . . ." Gold

Coast alleged that it was in a dispute with the State over

"whether the State has the duty to maintain in good and safe

condition a long stretch of seawall on the Waikiki coastline

along Kalakaua Avenue . . . (the 'Gold Coast')[.]" Gold Coast

also alleged that

(1) "the Seawall was built by unknown private parties
 
at least 80 years prior to the date of this filing";

(2) "the public has used the Seawall as a thoroughfare
 
along the coastline for most, if not all, of its existence";

(3) Gold Coast nor "its predecessors . . . prevented or
 
discouraged members of the public from accessing the Seawall";

(4) "[t]he Seawall is in an unsafe condition and poses
 
an imminent danger to members of the public who use the Seawall

as a thoroughfare"; and 
 
(5) in 1992, the State issued a notice declaring that
 
it "has a right-of-way" over the Seawall "and is responsible to

keep [it] in good and safe condition."

Gold Coast further alleged that the State "repaired and

rehabilitated the Seawall in 1992"; "appropriated funds for

improvements to the Seawall in years since the 1992

rehabilitation, but did not release these funds for actual use";

and despite Gold Coast's "repeated demands[,] . . . has

consistently informed [Gold Coast] that the State does not have a

2

Gold Coast's original complaint addressed twenty-one parcels of
real property along the Gold Coast. The first amended complaint dropped ten
of the twenty-one properties named in the original complaint and added one
property. The second amended complaint removed one of the properties (i.e.,
the parcel owned by Oceanside Manor Association) and therefore there are
eleven properties, which are not all contiguous, that are subject to this
suit.

3

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
duty to maintain the Seawall in a safe condition." Gold Coast

claimed the "State is responsible to maintain and keep the

Seawall in a good and safe condition and further, as the Seawall

is a public highway, the State has a duty to maintain the Seawall

in a condition safe for travel." Gold Coast sought a declaration

"that the State is required to maintain the Seawall and keep it

in good and safe condition" and an award of attorneys' fees and

costs.

The State filed answers to Gold Coast's complaints on

July 12, 2007, September 24, 2008, and September 20, 2010. The

State contended that

(1) Gold Coast failed to state a claim upon which
 
relief can be granted;

(2) Gold Coast's claims were barred by the State's
 
sovereign immunity, the statute of limitations, the political

question doctrine, the provisions of Hawaii Revised Statutes

(HRS) chapters 501 and 520, waiver, estoppel, and laches;

(3) Gold Coast does "not own the [(Seawall
3)] or any

interest in it"; the State "does not have a duty to repair and

maintain the [Seawall]" and "will not repair or maintain the

[Seawall]";

(4) the circuit court lacked subject matter
 
jurisdiction;

(5) the alleged controversy was not ripe; and
 
(6) Gold Coast lacked standing.
 
On April 26, 2010, the State filed a complaint (Civil

No. 10-1-0888) for declaratory relief against Tropic Seas; AOAO

of DH Beach; DH Apartments; CS Apartments; AOAO of 2987;

Tahitienne; AOAO of 3003; AOAO of 3019; Defendants/Appellees/

Cross-Appellees Olivia Chen Lum, trustee of the Olivia Chen Lum

Revocable Living Trust (Olivia Lum); Clarence Kwon Hou Lum,

trustee of the Clarence Kwon Hou Lum Trust and trustee under the

Will and Estate of Chow Sin Kum Lum (Clarence Lum); Jeanne S.J.

Chan and Howard N.H. Chan, trustees of the Jeanne S.J. Chan Trust

3

To achieve consistency throughout the remainder of this opinion,
this court refers to the "Seawall" rather than "seawall" or "seawalls." At

times, however, we quote the parties' references to the "seawall" or
"seawalls."

4

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(the "Chans"); Diamond Head Ambassador Hotel, Ltd. (DH Ambassador

Hotel); and Oceanside Manor Association (Oceanside Manor). The

State alleged, inter alia, that each parcel of real property

listed in the complaint "is located on or adjacent to the ocean

4
shore and makai  of Kalakaua Avenue . . . [and] has a seawall at
 
its makai boundary"; "Defendants own, control, or manage the

subject real properties, including the property on which the

[Seawall is] located"; "[n]one of the [Seawall was] built by the

Kingdom, Territory, or [State]"; and "an actual controversy that

may be resolved by a declaratory judgment" exists between the

State and the "defendants as to the ownership of the seawalls and

the real property under the [Seawall] and as to whether or not

the State has an easement on or over the [Seawall]" because a

lawsuit brought by Gold Coast against the State "is pending." 
 The State sought "a declaration that it does not own the seawalls

or the real property under the seawalls and . . . does not have

an easement by prescription or implication over the [Seawall]"

and costs.

Answers to the State's complaint were filed by (1) 
Olivia Lum, Clarence Lum, and the Chans (collectively 
Individual 
Defendants); (2) AOAO of 3003; (3) Tropic Seas, AOAO DH Beach, DH 
Apartments, CS Apartments, AOAO of 2987, Tahitienne, and AOAO of 
3019 (collectively AOAO Defendants); (4) Oceanside Manor; and (5) 
DH Ambassador Hotel. The Individual Defendants, AOAO of 3003, 
and the AOAO Defendants alleged in their answers to the complaints that the public consistently used "the [Seawall] as a public thoroughfare for at least 50 to 100 years"; the State's "claims are barred by its consent or voluntary participation"; and the State accepted "responsibility over the [Seawall] over the past several decades." The Individual Defendants and the AOAO Defendants alleged that the State's lawsuit was barred because the State's claims could have been brought as compulsory counterclaims pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 13(a). DH Ambassador Hotel alleged that the "seawall along Makai boundary of [its] property was rebuild [sic] and/or 
4

"Makai" means seaward in Hawaiian. Pukui, M.K. & Elbert, S.H.,
Hawaiian Dictionary: Hawaiian-English, English-Hawaiian at 520 (1986).

5

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reconstructed after 1991 by the [State]" and the State "knowingly

and voluntarily assumed the dominion and control over portions of

the [Seawall] adjoining [DH Ambassador Hotel's] property."

On June 15, 2010, the State filed a motion to

consolidate its case (Civil No. 10-1-0888) with the case brought

by Gold Coast against the State (Civil No. 07-1-1122), and the

circuit court granted the motion on August 10, 2010.

On March 18, 2011, the circuit court filed the "First

Stipulation of Facts" (SOF). The SOF refers to the "Seawall"

without prejudice because "[t]he parties disagree as to whether

it is more appropriate to refer to them as one seawall or

multiple seawalls." The SOF includes but is not limited to the

following stipulations:

!		AOAO Defendants, DH Ambassador Hotel, and AOAO of 3003
are members of Gold Coast. 
!		The Seawall is "on, at, or near the seaward boundaryof" eleven parcels of real property. 
!		Tropic Seas, AOAO of DH Beach Hotel, DH Apartments, CSApartments, AOAO of 2987, Tahitienne, AOAO of 3003, andAOAO of 3019 each own one of the eleven parcels ofproperty, and DH Ambassador Hotel owns three of theeleven parcels. 
!		"Sometime around 1982," the Land Division of theState's Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR)
"repaired and rehabilitated broken sections of the
Seawall" that included the portion of the Seawall onthe makai boundaries of DH Apartments, CS Apartments,and AOAO of 2987. 
!		In June 1982, DLNR completed "emergency repairwork . . . to shore approximately 40 feet of theSeawall along the boundary of [DH Apartments]." 
!		"Sometime after May 1984, the State did additional workon one or more portions of the Seawalls[,]" referringto that work as the "Waikiki Seawall, WalkwayRehabilitation, Phase III," and describing its workcompleted as repairs to "walkway on top of existingwall." 
!		The "Waikiki Seawall, Walkway Rehabilitation, PhaseIII" affected the portions of the Seawall on the makaiboundaries of eight of the eleven parcels at issue, notincluding the portion on the boundary of Tropic Seas(TMK 3-1-032-030) or the portions on the boundaries oftwo of DH Ambassador Hotel's three parcels (TMK 3-1­032-029 and TMK 3-1-032-28). 
!		In September 1993 and pursuant to a Special Management 
6

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Area Use Permit and Shoreline Setback Variance granted
by the City and County of Honolulu, DLNR "built or
rebuilt essentially the entire" portion of the Seawall
on the makai boundary of the DH Ambassador Hotel (TMK
Nos. 3-1-032:026, 027, 028) in response to damage
caused by Hurricane Iniki.

!		In September 1993, the makai boundary of the DHAmbassador Hotel (TMK Nos. 3-1-032:026, 027, 028) wasessentially the same as the shoreline, and "[t]hereforeto the extent the State built the wall makai of the then shoreline the wall is on State property." 
!		On or about March 15, 2002, the State, via a letterfrom DLNR, informed a "concerned resident" "that nopermits were ever obtained to attach a sea ladder tothe sea wall adjacent to the [DH] Ambassador Hotel." 
!		On July 25, 2003, the State granted Gold Coast a "Non-Exclusive Easement for a term of 55 years for theright, privilege, and authority to construct, use,maintain and repair a ladder 'in, over, under, andacross" a portion of the Seawall on the makai boundaryof one of DH Ambassador Hotel's parcels (TMK 3-1­032:027). 
!		Gold Coast paid the State $2,406 for the Non-ExclusiveEasement and procured commercial general liabilityinsurance in accordance with the terms of the Non-Exclusive Easement. 
!		"The State reserved the right to withdraw the Non-Exclusive Easement for public use or purposes, at anytime during the term of the easement upon the giving ofreasonable notice to [Gold Coast]." 
!		On August 12, 2003, Gold Coast installed a sea ladderonto the TMK 3-1-032:027 portion of the Seawall (i.e.,a ladder that is bolted to the Seawall and descends into the ocean). 
!		The portion of the Seawall on the makai boundary ofAOAO of 3019's parcel (TMK 3-1-033:009) was apparentlyworked on in 2006 but the parties do not know who didthe work. 
!		In 2006, "the State appropriated $2 million for plans,design and construction for the resurfacing of theseawall and installation of railings along Waikiki'sGold Coast." 
!		"Since at least 1960[,]" the State has held an express"easement of right of way for pedestrians only over,across and along the seawall along the highwater markat seashore" with regard to the portion of the Seawallon the makai boundary of AOAO of 3019's parcel. 
On March 22, 2011, the circuit court held a bench trial

at which June Anderson (Anderson), Robert Gentry (Gentry), and

7

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
Guy Bishaw (Bishaw) testified for the Kalakaua Group.  On March

31, 2011, the circuit court conducted a site visit.

On November 29, 2013, the circuit court entered its

FOFs/COLs/Order. The "Findings of Fact" (FOFs) section of the

circuit court's FOFs/COLs/Order included the facts that were

stipulated to by the parties in the SOF and the following

pertinent FOFs:

!		No part of the Seawall existed in 1872; the portion of
the Seawall that is on the makai boundaries of four of the eleven parcels existed in 1904; the portion of theSeawall that is on the makai boundaries of five other of the eleven parcels existed in 1912; and the portionof the Seawall that is on the makai boundaries of the two remaining parcels was constructed sometime between1921 and 1930. 
!		The Seawall was built "for the primary purpose ofprotecting private property from erosion." 
!		At high tide, the Seawall exists in contact with theocean along its entire length. 
!		The State has never repaired the portion of the Seawallon the makai boundary of the Tropic Seas parcel, andwhile some of this portion of the Seawall is makai ofthe shoreline as defined by HRS § 205A-1 (2001 
Repl.)6 
and therefore on State land, "nearly" the entire TropicSeas' portion of the Seawall is on registered land. 
!		The portion of the Seawall on the makai boundary of theDH Beach Hotel parcel lies on both State land andregistered land. 
!		The portion of the Seawall on the makai boundary of theDH Ambassador Hotel parcel was repaired by the State in1984, and rebuilt in 1993 after Hurricane Iniki onState land makai of the then shoreline, and lies inpart on State land. 
!		The portion of the Seawall on the makai boundary of the 
5

Russell Tsuji, the State Land Division Administrator, testified
for the State.

6

HRS § 205A-1 provides:

§205A-1 Definitions.

. . . .

"Shoreline" means the upper reaches of the wash
of the waves, other than storm and seismic waves, at
high tide during the season of the year in which the
highest wash of the waves occurs, usually evidenced by
the edge of vegetation growth, or the upper limit of
debris left by the wash of the waves.

8

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DH Apartments parcel was repaired by the State in 1982
and again sometime after May 1984, and lies in part on
State land.

!		The portions of the Seawall on the makai boundaries ofthe CS Apartments, AOAO of 2897, Tahitienne, and AOAOof 3003 parcels were repaired by the State sometimeafter May 1984, and lie in part on State land. 
!		The portion of the Seawall on the makai boundary of theAOAO of 3019 parcel was repaired by the State sometimeafter May 1984, lies on both State land and registeredland, and is the only parcel of the eleven subject tothis suit that has "a record easement in favor of the general public." 
!		The only public beach access route (i.e., public pathconnecting Kalakaua Avenue to the ocean) along the GoldCoast crosses a parcel that was included in theoriginal complaint but was removed by the first amendedcomplaint (TMK No. 3-1-033:006). 
!		A person can access the Seawall (1) by using the publicbeach access route, (2) from the beach in front of twoparcels at the Diamond Head end of the Gold Coast, (3)from the beach in front of two parcels at the Waikikiend of the Gold Coast, (4) from the ocean where theSeawall is low enough for the person to climb up ontothe Seawall from the ocean, (5) by using the metalsteps on the Seawall in front of the DH AmbassadorHotel, and (5) from any of the parcels bordering theSeawall. 
!		In 1975, the Deputy Attorney General for the State,Wallace W. Weatherwax (DAG Weatherwax), communicated by
memorandum to the Harbors Division of the State's 
Department of Transportation (DOT) that he opined that
the State had "the responsibility to maintain the
public right of way over the seawall [located at TMK 3­1-33-2, 53] and that DLNR is the agency responsible tomaintain the Seawall." DAG Weatherwax referenced "a Quitclaim Deed dated December 9, 1930 which reserved apedestrian public right of way over, along and acrossthe Seawall." DAG Weatherwax noted that neither DLNR nor DOT had "any records of maintenance or repair ofthe Seawall." 
!		"By letter dated March 15, 2007, the State informed[Gold Coast], through counsel, that the State disputedthat it had an easement over the Seawall and disputedthat the State had a duty to maintain the Seawall." 
!		"In 1982, in the Environmental Assessment for therepair of the portion of the Seawall near the [DHApartments,]" DLNR stated that the "top of the seawallserves as a public walkway for residents andbeachgoers"; "[r]esidents, surfers, beachgoers andfishermen use the top of the seawall to traversebetween the Diamond Head end of Waikiki Beach and Sans 
9

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Souci Beach."

! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! The "Contract Specifications and Plans" for Phase III
of the Waikiki Seawall Walkway Rehabilitation "project
dated May 1984 state: 'The State has a right-of-way
over the seawall and had obtained a right-of-entry onto
[a list of properties including but not limited to the
DH Ambassador, DH Apartments, and AOAO of 3019] for the
rehabilitation of the seawall walkway."

In 1992, "DLNR released a 'Notice of Determination
(Negative Declaration) for the Waikiki Seawall Walkway
Rehabilitation, Phase V,' which stated" that the
seawalls and walkways are used by the public and
generally located inside the affected properties; the
State "has a right-of-way over all the seawalls and
walkways and is responsible to keep them in good and
safe condition"; and the State was "obtaining right-of­
entry onto the properties and to construct in the
lots." [sic] 
 
Gold Coast "is a non-profit corporation comprised of
residents and owners of real property bordering the
Diamond Head Seawall." Gold Coast membership "is open
to all those who live in the area along the Diamond
Head Seawall and, at this time, no dues are paid."
Gold Coast "assumes that owners of property bordering
the Diamond Head Seawall do not have the right to block
the public from using the Seawall."

The owners and residents of the properties bordering
the Seawall "have access to the Seawall via gates
and . . . use the Seawall for access to the shoreline

and ocean." 
 
Anderson, a member of Gold Coast, has lived at the DH
Apartments for over thirty-seven years, used the
Seawall as a pathway for over fifty-five years, and
"[t]hroughout this entire period . . . observed the
public using the Seawall as a walkway and thoroughfare,
as well as for access to the ocean for fishing,
surfing, and swimming."

Anderson is unaware "of any of the private property
owners along the Gold Coast exercising any control over
the Seawall or blocking any member of the public from
use of the Seawall."

Gentry, the President of Gold Coast, has resided on
Kalakaua Avenue on the Gold Coast since 1982. "From

that time forward, [Gentry] has observed members of the
public use the [Seawall] as a walkway and for
recreational purposes on a continuous basis." Gentry
is unaware of any owner of property along the Seawall
ever blocking the public from using the Seawall. To

the best of Gentry's knowledge, owners along the
Seawall have acquiesced to the public's use of the
"Seawall as a walkway and for access to ocean
activities."

10

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
!		Bishaw was raised in and is a resident of Waikiki "and 
has used the Seawall to access offshore surfing spots"for approximately forty years. Bishaw has used the Seawall to access the surfing spots with his friendsand family "and has seen other members of the public dothe same." 
!		"The public has used the Seawall for both shoreline andocean access for decades and has done so without anyapparent interference from any private landowners alongthe Gold Coast." 
!		The circuit court and counsel for the parties conducteda site visit on March 31, 2011. "The site visit included a walk both along the length of the Gold Coastalong Kalakaua Avenue and along the length of theshoreline, including the Seawall[.]" 
!		"No signs or other indicia of ownership were observedalong the Seawall which might have indicated anyblocking of use of the Seawall by any private party." 
!		During the site visit, the Seawall was "uneven andcrumbling in parts" and "the court noted numerous pipesprotruding from the Seawall." 
The circuit court made the following pertinent

conclusions of law:

!		Gold Coast "presented clear and convincing evidence toprove that the State has a prescriptive easement overthe Seawall for pedestrian travel as of 1969." 
!		Under the doctrine of implied dedication, "the long-continued public use of the Seawall as awalkway . . . clearly raises a rebuttable presumptionthat the landowners . . . intended to dedicate the Seawall as a public walkway. The landowners do not dispute that presumption and no evidence has beenpresented to rebut that presumption." 
!		"[T]here is more than enough time to satisfy therequirement that the period [of public use] be 'muchmore' than the prescriptive period where public use isthe 'only' evidence of acceptance of dedication." 
!		"[T]he more than fifty years of continuous public useis not the only evidence of acceptance ofdedication. . . . [T]here is evidence of impliedacceptance by the State based on its assertion ofdominion and control over the Seawall through theState's statements that the Seawall is a public rightof way and the State's actions in repairing andrehabilitating the Seawall." 
!		"[A]n easement over the Seawall is critical to publicaccess to the shoreline along the GoldCoast. . . . [T]he balancing of the publicpolic[ies] . . . weighs in favor of the implieddedication of an easement over the Seawall for pedestrian use." 
11

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
!		"[T]o prevail on its claim that the Seawall . . . is a
public thoroughfare that has been surrendered to theState [under HRS § 264-1(c) (2007 Repl.)]," Gold Coastmust prove: "1) the Seawall is a thoroughfare that wasopened, laid out, or built by private parties, and 2)that the owners have not exercised an act of ownershipover the Seawall for five years or more." 
!		Gold Coast "proved that the Seawall is a thoroughfarethat was opened, laid out, or built by privateparties." 
!		"[T]he evidence establishes that the owners have notexercised an act of ownership over the Seawall for fiveyears or more." 
!		Gold Coast proved that the Seawall, except for theportions "that are on privately owned land registeredin the Land Court" (i.e., TMK No. 3-1-032:029 (DH BeachHotel) and TMK No. 3-1-032:030 (Tropic Seas)) "wassurrendered to the State in accordance with HRS § 264­1(c)." 
!		The State "has the right and duty to maintain" theportion of the Seawall on the makai boundary of TMK No.3-1-32:009 because "the State holds an express easementover that portion of the Seawall." 
!		The State owns and is responsible for the portion ofthe Seawall on the makai boundary of the DH AmbassadorHotel because it substantially rebuilt that portion ofthe Seawall. 
!		"[T]he State owns the Seawall and the real propertyunder the seawall by surrender and/or has an easementover and across the Seawall by implieddedication. . . ." 
On February 3, 2014, the circuit court entered the

Final Judgment in favor of Gold Coast and against the State with

respect to Civil No. 07-1-1122, and in favor of the Kalakaua

Group, the DH Ambassador Hotel, and the Individual Defendants and

against the State with respect to Civil No. 10-1-0888. The Final

Judgment
7
 ordered:
 
1. The [State] owns the relevant seawall or seawalls
in this matter on, at, or near the seaward boundary of [the
eleven parcels at issue] (referred to hereinafter as the
"Seawall") and the real property under the Seawall by
surrender except as to the portions of the Seawall [on the
makai boundaries of DH Beach Hotel and Tropic Seas because
they] are on privately owned land registered in the Land
Court. The State also hold [sic] an easement by implied
dedication over all the entire Seawall including those

7

On February 25, 2014, the State filed its notice of appeal from
the circuit court's FOFs/COLs/Order and Final Judgment.

12

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
portions of the Seawall [on the makai boundaries of DH Beach
Hotel and Tropic Seas because they] are on privately owned
land registered in the Land Court.

2. The State's claim for declaratory
judgment . . . is denied and that case is hereby dismissed
in its entirety with prejudice.

This Judgment resolves all claims asserted between the
parties[.] . . . Each party shall bear its/his/her own
attorneys' fees and costs.

On February 18, 2014, the Kalakaua Group filed a motion

for attorneys' fees and costs seeking an award of $376,539.25.
 
The Kalakaua Group argued that Gold Coast was "entitled to an

award of $362,831.79 in reasonable attorneys' fees (and taxes)
 
pursuant to the private attorney general doctrine." The Kalakaua

Group argued that the first prong of the private attorney general

doctrine's three-pronged test was satisfied because the circuit

court's decision in Gold Coast's favor vindicated the following

public policies: "(1) preserving this particular Seawall for all

residents and visitors to Waikiki; (2) holding the State to its

duty to preserve and maintain public highways in a safe

condition; and (3) reaffirming the public's right to access the

beach." The Kalakaua Group argued that the second prong of the

private attorney general doctrine test was satisfied because "it

was necessary for Gold Coast to file suit and [Gold Coast] was

solely burdened with this private enforcement of public rights."

The Kalakaua Group explained that

it was necessary for Gold Coast to bring the lawsuit to
enforce the duties that the State owed to the public when
from 1975-2006, the State acknowledged a public right-of-way
over the Seawall, repaired the Seawall to keep it available
to the public to use as a walkway, and proposed repairs that
were consistent with the acceptance of the Seawall as a
public walkway. Also, the State refused to recognize its
obligation to maintain and repair the Seawall, and,
significantly, filed its own lawsuit against the various
landowners adjacent to the Seawall seeking a declaration
that the Seawall was not a public highway. Furthermore,
Gold Coast was "solely responsible" for challenging the
State's erroneous conclusion that it no longer had an
obligation to maintain and repair the Seawall to ensure
public access to the beach and for clarifying the State's
responsibilities under the law.

The Kalakaua Group argued that the third prong of the

private attorney general doctrine test was satisfied because "the

public at large benefits from the decision[.]" The Kalakaua

Group explained that the decision "ensures that the State will

13

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
continue to repair and maintain the Seawall for the enjoyment of 
residents and visitors" and "prevents the State from reneging on future obligation to maintain public highways in a safe condition for the public and reaffirms the longstanding public policy in favor of access to Hawaii's [Hawai
'i's] beaches." The Kalakaua 
Group argued that "[a]ny defense of sovereign immunity is 'unavailing and inapposite' insomuch as the State initiated its own litigation in this case[,]" and that the circuit court has the inherent power to award reasonable attorneys' fees when justice so requires. 
The Kalakaua Group argued that Gold Coast was entitled

to costs in the amount of $13,707.46 under HRS § 607-24 (1993)
 
because Gold Coast prevailed and had received a final judgment

against the State.

On February 28, 2014, the State filed its Memorandum in

Opposition to the Kalakaua Group's motion for attorneys' fees and

costs. The State argued that the Kalakaua Group's motion for

attorneys' fees and costs was barred as untimely filed under HRCP

Rule 59(e) because it sought to alter or amend the Final Judgment

that ruled "[e]ach party will bear its own fees and costs

associated with this legal action." The State also argued that
 
the Kalakaua Group's motion should be denied because (1) the

State did not waive its sovereign immunity with regard to the

claim for declaratory relief brought against the State by Gold

Coast and (2) the private attorney general doctrine applies to

plaintiffs, not defendants. 
 
The State also argued that the Kalakaua Group's motion

is without merit because the circuit court's ruling in no way

vindicates public policy or benefits anyone other than the

private property owners. The State explains that it "always had

a general duty to maintain all of its property" and argues that

"the lawsuit changes nothing" because whether the State

appropriates and spends the money to repair the walls is a

political question. The State contends "there is no evidence as

to the number of persons in the general public (as opposed to

owners in adjacent buildings) who use the walls. The court's

findings do not state a number."

14

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State argued that even if Gold Coast is entitled to

attorneys' fees, the amount it is awarded must be substantially

reduced because (1) the circuit court's ruling did not provide

the relief requested, and (2) the hours claimed "are unsupported,

excessive, and unwarranted." The State further argues that Gold
 
Coast is not entitled to costs because it failed to obtain

meaningful relief and provided the circuit court with "absolutely

no detail as [to] any of [its] charges."

On March 5, 2014, the Kalakaua Group filed their Reply

Memorandum in Support of its motion for attorneys' fees and

costs. The Kalakaua Group argued its motion for attorneys' fees

and costs was timely filed in accordance with HRCP Rule 54(d)(2). 
 The Kalakaua Group argued that the type of relief sought "is

irrelevant because sovereign immunity is not implicated" when the

State initiates its own litigation. The Kalakaua Group also
 
argued that Gold Coast obtained meaningful relief because it

received a declaration that the public has used the Seawall for

decades and that the State owns the Seawall, and therefore

received relief that implies the State has a duty to maintain and

repair the Seawall for the benefit of the public. The Kalakaua

Group further argued that the amount for attorneys' fees it

requested was reasonable and that it "provided a comprehensive

billing of all of the fees incurred." The Kalakaua Group argued
 
that it was entitled to costs because it was "indeed the

prevailing party."

On May 13, 2014, the circuit court filed its order

denying the Kalakaua Group's motion for attorneys' fees and costs

based on its conclusion that the "State has not waived its

sovereign immunity." On June 6, 2014, the Kalakaua Group filed

its notice of appeal from the circuit court's Order Denying Fees

and Costs.

II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW

A. Jurisdiction

"The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that [the appellate court reviews] de novo under the right/wrong standard." Captain Andy's Sailing, Inc., v. Dep't of Land and 
Natural Res., State of Hawai
'i, 113 Hawai 'i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 
15

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
833, 841 (2006) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets

omitted).
B. Conclusions of Law

"An appellate court may freely review conclusions of

law and the applicable standard of review is the right/wrong

test. A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's

findings of fact and that reflects an application of the correct

rule of law will not be overturned." 
Dan v. State , 76 Hawai 'i 
423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994) (citations and internal

quotation marks omitted).
C. Statutory Interpretation

The interpretation of a statute is a
question of law reviewable de novo. 
 
Furthermore, our statutory construction is
guided by established rules:

When construing a statute, our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to
the intention of the legislature, which is to be
obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself. And we must read

statutory language in the context of the entire
statute and construe it in a manner consistent

with its purpose.

When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists[.]

In construing an ambiguous statute, the
meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous
words, phrases, and sentences may be compared,
in order to ascertain their true meaning. HRS

§ 1-15(1) (1993). Moreover, the courts may
resort to extrinsic aids in determining
legislative intent. One avenue is the use of

legislative history as an interpretive tool.

The [appellate] court may also consider the
reason and spirit of the law, and the cause
which induced the legislature to enact it to
discover its true meaning. HRS § 1-15(2). Laws

in pari materia, or upon the same subject
matter, shall be construed with reference to
each other. What is clear in one statute may be
called upon in aid to explain what is doubtful
in another. HRS § 1-16 (1993).

State v. Koch, 107 Hawai' i 215, 220, 112 P.3d 69, 74
(2005). . . . Absent an absurd or unjust result, the[appellate] court is bound to give effect to the plainmeaning of unambiguous statutory language; we may onlyresort to the use of legislative history when interpretingan ambiguous statute. 
Silva v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 115 Hawai 'i 1, 6-7, 165 P.3d 
16

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
247, 252-53 (2007) (citations, internal quotation marks, elipses,

and brackets omitted) (format altered).
D. Attorneys' Fees and Costs

"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., State of Hawai 'i, 120 Hawai 'i 
181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 92, 105, 176 P.3d 91, 104 (2008)).
III. DISCUSSION

A. The State's contentions on appeal

(1) The State contends the circuit court did not have
 
jurisdiction over the instant case because there was no "actual

controversy" as implicitly required for a declaratory judgment

under HRS § 632-1 (1993). The State contends there was no actual

controversy because the prospect of future litigation over the

condition of the Seawall is purely speculative, and the Kalakaua

Group's request for declaratory relief was essentially a request

for an advisory opinion to the legislature on whether or not the

State should appropriate funds to repair the Seawall. The State

argues that HRS § 632-1 does not give the Kalakaua Group "the

right to an advisory opinion regarding some hypothetical future

personal injury."

(2) The State contends the circuit court did not have
 
jurisdiction over the instant case because the only order issued

by the circuit court addressed ownership of the Seawall and

therefore the case brought by Gold Coast was "a quiet title

action" governed by chapter 669 of the HRS. The State contends

that Gold Coast may not bring a quiet title action because under

HRS § 669-1(a) (1993), plaintiffs without an interest in the

subject property may not seek to quiet title in the name of third

parties; "the State has sovereign immunity as to a quiet title

claim by a stranger to the property"; and HRCP Rule 19(a)

requires "the ACTUAL OWNERS OF PROPERTY" to be named as parties.

(3) The State contends the circuit court did not have
 
jurisdiction over the instant case because Gold Coast lacked

standing. The State contends Gold Coast lacked standing because,
 
17

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inter alia, the individual members of Gold Coast would have to

participate in the litigation because they are necessary parties

under HRCP Rule 19(a); the individual members do not have

standing to sue in their own right because they did not suffer an

actual or threatened injury as a result of the State's conduct;

and even if the members of Gold Coast were injured, a favorable

decision from the circuit court provides no relief because the

courts cannot direct the State to appropriate and expend funds.

(4) For the first time on appeal, the State contends
 
the circuit court erred on the merits when it concluded that the

State acquired ownership of the Seawall by either implied

dedication or surrender under HRS § 264-1(c) because private

parties cannot transfer property to the State without its

knowledge or consent under HRS § 171-30(a)(1) (2011 Repl.) and

HRS § 26-7 (2009 Repl.).
8

(5) The State contends the circuit court erred on the
 
merits when it concluded that the State owns the portions of the

Seawall that are not registered in land court and the land under

those portions by surrender because the Seawall is not a "trail"

or a "public highway" under HRS § 264-1(c).

(6) The State contends the circuit court erred on the
 
merits when it concluded the State acquired an easement over and

across the Seawall by implied dedication because Gold Coast

failed to establish that the public's use of the Seawall was not

permissive, there is no evidence that the owners of the Seawall

intended to dedicate it to public use, and Gold Coast did not

meet its "burden to show clear and convincing evidence of public

use on a 'regular and continuous basis' long before 1959."

The Kalakaua Group contends the circuit court did not

err because the circuit court did not convert Gold Coast's case

8

On May 7, 2015 and in support of its argument that private parties
cannot transfer property to the State without the State's knowledge or
consent, the State filed a letter with the appellate clerk that brings to thiscourt's attention HRS § 107-10 (2012 Repl.). The State's letter fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(j) because HRS
§ 107-10 was published before the State's opening brief was filed on July 9,2014. See HRAP Rule 28(j) ("Parties may, by letter to the appellate clerk,
bring to the appellate court's attention pertinent and significant authoritiespublished after a party's brief has been filed, but before a decision."(Emphasis added.)). 
18

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from one for a declaratory judgment to one for quiet title, had

jurisdiction over Gold Coast's action, and correctly concluded

that the State acquired the Seawall by surrender under HRS § 264­
1(c) and implied dedication.

DH Ambassador Hotel contends all of the State's

arguments are inapplicable to the portion of the Seawall on the

makai boundaries of the DH Ambassador Hotel parcels because the

parties' SOFs and the circuit court's unchallenged FOFs establish

that the State constructed this portion of the Seawall in 1993

and "virtually all of the Seawall fronting [the DH Ambassador

Hotel's parcels] is located on State property" and therefore the

State owns and is responsible for that portion of the Seawall.

The State replies to Kalakaua Group's arguments by

reiterating the arguments that it made in its opening brief and

by arguing that the circuit court's COL #17, which states stating

"There is no evidence that the public sought or received

permission to use the Seawall as a walkway, or that the owners

asserted that the public use of the Seawall was only by

permission of the owners[,]" means that Gold Coast failed to meet

its burden to establish that the public use of the Seawall "was

hostile or adverse to ownership of the [Seawall.]"

The State replies to DH Ambassador Hotel's arguments by

noting it agrees with DH Ambassador Hotel's conclusion that

"most" of the portion of the Seawall on the makai boundaries of

the DH Ambassador Hotel's properties was built on State land, but

argues that "all of the arguments made in the State's opening

brief apply fully to that small portion of the land owned by [DH

Ambassador Hotel]." The State argues that DH Ambassador Hotel's
 
encroachment onto State land "does not transfer [DH Ambassador

Hotel's] property to the State" and that the circuit court "erred

by ruling that the State now owns [the DH Ambassador Hotel] land

underlying the seawall."
B. The State's jurisdictional arguments are without merit.

The State contends the circuit court did not have

jurisdiction over the instant case because: (1) there was no
 
"actual controversy" as implicitly required for a declaratory

judgment under HRS § 632-1; (2) Gold Coast's action was in effect

19

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
one for quiet title and plaintiffs may not bring quiet title

actions in the name of third parties; and (3) Gold Coast lacked

standing.

HRS § 632-1 provides, in relevant part:

§632-1 Jurisdiction; controversies subject to.

. . . .

Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in civil
cases where an actual controversy exists between contending
parties, or where the court is satisfied that antagonistic
claims are present between the parties involved which
indicate imminent and inevitable litigation . . . and the
court is satisfied also that a declaratory judgment will
serve to terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving
rise to the proceeding. Where, however, a statute provides
a special form of remedy for a specific type of case, that
statutory remedy shall be followed[.]

The circuit court had jurisdiction under HRS § 632-1

because antagonistic claims were present between the parties as

indicated by Gold Coast's and the State's filing of reciprocal

suits for declaratory relief.

Gold Coast's complaint cannot be treated as an action 
for quiet title against the State under HRS § 669-1(a) because the State did not claim an interest in the Seawall.
9 The circuit 
court's rulings as to the ownership of the Seawall did not transform the action into one for quiet title because actions for quiet title settle disputes between plaintiffs and defendants who both claim title to the real property at issue, not between plaintiffs and defendants who both seek a declaratory judgment relieving them from any future liability stemming from apparent ownership. See Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai
'i 
402, 408, 879 P.2d 507, 513 (1994) ("While it is not necessary for the plaintiff to have perfect title to establish a prima facie case [for quiet title], he must at least prove that he has a substantial interest in the property and that his title is superior to that of the defendants.").
C.		The State has a duty to maintain the Seawall as a public
walkway because it acquired an easement by implied
dedication for that purpose.

9

A party may file an action for quiet title pursuant to HRS § 669­
1(a), which provides that an "[a]ction may be brought by any person against
another person who claims, or who may claim adversely to the plaintiff, an
estate or interest in real property, for the purpose of determining the
adverse claim." 
 
20

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In its FOFs/COLs/Order, the circuit court concluded the

State "has an easement over and across the Seawall by implied

dedication." The circuit court also concluded that "the State

has a prescriptive easement over the Seawall for pedestrian

travel as of 1969." In its Final Judgment, the circuit court

ordered that the State holds "an easement by implied dedication

over all the entire Seawall including those portions of the

Seawall . . . [that] are on privately owned land registered in

the Land Court." While the doctrines of easements by

prescription and easements by implied dedication have

similarities, they are not one in the same and thus must be

examined separately. 
 
A prescriptive easement is acquired "by use and

occupation for the period prescribed by law [for adverse

possession]. . . . [T]he use and occupation of the easement must

be long, continued, uninterrupted and peaceable." Lalakea v.

Hawaiian Irrigation Co., 36 Haw. 692, 706-07 (Haw. Terr. 1944);

see also The Nature Conservancy v. Nakila, 4 Haw. App. 584, 598,

671 P.2d 1025, 1035 (1983) (holding that the party claiming the

prescriptive easement has the burden of proving "the same

elements necessary to prove acquisition of title by adverse

possession"). The relevant prescriptive period is twenty years. 
 See HRS § 669-1(b) (1993) ("Action for the purpose of

establishing title to a parcel of real property of five acres or

less may be brought by any person who has been in adverse

possession of the real property for not less than twenty

years.").

A prescriptive easement confers rights in land that

"are measured and defined by the use made of the land giving rise

to the easement[,]" and unlike adverse possession, does not

operate "to divest title to the land at issue." 25 Am. Jur. 2d

Easements and Licenses § 39 (West 2015). In other words, "the
 
right to use an easement acquired by prescription cannot exceed

the use which was made during the prescriptive period, and an

easement holder is not entitled to materially alter the scope or

character of its easement." 25 Am. Jur. 2d Easements and

Licenses § 66 (West 2015) (footnote omitted). 
 
21

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Similarly, "[o]nce dedicated for a particular purpose,"

an easement by implied dedication "may not be taken for another

purpose." 59 Am. Jur. 2d Parks, Squares, and Playgrounds  § 14

(West 2015). An easement by implied dedication may arise when
 
one 
 
permits the public to use his or her land for a long
period[.] . . . There must be an offer and acceptance of
dedication. . . . [T]he offer may be implied under the
circumstances and the acceptance may also be implied by the
nature of the public use. In other words, the duration and
type of public use can raise both the presumption of the
owner's intent (or offer) to dedicate land to public use, as
well as constitute acceptance by the public.

Application of Banning, 73 Haw. 297, 304-05, 832 P.2d 724, 728-29

(1992) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).

Moreover, if "continuous adverse public use" is "the

only evidence of dedication," it must be "unopposed and

acquiesced in for a period longer than the prescriptive period to

infer public dedication." Id. at 308, 832 P.2d at 730. 
 
(emphases omitted). Exactly how much longer than the
 
prescriptive period, however, is not settled. Id. 
 
The relevant prescriptive period is twenty years. Id. at 309,

832 P.2d at 731 (citing HRS § 657-31 (1993), which provides that

"No person shall commence an action to recover possession of any

lands, or make any entry thereon, unless within twenty years

after the right to bring the action first accrued.").

In addition, pursuant to HRS § 520-7 (2006 Repl.), when

the public use of the land is for recreational purposes, the

prescriptive period must commence prior to 1969 for any type of

easement to arise. See HRS § 520-7 ("No person shall gain any

rights to any land by prescription or otherwise, as a result of

any usage thereof for recreational purposes as provided in this

chapter."). See also Banning, 73 Haw. at 309, 832 P.2d at 731

(holding that an easement by implied dedication was not

established when the only evidence of dedication was the general

public's use of a footpath for beach recreational purposes on a

regular and continuous basis from 1968 to 1988). Additionally,
 
"[a] permissive use of a right of way will not create an

easement, however long continued." Tagami v. Meyer, 41 Haw. 484,

488 (Haw. Terr. 1956). 
 
22

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the owners' offer to dedicate the Seawall to

public use and the State's acceptance of that offer can be

implied from the circumstances from well before 1969 to 2006. 
 The owners' offer can be implied by the testimony of Anderson

that to the best of her knowledge, no owner of the Seawall ever

exercised control over the Seawall or blocked any member of the

public from using the Seawall since she started using the Seawall

as a walkway and observing the public doing the same in 1956

(i.e., fifty-five years before the 2011 bench trial). Gentry
 
testified that to the best of his knowledge since he moved to the

Gold Coast in 1982, the owners of the Seawall had acquiesced to

the public's use of the Seawall for recreational purposes related

to the ocean and never blocked the public from using the Seawall. 
 The circuit court found, and the parties do not dispute, that the

"public has used the Seawall for both shoreline and ocean access

for decades and has done so without any apparent interference

from any private landowners along the Gold Coast."

The State's acceptance of the owners' offer to dedicate

the Seawall to public use can be implied from the public's open

10
and continuous non-permissive use  of the Seawall as a walkway
 
from as early as 1956; the State's recognition of the Seawall as

a public walkway for recreational purposes in 1960 with respect

to the portion of the Seawall on the makai boundary of AOAO 3019;

the State's recognition of the entire Seawall as a public walkway

in 1975, 1982, 1984, 1992, and 2006; and the State's repairs to

portions of the Seawall in 1982, 1984, and 1993.

Therefore, the circuit court did not err in concluding

that the State "has an easement over and across the Seawall by

implied dedication" because Gold Coast sufficiently established

that (1) the owners of the Seawall made an offer of dedication as

early as 1956, and (2) the State accepted the owners' offer

through the public's use of the Seawall since at least 1956, the

State's recognition of the Seawall as a public walkway since

1960, and the State's repairs to the Seawall since 1982.

10

No evidence was presented to suggest the public ever requested or
received permission from any of the owners of the Seawall before accessing the
Seawall for recreational purposes.

23

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because the State has a duty to keep the Seawall in

repair via its easement by implied dedication, it is unnecessary

to address whether or not the circuit court erred in concluding

that the State acquired an easement by prescription. See Levy v.
 
Kimball, 50 Haw. 497, 498, 443 P.2d 142, 144 (1968) (holding

"that an owner of and [sic] easement has the right and the duty

to keep it in repair" and "is liable in damages for injuries

caused by failure to keep the easement in repair").
D.		The State acquired ownership of the portions of the Seawall
on non-registered land and the land under those portions by
surrender.

In its Final Judgment, the circuit court held that the

State owns the Seawall "and the real property under the Seawall

by surrender except as to the portions of the Seawall

. . . [that] are on privately owned land registered in the Land

Court."

HRS § 264-1(c) provides in relevant part:

§264-1 Public highways and trails.

. . . .

(c) All roads, alleys, streets, ways, lanes, trails,
bikeways, and bridges in the State, opened, laid out, or
built by private parties and dedicated or surrendered to the
public use, are declared to be public highways or public
trails as follows:

. . . .

(2)		Surrender of public highways or trails shall be
deemed to have taken place if no act of
ownership by the owner of the road, alley,
street, bikeway, way, lane, trail, or bridge has
been exercised for five years . . . .

A seawall that "is used as a public thoroughfare" may

qualify as a "public trail" or "public highway" under HRS § 264­
1(c). See Levy, 50 Haw. at 499-500, 443 P.2d at 144-45 (holding

that under the predecessor of HRS § 264-1(c), which is identical

to HRS § 264-1(c) except it lacks the term "trails," a seawall

that is used as a public thoroughfare qualifies as a "public

highway" even though not expressly mentioned in the statute). A

seawall on land registered in land court, however, is not subject

to surrender. See HRS § 501-87 (2006 Repl.) (providing that land

registered in land court is not subject to surrender, adverse

24

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possession, or prescription). Under HRS § 264-2 (2007 Repl.),
 
once a seawall is determined to be a "public highway," the

seawall "and the land, real estate and property of the same" are

owned by "the government in fee simple."

Here, it is undisputed that the Seawall was built by

private parties and completed by 1930, the Seawall was dedicated

to public use as evidenced by the public's open and consistent

non-permissive use of the Seawall since at least 1956, and no

owners of the Seawall exercised ownership over the Seawall for at

least five years prior to litigation. Therefore, the circuit
 
court did not err in concluding that the State acquired ownership

of the Seawall "and the real property under the Seawall by

surrender except as to the portions of the Seawall . . . [that]

are on privately owned land registered in the Land Court."
E.		The State's consent is not required to establish an easement
by implied dedication or a public highway by surrender.

Because the State's argument that neither an easement

by implied dedication nor a public highway by surrender may be

established without the State's consent under HRS § 171-30, HRS

§ 26-7, and HRS § 107-10 was raised for the first time on appeal,

whether to address the argument is within our discretion. State

v. Moses, 102 Hawai
'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) (holding 
that "in both criminal and civil cases" and unless justice requires, an appellant waives an argument on appeal if he did not raise it at trial). 
"[T]he fundamental starting point for 
statutory-interpretation is the language of the statute itself. . . . [W]here the statutory language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." First Ins. Co. of Hawai
'i v. A&B Prop., 126 
Hawai'i 406, 414, 271 P.3d 1165, 1173 (2012) (quoting State v. 
Wheeler, 121 Hawai 'i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009)). The 
statutory language of HRS §§ 171-30, 26-7, and 107-10 are plain 
11
and unambiguous: (1) HRS § 171-30(a)(1)  makes BLNR responsible
 
11

HRS § 171-30(a)(1) provides that the Board of Land and Natural
Resources (BLNR) "shall have the exclusive responsibility, except as provided
herein, of acquiring, including by way of dedications: (1) All real property
or any interest therein and the improvements thereon, if any, required by the

25

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for "[a]ll real property or any interest therein" acquired by the

12
State; (2) HRS § 26-7  requires the Department of the AG to
 
approve "all documents relating to the acquisition of any land or

interest in lands by the State"; and (3) HRS § 107-1013
 places a
 
final check via the Attorney General on the acquisition of land

initiated "by the State or any department, agency, board,

commission, or officer thereof[.]" The State's argument that
 
these statutory provisions require the State to consent to

easements by implied dedication or public highways by surrender

is without merit. Both doctrines are well established means for

the public to acquire state land without the State's consent via

public use. 
The State's interpretation of HRS §§ 171-30, 26-7,
 
and 107-10 is not only inconsistent with the language of the

statutes, but if adopted, would produce an absurd result in that

it would silently abolish the doctrines of implied dedication and

surrender. See State v. Burgo, 71 Haw. 198, 202, 787 P.2d 221,

223 (1990) (holding that a statute may not be interpreted "in a

manner which produces an absurd result").
F. The Kalakaua Group's appeal

The Kalakaua Group contends the circuit court abused

its discretion in denying their motion for attorneys' fees and

costs because (1) sovereign immunity is not implicated in this

case, (2) the circuit court may award reasonable attorneys' fees

and costs when justice requires, (3) the Kalakaua Group is

entitled to recovery of reasonable attorneys' fees under the

State for public purposes[.]

12

HRS § 26-7 provides that the Department of the Attorney General
(Department of the AG) "shall administer and render state legal services,
including . . . approve as to legality and form all documents relating to the
acquisition of any land or interest in lands by the State[. ]"

13

HRS § 107-10 (Supp. 2001) provides, in relevant part:

§107-10 Acquiring if real property; prior approval.  No real

property or any right, title, or interest therein shall be
acquired by agreement, purchase, gift, devise, eminent domain, or
otherwise, for any purpose, by the State or any department,
agency, board, commission, or officer thereof, without the prior
approval of the [Department of the AG] as to form, exceptions, and
reservations. 
 
26

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
private attorney general doctrine, and (4) the Kalakaua Group is 
 
entitled to costs under HRS § 607-24.

The State answers that the circuit court did not err

because (1) the State did not waive its sovereign immunity as to

attorneys' fees; (2) Gold Coast was not the prevailing party; (3)

the Kalakaua Group was not entitled to attorneys' fees under the

private attorney general doctrine; (4) even if the Kalakaua Group

was entitled to attorneys' fees, the amount awarded must be

significantly reduced; and (5) the Kalakaua Group is not entitled

to costs.

The circuit court denied the Kalakaua Group's motion 
for attorneys' fees and costs based on its conclusion that the "State has not waived its sovereign immunity." The circuit court erred in this regard because "the doctrine of sovereign immunity is unavailing and inapposite" when the "case deals with a suit initiated by the State[.]" State ex rel. Anzai v. City and Cnty. 
of Honolulu, 99 Hawai
'i 508, 515-16, 57 P.3d 433, 440-41 (2002). 
The State waived its sovereign immunity when it filed its own action for declaratory judgment against the owners of the properties bordering the Seawall and requested and was granted consolidation. 
As to costs, the circuit court erred in denying the

Kalakaua Group's motion because the Gold Coast prevailed against

the State.

HRS § 607-24 (1993) provides, in relevant part:

In all cases in which a final judgment or decree is obtained
against the State, . . . any and all deposits for costs made
by the prevailing party shall be returned to the prevailing
party, and the prevailing party shall be reimbursed by the
State . . . all actual disbursements, not including
attorney's fees or commissions, made by the prevailing party
and approved by the court.

IV. CONCLUSION

The Circuit Court of the First Circuit's Final Judgment

entered February 3, 2014 and "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of

Law, and Order" entered November 29, 2013 are affirmed. The May
 
13, 2014 "Order Denying Plaintiff Gold Coast Neighborhood

Association Etal's Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed

February 18, 2014," also entered in the First Circuit of the

First Circuit, is vacated and remanded for consideration of the 
 
27

FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kalakaua Group's motion for attorney fees and the award of costs

to the Kalakaua Group.

On the briefs:

William J. Wynhoff
Deputy Attorney Generalfor Defendant/Plaintiff/Appellant/Cross-AppelleeState of Hawai
'i. 
Robert G. Klein

Randall K. Schmitt

Jordon J. Kimura

Troy J.H. Andrade
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnion)
for Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Gold Coast
Neighborhood Association and
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-
Appellants Tropic Seas, Inc.;
The Association of Apartment
Owners of Diamond Head Beach,
Inc.; Diamond Head Apartments,
Ltd.; CS Apartments, Ltd.; The
Association of Apartment
Owners of 2987 Kalakaua

Condominium; Tahitienne,
Incorporated; The Association
of Apartment Owners of 3003
Kalakaua, Inc.; and The
Association of Apartment Owners
of 3019 Kalakaua, Inc.

Stephen K.C. Mau
(Rush Moore)
for Defendant/Appellee/Cross-
Appellee Diamond Head
Ambassador Hotel, Ltd.

28

