FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CYRUS A.F. YOUNG, Defendant-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-20-0000524 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1FFC-17-0000773) 
OCTOBER 29, 2021 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND HIRAOKA, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J.  
This case requires that we decide whether Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 707-733.6(2) (Supp. 2012) violates the 
Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution. 
The Sixth Amendment requires a unanimous verdict 
to convict the defendant of a serious offense. Ramos v. 
Louisiana, ___ U.S. ___, ___, 140 S. Ct. 1390, 1395, 206 L. Ed. 2d 583 (2020). The Fourteenth Amendment prohibits the states from making or enforcing "any law which shall abridge the  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States[.]" 
HRS § 707-733.6 makes it a crime for a person who either resides with, or has recurring access to, a minor, to engage in "three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual contact with the minor over a period of time, while the minor is under the age of fourteen years." Subsection (2) of the statute provides: 
To convict under this section, the trier of fact, if a jury,
need unanimously agree only that the requisite number ofacts have occurred; the jury need not agree on which actsconstitute the requisite number. 
We hold that HRS § 707-733.6(2) does not violate the Sixth or 
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. We also hold that the trial court did not commit instructional error; and the offense of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree is not included in the offense of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years. 
BACKGROUND
 On August 3, 2017, Defendant-Appellant Cyrus A.F. 
Young was indicted by an O# ahu grand jury for Continuous Sexual 
Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years, in violation of HRS § 707-733.6. His jury trial began on February 25, 2020.
1 
The complaining witness (CW) was 18 years old at the time of the 
trial. She testified that Young was her stepfather, married to 
her mother. CW had known Young since she was a baby; she called 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
him "Dad." Young and CW's mother had two younger children, CW's 
half-siblings. 
The five lived together in the same house. 
CW testified that Young would touch her when she was 12 
and 13 years old: 
So I remember one night I was in the living room, and I just
woke up and I remember like feeling [Young] behind me,'cause I would lay on the couch, and he would just startlike rubbing -- rubbing my thighs and my stomach andsometimes my breast and just make me feel uncomfortable andlike -- like what's going on? 
And then I remember another time, I was sleeping in my
room, and he was leaving to go to work, and he told megoodnight. Then after he told me goodnight, he came backinto my room after maybe like a couple minutes, and hegrabbed my -- he pulled my ankles to the end of my bed whereI was sleeping, and he pulled down my pants and myunderwear, and he put his tongue on my vagina. 
And another time, I remember I was also in my room,
and I -- I felt him like come onto my bed. 
And then I could 
hear the sound of his velcro from his shorts like comingoff. And then I remember him grabbing my hand and puttinghis penis in my hand to make me hold it. And then after, he-- he put his penis in my butt -- between my butt cheeks.Then he started moving. And that's what I remember. 
CW described the incidents in more detail in response to further 
questions. She also described a fourth incident, when Young went into her bedroom and rubbed her body both over and under her clothes, then claimed he had sleepwalked into her room. 
Young testified in his own defense. He denied all of 
CW's allegations. 
The circuit court's jury instruction no. 22 on 
"Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen" was read to the jury by agreement.  It stated: 
2
2 The State submitted proposed jury instructions before trial began,
but withdrew them after the defense rested. Young did not submit proposed
jury instructions. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Defendant, CYRUS A.F. YOUNG, is charged with the
offense of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the 
Age of Fourteen. 
A person commits the offense of Continuous Sexual
Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen if he eitherresides in the same house with a minor under the age offourteen or has recurring access to the minor, and engagesin three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexualcontact with the minor over a period of time while the minoris under the age of fourteen years. 
There are four material elements of the offense of 
Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age ofFourteen, each of which the prosecution must prove beyond areasonable doubt. 
These four elements are: 
1. That on or about February 27, 2013, to and
including February 26, 2015, in the City and County of
Honolulu, the Defendant engaged in three or more acts of
sexual penetration or sexual contact with [CW] ; and 
2. That during that same period of time, the
Defendant either resided in the same house with [CW] or hadrecurring access to her; and 
3. That the Defendant did so intentionally or
knowingly as to the foregoing elements; and 
4. That during that same period of time, [CW] was
under the age of fourteen years. 
In addition, as to element number 1, the jury need
unanimously agree only that the requisite number of actshave occurred; the jury need not agree on which actsconstitute the requisite number . 
(Emphasis added.) 
The jury found Young guilty as charged. He was 
sentenced to a 20-year prison term. The circuit court entered a 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" on July 24, 2020. This appeal followed. 
POINTS OF ERROR 
Young contends: (1) "The trial court plainly erred in
failing to instruct the jury that each individual juror had to find three separate instances of sexual contact or sexual  
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
penetration"; (2) "The trial court plainly erred in failing to 
instruct the jury on the included offense of sexual assault in the third degree"; and (3) "HRS § 707-733.6(2) is unconstitutional under the 6th [sic] and 14th [sic] amendments [sic] of the United States Constitution." 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Jury Instructions 
The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or 
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given areprejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, ormisleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptivelyharmful and are a ground for reversal unless itaffirmatively appears from the record as a whole that theerror was not prejudicial. In other words, error is not tobe viewed in isolation and considered purely in theabstract. It must be examined in the light of the entireproceedings and given the effect which the whole recordshows it to be entitled. In that context, the real questionbecomes whether there is a reasonable possibility that errormay have contributed to conviction. 
State v. Rabago, 103 Hawai# i 236, 245-46, 81 P.3d 1151, 1160-61 
(2003) (cleaned up) (reformatted). Young did not object to any 
jury instruction. However, 
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in thecase of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of reviewis effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmlesserror standard of review because it is the duty of the trialcourt to properly instruct the jury. 
As a result, once
instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, withoutregard to whether timely objection was made, if there is areasonable possibility that the error contributed to thedefendant's conviction, i.e.
, that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
State v. Malave, 146 Hawai# i 341, 348, 463 P.3d 998, 1005 (2020) 
(cleaned up). 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Statutory Interpretation 
"The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." Rabago
, 103 Hawai# i at 245, 81 P.3d at 1160 
(cleaned up). 
Included Offenses Whether an offense is an included offense of another is 
a question of law reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard 
of review. See State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai# i 63, 68, 996 P.2d 
268, 273 (2000). 
Questions of Constitutional Law 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of the 
case, and, thus, questions of constitutional law are reviewed on appeal under the 'right/wrong' standard." Rabago, 103 Hawai# i at 
244, 81 P.3d at 1159 (cleaned up). 
DISCUSSION 
"A fundamental and longstanding principle of judicial 
restraint requires that courts avoid reaching constitutional questions in advance of the necessity of deciding them." State 
v. Uchima, 147 Hawai# i 64, 87, 464 P.3d 852, 875 (2020) (citation 
omitted). 
It is necessary for us to reach the constitutional 
issue in this case because Young's other points of error have no merit. We begin with the constitutional issue because our discussion of the continuing course of conduct criminalized by HRS § 707-733.6 informs our discussion of the remaining issues. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 707-733.6(2) does not violate the Sixth
or Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. 
Citing Ramos, Young contends that HRS § 707-733.6(2) 
violates the Sixth  and Fourteenth  Amendments to the United 
States Constitution. HRS § 707-733.6 provides: 4 3
§ 707-733.6 Continuous sexual assault of a minor under
the age of fourteen years . (1) A person commits the
offense of continuous sexual assault of a minor under the 
age of fourteen years if the person: 
(a) Either resides in the same home with a minor under the age of fourteen years or has recurringaccess to the minor; and 
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexualpenetration[
5] or sexual contact[6] with the 
3 U.S. Const. amend. VI provides: 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the
right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury ofthe State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previouslyascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature andcause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnessesagainst him; to have compulsory process for obtainingwitnesses in his favor, and to have the Assistance ofCounsel for his defence. 
4 U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1 provides: 
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and
subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of theUnited States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge theprivileges or immunities of citizens of the United States;nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, orproperty, without due process of law; nor deny to any personwithin its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
5 "Sexual penetration" means: 
(1) Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio,
deviate sexual intercourse, or any intrusion ofany part of a person's body or of any objectinto the genital or anal opening of anotherperson's body; it occurs upon any penetration,however slight, but emission is not required.As used in this definition, "genital opening"includes the anterior surface of the vulva or labia majora; or 
(2) Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not actualpenetration has occurred. 
(continued...) 
7 5 (...continued)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minor over a period of time, while the minor is
under the age of fourteen years. 
(2) To convict under this section, the trier of
fact, if a jury, need unanimously agree only that therequisite number of acts have occurred; the jury need notagree on which acts constitute the requisite number . 
(3) No other felony sex offense involving the same
victim may be charged in the same proceeding with a chargeunder this section, unless the other charged offenseoccurred outside the period of the offense charged underthis section, or the other offense is charged in thealternative. A defendant may be charged with only one countunder this section, unless more than one victim is involved,in which case a separate count may be charged for eachvictim. 
(4) Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the 
age of fourteen years is a class A felony. 
(Bold italics added.) 
In Ramos, the United States Supreme Court considered 
whether the laws of Louisiana and Oregon — which allowed 
defendants to be convicted of serious offenses by nonunanimous 10-to-2 jury verdicts — violated the Sixth Amendment right to trial "by an impartial jury[,]" as incorporated against the States by the Fourteenth Amendment. The Supreme Court held "the answer is unmistakable. A jury must reach a unanimous verdict inorder to convict." Id. at ___, 140 S. Ct. at 1395, 206 L. Ed. 2d583. The jury unanimity requirement "applies to state and federal criminal trials equally." Id. at ___, 140 S. Ct. at 1397, 206 L. Ed. 2d 583. Ramos did not address the issue presented by Young in this appeal: whether the juror unanimity   
HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2012). 
6 "Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts of 'sexual
penetration', of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person not married to
the actor, or of the sexual or other intimate parts of the actor by theperson, whether directly or through the clothing or other material intended tocover the sexual or other intimate parts. HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2012). 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirement extends to deciding which of several possible means 
the defendant used to commit an element of the crime. 
HRS § 707-733.6(2) requires that the jury "unanimously 
agree only that the requisite 
number of acts [(three or more)] 
have occurred; the jury need not agree on which acts constitute 
the requisite number." (Emphasis added.) Young argues that HRS 
§ 707-733.6(2) runs afoul of the federal constitutional requirement of jury unanimity. The history of the statute explains why it does not. 
Before 1997, Hawai# i had no statute specifically 
criminalizing continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age of 14 years. 
HRS § 707-732(1)(b) (1993) ("Sexual assault in the 
third degree") prohibited subjecting a person under the age of 14 to sexual contact, and HRS § 707-730(1)(b) (1993) ("Sexual assault in the first degree") prohibited subjecting a person under the age of 14 to sexual penetration. In State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai#i 1, 928 P.2d 843 (1996), the defendant was charged with 
one count of sexual assault in the first degree and one count of sexual assault in the third degree. 
The complaining witness was 
the defendant's son, who was 6 years old at the time of the alleged offense. At trial, the child (who was then 9 years old) testified about a number of occasions when he was subjected to sexual contact and sexual penetration by his father, but "he could only guess as to the number of separate instances because he could not presently remember." Id. at 7-10, 928 P.2d at 849
-
52. The jury was given a "general unanimity" instruction; that 
"as to each count, your verdict must be unanimous." Id. at 10, 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
928 P.2d at 852 (cleaned up). 
The jury found the defendant
guilty as charged on both counts.  
On appeal, the defendant argued that as to each charge, 
the prosecution was required to choose one of the several alleged 
instances of sexual contact or sexual penetration to prosecute, and that evidence of the other alleged instances should have been excluded under Rules 403 (exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice, confusion, or waste of time) and 404(b) (evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts) of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence. The State argued that sexual assault in the first degree and sexual assault in the third degree were continuing offenses, allowing the defendant's "repeated acts occurring over a period of time" to be aggregated into the two-count indictment. Arceo, 84 Hawai# i at 12, 928 P.2d at 854. 
A majority of the Hawai# i Supreme Court held: 
[W]hen separate and distinct culpable acts are subsumed
within a single count charging a sexual assault — any one ofwhich could support a conviction thereunder — and thedefendant is ultimately convicted by a jury of the chargedoffense, the defendant's constitutional right to a unanimousverdict is violated unless one or both of the followingoccurs: (1) at or before the close of its case-in-chief, theprosecution is required to elect the specific act upon whichit is relying to establish the "conduct" element of thecharged offense; or (2) the trial court gives the jury aspecific unanimity instruction, i.e., an instruction that 
advises the jury that all twelve of its members must agreethat the same underlying criminal act has been proved beyonda reasonable doubt . 
Arceo, 84 Hawai# i at 32-33, 928 P.2d at 874-75 (emphasis added). 
In a dissent, Justice Nakayama wrote: 
I agree with the majority's holding . . . that under thecurrent Hawai #i Penal Code (HPC), sexual assault in the
first degree . . . and sexual assault in the third degree. . . are not "continuing offenses" because they representdistinct acts and therefore, separate offenses. 
However, I
urge the Hawai #i legislature to enact a "continuous sexual 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse of a child" statute under the HPC, similar to the
statute enacted by the State of California,[7] to cure the
problems inherent in the criminal prosecution of sexualabuse cases involving a minor of tender years who is unableto specifically recall dates, instances or circumstancessurrounding the abuse. 
Id. at 38, 928 P.2d at 880 (Nakayama, J., dissenting). 
In response to Justice Nakayama's dissent, the 1997 
legislature enacted HRS § 707-733.5 (Supp. 2006) (repealed 
2006).  That statute — the predecessor of HRS § 707-733.6 — 
provided: 8
§ 707-733.5 Continuous sexual assault of a minor under
the age of fourteen years . (1) Any person who: 
(a) Either resides in the same home with a minor 
under the age of fourteen years or has recurringaccess to the minor; and 
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexualpenetration or sexual contact with the minorover a period of time, but while the minor isunder the age of fourteen years, 
is guilty of the offense of continuous sexual assault of a minorunder the age of fourteen years. 
(2) To convict under this section, the trier of
fact, if a jury, need unanimously agree only that the 
7 California Penal Code § 288.5 provided, in relevant part: 
(a) Any person who either resides in the same home with
the minor child or has recurring access to the child, who
over a period of time, not less than three months induration, engages in three or more acts of substantialsexual conduct with a child under the age of 14 years at thetime of the commission of the offense, . . . or three ormore acts of lewd or lascivious conduct . . . with a child under the age of 14 years at the time of the commission ofthe offense is guilty of the offense of continuous sexualabuse of a child. . . . 
(b) To convict under this section the trier of fact, if a
jury, need unanimously agree only that the requisite number
of acts occurred[,] not on which acts constitute therequisite number. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai #i at 41 n.6, 928 P.2d at 883 n.6 (Nakayama, J., dissenting). 
8 The legislature specifically referred to, and agreed with, Justice
Nakayama's Arceo dissent when it enacted HRS § 707-733.5. See 1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 379, § 1 at 1192. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requisite number of acts have occurred; the jury need not
agree on which acts constitute the requisite number . 
(3) No other felony sex offense involving the same
victim may be charged in the same proceeding with a chargeunder this section, unless the other charged offenseoccurred outside the time frame of the offense charged underthis section or the other offense is charged in thealternative. A defendant may be charged with only one countunder this section unless more than one victim is involved,in which case a separate count may be charged for eachvictim. 
(4) Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the 
age of fourteen years is a class A felony. 
(Bold italics added.) 
In Rabago, a majority of the supreme court held that 
HRS § 707-733.5(2) "violates the rule adopted by this court in 
Arceo" and struck down the statute "as an unconstitutional violation of a defendant's constitutional right to due process of law." 103 Hawai# i at 238, 81 P.3d at 1153. 
The conduct element requisite to HRS § 707–733.5,
i.e., "three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual
contact," when combined with the attendant circumstance of"over a period of time," . . . necessarily entails multipleimpulses and the operation of intermittent forces and thusdeviates from the construct of "continuing offenses" adoptedby this court in Arceo. Multiple acts of sexual penetrationor sexual contact, committed "over a period of time,"bespeak "separate and distinct intents," which, under theformulation that this court adopted in Arceo, can only occurunder circumstances in which the "defendant intended to commit more than one offense in the course of [the] criminalepisode." . . . 
. . . Arceo recognized that the aggregated acts of
sexual assault that now constitute the conduct element of HRS § 707–733.5 are inherently separate, on the basis that"'[m]ultiple sex acts do not merge into a single continuingoffense because the defendant can be convicted and punished
for each separate act .'" 
Id. at 252, 81 P.3d at 1167 (emphasis added) (citations omitted). 
The majority acknowledged that the legislature intended HRS § 707-733.5 be a continuing offense, but held that 
the legislature's mere labeling of a criminal offense in a
particular manner does not necessarily make it so. It is 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the judicial branch that independently determines whether
such a label is justified . Thus, as an imperative of the
separation of powers doctrine, it is the province of thiscourt, and not the legislature, ultimately to ascertainwhether, for purposes of HRS § 707–733.5, multiple acts ofsexual penetration or sexual contact may be deemed a"continuing offense." As previously discussed, we hold thatsuch acts are, by nature, separate and discrete andtherefore may not form the basis of a "continuing offense." 
Id. at 253, 81 P.3d at 1168 (cleaned up) (bolding added). 
In another dissent, Justice Nakayama wrote: 
It is not this court's duty to judicially legislate.Instead, this court's primary responsibility is to ascertainand give effect to the intention of the legislature inaccordance with the law's plain and obvious meaning. In enacting HRS § 707–733.5 to remedy the problems inherent inthe prosecution of "resident molesters," the legislatureclearly established a continuing course of conduct offense.The legislature expressed that the purpose of HRS § 707-733.5 "is to set forth the parameters of the offense ofcontinuous sexual assault of a minor under the age offourteen years . . . that defines the circumstances andprovides specific guidelines under which the sexual assaultof a minor is deemed a continuing offense" and declared thatsexual assaults by "resident molesters" constitute acontinuing offense. As such, in giving effect to HRS§ 707–733.5, this court is not at liberty to disregard HRS§ 707–733.5's plain language and obvious meaning, as themajority now sees fit to do. 
Rabago, 103 Hawai# i at 257 n.5, 81 P.3d at 1172 n.5 (Nakayama, 
J., dissenting, joined by Moon, C.J.). 
Following Rabago, the legislature proposed an amendment 
to the Hawai# i Constitution. The legislature explained: 
The purpose of this Act is to propose an amendment toarticle I of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii to provide that the legislature may define what behaviorconstitutes a continuing course of conduct in continuoussexual assault crimes against minors younger than fourteenyears of age and what constitutes the jury unanimity that isrequired for a conviction. 
Under current Hawaii law, it is difficult to prosecute
those who repeatedly sexually assault a child, because ofthe difficulty young children have in remembering theindividual dates on which they were sexually assaulted.This amendment would allow the legislature to enact a lawthat would permit juries to convict a person of thecontinuous sexual assault of a minor younger than fourteenyears of age, if each member of the jury was convincedbeyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had sexually 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assaulted the child the required number of times (such as
three), even if there were not unanimity as to theindividual assaults. This would make it easier to prosecutethose who repeatedly sexually assault a child. 
2006 Haw. Sess. Laws S.B. No. 2246, § 1 at 1268-69. 
The proposed constitutional amendment was ratified on 
November 7, 2006, and became article I, section 25 of the Hawai# i 
Constitution. Article I, § 25 provides: 
In continuous sexual assault crimes against minors youngerthan fourteen years of age, the legislature may define: 
1. What behavior constitutes a continuing course of
conduct; and 
2. What constitutes the jury unanimity that is requiredfor a conviction. 
Thus, after the amendment was ratified, the Hawai# i Constitution 
empowered the legislative branch to define the actus reus
element of continuous sexual assault crimes against minors younger than 14 years of age as a continuing course of conduct. 9 
During the 2006 session the legislature also passed 
Act 60, which repealed HRS § 707–733.5 and reenacted it, with a few minor changes, as HRS § 707-733.6. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 60, §§ 1, 6 at 89, 92. A committee of the legislature explained: 
Your Committee finds that this measure, along with the
proposed constitutional amendment in S.B. 2246, is intended
to reverse the effect of State v. Rab[a]go , 103 Haw. 2[36]
(2003). Under the current law, it is difficult to prosecutethose who repeatedly sexually assault young children,because of the difficulty young children have in rememberingthe individual dates on which they were sexually assaulted.This measure would permit juries to convict a person of thecontinuous sexual assault of a child, if each member of thejury was convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that thedefendant had sexually assaulted the child the required 
9 "Actus reus" is defined as "[t]he wrongful deed that comprises the
physical components of a crime and that generally must be coupled with mensrea to establish criminal liability[.]" Actus Reus, Black's Law Dictionary
(11th ed. 2019).  
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minimum number of times, even if there were no unanimity as
to the individual assaults, thus making it easier toprosecute those who repeatedly sexually assault children. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3010, in 2006 Senate Journal, at 1458 
(emphasis added). Act 60 became effective upon ratification of the constitutional amendment. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 60, § 9 at 93. 
Young concedes that "because the Hawaii [sic] 
Constitution was amended to include Article 1, Section 25, the Hawaii [sic] Supreme Court is constrained from following the precedent it set in Rabago." He argues, however, that HRS § 707-733.6(2) violates the United States Constitution's Sixth Amendment right to trial "by an impartial jury" (incorporated against the States by the Fourteenth Amendment), which affords him greater protection than that provided by the Hawai# i 
Constitution. 
His argument is without merit. HRS § 707-733.6 is 
a continuing-course-of-conduct offense. See State v. Shaw, ___ 
Hawai#i ___, ___, ___ P.3d ___, ___, 2021 WL 4487289, at *4 (Haw. 
Oct. 1, 2021) (noting that "if the act proscribed by the statute 'describes an ongoing course of conduct,' that 'connotes a legislative design to make an aspect of [the crime] continuing[.]'") (quoting State v. Temple
, 65 Haw. 261, 267, 650 
P.2d 1358, 1362 (1982)). The United States Constitution does not require jury unanimity about specific incidents of underlying conduct to convict a defendant of a continuing-course-of-conduct offense. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In 
Richardson v. United States, 526 U.S. 813, 119 
S. Ct. 1707, 143 L. Ed. 2d 985 (1999), the United States Supreme 
Court reiterated that "a federal jury need not always decide unanimously which of several possible sets of underlying brute facts make up a particular element, say, which of several possible means the defendant used to commit an element of the crime." Id. at 817, 119 S. Ct. 1707, 143 L. Ed. 2d 985 (citing 
Schad v. Arizona, 501 U.S. 624, 631-32, 111 S. Ct. 2491, 115 L. Ed. 2d 555 (1991) (plurality opinion), abrogation on other grounds recognized, Edwards v. Vannoy, ___ U.S. ___, ___ & n.4, 141 S. Ct. 1547, 1556 & n.4, 209 L. Ed. 2d 651 (2021), and Andersen v. United States, 170 U.S. 481, 499–501, 18 S. Ct. 689, 42 L. Ed. 1116 (1898)); see also Schad, 501 U.S. at 649, 111 S. Ct. 2491, 115 L. Ed. 2d 555 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) ("[I]t has long been the general rule that when a single crime can be committed in various ways, jurors need not agree upon the mode of commission.") (citations omitted). 
The Schad plurality opinion recognized: 
Judicial restraint necessarily follows from a
recognition of the impossibility of determining, as an a
priori matter, whether a given combination of facts isconsistent with there being only one offense. Decisions 
about what facts are material and what are immaterial, or 
. . . what facts are necessary to constitute the crime, and
therefore must be proved individually, and what facts aremere means, represent value choices more appropriately madein the first instance by a legislature than by a court . 
Respect for this legislative competence counsels restraintagainst judicial second-guessing[.] 
501 U.S. at 638, 111 S. Ct. 2491, 115 L. Ed. 2d 555 (cleaned up) 
(emphasis added). The Hawai# i legislature enacted HRS 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 707-733.6, as authorized by article I, section 25 of the Hawai# i 
Constitution, to criminalize a continuing course of conduct. 
The 
statute requires jury unanimity on the defendant's course of 
conduct, but does not require jury unanimity about the means by which the course of conduct was committed — that is, the underlying brute facts. That was the legislature's prerogative under article I, section 25 of the Hawai# i Constitution. See 
Schad, 501 U.S. at 638, 111 S. Ct. 2491, 115 L. Ed. 2d 555. 
The United States Supreme Court acknowledged that state 
statutes criminalizing the continuous sexual abuse of a minor "have sometimes permitted jury disagreement about a 'specific' underlying criminal 'incident' insisting only upon proof of a 'continuous course of conduct' in violation of the law." Richardson
, 526 U.S. at 821, 119 S. Ct. 1707, 143 L. Ed. 2d 985 
(citing People v. Gear, 23 Cal.Rptr.2d 261, 263–67 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993) (involving California Penal Code § 288.5) (other citations omitted). Hawai#i Supreme Court Justice Nakayama, dissenting in 
Rabago, also referred to Gear (among other California cases) as rejecting constitutional challenges to California Penal Code § 288.5: 
In People v. Gear, 19 Cal.App.4th 86, 23 Cal.Rptr.2d
261 (1993), the minor victim alleged that the defendant
sexually assaulted her at least twenty times. The defendant was subsequently convicted on one count of continuous sexualabuse of a minor, in violation of Penal Code § 288.5. On appeal, the defendant asserted that Penal Code § 288.5 wasunconstitutional on the ground that it deprived him of hisright to a unanimous jury verdict by allowing a convictionwithout requiring jury unanimity as to which threeunderlying acts supported the conviction. Rejecting thedefendant's argument, the court noted that the defendantvirtually ignored the established continuous course ofconduct exception to the requirement of jury unanimity onwhich specific acts the defendant committed. Id. at 91, 23
Cal.Rptr.2d 261. The court recognized that the continuous 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
course of conduct exception "arises . . . when, as here, the
statute contemplates a continuous course of conduct of aseries of acts over a period of time[,]" id. at 91–92, 23Cal.Rptr.2d 261 (citations omitted), and, thus, clarifiedthat 
[t]he crime of continuous sexual abuse of a child([Penal Code] § 288.5) is a continuous[-]course-of-conduct crime and therefore falls within the exception
to the rule that jurors must agree on the particularcriminal acts committed by the defendant  before 
convicting him. . . . [Penal Code §] 288.5 was not
enacted without due regard for and in contravention ofthe constitutional requirement that an accused cannotbe convicted of a crime without a unanimous verdict of a jury of his peers. This is so because [Penal Code§] 288.5 criminalizes a continuous course of conduct ;
the actus reus of the crime is the course of conduct encompassing the individual acts of sexual conduct . 
The statute requires jury unanimity with respect to
the course of conduct — i.e., the actus reus  — and 
thereby satisfies the constitutional requirement.. . . The continuous-course-of-conduct crime does not 
require jury unanimity on a specific act, because it
is not the specific act that is criminalized . The 
actus reus  of such a crime is a series of acts 
occurring over a substantial period of time, generallyon the same victim and generally resulting in
cumulative injury. The agreement required for
conviction is directed at the appropriate actus reus:
unanimous assent that the defendant engaged in thecriminal course of conduct . 
Id. at 92–93, 23 Cal.Rptr.2d 261 (internal citations andquotation marks omitted and emphases added). 
Rabago, 103 Hawai# i at 259-60, 81 P.3d at 1174-75 (Nakayama, J., 
dissenting, joined by Moon, C.J.) (bold italics added) (brackets
and other italics in original).  
The actus reus or conduct element10 of HRS § 707-733.6 
is a series of three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual 
10 HRS § 702-205 (1993) provides: Elements of an offense . The elements of an offense are such 
(1) conduct, (2) attendant circumstances, and (3) results of
conduct, as: 
(a) Are specified by the definition of the offense,and 
(b) Negative a defense (other than a defense basedon the statute of limitations, lack of venue, orlack of jurisdiction). 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contact. 
The statute requires jury unanimity with respect to the 
course of conduct — the actus reus — thereby satisfying the 
constitutional requirement. To find a defendant guilty of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years, each juror must find that the defendant committed three (or more) specific predicate acts; unanimity is not required on which acts the defendant committed because the acts themselves are not criminalized. The predicate acts are the brute facts; that is, the means by which the defendant commits the continuing-course-of-conduct crime. 
The continuous-course-of-conduct crime does not require jury
unanimity on a specific act, because it is not the specific
act that is criminalized . The actus reus  of such a crime is 
a series of acts occurring over a substantial period of
time, generally on the same victim and generally resultingin cumulative injury. The agreement required for conviction
is directed at the appropriate actus reus : unanimous assent 
that the defendant engaged in the criminal course of
conduct. 
Gear, 23 Cal.Rptr.2d at 266 (cleaned up) (bold italics added) 
(quoting People v. Jones, 792 P.2d 643, 663-64 (Cal. 1990) (Mosk, J., dissenting)); cf. State v. Jones, 96 Hawai# i 161, 170, 29 P.3d 
351, 360 (2001) ("In an alternative means case, where a single offense may be committed in more than one way, there must be jury unanimity as to guilt for the single crime charged. 
Unanimity is 
not required, however, as to the means by which the crime was committed[.]"); State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai# i 577, 587, 994 P.2d 
509, 519 (2000) (explaining that the jury was not required to be unanimous with respect to the "means" by which the defendant committed the offense and "the general principle that juries need 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not agree on alternative means of establishing the mental state 
component possessed by the defendant is well established and widely recognized."). 
Finally, courts in other jurisdictions have held that 
their respective continuous sexual assault statutes do not require jury unanimity on the specific predicate acts. See, 
e.g.
, Arizona v. Ramsey, 124 P.3d 756, 764 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2005) 
(under Arizona statute concerning continuous sexual abuse of a child, "the specific, individual acts that constitute the requisite number of predicate acts . . . clearly constitute the underlying brute facts or means rather than elements of the crime on which the jury must agree unanimously and separately.") (cleaned up) (quoting Richardson, 526 U.S. at 817–18); Wisconsin v. Johnson, 627 N.W.2d 455, 460 (Wis. 2001) (under Wisconsin statute concerning repeated acts of sexual assault of the same child, "the predicate acts of sexual assault are not themselves elements of the offense, about which the jury must be unanimous before convicting the defendant. Rather, to convict under this statute, the jury need only unanimously agree that the defendant committed at least three acts of sexual assault of the same child within the specified time period."); Buxton v. Texas, 526 S.W.3d 666, 679 (Tex. App. 2017) (under Texas continuous sexual abuse of a child statute, "it is the commission of two or more acts of sexual abuse over the specified time period — that is, the pattern of behavior or the series of acts — that is the actus reus element of the offense as to which the jurors must be unanimous in order to convict.") (citing cases). 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For all of these reasons, we hold that HRS § 707
-
733.6(2) does not violate the Sixth or Fourteenth Amendments to 
the United States Constitution. 
There was no instructional error. 
Young contends that the circuit court's instruction 
no. 22 was "misleading and confusing[.]" It was not. HRS § 707-
733.6(2) provides: 
To convict under this section, the trier of fact, if a jury,
need unanimously agree only that the requisite number ofacts have occurred; the jury need not agree on which actsconstitute the requisite number. 
The circuit court's jury instruction no. 22 (which, according to 
the circuit court, was based upon "the [anticipated Hawai# i 
Pattern Jury Instructions — Criminal] 9.42.5[.]") stated that the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt: 
1. That on or about February 27, 2013, to and
including February 26, 2015, in the City and County of
Honolulu, the Defendant engaged in three or more acts ofsexual penetration or sexual contact with [CW][.] . . . 
. . . . 
. . . [A]s to element number 1, the jury need
unanimously agree only that the requisite number of actshave occurred; the jury need not agree on which actsconstitute the requisite number. 
Young argues: 
Some jurors may find two acts of sexual contact occurred.Other jurors may disagree with these two acts and mayconclude that two other acts occurred. Another juror mayfind only one act had occurred. The jury could interpret
the instruction to allow them to accumulate the acts to meet the threshold requisite number of three acts even though notall of the jurors may have concluded that he committed threeor more acts . It's even possible for the jurors to be
separated into two separate groups. One group could find he
did two acts and the other could find he committed two different acts; but when accumulated, the threshold of three 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acts is met . When they view the instruction, they could
agree that the requisite number of acts has been met and
find him guilty because they were not required to agree onthe same acts. 
(Emphasis added.) Young's argument is without merit. The 
circuit court's instruction clearly told the jury they must unanimously agree "that the requisite number of acts have occurred[.]" If any juror found that Young committed less than three acts, there would not be unanimous agreement "that the requisite number of acts have occurred[.]" We hold that the circuit court's instruction no. 22 was neither misleading nor confusing; the circuit court did not plainly err by giving it. 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree is not
included in Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years. 
Young contends that the circuit court plainly erred by 
failing to instruct the jury on the included offense of Sexual 
Assault in the Third Degree (Sex Assault 3). The circuit court 
did not err. Sex Assault 3 is not an offense included in 
Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years. There are several reasons for this conclusion. 
HRS § 701-109 (1993) provided, in relevant part: 
Method of prosecution when conduct establishes an element of
more than one offense . . . . 
. . . . 
(4) A defendant may be convicted of an offense
included in an offense charged in the indictment or theinformation. 
An offense is so included when: 
(a) It is established by proof of the same or lessthan all the facts required to establish thecommission of the offense charged; 
. . . . 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) It differs from the offense charged only in the
respect that a less serious injury or risk ofinjury to the same person, property, or publicinterest or a different state of mind indicatinglesser degree of culpability suffices toestablish its commission. 
HRS § 701-109(4)(a) 
"HRS § 701–109(4)(a) adopted the common law definition 
of lesser included offenses[,] that an offense is included when 
it is established by proof of the same or less than all the facts required to establish the offense charged." State v. Burdett, 70 
Haw. 85, 87, 762 P.2d 164, 166 (1988) (citing Commentary to HRS § 701–109). "In other words, an offense is included if it is impossible to commit the greater without also committing the lesser." Id. at 87-88, 762 P.2d at 166 (citations omitted). The statute criminalizing Sex Assault 3 provides, in 
relevant part: 
§ 707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree . (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the third
degree if: 
. . . . 
(b) The person knowingly subjects to sexual contactanother person who is less than fourteen yearsold or causes such a person to have sexualcontact with the person[.] 
HRS § 707-732 (Supp. 2012). To convict a defendant of Sex 
Assault 3, a jury must unanimously agree "that the same underlying criminal act has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt." Arceo, 84 Hawai# i at 33, 928 P.2d at 875 (underscoring 
added). 
By contrast, a jury can convict a defendant of 
Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen under HRS § 707-733.6 if each juror finds that the defendant 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
engaged in "three or more acts of sexual penetration 
or sexual 
contact[,]" even though the jury does not agree on which three 
(or more) predicate acts took place. Thus, Sex Assault 3 requires the jury to unanimously agree that the same specific act of sexual contact was proven, whereas Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen requires a jury to unanimously agree that the requisite number of specific predicate acts — either sexual penetration or sexual contact — have occurred. It is possible to commit Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen without also committing Sex Assault 3. 
In addition, "a lesser included offense cannot have a 
mental state greater than or different from that which is required for the offense charged." Burdett, 70 Haw. at 88, 762 
P.2d at 166 (citations omitted). HRS § 707-733.6 does not specify a mens rea element; accordingly, the mens rea for Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen is "intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." See HRS § 702-204 
(1993) ("When the state of mind required to establish an element of an offense is not specified by the law, that element is established if, with respect thereto, a person acts intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly."). The mens rea element of Sex Assault 3 is "knowingly." Thus, Sex Assault 3 cannot be an offense included in Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen because the mental state required for the former is "different from" the mental state required for the latter, and because the mental state required for the former 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
("knowingly") is greater than one of the mental states applicable 
to the latter ("recklessly"). 
See HRS § 702-206 (1993) (defining 
states of mind). 
In applying HRS § 701–109(4)(a), the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court has also held that "the legislative statutory scheme" may be considered in determining whether an offense is a lesser included offense of another. Friedman, 93 Hawai# i at 72, 996 P.2d 
at 277 (citations omitted). As noted above, when the legislature enacted HRS § 707-733.6 it stated: 
[I]t is difficult to prosecute those who repeatedly sexually
assault young children, because of the difficulty youngchildren have in remembering the individual dates on whichthey were sexually assaulted. This measure would permitjuries to convict a person of the continuous sexual assaultof a child, if each member of the jury was convinced beyonda reasonable doubt that the defendant had sexually assaultedthe child the required minimum number of times, even ifthere were no unanimity as to the individual assaults, thusmaking it easier to prosecute those who repeatedly sexuallyassault children. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3010, in 2006 Senate Journal, at 1458. 
Thus did the legislature express its intent to require a lesser degree of proof about specific assaults from children younger than 14 to convict a defendant for Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen than it did for Sex Assault 3. 
Finally, the intent to treat Continuous Sexual Assault 
of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen differently than Sex Assault 3 is also evident from the language of HRS § 707-733.6(3), which provides in relevant part: 
No other felony sex offense[11] involving the same victim may
be charged in the same proceeding with a charge under this
section, unless the other charged offense occurred outside 
11 Sex Assault 3 is a class C felony. HRS § 707-732(2). 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the period of the offense charged under this section, or the
other offense is charged in the alternative . A defendant 
may be charged with only one count under this section,unless more than one victim is involved, in which case aseparate count may be charged for each victim. 
(Emphasis added.) It would be unnecessary to charge Sex 
Assault 3 in the alternative if it were included in the offense of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen. 
HRS § 701-109(4)(c) 
HRS § 701–109(4)(c) expands the doctrine of lesser
included offenses to include crimes that require a lesser
degree of culpability or a less serious injury or risk ofinjury. Subsection (c) differs from (a) in that there maybe some dissimilarity in the facts necessary to prove thelesser offense, but the end result is the same. 
Burdett, 70 Haw. at 90, 762 P.2d at 167. 
As discussed in the preceding section, the mens rea for 
Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen is 
"intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." The mens rea for Sex Assault 3 is "knowingly." Thus, Sex Assault 3 cannot be an offense included in Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen because it does not "require a lesser degree of culpability." 
In addition, the "end result" of Sex Assault 3 is that 
a minor less than 14 years old is subjected to sexual contact with the defendant. The "end result" of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen is that a minor less than 14 years old, who either resides in the same home with the defendant or to whom the defendant has recurring access, is subjected to three or more acts of sexual contact or sexual 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
penetration with the defendant. 
Because the end results are not 
the same, the offense of Sex Assault 3 is not included in the 
offense of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence" entered by the circuit court on July 24, 2020, is affirmed. On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate JudgeWilliam H. Jameson, Jr. Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-AppelleeState of Hawai# i. 
Robert T. Nakatsuji,First Deputy Solicitor General,for Amicus Curiae Attorney Generalof the State of Hawai# i. 
27 