FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
–––O0O–––
 
JAMAE KAWAUCHI, in her official capacity
as County Clerk of the COUNTY OF HAWAI' I,
a municipal corporation of the State of Hawai' i,
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v. 
MAILE P. DAVID, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-10-0000066
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0226)
 
DECEMBER 13, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
This appeal involves (1) a constitutional challenge to
 
Article III, Section 3-3 of the County Charter for the County of
 
1
Hawai'i ("Section 3-3"),  which requires that a candidate for
local public office be registered to vote in the district in
 
which the candidate intends to run for at least ninety days
 
1
 Section 3-3 of the Hawai' i County Charter states: 
Qualifications.
 
A person must be a citizen of the United States of
America and have been a duly qualified elector of the county
for at least one year immediately preceding election or
appointment to the county council. A person must also have
been a resident and registered voter of the district from
which the person is to be elected or appointed for at least
ninety (90) days immediately preceding the primary election
or the appointment.
 
County Charter, County of Hawai' i § 3-3 (2010).   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
before the primary election, (2) a claim that the appeal by the
 
County of Hawai' i is moot, and (3) a claim that the Circuit Court 
2
of the Third Circuit ("Circuit Court")  lacked authority to
consider the county clerk's challenge to the candidate's
 nomination papers because certain procedural deadlines under
 
3
Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 12-8  were not met.
We agree that the public-interest exception to the
 
mootness doctrine applies, but conclude that the procedural
 
2
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara ("Judge Hara") presided.
 
3
 At the time, HRS § 12-8 stated in pertinent part:
 
(a) All nomination papers filed in conformity with
section 12-3 shall be deemed valid unless objection is made
thereto by a registered voter, an officer of a political
party whose name is on file with the chief election officer,
the chief election officer, or the county clerk in the case
of a county office. All objections shall be filed in
writing not later than 4:30 p.m. on the thirtieth day or the
next earliest working day prior to the primary or special
election.
 
. . . .
 
(e) If the chief election officer or clerk in the case
of county offices determines that the objection may warrant
the disqualification of the candidate, the chief election
officer or clerk shall file a complaint in the circuit court
for a determination of the objection; provided that such
complaint shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court
not later than 4:30 p.m. on the seventh working day after
the objection was filed.
 
. . . .
 
(g) If an officer of a political party whose name
appears on file with the chief election officer, the chief
election officer, or clerk in the case of county offices
files a complaint in the circuit court, the circuit court
clerk shall issue to the defendants named in the complaint a
summons to appear before the court not later than 4:30 p.m.
on the fifth day after service thereof.
 
(h) The circuit court shall hear the complaint in a summary
manner and at the hearing the court shall cause the evidence to be
reduced to writing and shall not later than 4:30 p.m. on the
fourth day after the return give judgment fully stating all
findings of fact and of law. The judgment shall decide the
objection presented in the complaint, and a certified copy of the
judgment shall forthwith be served on the chief election officer
or the clerk, as the case may be.
 
(i) If the judgment disqualifies the candidate, the chief
election officer or the clerk shall follow the procedures set
forth in sections 11-117 and 11-118 regarding the disqualification
of candidates.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 12-8 (2009).
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
deadlines in HRS § 12-8 are mandatory and not directory. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court lacked the authority to decide the
 county clerk's challenge at the time that it issued its final
 judgment, and we do not address Section 3-3's constitutionality.
 
I. Background
 
A. The complaint and summons.
 
4
 On August 2, 2010, Kenneth G. Goodenow, in his
official capacity as County Clerk of the County of Hawai' i 
("County Clerk"), filed a Complaint for Declaratory Relief 
("Complaint") in the Circuit Court pursuant to HRS § 12-8 that contained the following allegations: On June 25, 2010, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Maile P. David ("David") presented herself in the Kona Satellite Elections Office ("Kona Office") "to apply for nomination papers to run as a candidate in Council District 6." David used to live in Council District 7 and, as of June 25, 2010, remained registered to vote in Council District 7. While David was attempting to obtain nomination papers, county employees determined that she did not meet Section 3-3's ninety-day-registered-voter requirement and informed her of this determination. David left the Kona Office with the application form for the nomination papers. 
On July 1, 2010, David sent a letter to the County
 
Clerk demanding that she be allowed to file nomination papers as
 a candidate for Council District 6. 
The County Clerk rejected
 
David's demand on the grounds that David was not eligible to run
 for office in Council District 6. 
On July 7, 2010, David filed a Petition for Preemptory 
Writ of Mandamus Directed to the Respondent Kenneth Goodenow, County Clerk of the County of Hawai' i, State of Hawai' i ("Mandamus 
Petition") with the Hawai' i Supreme Court, seeking an order 
directing the County Clerk to issue nomination papers to David and to then receive and file those papers. The supreme court granted the Mandamus Petition in part on July 15, 2010, and 
4
 Jamae Kawauchi was substituted for former County Clerk Kenneth G.
Goodenow during the pendency of this appeal by stipulation. 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ordered the County Clerk to issue the nomination papers. 
On July 19, 2010, David filed her nomination papers
 
with the County Clerk. David "certified under penalty of law
 
that she 'will qualify under the law for the office for which
 [she is] seeking.'" 
On July 20, 2010, the County Clerk accepted and filed 
David's nomination papers, placing David on the ballot as a candidate for Hawai' i County Council for Council District 6. 
That same day, David filed a complaint with the Circuit Court in Civil No. 10-1-259K, David v. Goodenow, seeking, among other things, a determination that the 90-day-registered-voter requirement in Section 3-3 is "invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise not applicable" to David.
5 
On July 22, 2010, the County Clerk sent a letter to the
 
Elections Program Administrator for the County Office of
 Elections giving official notice that he objected under HRS § 12­8(a) to David's qualifications "to seek election to and serve as
 the representative of Council District 6" and "formally notified"
 David of his objections. Based on these allegations, the County
 Clerk filed the Complaint with the Circuit Court on August 2,
 2010, seeking, among other things, a declaration that David "does
 not meet the legal criteria for the holding of Council
 office. . . ." That same day, the Clerk of the Circuit Court
 issued a standard Summons that required David to serve an answer
 to the Complaint within 20 days following service of the Summons. 
On August 10, 2010, David filed a document dated
 
August 5, 2010 entitled Return and Acceptance of Service of
 Complaint Filed August 2, 2010 ("RASC"), which stated: "MAILE P.
 DAVID, the Defendant herein, by and through her attorney, accepts
 service of the Complaint of Declaratory Relief (with attached
 Exhibits 1 to 6 and Summons) filed August 2, 2010 and by this
 pleading makes due return as to the service of said summons." 
5
 While the record does not address Civil No. 10-1-259K again, the
docket of that case indicates that it was dismissed via stipulation on
September 23, 2010, the same day that the final judgment was entered in the
instant case.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. David's motion for partial summary judgment.
 
On August 11, 2010, David filed a motion for partial
 
summary judgment, arguing that the Circuit Court lacked subject
 
matter jurisdiction over the Complaint. First, David noted that
 pursuant to HRS § 12-8(e), the County Clerk was required to file
 the Complaint in the Circuit Court within seven working days
 after the date "the objection was filed." David claimed that the
 County Clerk's objection was filed on July 20, 2010, the date she
 received a letter from the County Clerk, addressed to her, which
 stated:
 
Upon further consideration and consultation with the
Office of Corporate Counsel, I will accept the filing of
your nomination papers. . . .
 
As discussed with you by telephone, I will file an
objection pursuant to Hawai' i Revised Statutes [sic] Section
12-8 and will subsequently file a complaint in circuit courtfor a determination of this objection. 
David argued that the County Clerk's subsequent July 22, 2010
 
letter to the Elections Program Administrator was unnecessary and
 had "no meaning or legal value." Thus, David argued, the
 Complaint was untimely under HRS § 12-8(e) as it was not filed
 within seven working days after July 20, 2010, and, as a result,
 the Circuit Court "cannot grant relief under [the County Clerk's]
 Complaint." 
Second, David argued that HRS § 12-8(g) required the
 
Circuit Court to conduct an immediate hearing on the Complaint
 and that HRS § 12-8(h) required the entry of judgment "not later
 than 4:30 p.m. on the fourth day after the return." David argued
 that she "submitted" her "return" on August 5, 2010, but did not
 receive a timely hearing pursuant to HRS § 12-8(h) and, because
 the Circuit Court proceedings did not comply with HRS § 12-8, the
 Circuit Court was therefore deprived of authority over the case. 
In opposition, the County Clerk argued, first, that the
 
seven-working-day period began to run on July 22, 2010, and,
 second, that HRS § 12-8(h) did not require a prompt hearing
 because David's name was already on the ballot.
 
Judge Greg K. Nakamura orally denied David's motion for
 
partial summary judgment at a hearing on September 7, 2010. 
Judge Nakamura stated, first, that the seven-working-day period
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
began to run on July 22, 2010, the date the County Clerk filed an 
objection with the Elections Program Administrator. Second, Judge Nakamura, citing Tataii v. Cronin, 119 Hawai' i 337, 198 
P.3d 124 (2008), held that the summons procedure provided for in HRS § 12-8(g) was directory, not mandatory, because 
[t]he purpose of H.R.S. § 12-8(g) is to have a determination
made as soon as possible whether a candid –– whether a
particular candidate for office is qualified or not. This
 is so that an election can proceed with as much clarity as
possible regarding the identity of the candidates who are
lawfully running for office. On the other hand, H.R.S.
§ 12-8(g) is not intended to allow a candidate who is not
qualified to run for office or be elected to that office.
Therefore, this Court determines that H.R.S. § 12-8(g) is
directory and not mandatory and this Court continues to have
jurisdiction over this matter.
 
Judge Hara filed a written order denying the motion for partial
 
summary judgment on September 27, 2010 on substantially the same
 grounds as those in Judge Nakamura's oral ruling. 
C. Findings of fact, conclusions of law, and judgment.
 
A hearing on the merits of the Complaint was held on
 
September 9, 2010 before the Circuit Court, Judge Hara presiding. 
While it was undisputed that David was late in registering to
 vote in Council District 6, David argued that the ninety-day­registered-voter requirement was unconstitutional. At the
 conclusion of the hearing, the Circuit Court stated that it would
 rule in favor of David:
 
So in weighing the . . . benefits or . . . particular
kinds of . . . requirements that it might serve to the
County as against the harm it does to Ms. David, I think the
Court finds that the balance tips in favor of Ms. David.
And so I would find . . . and issue a declaratory ruling
that the requirement for being a registered voter 90 days
prior to the primary election as a requirement for
candidates for –– candidacy for the office of . . . county
council . . . should not apply to . . . affect Ms. David's
ability to run for council in this election.
 
On September 20, 2010, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Findings and Conclusions on Summary Proceeding.6 The Circuit
 
Court found, pursuant to stipulation, that:
 
6
 The Record on Appeal includes a second set of Findings and
Conclusions on Summary Proceeding, dated and filed on September 23, 2010,
which contains amendments to the September 20, 2010 Findings and Conclusions
on Summary Proceeding.
 
6
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a. Defendant is a citizen of the United States, is a
life-long resident of the County of Hawai' i, has been and
continues to be a registered voter in the County of Hawai' i 
for many years[,] and has physically resided in Kahauko,
South Kona (in the area covered by County Council DistrictNumber Six) since December 2008. 
b. County Council District Number Six covers the area
of South Kona-Ka' u-Puna and Defendant seeks to be elected to 
this seat in the upcoming County of Hawai' i special election
to be held on September 18, 2010. 
c. Defendant moved to her present place of habitation
after the last general election was held in November 2008.No elections were conducted in the County of Hawai' i after 
November 2008. 
d. The present dispute arises out of the fact that
Defendant changed her voter precinct registration from herformer place of registration (which was in the area coveredby County District Number Seven for North Kona) to hercurrent voter precinct registration for the area covered byCounty Council District Number Six (South Kona-Ka' u-Puna) on
June 25, 2010. 
e. Defendant changed her voter precinct registration
on June 25, 2010, the same day that she applied for
nomination papers for County Council [] District Number Six.
June 25, 2010 is 86 days prior to the September 18, 2010
State primary election.
 
The Circuit Court concluded that, applying Section 3-3 "on its
 
face," David would be ineligible to run for Council District 6
 because she was not registered to vote in that district at least
 ninety days prior to the primary election. The Circuit Court
 further concluded, however, that:
 
5. As to the 90-day voter registration requirement,
this requirement places an additional requirement on
Defendant in order for Defendant to serve as an elected
 representative of Council District Number Six.
 
6. Under either the "rational basis" test or "strict
 
scrutiny" test, the 90-day voter registration requirement is
an unreasonable burden on Defendant's ability to be a
representative of Council District Number Six and is
therefore invalid and not applicable to Defendant.
 
Based on these findings and conclusions, the Circuit Court
 
entered the Final Judgment in favor of David and against the
 County Clerk on September 20, 2010.
7
 
David ultimately lost the 2010 primary election for
 
Hawai'i County Council, Council District 6. See Primary Election 
2010 - State of Hawaii - Hawaii County, Final Summary Report 1, 2
 
7
 The Record on Appeal includes a duplicate Final Judgment, dated
(with stamped signature) and filed on September 23, 2010.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Sept. 28, 2010, 6:12 PM), http://hawaii.gov/elections/results/
 
2010/primary/files/coh.pdf. 
II.	 Points of Error
 
On appeal, the County Clerk argues that the Circuit
 
Court erred by applying a balancing test, rather than a rational
 
basis test, when declaring that Section 3-3's 90-day-registered­voter requirement was "invalid and not applicable to [David],"
 and that the Circuit Court erred in finding that the suspect
 provision did not pass the rational basis test. 
On cross-appeal, David argues that the Circuit Court
 
erred by denying David's motion for partial summary judgment
 because (1) the County Clerk's Complaint was not filed within
 seven working days after the filing of an objection as required
 by HRS § 12-8(e) and (2) the Circuit Court failed to hold a
 timely hearing pursuant to HRS § 12-8(g) and (h). 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The case falls within the public-interest exception to
the mootness doctrine.
 
The fact that David lost her primary election bid calls 
into question the justiciability of the parties' appeals. 
Although this case is no longer a live controversy, "when the question involved affects the public interest and an authoritative determination is desirable for the guidance of public officials, a case will not be considered moot." Kaho'ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai' i 302, 333, 162 P.3d 696, 727 
(2007) (quoting Slupecki v. Admin. Dir. of Courts, State of Haw., 110 Hawai' i 407, 409 n.4, 133 P.3d 1199, 1201 n.4 (2006)) 
(emphasis and internal quotation marks omitted). The issues here fall squarely within the public-interest exception to the mootness doctrine. See Nishimura v. Williams, 126 Hawai' i 115, 
119, 267 P.3d 699, 703 (App. 2011) (question of whether Kaua' i 
county clerk properly accepted candidate's nomination papers excepted from mootness doctrine); cf. Johnston v. Ing, 50 Haw. 379, 382, 441 P.2d 138, 140 (1968) (the form and content of an official ballot is a "matter of substantial public moment"). 
8
   
   
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Thus, we will consider further the parties' arguments.
 
B.	 The failure to comply with mandatory procedural
requirements in HRS § 12-8 precluded the entry of
judgment.
 
Ultimately, we conclude that we cannot render a
 
decision on the constitutional issue in this case because, after
 
the Complaint was filed, mandatory procedures provided for in HRS
 § 12-8 were not followed. In support of this conclusion, we
 address (1) the legal framework for challenging nomination
 papers, (2) the legislative history behind HRS §§ 12-8(g) and
 (h), (3) the procedures that HRS §§ 12-8(g) and (h) appear to
 require, (4) whether the procedural provisions in HRS §§ 12-8(g)
 and (h) are mandatory or directory, and (5) whether such
 provisions were followed.
 
1.	 Overview of Chapter 12 of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
Chapter 12 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes sets forth 
the procedures related to primary elections in Hawai' i. As of 
the 2010 primary election, primary elections were held "on the 
second to the last Saturday of September in every even numbered year[,]" with the exception that no primary election may precede a general election by less than forty-five days. H
AW. REV. STAT. 
§ 12-2 (2009). Except for the nomination of electors for the offices of the president and vice president of the United States of America, "[a]ll candidates for elective office . . . shall be nominated in accordance with [Chapter 12] and not otherwise." H
AW. REV. STAT. §§ 12-1, 14-21 (2009). 
To have one's name printed on a primary, special-
primary, or special-election ballot, nomination papers must have
 been "filed in the candidate's behalf" and had to contain, among
 other things,
 
[a] sworn certification by self-subscribing oath by the
candidate that the candidate qualifies under the law for the
office the candidate is seeking and that the candidate has
determined that, except for the information provided by the
registered voters signing the nomination papers, all of the
information on the nomination papers is true and correct[.]
 
HAW. REV. STAT. §§ 12-3(a), (a)(6) (2009).  With reference to
 
9
  
   
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
candidates for county offices, nomination papers, generally, were
 
required to "be filed with the . . . [county] clerk . . . not
 later than 4:30 p.m. on the sixtieth calendar day prior to the
 primary, special primary, or special election . . . ." H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 12-6(1) (2009).
 
The procedure by which nomination papers could be
 
challenged was provided in HRS § 12-8. Pursuant to § 12-8(a),
 
All nomination papers filed in conformity with section 12-3
 
shall be deemed valid unless objection is made thereto by a
registered voter, an officer of a political party whose name
is on file with the chief election officer, the chief
election officer, or the county clerk in the case of a
 county office. All objections shall be filed in writing not
 
later than 4:30 p.m. on the thirtieth day or the next
 earliest working day prior to the primary or special
 election.
 
HAW.  REV.  STAT.  § 12-8(a) (2009) (emphasis added).  If the county
 
clerk "determines that the objection may warrant disqualification
 
of the candidate," the clerk "shall file a complaint in the
 circuit court for a determination of the objection . . . not
 later than 4:30 p.m. on the seventh working day after the
 objection was filed." H
AW.  REV.  STAT.  § 12-8(e).  
After the complaint was filed, the circuit court and
 
its clerk assumed certain responsibilities. 
If . . . the chief election officer, or clerk in the
case of county offices files a complaint in the circuit
court, the circuit court clerk shall issue to the defendants
 
named in the complaint a summons to appear before the court
not later than 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day after service
thereof.
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 12-8(g) (emphasis added).  Thereafter, 
The circuit court shall hear the complaint in a
summary manner and at the hearing the court shall cause the
 
evidence to be reduced to writing and shall not later than
 
4:30 p.m. on the fourth day after the return give judgment
fully stating all findings of fact and of law. The judgment
shall decide the objection presented in the complaint, and a
certified copy of the judgment shall forthwith be served on
the chief election officer or the clerk, as the case may be.
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 12-8(h) (emphasis added).
 
Ultimately, if the candidate is disqualified "after the
 
close of filing and the ballots have been printed," the clerk
 
"may order the candidate's name stricken from the ballot or order
 that a notice of . . . disqualification be prominently posted at
 the appropriate polling places on election day." H
AW.  REV.  STAT.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§§ 11-117(b), 12-8(i) (2009).
 
2. Legislative history behind HRS §§ 12(g) and (h).
 
The provisions at issue here, HRS §§ 12-8(g) and (h), 
include only some of the procedures found in HRS § 12-8, which 
defines the process by which unqualified candidates are to be officially disqualified and removed from consideration in a primary election. The critical language in §§ 12-8(g) and (h), however, has a long and unique history wholly separate from the remainder of HRS § 12-8, originating in Hawai' i statutes that 
concern contests for cause in primary and special primary elections. 
Our historical analysis begins with Rose v. Trask, 27 
Haw. 596 (Haw. Terr. 1923). Trask had been nominated at the 1923 primary election to be the democratic candidate for the office of sheriff of the City and County of Honolulu in the forthcoming municipal election. 27 Haw. at 597. Rose, unsatisfied with the result, filed a petition in the Hawai' i Supreme Court contesting 
Trask's nomination. Id. Trask argued that the supreme court 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the petition. Id. 
The supreme court stated that the Primary Law, which
 
governed primary elections, "contain[ed] no express provision
 permitting a contest of a primary election[,]" but also noted
 that the Primary Law provided that laws relating to elections
 applied to primaries to the extent that such laws are consistent
 with the Primary Law. Id. at 597–98. In this respect, the
 
Municipal Act allowed contests of municipal elections, stating
 that interested candidates or any thirty voters could contest
 decisions of boards of inspectors by filing a petition in the
 supreme court "within thirty days following the election proposed
 to be contested . . . ." Id. at 598. The Municipal Act further
 
stated:
 
Sec. 1692. Summons. The clerks shall thereupon issue
to the respondents named in such petition a summons to
appear before the supreme court within ten days after the
service thereof.
 
Sec. 1695. Hearing, judgment. At the hearing, the
court shall cause the evidence to be reduced to writing and
shall give judgment, stating all findings of fact and of
law. Such judgment may invalidate the election on the
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
grounds that a correct result cannot be ascertained because
of a mistake or fraud on the part of the inspectors of
election; or decide that a certain candidate, or certain
candidates, received a majority or plurality of the votes
cast and were elected. . . .
 
Id. at 598–99.
 
The supreme court concluded that the Municipal Act's
 
election-contest laws were inconsistent with the Primary Law
 
because, among other things, based on the Municipal Act's time
 periods, the completion date of a primary-election contest could
 quite plausibly extend beyond the date of the general municipal
 election. Id. at 600. Thus, the municipal-election-contest laws
 
did not apply to primary elections. Id. at 602. Therefore, the
 
court held that it lacked subject-matter jurisdiction to consider
 the petition because no law granted Rose the right to contest the
 primary election. Id.
 
As a legislative response to Rose, the Hawai' i 
Territorial Legislature in 1925 proposed S.B. No. 144 to explicitly allow contests of primary elections with judicial oversight. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 119, in 1925 Senate Journal, at 431. The Senate Committee on Judiciary initially claimed that the object of S.B. No. 144 was "to apply to contests at primary elections the same provisions now applicable to general elections[,]" including Sections 1692 and 1695 of the Municipal Act. Id. However, the House Committee on Judiciary recommended 
several amendments to the bill — for instance, that the petition should be filed in a circuit court rather than the supreme court and that "[t]he court shall hear such contest in a summary manner[.]" H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 752, in 1925 House Journal, at 1776–77. The House Committee on Judiciary also recommended requiring the circuit court to issue its judgment "within eight days following the return day of said summons." Id. at 1777 
(emphasis added). S.B. No. 144 passed third reading in the House of Representatives with these amendments, and the amended version passed final reading in the Senate. 1925 Senate Journal, at 1249. 
S.B. No. 144 was enacted as Act 226 in 1925. 1925 Haw.
 
Sess. Laws Act 226, § 1 at 272–73. Act 226 required a petition
 contesting the decision of any board of inspectors in a primary
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
election to be filed within seven days following the primary
 
election with the clerk of the circuit court of the judicial
 circuit in which the election district was situated. Id. Act
 
226 also provided:
 
Section 49D. Summons. The clerk shall thereupon
issue a summons to the respondents named in such petition to
appear before such circuit court within five days after the
service thereof.
 
Section 49E. Hearing, judgment. The court shall hear
 
such contest in a summary manner and at the hearing the
court shall cause the evidence to be reduced to writing and
shall within eight days following the return day give
judgment fully stating all findings of fact and of law.
Such judgment shall decide what candidate was nominated or
elected, as the case may be, in the matter presented by the
said petition, and a certified copy of such judgment shall
forthwith be served on the county or city and county clerk
who shall thereupon place the name of such candidate
declared to be nominated on the ballot for the forthcoming
general election and such judgment shall be conclusive of
the right of the candidate so declared to be
nominated; . . . .
 
Id. Act 226, in its final form, mandated that the summons
 
require the respondents to appear in court within five days of
 
service, rather than the ten days specified in Section 1692 of
 the Municipal Act. Act 226 also required judgment to be entered
 "within eight days following the return day"; although the final
 version did not specifically use the words "return day of said
 summons," the legislative history makes clear that that is how
 "return day" should be interpreted.
8
 
In 1955, the Revised Laws of Hawaii were recodified,
 
and the word "day" was dropped from the phrase "return day"
 without any apparent legislative enactment calling for the
 change; thus, the 1955 Revised Laws, as recodified, required the
 circuit court to enter judgment "within eight days following the
 return." Compare Rev. L. of Haw. § 11-112 (1955), with Rev. L.
 
of Haw. § 283 (1945), and Rev. L. of Haw. § 7742 (1935).
 
In 1970, the Hawai' i State Legislature enacted Act 26, 
which, among other things, "[c]onsolidate[d] the primary, general, and special election contest provisions" and "[s]horten[ed] the time for decision in a primary election 
8
 That is, "return day" means "a day on which a [respondent] must
appear in court[.]" B LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 454 (9th ed. 2009).
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contest." See Legislative Reference Bureau, 1970 Digest and
 
Index of Laws Enacted, 1970 Reg. Sess. at 31 (emphasis added);
 
1970 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 26, § 2 at 43–44. Thus, Act 26 stated
 that the circuit court "shall hear the contest in a summary
 manner and at the hearing the court shall cause the evidence to
 be reduced to writing and shall within four days following the
 return give judgment fully stating all findings of fact and of
 law." 1970 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 26, § 2 at 43–44 (emphasis
 added).
 
In 1973, the Legislature enacted Act 217, henceforth
 
requiring parties seeking to contest primary and special primary
 elections for cause to file a complaint with the supreme court
 clerk, rather than the circuit court clerk. 1973 Haw. Sess. Laws
 Act 217, § 1(aaa) at 462. The Legislature further required that
 the supreme court clerk "shall issue to the defendants named in
 the complaint a summons to appear before the supreme court not
 later than 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day after service thereof." 
Id. Significantly, the Legislature modified the previous
 
requirement that the circuit court "shall within four days
 following the return give judgment," stating that the supreme
 court "shall not later than 4:30 p.m. on the fourth day after the
 return give judgment . . . ." Id. (emphasis added). 
In 1990, as it is today, the statute regulating the
 
procedure for contesting primary and special primary elections
 for cause was found in HRS § 11-173.5. See H
AW.  REV.  STAT. § 11­
173.5 (1985 & 2009). Until 1990, HRS § 12-8 did not provide for
 judicial review of objections to nomination papers. See H
AW.  REV.
 
STAT. § 12-8 (1985). That year, however, the Legislature enacted
 
Act 125. 1990 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 125, § 1 at 231–32. Act 125
 stated that if the chief election officer or clerk determined
 that an objection to nomination papers may warrant the
 disqualification of a candidate, then the chief election officer
 or clerk "shall file a complaint in the circuit court for a
 determination of the objection; provided that such complaint
 shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court not later than
 4:30 p.m. on the seventh working day after the objection was
 filed." Id.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Act 125 also added new provisions to HRS § 12-8 with
 
language taken verbatim from HRS § 11-173.5. Act 125 states:
 
[ ] If the chief election officer or clerk in the
 
case of county offices files a complaint in the circuit
court, the circuit court clerk shall issue to the defendants
 named in the complaint a summons to appear before the court
 
not later that [sic] 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day after
 service thereof.
 
[ ] The circuit court shall hear the complaint in a
 
summary manner and at the hearing the court shall cause the
 evidence to be reduced to writing and shall not later than
 4:30 p.m. on the fourth day after the return give judgment
 fully stating all findings of fact and of law. . . .
 
Id. at 232 (emphasis added).9 These are the provisions at issue
 
in this case.
 
3. HRS §§ 12-8(g) and (h) procedures.
 
Upon the timely-filed challenge to a primary
 
candidate's nomination papers, the circuit court clerk "shall
 
issue to the defendants named in the complaint a summons to
 appear before the court not later than 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day
 after service thereof." H
AW.  REV.  STAT. § 12-8(g). "The summons
 
and complaint shall be served together." Haw. R. Civ. P. 4(d). 
Upon service of the complaint and summons, the circuit court will
 enter judgment not later than 4:30 p.m. on the fourth day after
 the return day of the summons. H
AW.  REV.  STAT. § 12-8(h). In
 
other words, the Legislature intended that the circuit court
 should have nine days after service of the complaint and summons,
 except as those days may be counted under HRS § 1-29 (2009) and
 Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 6(a), to hold a hearing on 
the complaint, cause the evidence to be reduced to writing, and
 enter judgment fully stating all findings of fact and of law.
 
9
 While H.B. No. 2207, the bill which became Act 125, was still in
committee, then-Lieutenant Governor Benjamin J. Cayetano presented testimony
to the House Committee on Judiciary on February 8, 1990. A Bill for an Act
 
Relating to Challenges to Candidate Nomination Papers: Hearing on HB 2207
 
Before the H. Comm. on Judiciary, 15th Leg. (Haw. Feb. 8, 1990) (testimony of
Benjamin J. Cayetano). Attached to his testimony are proposed amendments to
HRS § 12-8, which include the identical language found in HRS §§ 12-8(g) and
(h). Id. Summarizing the import of these amendments, Lt. Governor Cayetano
testified that after the chief election officer or clerk files a complaint in
circuit court, "[t]he court shall conduct a summary hearing with all evidence
reduced into writing and issue its judgment within a limited amount of time." 
Id. (emphasis added).
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4.	 Judgment must be filed not later than nine days
 
after service of the summons.
 
In general, "[w]here the language of a statute is plain 
and unambiguous that a specific time provision must be met, it is mandatory and not merely directory." Tataii v. Cronin, 119 
Hawai'i 337, 339, 198 P.3d 124, 126 (2008) (quoting Coon v. City 
& Cnty. of Honolulu, 98 Hawai' i 233, 255, 47 P.3d 348, 370 
(2002)) (internal quotation marks omitted). With respect to a similar statute providing that a complaint challenging election results "shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the supreme court not later than 4:30 p.m. on the twentieth day following the . . . election," the supreme court held that "the twenty-day provision is clear and must be given a mandatory reading." Id. 
The supreme court has also recognized, however, that "a 
statute specifying a time within which public officials are required to perform an act is directory unless . . . the nature of the act or the statutory language indicates that the time was intended to be a limitation." Malahoff v. Saito, 111 Hawai' i 
168, 192, 140 P.3d 401, 425 (2006) (State was not authorized to implement payroll lag following expiration of specific time schedule mandated by statute). Put another way, it is directory unless, among other things, "time is of the essence of the act required[.]" Perry v. Planning Comm'n of the Cnty. of Haw., 62 
Haw. 666, 676, 619 P.2d 95, 103 (1980). In evaluating whether a provision is to be accorded directory or mandatory effect, our objective is to ascertain the legislative intent. State v. 
Himuro, 70 Haw. 103, 105, 761 P.2d 1148, 1149 (1988) 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has articulated a three-prong 
test to determine when the word "shall" may be interpreted as directory: 
First, "shall" can be read in a non-mandatory sense when a
statute's purpose "confute[s] the probability of a
compulsory statutory design." Second, "shall" will not be
read as mandatory when "unjust consequences" result.
Finally, "the word 'shall' may be held to be merely
directory, when no advantage is lost, when no right is
destroyed, when no benefit is sacrificed, either to the
public or to the individual, by giving it that
construction."
 
16
    
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Leslie v. Bd. of Appeals of the Cnty. of Hawai' i, 109 Hawai' i 384, 
394, 126 P.3d 1071, 1081 (2006) (citations omitted) (quoting
 
Perry, 62 Haw. at 676–77, 619 P.2d at 102–03) (statute requiring
 that developer shall apply for a special management area use
 permit was mandatory).
 
i.	 The statute's purpose favors a compulsory
design.
 
"The legislative intent may be determined from a
 
consideration of the entire act, its nature, its object, and the
 
consequences that would result from construing it one way or the
 other." Tataii, 119 Hawai
'i at 339, 198 P.3d at 126 (quoting 
State v. Himuro, 70 Haw. at 105, 761 P.2d at 1149) (internal
 quotation marks omitted). The Circuit Court found that "the
 purpose of election laws determining the qualifications of a
 candidate as found in HRS Section 12-8 is to determine if a
 candidate is qualified to run for the given elected office[.]" 
Although correct in part, the Circuit Court's formulation is
 incomplete to the extent that it omits the temporal context: that
 the purpose is to timely determine the qualifications of the
 candidate for public office.
10 Primary elections, and the
 
election season in general, will not wait for legal challenges to
 be resolved.
11
 
10
 Nomination papers are deemed valid unless a timely objection is
made, as "all objections shall be filed in writing not later than 4:30 p.m. on
the thirtieth day or the next earliest working day prior to the primary orspecial election." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 12-8(a) (emphasis added).  Even if a 
timely objection is made and the county clerk believes that the objection
warrants disqualification, the county clerk "shall file a complaint in the
circuit court . . . not later than 4:30 p.m. on the seventh working day afterthe objection was filed." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 12-8(e) (emphasis added).  The 
Legislature's use of the word "shall," as it pertains to the filing of anobjection and the filing of a complaint, is mandatory and not directory — inother words, if these provisions are not complied with, an otherwiseunqualified candidate will not be disqualified under the procedures set forth
in HRS § 12-8. See Tataii, 119 Hawai' i at 338 n.2, 339, 198 P.3d at 125 n.2,
126 (with respect to a statute providing that a complaint challenging election
results "shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the supreme court notlater than 4:30 p.m. on the twentieth day following the . . . election," thesupreme court held that "the twenty-day provision is clear and must be given amandatory reading"). 
11
 The different time periods required for action under HRS § 12-8
suggest that the Legislature made deliberate choices that were not intended to
be suggestions. To hold otherwise would be to "confound the statutory
scheme." See Himuro, 70 Haw. at 105, 761 P.2d at 1150.
 
17
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
That the purpose of HRS § 12-8 is to permit prompt or
 
timely resolution of challenges to candidates' nomination papers,
 
is supported by the context in which primary elections occur: the
 short time frames involved in elections; the time needed for
 election officials to prepare the primary ballots; and the
 unfairness to a candidate associated with having his or her
 nomination challenged but not resolved for an extended period,
 including possibly through the primary election itself. A
 mandatory reading of the judgment-filing deadline in HRS § 12­8(h) appears most consistent with the legislative intent. In
 fact, it appears necessary in order to ensure timely resolution
 prior to the primary election.
12
 
ii.	 Reading "shall" as mandatory in HRS § 12-8(h)
does not impose unjust consequences.
 
The consequences of reading "shall" as mandatory in 
this case are not unjust. The situation is much like that in Himuro where the defendant faced sanctions for violating Hawai'i's implied consent law for refusing to submit to a blood 
or breath test. Before imposing sanctions, the law required that "[a] hearing to determine the truth and correctness of an affidavit submitted to a district judge shall be held within twenty days after the district judge has received the affidavit." 70 Haw. at 105, 761 P.2d at 1149. When the hearing was held on the twenty-first day after receipt of the affidavit, the district court dismissed the case. 
12
 A mandatory reading of "shall" in the instant case is consistent
with the legislative history of how language adopted verbatim from HRS § 11­
173.5 evolved in the context of contests for cause in primary and special
primary elections. See supra Section III.B.2 at 11–15. Compare Rose, 27 Haw.
at 598 (description of Municipal Act provisions), with 1925 Haw. Sess. Laws
 Act 226, § 1 at 272–73. Such differences presumably reflected the Rose
 
court's concern that contests for cause of primary elections presented a
unique challenge — namely, that a drawn out contest process would extend
beyond the date of the general election. See Rose, 27 Haw. at 600.
 
Furthermore, in 1970, the Legislature reduced the amount of time
that the circuit court had to enter judgment from eight days to four days
after the return day, indicating that the time for filing the judgment is of
the essence. See Legislative Reference Bureau, 1970 Digest and Index of Laws
Enacted, 1970 Reg. Sess. at 31. Compare H
AW. REV. STAT. § 13-64 (1968) (eight
days), with 1970 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 26, § 2 at 43–44 (four days). 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Noting that the purpose of requiring a prompt hearing 
under the implied consent law was not specified in the 
legislative history, the Hawai' i Supreme Court said that it 
nevertheless appeared clear 
that the legislature's object was to provide a procedure for
the prompt revocation of an arrested person's driver's
license upon refusal to submit to sobriety testing. The
 
license revocation procedure contributes to the overall goal
of preventing traffic accidents by removing intoxicated
drivers from the highways as expeditiously as possible.
 
Id. at 105–06, 761 P.2d at 1150 (emphasis added). The court
 
"acknowledge[d] that the consequences of a mandatory construction
 
are harsh to the state in the instant case, since the [defendant]
 will avoid the sanctions of the statute simply because the
 hearing was held one day late." Id. at 106, 761 P.2d at 1150. 
Nevertheless, the court affirmed.
 
Here, the consequences are no different than if the
 
original complaint was never filed or not filed on time. We keep
 in mind as well the fact that, in this case, counsel for the
 County Clerk conceded at oral argument that the County Clerk was
 responsible for the court clerk's issuance of the incorrect form
 of summons. Although perhaps harsh, we do not find the
 consequence of a mandatory reading of "shall" under the
 circumstances to be unjust.
 
iii. Advantage would be lost and benefit would be
sacrificed if "shall" was read as directory.
 
Because of the short time frames involved in elections,
 
the time needed for election officials to prepare the primary
 ballots, and the unfairness to a candidate associated with having
 his or her nomination challenged but not resolved for an extended
 period of time, candidates would be disadvantaged by a process
 that permitted an open-ended challenge to their qualifications.
 As such, advantage would be lost and benefit would be sacrificed
 if "shall" is read as directory in HRS § 12-8(h).
 
Extended legal challenges can adversely affect
 
campaigns and the tenor of the election in general. In this
 case, for instance, even though David's name appeared on the
 ballot and, therefore, she did not suffer deprivation of the
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ultimate right that she sought to vindicate (to be permitted to
 
run for office from Council District 6), the specter of the
 County Clerk's complaint charging David as ineligible to run for
 office hung over her campaign until the election.
 
Based on these considerations, we hold that it was the
 
Legislature's intent that time was to be a limitation and that
 the provisions requiring that judgment be issued within nine days
 of the summons being served are mandatory rather than directory.
 
5. Judgment was entered too late.
 
The Circuit Court failed to enter judgment within nine
 
days after the service of the Complaint. Although the County
 Clerk did not file proof of service, David's RASC indicates that
 David accepted service on August 5, 2010. HRS § 12-8(g)required
 the service of a summons to appear before the court not later
 than 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day after service of the complaint
 and summons — that is by August 10, 2010. As the Circuit Court
 found, the circuit court clerk did not issue the summons required
 by HRS § 12-8(g), but instead called upon David to serve an
 answer to the Complaint within twenty days after service of the
 summons. The mandatory nature of the nine-day requirement is not
 altered, however, just because the substance of the summons
 actually issued failed to comply with HRS § 12-8(g), as this
 would defeat the Legislature's intent. 
HRS § 12-8(h) required that the Circuit Court hold a
 
hearing and enter judgment stating all findings of fact and of
 law not later than 4:30 p.m. four days after August 10, 2010,
 which was August 16, 2010. See Haw. R. Civ. P. 6(a). A hearing
 
was not held, however, until September 9, 2010. Most important,
 the Final Judgment was not entered until September 20, 2010, more
 than a month after the last day it should have been entered under
 a mandatory reading of the statute and two days after the primary
 election.
 
The application of a mandatory deadline does not lead
 
to unjust consequences in this case. The record does not reveal
 that David utilized delaying tactics, or that there were any
 other extraordinary circumstances, besides the improper form of
 
20
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the summons, that prevented the case from being decided by the
 
statutory deadline.
 
Section 12-8, when read as a whole, states that a
 
candidate's nomination papers "shall be deemed valid" unless the
 candidate is disqualified pursuant to the procedures set forth in
 the statute. See H
AW. REV. STAT. § 12-8(a).  The failure to enter
 
judgment within the statutory time period necessitates our
 vacating the Final Judgment and the dismissal of the Complaint.
 
Because we hold that the Final Judgment is void, we
 
express no opinion on the constitutionality of Section 3-3's
 ninety-day-registered-voter requirement.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
The September 20, 2010 and the September 23, 2010 Final
 
Judgments, entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, are
 
hereby vacated and the case is remanded with instructions to
 dismiss the Complaint.
 
Michael J. Udovic
 
(William V. Brilhante, Jr.
and Brooks L. Bancroft,
with him on the briefs)
for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee
 
Michael J. Matsukawa
 
for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant
 
21
 