NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000503
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AMBER ONISHI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-1031)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(
By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Amber Onishi (Onishi) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence entered on
 
June 14, 2016 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1
 
After a jury trial, Onishi was found guilty of Assault
 
Against a Law Enforcement Officer in the Second Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-712.6(1) 
(2014).
2
 
On appeal, Onishi contends that the jury instruction on
 
self-induced intoxication was erroneous because it was
 "confusing" and conveyed a different meaning than that contained
 in the statute. Onishi further contends that the Circuit Court
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-712.6(1) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault against a law
enforcement officer in the second degree if the person
recklessly causes bodily injury to a law enforcement officer
who is engaged in the performance of duty.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"erred in failing to clarify or rephrase the language as the jury
 
so requested via Communication."
 
After reviewing the record on appeal, the relevant
 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues 
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve
 Onishi's points on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
Onishi argues that the Circuit Court erred when it used
 
the following language to instruct the jury on self-induced
 intoxication:
 
Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant may
not be used to negative the state of mind sufficient to
establish an element of the offense. However, evidence of
self-induced intoxication of the defendant may be used to
prove or negative conduct or to prove state of mind
sufficient to establish an element of an offense.
 
The language found in HRS ยง 702-230(2) (2014) provides:
 
Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant is
 admissible to prove or negative conduct or to prove state of
mind sufficient to establish an element of an offense. 
Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant is
 not admissible to negative the state of mind sufficient to
establish an element of the offense.
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 30 
provides the requirements for "Instructions to the Jury" in penal
 
proceedings. "Under HRPP Rule 30, the crux of the court's
 instructions is that they 'afford to the jury an adequate and
 understandable charge.'" 
State v. Toro , 77 Hawai' i 340, 348, 884 
P.2d 403, 411 (App. 1994) (citing HRPP Rule 30 (d)3). Thus, the 
3 HRPP Rule 30(d) provides:
 
Instruction to the Jury
 (d) Court's Instruction. The court may revise the language
of any or all of the requested instructions which are
approved by the court in whole or in part pursuant to
subdivision (b) of this rule and of any or all of the
requested instructions to which no objection is made, and
may combine such instructions, with or without any
additional instructions which the court shall deem
 appropriate, in such manner as the court believes will
eliminate repetition and will afford to the jury an adequate
and understandable charge. If no written requests for
instructions are filed the court shall prepare its own
instructions. Any revision made and any instructions
prepared by the court pursuant to the foregoing provisions
shall be reduced by the court to writing, and counsel shall
be entitled to be heard thereon. The court shall inform
 counsel of its proposed action with respect to any such
revision made or instructions prepared by the court, and any
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"trial court is not required to instruct the jury in the exact 
words of the applicable statute but to present the jury with an understandable instruction that aids the jury in applying that law to the facts of the case." State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 
330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 645, 586 P.2d 250, 263 (1978)). 
Hawai'i Pattern Jury Instructions (HAWJIC) provides 
jury instructions the court may use. The HAWJIC "is a product of the cooperative effort of judges and attorneys to encompass and to standardize rules of law in jury instructions, and is widely used by the circuit courts." Toro, at 348, 884 P.2d at 411. 
"[T]he court [is] not required to give the criminal pattern instructions adopted by the Hawai' i Supreme Court's standing 
committee on pattern criminal jury instructions, but [it has] the discretion under HRPP Rule 30 to give such instructions as it believe[s] would be adequate and understandable to the jury." Id. Thus, although HAWJIC is not binding, it is instructive, and 
the court may look to it to craft its instructions. State v. 
Hatori, 92 Hawai' i 217, 221 n.5, 990 P.2d 115, 119 n.5 
(App. 1999). Relevant to the instruction at issue here, HAWJIC 7.04 provides:
 
7.04 INTOXICATION
 
Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant
 
may not be used to negative the state of mind sufficient to
establish an element of the offense. However, evidence of
self-induced intoxication of the defendant may be used to
prove or negative conduct or to prove state of mind
sufficient to establish an element of an offense.
 
Hawaii Criminal Jury Instructions (2005),
 
https://perma.cc/CA4T-B63C (last accessed June 21, 2018). 
Although the instruction in the present case differs
 
slightly from the statute, the language in the instruction
 conveys the law as provided in the statute, and thus presented
 
3(...continued)
changes thereon made by the court shall be reduced to
writing and submitted to counsel prior to their arguments to
the jury. 
Instructions settled as above set forth shall be
 
read to the jury.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the jury with an adequate and understandable instruction of the
 
law. This is supported by the fact that the HAWJIC instruction
 is identical to the instruction in this case. Therefore, the
 instruction was not in error.
 
Because the instruction was not in error, the Circuit
 
Court's response to the jury's request for clarification of the
 instruction referring the jury back to this instruction was also
 not in error.
4
 
Based on the foregoing, the June 14, 2016 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 25, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
4
 Our resolution of this issue makes it unnecessary to address
Onishi's other arguments.
 
4
 