NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000881
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE MATTER OF THE PROTECTIVE ARRANGEMENT
OF 
FLORENCE PUANA, Respondent-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(C. NO. 14-1-0135)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Katherine Kealoha ( Kealoha)
appeals from the Judgment (Judgment ) dismissing Kealoha's
"Petition for Protective Arrangement and for Appointment of
Conservator," ( Petition) filed on November 25, 2016 by the
Probate Court of the First Circuit ( Probate Court).1 
Kealoha's Petition sought to establish a protective
arrangement and to appoint a conservator under Hawaii Revised
Statutes ( HRS) § 560:5-401(2) (Supp. 2017) for Kealoha's
grandmother, Respondent-Appellee Florence Puana ( Puana), who at
that time was ninety-five years old, because it was alleged Puana
was impaired and unable to effectively manage her own affairs.
Puana objected to the appointment of a conservator, and a Kokua
1The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kanawai2 was appointed by the Probate Court.  Following the
report of the Kokua Kanawai, the Probate Court entered its
2Rule 113 of the Hawai #i Probate Rules titled "Role and Authority
of Kokua Kanawai" provides, in relevant part, that:
 
[a] Kokua Kanawai appointed in a protective
proceeding shall serve as and shall be limited to
serving as an extension of the court to conduct an
independent review of the situation, to interview the
respondent and the person seeking to be appointed
conservator or guardian, and to report its findings
and recommendations to the court.  In conservatorship
proceedings, the Kokua Kanawai's duties shall include
those items listed in Hawai #i Revised Statutes Section
560:5-406(c) and (d)[.]
Additionally, HRS § 560:5-406(c) and (d) (2006 and Supp. 2017) provide:
§560:5-406 Original petition; preliminaries to hearing.
. . . 
(c) Unless otherwise ordered by the court for
good cause shown, the kokua kanawai shall interview
the respondent in person and, to the extent that the
respondent is able to understand:
(1) Explain to the respondent the substance of
the petition and the nature, purpose, and effect
of the proceeding;
(2) If the appointment of a conservator is
requested, inform the respondent of the general
powers and duties of a conservator and determine
the respondent's views regarding the proposed
conservator, the proposed conservator's powers
and duties, and the scope and duration of the
proposed conservatorship;
(3) Inform the respondent of the respondent's
rights, including the right to employ or request
that the court appoint a lawyer to consult with
a lawyer at the respondent's own expense; and
(4) Inform the respondent that all costs and
expenses of the proceeding, including
respondent's attorney's fees, will be paid from
the respondent's estate unless the court
otherwise directs.
(d) In addition to the duties imposed by
subsection (c), the kokua kanawai shall:
(1) Interview the petitioner and the proposed 
conservator, if any; and
(2) Make any other investigation the court
directs.  
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Judgment denying Kealoha's Petition and granting Puana an award
of attorneys' fees and costs.  
Kealoha now asserts two points of error.  In her first
point of error, Kealoha argues the Probate Court erred in denying
her request for the appointment of a conservator because the
Probate Court "applied 'incapacitated' instead of 'impaired'
sufficient to undermine ability to manage financial affairs" as
the standard to appoint a conservator.  In her second point of
error, Kealoha seeks plain error review of the Probate Court's
award of attorneys' fees and costs to Puana. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Kealoha's
points of error as follows:
(1)  The Probate Court did not err in denying Kealoha's
Petition to appoint a conservator because there is no evidence
that the Probate Court mistakenly considered whether Puana was
"incapacitated" rather than "impaired," as required by HRS
§ 560:5-401(2) for the appointment of a conservator, and the
Probate Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the
Petition. 
HRS § 560:5-401 provides, in relevant part, that:
§560:5-401 Protective Proceeding.   Upon petition and
after notice and hearing, the court may appoint a limited or
unlimited conservator or make any other protective order
provided in this part in relation to the estate and affairs
of:
. . . 
(2) Any individual, including a minor, if the
court determines that, for reasons other
than age:
(A) By clear and convincing evidence, the       
    individual is unable to manage property and 
    business affairs effectively because of an  
    impairment in the ability to receive and    
    evaluate information or to make or          
    communicate decisions, even with the use of 
    appropriate and reasonably available        
    technological assistance or because of       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
    another physical, mental, or health          
 impairment, or because the individual is     
 missing, detained, or unable to return to    
 the United States; and   
   
   
(B) By a preponderance of evidence, the         
    individual has property that will be wasted 
    or dissipated unless management is provided 
    or money is needed for the support, care,   
    education, health, and welfare of the       
    individual or of individuals who are        
    entitled to the individual's support and    
    that protection is necessary or desirable   
    to obtain or provide money. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, before the Probate Court could appoint a
conservator, it had to first be established "[b]y clear and
convicting evidence" that Puana is "unable to manage property and
business affairs effectively because of an impairment in the
ability to receive and evaluate information or to make or
communicate decisions[.]"  HRS § 560:5-401(2)(A).  "The clear and
convincing evidence standard requires that degree of proof which
will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or
conviction as to the allegations sought to be established, and
requires the existence of a fact be highly probable." Kekona v.
Bornemann, 135 Hawai #i 254, 263, 349 P.3d 361, 370 (2015)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
Kealoha's claim that the Probate Court applied the
wrong standard in denying the appointment of a conservator under
HRS § 560:5-401(2)(A) is unsupported by the record.  Kealoha's
only support for this proposition is that the Probate Court was
provided with an assessment by a specialist in geriatric
medicine, Dr. Patricia Blanchette ( Dr. Blanchette's Assessment)
that concluded Puana was not an "incapacitated person" and,
therefore, the Probate Court must have erred by failing to
determine whether Puana had an impairment under HRS § 560:5-
401(2)(A).  Neither the Probate Court's orders nor its Judgment
indicate the Probate Court misunderstood the law, as the orders
and Judgment only state that the court is denying the request for
the appointment of a conservator.  We find no indication in the
record that the Probate Court applied the wrong standard in
denying the Petition.  
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
It appears that Kealoha's actual contention is that the
Probate Court abused its discretion in finding that there was no
clear and convincing evidence to support the appointment of a
conservator under HRS § 560:5-401(2)(A).  The only evidence
before the Probate Court regarding Puana's alleged impairment
consisted of statements excerpted by Kealoha from Puana's
deposition in collateral litigation that Kealoha contends shows
that Puana was confused regarding her financial affairs and taken
advantage of by her son.  From this evidence alone Kealoha
asserted that Puana was "obviously impaired."  The Probate Court
was free to determine the appropriate weight to give Kealoha's
interpretation of Puana's mental state from the deposition,
considering that Kealoha is both a layperson with respect to such
matters and the context out of which the Petition arose, i.e.,
litigation between the parties.  See In re Estate of Herbert , 90
Hawai#i 443, 454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999) (noting that in cases of
conflicting evidence, the credibility of witnesses and the weight
given to their testimony are within the province of the fact-
finder and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal).  The
Kokua Kanawai, a disinterested party, also reviewed the
deposition transcript and found that although Puana may have been
confused about certain details and dates, the deposition alone
was not sufficient to indicate obvious cognitive impairment. 
The remaining evidence before the Probate Court
contradicts or, at the very least, does not support Kealoha's
claim that Puana is impaired.  Puana's medical records revealed
no neurological impairment and indicated that her neuromental
status was intact.  In a cognitive assessment test taken by Puana
on December 4, 2014, Puana's score indicated a normal
performance.  Dr. Blanchette's Assessment, the result of an
independent medical evaluation, was conducted to evaluate Puana
"with regard to her capacity to manage her personal and financial
affairs."  The assessment noted that Puana's ability to answer
all of Dr. Blanchette's questions, including detailed questions
regarding names, dates, medical conditions, and medications, was
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"impressive."  Puana was also able to discuss in detail her
financial situation, and reasons for actions taken with respect
to her trust.  Dr. Blanchette's Assessment concluded that Puana's
mental status is "normal." 
Kealoha correctly points out that Dr. Blanchette's
Assessment concluded that Puana does not meet the definition of
an "incapacitated person" as defined in HRS § 560:5-102 (2006)3
and that this is not the required finding for the appointment of
a conservator by the court under HRS § 560:5-401.4  The
appointment of a conservator requires a judicial finding that
"the individual is unable to manage property and business affairs
effectively because of an impairment in the ability to receive
and evaluate information or to make or communicate decisions[.]" 
HRS § 560:5-401(2)(A).  Dr. Blanchette's Assessment, however,
found that Puana's mental status was "normal" with respect to the
purpose of the assessment to ascertain Puana's "capacity to
manage her personal and financial affairs."  The burden is on
Kealoha to show by clear and convincing evidence that Puana
requires the appointment of a conservator.  Dr. Blanchette's
Assessment does not support Kealoha's allegation that Puana is
impaired under HRS § 560:5-401(2).
There is no substantial evidence in the record, much
less clear and convincing evidence, that Puana suffers from any
impairment such that she is unable to effectively manage her
3HRS § 560:5-102 (2006) defines "incapacitated person" as:
an individual who, for reasons other than being a minor, is
unable to receive and evaluate information or make or
communicate decisions to such an extent that the individual
lacks the ability to meet essential requirements for
physical health, safety, or self-care, even with appropriate
and reasonably available technological assistance.
4Kealoha's argument on appeal that Dr. Blanchette failed to
adequately address the allegations regarding Puana's impairment because she
made a determination regarding whether Puana was an "incapacitated person" is
perplexing.  Kealoha's Petition explicitly sought a finding from the Probate
Court that Puana "is an incapacitated person as defined in Haw. Rev. Stat.
§ 560:5-102 . . . ."  Although Dr. Blanchette's Assessment did not make a
specific finding with respect to impairment, it was clearly relevant evidence
that the Probate Court could consider in ruling on whether grounds existed for
appointing a conservator.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
property or business affairs.  There is no substantial support in
the record to suggest that Puana is not able to receive and
evaluate information and to communicate her decisions.  To the
contrary, the evidence in the record supports the opposite
finding that Puana is not impaired and no basis existed for the
Probate Court to order the appointment of a conservator.  The
Probate Court did not abuse its discretion in so finding.  Thus,
we conclude Kealoha's first point of error lacks merit.
(2) Regarding Kealoha's second point of error, we
decline to apply plain error review to the Probate Court's award
of attorneys' fees and costs in favor of Puana.  Kealoha admits
this award was not challenged below with the Probate Court, but
insists that justice requires our review for plain error.
In civil cases, "the appellate court's discretion to
address plain error is always to be exercised sparingly."  Okada
Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Board of Water Supply, 97 Hawai #i 450, 458,
40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002).  This court will consider a claim of plain
error only when "justice so requires."  Alvarez Family Trust v.
Assoc. of Apartment Owners of Kaanapali Alii, 121 Hawai #i 474,
490, 221 P.3d 452, 468 (2009).  
We have taken three factors into account in deciding
whether our discretionary power to notice plain error
ought to be exercised in civil cases: (1) whether
consideration of the issue not raised at trial
requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution
will affect the integrity of the trial court's
findings of fact; and (3) whether the issue is of
great public import.
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
While the first two factors are arguably met in this
case, as deciding whether the Probate Court had the power to
award attorneys' fees requires no additional facts and the issue
is independent from the other issues in the case, the third
factor is not satisfied.  The issue here is not one of "great
public import."  In civil cases, a matter is of "great public
import" "only when such issue affects the public interest." Id.
at 491, 221 P.3d at 469.  See Montalvo v. Lapez , 77 Hawai #i 282,
291, 884 P.2d 345, 354 (1994) (preserving the integrity of the
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
jury system with proper jury instruction on essential element in
claims against city); Fujioka v. Kam , 55 Haw. 7, 9, 514 P.2d 568,
570 (1973) (the constitutionality of a statute); Office of
Hawaiian Affairs v. State, 96 Hawai #i 388, 396 n.12, 31 P.3d 901,
909 n.12 (2001) (whether federal law bars the state from using
money derived from its airport system to pay the Office of
Hawaiian Affairs).  We cannot say that requiring Kealoha to pay
Puana's attorneys' fees is a matter of great public import. 
Based on the foregoing, we deny plain error review.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment
dismissing Kealoha's Petition for Protective Arrangement and for
Appointment of Conservator entered on November 25, 2016, by the
Probate Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, June 12, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Kevin P.H. Sumida, 
Anthony L. Wong, 
Lance S. Au, 
for Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge
Gerald Kurashima,
for Respondent-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
8