NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000904 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE MEDIATION BETWEEN 
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO, 
Union-Appellee,
and 
C
ITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICES, REFUSE DIVISION (on bulky item refuse collection)
(KA-13-09)(2013-024), Employer-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1SP181000206) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Employer-Appellant City and County of Honolulu, 
Department of Environmental Services, Refuse Division (City
 or 
Employer), appeals from the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit on October 22, 2018.  For the reasons 
explained below, we affirm the Judgment. 1
BACKGROUND 
Union-Appellee United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 
646, AFL-CIO (UPW or Union) initiated three class grievances 
against the City. UPW and the City agreed to have one person 
1 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
serve as arbitrator for all three cases. UPW served a discovery 
request upon the City. The City did not respond. UPW filed a motion to compel and for sanctions. The arbitrator granted the motion and imposed sanctions against the City. The April 3, 2018 "Order Granting Motion to Compel and for Sanctions" provided, in 
relevant part: 
I. Employer shall pay to the union sanctions in the
amount of $4,188.48 for continuing and repeated violations
of Section 15.09 and the arbitrator's prior cease and desistorder. . . . Payment of the sanctions by employer to theunion in the amount of $4,188.48 shall be made not laterthan 30 days from the date of this order. 
J. Employer is hereby ordered to provide prompt,
full, and complete responses to the union's request forinformation dated February 9, 2018 by not later than 7 daysfrom the date of this order, and shall cease and desist fromcontinuing to violate Section 15.09 of the unit 1 agreement. 
K. In the event employer fails to comply with
paragraphs I and J of this decision and order, employershall pay to the union a daily assessment to be determinedby the Arbitrator. If there is non-compliance with theterms and conditions of this order, additional attorney'sfees incurred by the union to enforce compliance with thisdecision may be ordered. 
(citations omitted). 
The City did not comply with the Order Granting Motion 
to Compel. UPW moved for entry of a partial final award. The 
arbitrator granted the motion and issued a "Partial Final Arbitration Decision and Award" (Partial Final Award) on June 7, 
2018. The Partial Final Award provided: 
1. Employer shall pay to the Union daily
assessments of $300.00 per day from April 10, 2018 to May
21, 2018 for a total of $12,300[.] The assessments shall be paid by the Employer to the Union not later than forty-five(45) days from the date of this decision and award. In the event Employer fails to make timely payment of the dailyassessments, Employer shall pay interest on the amounts dueand owing at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum to thedate payment of the full amount due and owing is actuallymade to the Union. 
2. Employer shall pay to the Union $4,188.48 for
attorney 's fees which were due and owing on and after May3, 2018 under the April 3, 2018 order granting the motion tocompel and for sanctions together with interest assessed atten percent (10%) per annum from May 3, 2018 to the datepayment is actually made by Employer to the Union. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. Employer shall pay to the Union additional
attorney's fees in the amount of $15,078.53 for attorney's
fees and costs in the amount of $562.47 to enforce compliance with the remedial terms of the April 3, 2018order granting the motion to compel and for sanctions. The additional reasonable attorney's fees and costs shall bepaid by the Employer to the Union not later than forty-five(45) days from the date of this decision and award. In the event Employer fails to make timely payment of theadditional costs and reasonable attorney's fees, Employershall pay interest on the amounts due and owing at the rateof ten percent (10%) per annum to the date payment of thefull amount due and owing is actually made to the Union. 
UPW then initiated a special proceeding in circuit 
court to confirm the Partial Final Award. The City did not move 
to vacate the Partial Final Award. The record does not contain a memorandum in opposition filed by the City.  The circuit court 
entered an order granting UPW's motion and the Judgment. This appeal by the City followed. 2
POINT OF ERROR 
The City raises a single, narrow point of error: 
"The circuit court erred as a matter of law in 
granting UPW's Motion to Confirm in concludingthat the Partial Final Award was subject toconfirmation under Haw. Rev. Stat. § 658A-22." 
2 The City filed a motion to supplement the record on appeal,
contending its memorandum in opposition to UPW's motion was filed using anincorrect case number. We denied the motion without prejudice because theCity did not demonstrate that the document was presented to or considered bythe circuit court, citing State v. Pacquing, 129 Hawai #i 172, 192, 297 P.3d
188, 208 (2013) ("supplementing the record on appeal with evidence notpresented to the trial court is improper under HRAP [Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure] Rule l0(e)"). 
The City filed a renewed motion to supplement the record on
appeal, stating that the circuit court had granted the City's ex parte motionto re-file the memorandum under the correct case number, but for some reason"the refiling of the City's opposition memorandum did not make it to thecorrect S.P. Number, as the Record on Appeal does not contain the document[.]"UPW opposed the renewed motion. We denied the motion without prejudice to theCity seeking relief from the circuit court under HRAP Rule 10(e)(1) and(2)(B), because "the circuit court in the underlying case is better situatedto determine whether it was presented with or considered the [City'smemorandum in opposition], and whether the documents were omitted from therecord on appeal by error or accident." The circuit court clerk did not thereafter file a supplemental record on appeal. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The City did not move to vacate the Partial Final Award 
and the record contains no memorandum in opposition to UPW's 
motion to confirm. The only argument the City could not have waived is that the circuit court lacked jurisdiction under Chapter 658A of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) to confirm the 
Partial Final Award. See Mathewson v. Aloha Airlines, Inc., 82 
Hawai# i 57, 69, 919 P.2d 969, 981 (1996) ("The lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction can never be waived by any party at any 
time.") (cleaned up). 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
"Whether a circuit court possesses subject matter 
jurisdiction over a dispute relating to arbitration . . . is a question of law reviewable de novo." Mathewson, 82 Hawai# i at 
69, 919 P.2d at 981 (citations omitted). 
Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of
law to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard.
Our statutory construction is guided by the following wellestablished principles: our foremost obligation is toascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from thelanguage contained in the statute itself. And we must read statutory language in the context of the entire statute andconstrue it in a manner consistent with its purpose. 
United Public Workers, AFSCME, Loc. 646 v. City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 124 Hawai# i 367, 369, 244 P.3d 604, 606 (App. 2010) 
(reformatted) (the Sick Leave Credit case). 
DISCUSSION 
HRS § 658A-22 (2016) provides: 
Confirmation of award . After a party to an arbitration
proceeding receives notice of an award, the party may make a
motion to the court for an order confirming the award atwhich time the court shall issue a confirming order unlessthe award is modified or corrected pursuant to section658A-20 or 658A-24 or is vacated pursuant to section658A-23. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The City contends that HRS § 658A-22 did not authorize 
confirmation of the Partial Final Award because the Partial Final 
Award "did not address any of the substantive merits of the underlying labor grievance" and HRS § 658A-22 "contemplates a final decision on the merits, not an interim, interlocutory decision, award, or order." 
The City relies upon Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & 
Wright, 76 Hawai# i 115, 869 P.2d 1334 (1994). Jenkins was an 
appeal from a civil lawsuit. The circuit court granted motions to dismiss filed by six of the seven defendants. The plaintiff appealed. The six defendants contested appellate jurisdiction because the orders granting the motions to dismiss did not resolve the plaintiff's claim against the seventh defendant, and no separate judgment had been entered as required by Rule 58 of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP). The supreme court 
held: 
(1) An appeal may be taken from circuit court orders
resolving claims against parties only after the orders havebeen reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been enteredin favor of and against the appropriate parties pursuant toHRCP 58; (2) if a judgment purports to be the final judgmentin a case involving multiple claims or multiple parties, thejudgment (a) must specifically identify the party or partiesfor and against whom the judgment is entered, and (b) must(i) identify the claims for which it is entered, and(ii) dismiss any claims not specifically identified; (3) ifthe judgment resolves fewer than all claims against allparties, or reserves any claim for later action by thecourt, an appeal may be taken only if the judgment containsthe language necessary for certification under HRCP 54(b);and (4) an appeal from any judgment will be dismissed as
premature if the judgment does not, on its face,  either 
resolve all claims against all parties or contain the
finding necessary for certification under HRCP 54(b). 
Id. at 119, 869 P.2d at 1338. Jenkins is inapposite because HRCP 
Rules 54(b) and 58 do not apply to "[a]pplications to a circuit 
court under [HRS] chapter 658A, relating to arbitration, and proceedings thereon prior to judgment[.]" HRCP Rule 81(a)(5). 
The City also relies upon the Sick Leave Credit case. 
That case involved two class-action labor grievances. The union and employer agreed to arbitrate the grievances pursuant to 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provisions in the parties' collective bargaining agreements. The 
circuit court appointed an arbitrator. At some point, the City contested the arbitrability of the grievances. The arbitrator held a hearing, then issued an "Arbitrator's Determination on the Issue of Arbitrability[.]" The arbitrator decided "that the class grievance is arbitrable on its merits and this matter shall proceed to further arbitration for a determination on the merits of the class grievance." Id. at 368, 244 P.3d at 605. The union 
moved to confirm the arbitrator's decision. The circuit court granted the motion and entered a judgment. The City appealed. We held that the legislature "intended [the term] 'award' as used in HRS § 658A–28(a)[
3] to mean a final arbitration award and not 
merely any arbitration intermediate decision." Id. at 370, 244 
P.3d at 607 (cleaned up) (bold italics added). Because the arbitrator's decision regarding arbitrability was not an "award" under HRS § 658A–28(a), we dismissed the appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction. We did not decide whether the circuit court had the authority under HRS § 658A–22 to "issue a confirming order" on the arbitrator's determination of arbitrability. 
In this case, the arbitrator was authorized to issue 
the Order Granting Motion to Compel. HRS § 658A-17 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Witnesses; subpoenas; depositions; discovery . 
. . . . 
(c) An arbitrator may permit such discovery as the
arbitrator decides is appropriate in the circumstances,
taking into account the needs of the parties to thearbitration proceeding and other affected persons and the 
3 HRS § 658A-28 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Appeals . (a) An appeal may be taken from: 
. . . . 
(3) An order confirming or denying confirmation of
an award[.] 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
desirability of making the proceeding fair, expeditious, and
cost effective. 
(d) If an arbitrator permits discovery under
subsection (c), the arbitrator may order a party to thearbitration proceeding to comply with the arbitrator'sdiscovery-related orders, issue subpoenas for the attendanceof a witness and for the production of records and otherevidence at a discovery proceeding, and take action againsta noncomplying party to the extent a court could if the 
controversy were the subject of a civil action in thisState . 
(bold italics added). HRCP Rule 37(b) authorizes a court to 
impose sanctions, including an award of attorneys' fees, against a party that fails to comply with a discovery order. 
After the City failed to comply with the Order Granting 
Motion to Compel, UPW moved for summary disposition of the issue under HRS § 658A-15(b)(2). HRS § 658A-15 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
(b) An arbitrator may decide a request for summary
disposition of a claim or particular issue : 
. . . . 
(2) Upon request of one party to the arbitration
proceeding if that party gives notice to allother parties to the proceeding, and the otherparties have a reasonable opportunity torespond. 
(bold italics added). 
In addition, HRS § 658A-18 (2016) provides in relevant 
part: 
Judicial enforcement of pre-award ruling by arbitrator . If 
an arbitrator makes a pre-award ruling in favor of a partyto the arbitration proceeding, the party may request the
arbitrator to incorporate the ruling into an award undersection 658A-19 . A prevailing party may make a motion to
the court for an expedited order to confirm the award undersection 658A-22, in which case the court shall summarilydecide the motion. The court shall issue an order to confirm the award unless the court vacates, modifies, orcorrects the award[.] 
(bold italics added). The Order Granting Motion to Compel was a 
pre-award ruling by the arbitrator. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 The City argues that HRS § 658A-18 only allows the 
incorporation of a pre-award ruling into a final award. But the 
plain language of HRS § 658A-18 refers to the arbitrator 
incorporating a pre-award ruling into "an" award, not "the" award or "the final" award. That is also what HRS Chapter 658A, read as a whole, comprehends. HRS § 658A-19 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Award.  (a) An arbitrator shall make a record of an award . 
The record shall be signed or otherwise authenticated by any
arbitrator who concurs with the award. The arbitrator or the arbitration organization shall give notice of the award,including a copy of the award, to each party to thearbitration proceeding. 
(bold italics added). A "record" is "information that is 
inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form." HRS § 658A-1 (2016). The Partial Final Award was a record signed by the arbitrator. Nothing in HRS Chapter 658A limits the arbitrator to issuing one "final" award. 
The Partial Final Award was an interim award. HRS 
§ 658A-8 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Provisional remedies . 
. . . . 
(b) After an arbitrator is appointed and is
authorized and able to act: 
(1) The arbitrator may issue such orders for
provisional remedies, including interim awards ,
as the arbitrator finds necessary to protect theeffectiveness of the arbitration proceeding andto promote the fair and expeditious resolutionof the controversy, to the same extent and under 
the same conditions as if the controversy werethe subject of a civil action[.] 
(bold italics added). HRS § 658A-18 authorized UPW to "make a 
motion to the [circuit] court for an expedited order to confirm the [interim] award under section 658A-22[.]" That is what UPW did below. The circuit court had jurisdiction to enter the order granting UPW's motion to confirm the Partial Final Award. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Having confirmed the Partial Final Award, the circuit 
court also had jurisdiction to enter the Judgment. HRS § 658A-25 
(2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Judgment on award; attorney's fees and litigation expenses . 
(a) Upon granting an order confirming . . . an award, the
court shall enter a judgment in conformity therewith. The judgment may be recorded, docketed, and enforced as anyother judgment in a civil action. 
CONCLUSION 
The Order Granting Motion to Compel was a pre-award 
ruling authorized by HRS § 658A-17. UPW moved for it to be 
incorporated into an "award" as allowed by HRS §§ 658A-18 and -19. The arbitrator granted the motion and issued the Partial 
Final Award, which was an interim award, under HRS § 658A-8. UPW then utilized HRS §§ 658A-18 and -25 to move the circuit court for an expedited order to confirm the Partial Final Award under HRS § 658A-22. The circuit court had jurisdiction to confirm the Partial Final Award and to enter the Judgment. For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the circuit court on October 22, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 12, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
9 Ernest H. Nomura, Deputy Corporation Counsel,for Employer-Appellant. 
Herbert R. Takahashi,Rebecca L. Covert, for Union-Appellee. 