NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000499 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
EDMUND M. ABORDO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
PATRICIA (AKA) PATTI ANN ICHIDA, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 18-1-0392) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Edmund M. Abordo (Abordo) appeals 
pro se from the June 29, 2018 Final Judgment, which was entered 
in favor of Defendant-Appellee Patricia (aka) Patti Ann Ichida (
Ichida) and against Abordo, by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (Circuit Court).  Abordo also challenges the Circuit 
Court's June 29, 2018 Order Granting [Ichida's] Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's Complaint filed on March 12, 2018 (filed 4/2/2018) and Dismissing Plaintiff's Claims with Prejudice (Dismissal 
Order). 1
Abordo raises four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court: (1) disregarded precedent in 
1 The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not construing his case liberally and allowing him to present 
evidence; (2) abused its discretion in shifting the burden of proof to Abordo, but not allowing him to present evidence in support of his claims; (3) did not view the complaint in light of the laws that support his standing to sue; and (4) abused its discretion in dismissing the complaint and applied the wrong statute of limitations. Abordo also argues, inter alia, that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing his claims for failure to first file his case with the Civil Rights Commission (Commission). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Abordo's points of error as follows: 
A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo. Wright v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 111
Hawai #i 401, 406-07, 142 P.3d 265, 270-71 (2006). 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure
to state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt thatthe plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support ofhis or her claim that would entitle him or her to relief. [The appellate court] must therefore view aplaintiff's complaint in a light most favorable to himor her in order to determine whether the allegationscontained therein could warrant relief under anyalternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing [a]circuit court's order dismissing [a] complaint . . .[the appellate court's] consideration is strictlylimited to the allegations of the complaint, and [theappellate court] must deem those allegations to betrue. 
In re Estate of Rogers, 103 Hawai #i 275, 280-81, 81 P.3d
1190, 1195-96 (2003) (citations omitted) (some brackets andellipsis in original) (some brackets added). 
Cnty. of Kaua# i v. Baptiste, 115 Hawai# i  15, 24, 165 P.3d 916, 925 
(2007), overruled on other grounds by Tax Found. of Hawai# i v. 
State, SCAP-16-0000462, slip op. (Haw. Mar. 21, 2019). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The complaint, which is entitled "Civil/Criminal 
Complaint for Violations under HRS § 846[E]-3(i)," alleges that 
Abordo has a criminal conviction for one or more sexual offenses, which requires that he register as a "covered offender" pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 846E-2 (2014). Viewed 
liberally, the complaint alleges that: (1) Ichida used 
information from the sex offender registry to injure or harass Abordo by depriving him from his rental unit and disclosing his sex offender status to other tenants, and to embarrass him in front of other tenants, particularly when Ichida kicked him out of the house he was renting from her based on his sex offender status; and (2) Ichida wrongfully terminated or rejected him as a tenant, as well as terminated his services as a handyman at the subject property, based on his sex offender status. Abordo seeks general damages and punitive damages against Ichida; the complaint also requests that criminal charges be filed against Ichida for her use of the sex offender registry information to deny Abordo fair housing. 
In response to Abordo's complaint, Ichida filed a 
motion to dismiss. Ichida argued that the Commission has jurisdiction over claims for discrimination in real property transactions and that Abordo failed to present his claims to the Commission, thus failing to exhaust his administrative remedies, and his claims are now time-barred. Ichida further argued that Abordo's claims are not actionable because he is not within a protected class as would give rise to a fair housing claim and that Abordo cannot state a claim for intentional or negligent 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
infliction of emotional distress as he has not alleged that 
Ichida engaged in any outrageous conduct as would support such claims. 
After a hearing was held on May 8, 2018, Ichida's 
motion was granted. The Dismissal Order states simply that Ichida's motion to dismiss is granted and that all of Abordo's claims are dismissed with prejudice. Although no transcript was provided to this court, the Circuit Court's minutes report the Circuit Court's reasoning as follows: 
BASED ON THE COURT'S REVIEW OF THE MATTERS THAT HAVE 
BEEN SUBMITTED AND REVIEWING THE COMPLAINT THAT WAS FILED 
AND THE ALLEGATIONS IN THE COMPLAINT THE COURT GRANTED THE MOTION TO DISMISS. 
WITH RESPECT TO THE ALLEGATIONS OF A CRIMINAL 
COMPLAINT, A PRIVATE CITIZEN DOES NOT HAVE THE AUTHORITY TOBRING CRIMINAL CHARGES IN COURT. THAT IS THE AUTHORITY AND DISCRETION OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY, THAT IS THE OFFICETHAT INITIATES AND PURSUES CRIMINAL CHARGES. 
WITH RESPECT TO THE CIVIL CLAIMS ALLEGED, THERE IS NOT
A VIABLE THEORY THAT HAS BEEN ALLEGED. THE PLTF FAILED TO EXHAUST HIS ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES. CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER IS NOT A PROTECTED CLASS AND THERE IS NO ALLEGATIONS OF OUTRAGEOUS CONDUCT OR PHYSICAL INJURY. 
Although it is unclear whether Abordo is challenging on 
appeal the Circuit Court's dismissal of his request for criminal 
charges to be brought against Ichida, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in concluding that a private citizen does not have the authority to bring criminal charges. See generally HRS § 806-7 (2014). 
With respect to Abordo's civil claims, we first 
consider HRS § 515-3 (2018), which is applicable to real estate transactions, including rentals, and states in part: 
§ 515-3 Discriminatory practices.  It is a 
discriminatory practice for an owner or any other person
engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a real estatebroker or salesperson, because of race, sex, including 
4  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, color,
religion, marital status, familial status, ancestry,disability, age, or human immunodeficiency virus infection : 
(1) To refuse to engage in a real estate transactionwith a person;
. . . . 
(Emphasis added). 
We also consider HRS § 378-2 (2015), which is 
applicable to employment and states, in part: 
§ 378-2 Discriminatory practices made unlawful;
offenses defined. (a) It shall be an unlawful
discriminatory practice: 
(1) Because of race, sex including gender identityor expression, sexual orientation, age,religion, color, ancestry, disability, maritalstatus, arrest and court record , or domestic or
sexual violence victim status if the domestic or sexual violence victim provides notice to thevictim's employer of such status or the employerhas actual knowledge of such status: 
(A) For any employer to refuse to hire or
employ or to bar or discharge fromemployment, or otherwise to discriminateagainst any individual in compensation orin the terms, conditions, or privileges ofemployment[.] 
(Emphasis added). 
In addition, we consider HRS § 368-11 (2015), which 
sets forth the jurisdiction of the Commission and states in part: 
§ 368-11 Complaint against unlawful discrimination.
(a) The commission shall have jurisdiction over the subjectof discriminatory practices made unlawful by part I ofchapter 489, chapter 515, part I of chapter 378, and thischapter. Any individual claiming to be aggrieved by analleged unlawful discriminatory practice may file with thecommission's executive director a complaint in writing thatshall state the name and address of the person or partyalleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatorypractice complained of, set forth the particulars thereof,and contain other information as may be required by thecommission. . . . 
. . . . 
(c) No complaint shall be filed after the expiration
of one hundred eighty days after the date: 
(1) Upon which the alleged unlawful discriminatory
practice occurred; or 
(2) Of the last occurrence in a pattern of ongoingdiscriminatory practice. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(d) For the purposes of this chapter "unlawful
discriminatory practice" means an unfair discriminatory
practice or like terms, as may be used in part I of chapter489, chapter 515, or part I of chapter 378. 
Hawai# i case law confirms that a person who wishes to 
file a judicial complaint for unlawful discriminatory practice in 
violation of matters within the Commission's jurisdiction, including claims of violations of HRS §§ 515-3 and/or 378-2, must first file a complaint with the Commission and receive a notice of right to sue from the Commission. See, e.g., Simmons v. Aqua Hotels & Resorts, Inc., 130 Hawai# i 325, 328-29, 310 P.3d 1026, 
1029-30 (App. 2013); see also HRS § 368-12 (2015). 
To the extent that Abordo is claiming that he suffered 
an actionable injury and is entitled to damages arising out of Ichida's termination and/or rejection of him as a renter on account of his status as a sex offender, sex offender status is not a protected class under HRS § 515-3. 
Therefore, the 
Commission did not have jurisdiction over such a claim and Abordo was not required to file a complaint with the Commission and receive a notice of right to sue from the Commission. Accordingly, Abordo was not required to exhaust administrative remedies with respect to such a claim. However, since sex offender status is not a protected class under HRS § 515-3, which is applicable to discrimination in real estate transactions, the complaint fails to state a claim upon which relief can be granted based on Ichida's alleged housing discrimination against Abordo based on his status as a sex offender, and the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing this claim. 
6  To the extent that Abordo is claiming that he suffered 
an actionable injury and is entitled to damages arising out of 
Ichida's termination and/or rejection of him as a handyman  on 
account of his status as a convicted sex offender, discrimination based on "arrest and court record" is unlawful under HRS § 378-2. Therefore, the Commission would have had jurisdiction over such a claim, and Abordo was required to file a complaint with the Commission and receive a notice of right to sue from the Commission. Accordingly, Abordo was required to exhaust administrative remedies with respect to such a claim. There is no allegation in the complaint, or evidence in the record on appeal, that Abordo received such a right to sue from the Commission or otherwise exhausted the remedies available under HRS chapter 368. See HRS §§ 368-11 through 368-16. Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing any such claim. 2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As stated above, the complaint also alleges that Ichida 
used information from the sex offender registry to injure or harass Abordo by depriving him of his rental unit and disclosing his sex offender status to other tenants, and to embarrass him in front of other tenants, particularly when Ichida kicked him out of the house he was renting from her, or attempting to rent from her, based on his sex offender status. The Circuit Court concluded that this did not constitute an allegation of outrageous conduct; Abordo does not allege physical injury. 
2 We do not reach the issue of whether, or under what circumstances,
a "handyman" may bring a claim pursuant to HRS § 378-2. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The elements of the tort of Intentional Infliction of 
Emotional Distress are: (1) that the conduct allegedly causing 
the harm was intentional or reckless; (2) that the conduct was outrageous; and (3) that the conduct caused extreme emotional distress to another. Hac v. Univ. of Haw., 102 Hawai# i 92, 106-
07, 73 P.3d 46, 60-61 (2003). "The term 'outrageous' has been construed to mean without just cause or excuse and beyond all bounds of decency." 
Enoka v. AIG Haw. Ins. Co., Inc., 109 
Hawai# i 537, 559, 128 P.3d 850, 872 (2006) (citations and some 
internal quotation marks omitted). Additionally, "[t]he question whether the actions of the alleged tortfeasor are unreasonable or outrageous is for the court in the first instance, although where reasonable people may differ on that question it should be left to the jury." Young v. Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai# i 403, 429, 
198 P.3d 666, 692 (2008) (citation omitted). There is "no clear definition of the prohibited outrageous conduct," and the correct inquiry is simply whether "an average member of the community" would exclaim, "Outrageous!" Id. at 425, 198 P.3d at 688 (internal citations, brackets, and quotations marks omitted). We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in determining that Ichida's actions, as alleged in the complaint, were not outrageous. 
"[A negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED)] 
claim is nothing more than a negligence claim in which the alleged actual injury is wholly psychic and is analyzed utilizing ordinary negligence principles." Doe Parents No. 1 v. State, Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai# i 34, 69, 58 P.3d 545, 580 (2002) 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(internal citation and quotation marks omitted). Although the 
injury is wholly psychic, Hawai# i courts have generally held that 
an NIED plaintiff "must establish some predicate injury either to property or to another person in order [sic] himself or herself to recover for negligently inflicted emotional distress." Id. (citations omitted). 
A viable NIED claim for psychic injuries in the absence 
of physical injury or mental illness must allege: (1) a duty or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct for the protection of others against unreasonable risks; (2) the defendant breached the duty; (3) a reasonably close causal connection between the defendant's breach and the plaintiff's resulting injury; and (4) serious emotional distress or disturbance resulting in physical injury to or mental illness of the plaintiff, or circumstances guaranteeing the genuineness and seriousness of the claim. See id. at 68-88, 58 P.3d at 579-99. By this standard, Abordo failed to state a claim for NIED upon which relief can be granted. 
For the reasons stated above, the Circuit Court's June 
29, 2018 Dismissal Order and Judgment are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu,  Hawai# i, April 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: Edmund M. Abordo,
Plaintiff-Appellant 
Pro Se. Chief Judge 
Steven J. Kim,for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9 