  SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000125
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JOSEPH M. MAXILOM, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 10-1-0030; CR. NO. 06-1-1484)
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Joseph M. Maxilom ("Maxilom"), pro 
se, appeals from the Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order 
Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief filed on October 1, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1 The Circuit Court denied Maxilom's Hawai' i Rules of 
Penal Procedure petition for post-conviction relief (alternatively, "Rule 40 Petition" or "Petition") without a hearing, finding that there was substantial evidence to support Maxilom's conviction and his claims were "patently frivolous and without a trace of support from the record[.]" 
On appeal, Maxilom argues that his trial counsel
 
provided him with ineffective counsel: 
(1) "Trial counsel violated [Maxilom's] Sixth Amendment
 
right by trial counsel's failure to call as witnesses any of the
 ten witnesses requested by [Maxilom]."
 
(2) "Trial counsel failed to conduct a pre
 
investigation with certain witnesses that [Maxilom] told trial
 counsel to interview because witness was [Maxilom's] alibi[.]" 
(3) "Trial counsel denied [Maxilom] of his
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional right to cross-examine witnesses and alleged
 
victim regarding her recantation to detective and officer;
 prosecution's case rested solely on victim's credibility, and
 such cross-examination was essential to truth-finding process
 because victim might have admitted to lying about charges to
 private investigator." 
Maxilom also contends that (4) his appellate counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance of counsel when appellate counsel
 "tricked [Maxilom] into signing a paper by telling him it was to
 release information to counsel on his appeal" when it was really
 "to cancel his direct appeal." Consequently, Maxilom argues, he
 did not knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily waive his right
 to appeal.
2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Maxilom's points of error as follows: 
The Circuit Court did not err in denying Maxilom's Rule
 
40 Petition without a hearing. The record on appeal does not
 indicate that Maxilom's Petition raised a colorable claim so as
 to require a hearing before the Circuit Court. See Haw. R. Pen.
 
P. 40(f) (court may deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without a trace of support either in the record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner); Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai' i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 (1999) 
(question is whether the trial record indicates that petitioner's application for relief made such a showing of a colorable claim as to require a hearing before the lower court). To the extent that we understand his arguments in his Rule 40 Petition and on 
2
 We take judicial notice of the February 1, 2010 Motion to Dismiss
Appeal and Order ("Motion to Dismiss"), filed in appeal no. 30035. See State
 
v. Akana, 68 Haw. 164, 165, 706 P.2d 1300, 1302 (1985) (stating that "[t]his
court has validated the practice of taking judicial notice of a court's own
records in an interrelated proceeding where the parties are the same." (citing
State v. Wong, 50 Haw. 42, 43, 430 P.2d 330, 332 (1967))); Haw. R. Evid.
201(d) (under which a court is mandated to take judicial notice if requested
by a party and supplied with the necessary information); Haw. R. Evid. 201(d)
cmt. (stating that the necessary information may be consistent with subsection
(b) which permits judicial notice of facts capable of accurate and ready
determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be
questioned). The Motion to Dismiss is supported by a declaration signed by
Maxilom ("Declaration").
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal, Maxilom failed to show that he was provided with
 
ineffective assistance of counsel as follows:
 
(1)
 & (2) Maxilom did not make a colorable claim that 
he was denied effective assistance of trial counsel because he failed to assert how his trial counsel's failure to call various witnesses resulted in "the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Barnett, 91 Hawai' i at 
26-27, 979 P.2d at 1052-53; Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 427, 
879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (setting forth the standard for ineffective assistance of counsel claims under Hawai' i Rules of 
Penal Procedure Rule 40); See also State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348-49, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (stating that the burden is on appellant to establish an ineffective assistance of counsel claim). The failure to call a witness at trial does not raise a colorable claim of ineffective assistance unless the Appellant can relate the witness to an issue in the trial and can explain how the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense is caused by the failure to call that witness. 
(a)
 Any reputation or opinion evidence of the
 
complainant's past sexual behavior would have been barred because
 it was not "constitutionally required to be admitted," "the
 source of semen or injury" was not at issue, and consent was not
 an element of either offense. Haw. R. Evid. 412(a), 412(b) &
 cmt.; H
AW. REV. STAT. §§ 707-730(1)(b) (Supp. 2006) & -732(1)(b)
 
(Supp. 2006). 
(b) Whether complainant's school attendance record
 
showed she was at school the week of February 13 through 17, 2006
 or Maxilom's attendance record could confirm that Maxilom was at
 work on February 14, 2006 was of little consequence, given that
 complainant testified at trial that the first incidents occurred
 on the weekend and she never saw Maxilom during the school week,
 and Maxilom's trial counsel extensively cross-examined her
 regarding her prior statements that the incidents occurred on
 February 14, 2006.
 
(c) Any failure on the part of Maxilom's counsel
 
to call witnesses regarding the tape-recorded statement
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
complainant made to Detective Souza did not result in the
 
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. At
 trial, the complainant's statement was admitted into evidence,
 and the complainant was cross-examined on its substance. 
Specifically, the complainant testified that the statement was
 false, that it was already typed when she arrived to speak with
 Detective Souza, and that she signed it under a mistaken belief
 that signing it would make the case go away. In addition,
 Maxilom does not assert what the uncalled witnesses would have
 testified to that was not already established by cross-
examination of the complainant.
 
(d) Maxilom has not asserted how his counsel's
 
failure to call any witness to testify regarding "Defendant's
 Exhibit G," a medical document summarizing complainant's account
 of the incidents, substantially impaired a potentially
 meritorious defense because complainant's testimony at trial
 substantially comported with the document, and Maxilom's trial
 counsel extensively cross-examined complainant about inconsistent
 statements she allegedly made regarding the date of the
 incidents.
 
(e) With regard to the list entitled "Identified 
witnesses" attached to Maxilom's opening brief, that attachment is not part of the record on appeal, and, consequently, we will not consider it. Stanley v. State, 76 Hawai' i 446, 448, 879 P.2d 
551, 553 (1994) (stating that "[a]ppellate review must be based upon the evidence contained in the record, not upon matters outside of the record" (quoting State v. Lewis 6 Haw. App. 624, 626. 736 P.2d 70, 72 (1987) (internal quotation marks omitted))).
 
(f) The only "alibi" witness Maxilom identifies is 
included in the "Identified witnesses" list attached to his opening brief, which we may not consider. Stanley, 76 Hawai' i at 
448, 879 P.2d at 553. To the extent Maxilom is referring to witnesses that would testify that he was at work on February 14, 2006, as we have already discussed, any failure on the part of trial counsel to produce additional evidence on that point could not have resulted in the substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) Maxilom did not argue in his Rule 40 Petition that
 
his trial counsel denied him his constitutional right to cross-
examine "witnesses" or complainant regarding her recantation to
 the police, and the argument is, therefore, disregarded. Haw.
 R. App. P. 28(b)(4). 
(4) Maxilom did not make a colorable claim that he was
 
denied effective assistance of appellate counsel as a consequence
 of being "tricked" into signing his Declaration. Even if we were
 to take Maxilom's allegations that he did not know what he was
 signing and so did not knowingly withdraw his appeal as true, he
 fails to state a colorable claim because he does not allege facts
 that show he was harmed or even potentially harmed by the
 withdrawal of his appeal because he does not identify potentially
 meritorious issues that he would have raised on appeal. See
 
Barnett, supra; Dan, supra. To the extent that Maxilom suggests
 
he would have made any of the arguments that he made in the
 instant appeal from the denial of his Rule 40 Petition, as we
 have already discussed, he either already waived them or they are
 not colorable. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Findings of Fact;
 
Conclusions of Law; Order Denying Petition for Post-Conviction
 Relief filed on October 1, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 19, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Joseph M. Maxilom,
Pro Se Petitioner-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity & County of Honolulu,for Respondent-Appellee ,
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 