NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000692 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SAMUEL JOO RIM SU, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-00252) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Samuel Joo Rim Su (Su) appeals from 
the August 2, 2018 Judgment entered by the District Court of the 
First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court),  convicting Su 
of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-
61(a)(1) (2007) 1
On appeal, Su maintains that the District Court erred 
when it limited his cross-examination of one of the State's 
witnesses. 
After a careful review of the record and the applicable 
authority, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and 
the arguments made by the parties, we resolve Su's appeal as 
follows and affirm. 
1 The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Su designates as error the District Court's decision to 
limit his cross-examination of Officer Jared Spiker (Officer 
Spiker), the officer who conducted the field sobriety testing 
(FST) of Su, by prohibiting cross-examination regarding three 
specific instances of conduct. 
The scope and extent of cross and recross-examination of a
witness is within the sound discretion of the trial judge. Under this standard, we will not disturb the trial court'sexercise of its discretion unless it is clearly abused.  An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearlyexceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules orprinciples of law or practice to the substantial detrimentof a party-litigant. 
State v. Jackson, 81 Hawai# i 39, 47, 912 P.2d 71, 79 (1996) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Article I, section 14 of the Hawai #i Constitution and 
the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution guarantee criminal defendants the right to be confrontedwith witnesses against them.  Implicit in a defendant'sright to confront witnesses against him, is his right tocross-examine and to impeach the confronted witness. However, "the right to confront and to cross-examine is notabsolute and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodateother legitimate interests in the trial process." 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai# i 390, 420, 56 P.3d 692, 722 (2002) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
"When the trial court excludes evidence tending to 
impeach a witness, it has not abused its discretion as long as 
the [trier of fact] has in its possession sufficient information 
to appraise the biases and motivations of the witness."  State v. 
Sabog, 108 Hawai# i 102, 107, 117 P.3d 834, 839 (App. 2005) 
quoting State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai# i
 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 
1220 (1996).  Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 608(b) 
provides, in pertinent part, 
(b) Specific instances of conduct.  Specific instances
of the conduct of a witness, for the purpose of attacking
the witness' credibility, if probative of untruthfulness,may be inquired into on cross-examination of the witnessand, in the discretion of the court, may be proved byextrinsic evidence. 
The hearing on Su's three requests was consolidated 
with trial, with Su's consent.  In his first Notice of Intent, Su 
sought, pursuant to HRE Rules 404(a)(3) and 608(b), to use a 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transcript of the testimony by Officer Spiker before the 
Administrative Drivers License Revocation Office (ADLRO) in ADLRO 
Case No. 16-02028, In the Matter of Selina Kuni to impeach him 
regarding the filing of an allegedly false sworn statement before 
the ADLRO.  In this transcript, Officer Spiker is asked about his 
conduct in the Kuni case, specifically with regard to Officer 
Spiker's submission of the notice of Kuni's administrative 
revocation form (Notice of Revocation) to the ADLRO.  Although 
not entirely clear, it appears that this Notice of Revocation, 
which was used to document whether Kuni would submit or refuse to 
submit to a blood alcohol test, was "not identical" to the one 
Officer Spiker provided to the ADLRO.   Officer Spiker 
acknowledged that the copy of the Notice of Revocation given to Kuni was not the same as the one submitted to the ADLRO,  insofar 
as Officer Spiker checked off certain boxes after he had made the copies. Nevertheless, Officer Spiker maintained that Kuni had 
initialed her refusals on the form. 32
The District Court ruled, 
So the court's going to note that the court does agree with
the State in a sense that he did make the markings.  He looked at it.  He -- in his testimony, he explained why he did it.  He said it was an error on his part.  He did -- he recalled he [sic] did initial a refusal.  And so based on that, the court's going to note that he admitted that theform was altered  after giving it to her.  So while -- I 
2 Neither the copy given to Kuni nor to the ADLRO was presented to
the District Court as part of the first Notice of Intent.  In the transcriptof the hearing before the ADLRO, the hearings officer confirmed with Kuni'sdefense counsel that he would be seeking a continuance to call Kuni as awitness to authenticate the exhibit proffered there as the form she received. Neither a transcript of any further hearing in the Kuni ADLRO case nor copiesof either form are in the record in this appeal. 
3 Officer Spiker testified as follows: 
OFFICER SPIKER: I can’t recall why I did that because
normally I normally check it off and then make the copiesbut I can’t recall why, I know she initialed everything thatshe refused. I just made an error on my part. As I recallshe did initial a refusal . . . I guess it is just - -
ATTORNEY BURK: But whenever, on the form when you
swear and affirm that you handed that form to her, that isnot in fact true then, correct? 
OFFICER SPIKER: Yes, in this instance, yes, not true. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
guess -- well, technically, they signed the forms.  He did 
explain what he did and that he made an error, and heexplained it.  So based on that, the court is going to notallow counsel to cross-examine him in regard to the ADLRO –-
The District Court went on to rule that, under HRE Rule 608, 
Officer Spiker had been questioned about the form and explained 
it.4 
In his second Notice of Intent, Su sought permission to 
cross-examine Officer Spiker pursuant to HRE Rules 404 and 608(b) 
regarding his testimony in an unrelated OVUII case, State v. Lee, 
1DTA-16-03978, and "if necessary" to introduce extrinsic evidence 
of the same.  In Lee, Officer Spiker testified about his 
observations of Lee's driving leading to her stop, and provided 
his estimates regarding distances Lee traveled over a double 
solid yellow line, and the relative speeds and positions of their 
respective vehicles during the observations.  The Lee trial court 
found that Officer Spiker's testimony "simply doesn't make 
physical sense" and acquitted Lee.  The District Court ruled that 
Officer Spiker's testimony in the Lee case was composed of his 
estimates, that the Lee trial court never determined that Officer 
Spiker was not credible, but that "he was trying to be honest, 
you know, and unfortunately, [] what his testimony was didn't 
make sense." 
In Notice of Intent #3, Su sought to impeach Officer 
Spiker with the officer's report and testimony in State v. 
Darrell Thomas, 1-DCW-16-0002046, allegedly contradicted by a 
video recording of the same incident introduced as evidence in 
4 While somewhat ambiguous, the District Court seems to have held
that the incident was not a specific example of untruthfulness under HRE
Rule 608(b): 
THE COURT:  -- 608.  So specifically, for 608(b), the
court has to look for specific instances of conduct of awitness for the -- for the purpose of attacking thewitness's credibility if probative of untruthfulness. That's when it can be inquired into on cross-examination. So in light of the fact that at the time when he wasquestioned about it, he explained it and -- and -- and that-- and of that nature, then the court is going to -- that'swhy the court's denying it, okay? 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thomas.  In Thomas, Officer Spiker was shown video recordings of 
security footage of the incident involved  and allowed to explain 
what he was shown and how it differed from the description of events he included in his police report.  In lieu of the video 
recording, video stills were presented to the District Court.   
The District Court ruled that based on the video stills, it could not conclude that Officer Spiker lied or misrepresented events in 
the police report. 6 5
On appeal, Su relies solely on HRE Rule 608 for his 
argument that he should have been allowed to cross-examine 
Officer Spiker regarding these three specific instances of 
conduct because each represented false information presented to 
the respective tribunals.  We agree that specific instances of 
conduct may be inquired into on cross-examination of a witness 
"if probative of untruthfulness."  Id. However, the District 
Court, after careful consideration of the documents presented by 
Su, found that each instance did not constitute examples of 
untruthfulness under HRE Rule 608(b). 
Based on our review of the record, we do not disagree. 
The transcript of ADLRO proceedings submitted by Su reflected 
that Officer Spiker had been shown the Notice of Revocation form, 
which he acknowledged he marked after making copies and that he 
made a mistake and did not follow his normal procedure.  The 
transcript of Officer Spiker's testimony in the Lee case showed 
that he testified as to estimates of distance and speed and that 
he was not certain of these numbers.  Finally, although the 
screen shots of the surveillance videos in the Thomas case did 
not depict, for example, the clenched fist or a classic fighting 
5 Although the video recordings were admitted into evidence by the
defense in Thomas, the transcript does not reveal whether the recordings
captured the entire incident involved there.  The foundation laid was merelythat the video appeared to be surveillance video taken of the incident. 
6 However, both counsel referenced seeing the video recording in
their arguments.  Su presented the declaration of the attorney representingDarrel Thomas in 1DCW-16-0002046, who averred that the still shots "appear tobe in substantially the same condition of the video evidence, but for the factthat they are still photos that appear to have been extracted from the video." 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stance that Officer Spiker maintained Thomas displayed during the 
incident, neither the screen shots nor the video recordings 
themselves purported to be a complete documentation of the 
incident.  Each of the examples in the three Notices of Intent 
could fairly be characterized as mistakes, inaccuracies in memory 
or differences in interpretations of another's actions. 
Furthermore, the District Court, having consolidated 
the hearing on the Notices of Intent with trial was able to 
review all the materials included in those Notices and the 
additional exhibits presented, and had "in its possession 
sufficient information to appraise the biases and motivations of 
the witness" and did not abuse its discretion by preventing 
further cross-examination of Officer Spiker on these incidents. 
Sabog, 108 Hawai# i at 107, 117 P.3d at 839; HRE Rule 403 
("Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by . . . considerations of 
. . . needless presentation of cumulative evidence."). 
For the foregoing reasons, the August 2, 2018 Judgment 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu 
Division is affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Jonathan Burge,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appelle. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 