 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000654
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SUSAN OWEN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DCC-16-0016672)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Susan Owen (Owen) appeals from the
 
Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment (
Judgment) entered on
 
August 10, 2017, by the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
Kaneohe Division (
District Court).1 After a bench trial, Owen
 
was convicted of Pet Animal or Equine Animal Desertion, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1109.7 (Supp.
 
2017).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Michael Marr presided.
 
2
 HRS § 711-1109.7 provides:
 
§ 711-1109.7 Pet animal or equine animal desertion.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in
possession of any pet animal or equine animal to desert the
pet animal or equine animal.
 (2) Any person who violates subsection (1) shall be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
exceeding $1,000 in addition to any other penalties.
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Owen raises one point of error, contending 
that the evidence was insufficient to sustain Owen's conviction 
because Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (the State) failed to 
elicit sufficient evidence to establish that Owen knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly deserted a pet animal. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Owen's contentions as
 follows:
 
Owen contends that the State failed to establish that
 
she was the pet animal owner or in possession of pet animals and
 that she deserted pet animals. Owen submits that the
 uncontroverted evidence was that she was not the owner of the
 cats, but that she had temporary possession of the cats for two
 days. She argues that the cats were not her pets, or anyone
 else's pets, as she received the cats from a friend who obtained
 them after a feral cat gave birth. Owen further submits that it
 was never her intent to keep the cats as pets and when she did
 
2(...continued)
(3) Any person who violates subsection (1) and
recklessly causes the death of or substantial bodily injury
to the pet animal or equine animal shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000 in
addition to any other penalties.
 (4) Each pet animal or equine animal that is deserted
in violation of subsection (1) or suffers death or
substantial bodily injury as a result of a violation of
subsection (1) shall constitute a separate offense.
 (5) For the purposes of this section, "desert" means
to leave without the intent to return.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not find them a home, she dropped them off at a park that she
 
believed was a cat sanctuary.
 
In her Opening Brief, Owen further argued that although
 
she was in the possession of animals, they were not pets, based
 on a (mistaken) assertion that the term pet was undefined and
 required proof that the animals were domesticated. However,
 after the State pointed to the definition of "[p]et animal" in
 HRS § 711-1100 (2014),
3 in her Reply Brief, Owen instead argued
 
that the plain language of the statute results in an absurd or
 unjust result here because she only had the cats in her
 possession for two days and she never intended to keep them as
 her pets.
 
The appellate court reviews the sufficiency of evidence
 
on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(citation omitted). "Substantial evidence as to every material 
element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
3
 HRS § 711-1100 is entitled "Definitions" and provides that "'Pet
animal' means a dog, cat, domesticated rabbit, guinea pig, domesticated pig,
or caged birds . . . so long as not bred for consumption." (Emphasis added). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the State adduced testimony from Darcy Aila 
(Aila), a park attendant at He' eia State Park, who testified that 
he noticed a lady, later identified as Owen, with her car doors 
open and a cage in the back seat. Aila asked Owen, "What's going on" and she said that she dropped off two kittens at the park. Aila testified that he told Owen that she could not drop cats there, and pointed to the signs stating that "animal abandonment is a crime; you will be prosecuted" and requiring animals to be caged or leashed and not unattended. Aila asked Owen where the cats were and she pointed at two kittens eight to ten feet away. Aila told her to catch them and take them away, but she responded they were wild and untrainable. He told her to wait there, took down her license plate number, and reported to the park manager, who called the police. When Aila returned to the area where he had been speaking with Owen, she was gone, but the kittens were still there, lying in the grass. 
Further testimony was adduced by the State as to the
 
identification of the kittens, as well as further signage, and
 testimony from a "Catfriends" volunteer who stated, inter alia,
 that based on her lengthy experience with cats, the cats in
 question were not feral cats.
 
Owen testified, inter alia, that she had gone to the
 
park on the day in question and left the two, three-month-old,
 kittens at the park because she believed it was a cat sanctuary. 
Owen testified that she could not keep the cats herself because
 she did not have a place for them, but admitted that she had not
 tried to place them with anyone else. Nevertheless, Owen denied
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that she intended to abandon the cats and stated that she left
 
the park without taking the kittens with her because she was
 frightened, it was dark, and she could not see them any longer.
 
We conclude that the evidence adduced at trial, and the
 
reasonable inferences therefore, support the conclusion that Owen
 was guilty as charged. There was sufficient evidence that the
 two kittens were pet animals, within the meaning of HRS § 711­1100, that they were in Owen's possession, and that she
 knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly deserted them. We
 further conclude that Owen's argument that, in this case, the
 application of the plain language of HRS § 711-1109.7 results in
 an absurd or unjust result is without merit.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's August 10, 2017
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 28, 2018. 
On the briefs: Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 