 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
    
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000542 24-AUG-2026 07:54 AM Dkt. 94 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000542  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
‘I  
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I,  Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,  
v.  
LAVERNE L. LEE, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CPC-23-0000095) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee State of Hawaiʻ i 
(
State) appeals, and Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
Laverne L. Lee (Lee) cross-appeals, from the Circuit Court of 
the Fifth Circuit's (circuit court) July 23, 2025 "Findings of 
Fact; Conclusions of Law; and Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Motion to Suppress Evidence" (Suppression Order).
1 
On May 4, 2023, the State charged Lee by Felony 
Information with one count of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the 
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2016). 
In November 2024, Lee moved 
to suppress evidence "allegedly recovered by police on April 20, 2022," during a search of Lee's vehicle, pursuant to article I, 
section 7 of the Constitution of the State of Hawaiʻ i, and the 
Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution. The search 
of Lee's vehicle was conducted pursuant to a Search Warrant 
issued on April 14, 2022, and executed on April 20, 2022.  The 
Search Warrant was supported by Officer Tyler Yates' (Officer 
Yates) "Affidavit in Support of Search Warrant" (Affidavit), 
which included attachments setting forth Officer Yates' 
"Training and Experience," and the "Observation of Affiant." (Formatting altered.) 
Officer Yates submitted the return of search warrant 
on June 9, 2022.  The return of search warrant included a 
"Search Warrant Property Receipt for Case 22-04957" (Property 
Receipt), which was signed on May 11, 2022. The Property 
Receipt included an itemized list of the property that was 
seized during the search of Lee's vehicle. 
The circuit court heard Lee's "Motion to Suppress 
Evidence" (
Motion to Suppress) and entered its Suppression 
Order. The circuit court granted the Motion to Suppress in 
part, finding that Officer Yates violated Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 41(d) by filing the return of search 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
      
     
 
 
  
 warrant fifty days after the search, and suppressing the 
evidence seized from Lee's vehicle on that basis. The circuit 
court denied the Motion to Suppress in part, rejecting Lee's 
argument that the search was not supported by probable cause. 
On appeal, the State raises a single point of error, 
contending that "the circuit court erred by suppressing evidence 
seized pursuant to the search warrant, reasoning that [HRPP Rule 
41(d)] had been violated" where "the lead officer unintentionally did not promptly file the search warrant return 
and that [Lee] was not prejudiced by the 50-day delay in filing 
the return." (Formatting altered) (footnote omitted.) 
On cross-appeal, Lee also raises a single point of 
error, contending that "[t]he circuit court erred when it denied 
in part Lee's [M]otion to [S]uppress and determined that the 
evidence underlying the search warrant was sufficient for 
probable cause." (Formatting altered.) 
We resolve the State's and Lee's points of error as 
follows: 
(1) Probable Cause: We first address Lee's contention 
that the Search Warrant was not supported by probable cause "when it allowed a search of Lee's vehicle, license plate number 
KEH 764, and insufficient evidence was provided of any drug 
activity associated with that particular vehicle." Lee contends 
that the circuit court therefore erred in denying her Motion to 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 Suppress in part, and in entering conclusion of law (COL) 4.   
"[T]he determination of probable cause for the issuance of a 
search warrant warrants de novo review on appeal." State v. 
Navas, 81 2
Hawaiʻi 113, 123, 913 P.2d 39, 49 (1996) (formatting  
altered).   
In 
Iwatate, this court reiterated that, 
[U]nder the safeguards of the fourth amendment to the 
United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution, all arrests and searches must be based 
upon probable cause. 
Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to 
warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an 
offense has been committed. Direct evidence, however, is 
not necessary for a probable cause determination by the 
[judge]. The issuance of a search warrant is prohibited except upon a finding of probable cause supported by oath 
or affirmation. 
108 Hawaiʻ i at 368, 120 P.3d at 267 (quoting  Navas, 81 Hawaiʻ i at  
115-16, 913 P.2d at 41-42).    
Officer Yates' Affidavit established probable cause 
for the Search Warrant. 
The Affidavit represented that, in 
2 COL 4 states, 
In the present case, although Officer Yates does not indicate any 
information that [Lee] allegedly used the subject vehicle to 
conduct alleged drug sales and no assisting officer is quoted as 
clearly seeing [Lee] utilize the subject vehicle at the time of 
(or immediately before) the controlled buy, there is sufficient 
information to link the subject vehicle to [Lee] and the information from assisting officers do create a permissible 
inference that there is a nexus between [Lee's] alleged drug 
sales and the subject vehicle. [See State v. Iwatate
, 108 Hawaiʻi 
361, 120 P.3d 260 (App. 2005)]. 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 April 2022, Officer Yates obtained information from a 
confidential Cooperative Source (
CS) that Lee "was distributing 
crystal methamphetamine on the island of [Kauaʻ i]."  The CS 
described Lee, and related that Lee "drives a white colored 
Lexus SUV with black colored rims." 
Between April 6 and 12, 2022, CS participated in a 
controlled buy of crystal methamphetamine from Lee in 
coordination with Officer Yates and other Kauaʻ i Police 
Department (KPD) officers.  Prior to the controlled buy, CS met 
with Officer Yates at a prearranged meet location. CS was 
instructed to follow a prearranged route directly to a 
prearranged buy location, and CS was provided traceable money by 
the KPD to purchase an agreed upon amount of crystal 
methamphetamine from Lee. CS's person and vehicle were searched to ensure that CS did not have "illegal narcotics, contraband, 
weapons, and money." 
Officer Yates and other KPD officers monitored CS 
travelling directly from the meet location to the prearranged 
buy location.  At the buy location, two KPD officers 
participating in the operation "observed a white colored Lexus 
SUV with tinted windows and black rims."  A third KPD officer 
related that the white colored Lexus SUV bore the license plate 
number "KEH764."  A KPD officer observed CS arrive at the buy 
location, "approach the white colored SUV bearing [ Hawaiʻi] State 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 License plate KEH764 and make contact with [Lee]," and "leave 
the prearranged buy location." 
Officer Yates and the other KPD officers monitored CS 
travel directly from the buy location to the meet location. 
At 
the meet location, Officer Yates "obtained the agreed amount of crystal methamphetamine that [CS] just purchased from [Lee]." 
Following the controlled buy, the crystal methamphetamine 
purchased by CS from Lee was tested and "reacted positive for the presence of methamphetamine."  Officer Yates conducted a 
State of Hawai
ʻi Motor Vehicle Inquiry, and "learned that [the] 
vehicle bearing [Hawaiʻ i
] State license plates KEH764 is 
described as [a] white colored 2007 Lexus MPVH . . . registered 
to [Lee]." 
Officer Yates' sworn statement represented that, based 
on the above observations, 
[Officer Yates] believes that crystal methamphetamine 
and/or Drug Paraphernalia can be located within the vehicle 
described as a white colored 2007 Lexus MPVH bearing 
[Hawaiʻi]  State License plate KEH7 64, registered to [Lee]  
.  . . .   [Officer Yates]  therefore requests the issuance of 
a search warrant for the following:  
 
 A motor vehicle bearing [ Hawaiʻi]  State license plates 
KEH764 described as a white colored 2007 Lexus MPVH 
registered to [Lee] . . .  , including but not limited to 
purses, backpacks, bags, fanny- packs, hand- held electronic 
devices, containers, packages, luggage, receipts, documents, and clothing found within the vehicle.  
Lee argues on appeal that "[t]he evidence presented in 
the [A]ffidavit failed to sufficiently link the vehicle searched 
(the vehicle with license plate KEH 764) with any drug 
  6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 activity." Probable cause is based on the reasonable inferences 
drawn from the totality of the circumstances. See State v. 
Chong, 52 Haw. 226, 231, 473 P.2d 567, 571 (1970) ("[P]robable cause is generally based upon a combination of factors, which 
together form a sort of mosaic, of which any one piece by itself 
often might not be enough to constitute probable cause, but 
which, when viewed as a whole, does constitute probable 
cause."); State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawaiʻ i 409, 431, 23 P.3d 744, 766 
(App. 2001) ("[W]e consider the totality of the circumstances to 
determine, de novo, whether [a police officer] had probable 
cause to arrest [the defendant]." (formatting altered)).  Here, 
the Affidavit established that the observations of CS and KPD officers who participated in the controlled buy, taken as a 
whole, support a reasonable inference that Lee is the registered 
owner of a white Lexus with license plate number KEH 764, and 
that, while in this vehicle, Lee sold crystal methamphetamine to 
CS at a controlled buy location. 
We conclude that the circuit court was not wrong in 
determining that the Search Warrant was supported by probable cause.  We therefore affirm the circuit court's denial of Lee's 
Motion to Suppress on that basis, and we affirm COL 4. 
(2) HRPP Rule 41(d): We next address the State's 
contention that the circuit court erred by suppressing the 
evidence seized based on the violation of HRPP Rule 41(d).  The 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 State contends that the evidence should not have been suppressed 
because Lee "was not prejudiced by [Officer Yates'] 50-day delay 
in filing the return" of the search warrant, and that "non-
compliance with HRPP Rule 41(d)," standing alone, "does not 
require suppression of evidence."   (Formatting altered)  
(emphasis omitted.)   The State contends, on this basis, that the  
circuit court erred in entering COL 7, which states,  3
Although the [State] argues that the requirement of a 
prompt return should be treated as ministerial and Officer 
Yates did not have ill intent, the length of the delay in 
this case is sufficient to justify treatment of the prompt 
return requirement as substantive and justify suppression 
in order to incentivize the police and other law enforcement to comply with the promptness requirement of 
HRPP Rule 41(d). 
In State v. Stachler, the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court held 
that,  
[W]here, as here, there has been no showing that a violation of [HRPP] Rule 41(d) procedures has resulted in 
prejudice to the defendant's rights, a suppression remedy 
is not appropriate. 
This, of course, should in no way be interpreted as a license to law enforcement officers to disregard the 
procedures of [HRPP] Rule 41(d). We will not hesitate to 
call into play the suppression remedy where a sufficient 
showing of prejudice is made. 
3 HRPP Rule 41(d) states, in pertinent part, 
Execution and r eturn with inventory. The officer taking 
property under the warrant shall give to the person from 
whom or from whose premises the property was taken a copy 
of the warrant and a receipt for the property taken or shall leave the copy and receipt at the place from which 
the property was taken.  The return shall be made promptly 
and shall be accompanied by a written inventory of any 
property taken. 
(Emphasis added. )  The State represents that it "does not dispute the circuit 
court's conclusion that a 50- day delay between execution of the search 
warrant and the filing of the search warrant return is not prompt." 
(Emphasis added.) 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 58 Haw. 412, 422-23, 570 P.2d 1323, 1330 (1977) (citation 
omitted).  A finding of prejudice to the defendant's rights is therefore required to "call into play the suppression remedy." 
Id. 
Here, it appears the circuit court ordered the 
suppression of evidence seized in the search of Lee's vehicle on 
the sole ground that "the length of the delay in this case is 
sufficient to justify treatment of the prompt return requirement 
as substantive and justify suppression in order to incentivize 
the police and other law enforcement to comply with the 
promptness requirement."
4 
The record reflects that Lee failed to satisfy her 
burden of demonstrating that Officer Yates' delayed return of the search warrant resulted in prejudice to Lee. See id. at 
4 At the hearing on the Motion to Suppress, the circuit court 
explained its ruling that Officer Yates' delayed return of the search warrant 
violated HRPP Rule 41(d), as follows: 
[I]n regards to the [HRPP] Rule 41(d) [violation], the 
[circuit] [c]ourt finds that Officer Yates didn't have bad 
intent in filing the return. The return was filed June 
9th. The search warrant was April 20th. The [circuit] 
[c]ourt finds that the return -- search warrant return was 
not filed promptly in accordance with [HRPP] Rule 41(d). 
The [circuit] [c]ourt's concern is that if the [circuit] 
[c]ourt treats this as ministerial and there is no 
consequence, then there's no incentive for the police to 
comply with -- there's no incentive for law enforcement to 
comply with [HRPP] Rule 41(d). Based on that, the 
[circuit] [c]ourt will grant the [M]otion to [S]uppress for 
failure to comply with Rule -- HRPP Rule 41(d). 
(Emphasis added.) 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
 
   
  
 
 422, 570 P.2d at 1330 (adopting the proposition that "a motion 
to suppress because of violations of [HRPP] Rule 41(d) should be 
granted only in instances where the defendant demonstrates 
prejudice from the violation" (citation omitted)). Lee did not 
introduce any evidence that would demonstrate that she suffered 
any prejudice, nor did she argue to the circuit court that she 
suffered prejudice
. Given the lack of prejudice to Lee, we 
conclude that the circuit court erred in suppressing the 
evidence obtained from the search of Lee's vehicle based on the 
violation of HRPP Rule 41(d). 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and 
reverse in part the Suppression Order.   
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, August 24 , 2026.  
On the briefs:  
Sara K. Haley,  
Deputy Public Defender,  
for Defendant-Appellee/  
Cross-Appellant.  
 
Tracy Murakami,  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,  
County of Kauaʻ i, 
for Plaintiff-Appellant/ Cross-Appellee.  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Presiding Judge  
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
10 