FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000431 18-AUG-2026 08:21 AM Dkt. 106 MO 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
---oOo---
LESLIE CABRAL, individually
and as Personal Representative of
the Estate of LEONARD CABRAL, JR.;
LEONARD CABRAL, SR.; and NICHOLAS CABRAL,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
PALI MOMI MEDICAL CENTER, Defendant-Appellee 
NO. CAAP-24-0000431 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CCV-22-0000466) 
August 18, 2026 
NAKASONE, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND WADSWORTH, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
Leonard Cabral, 
Junior died five days after being 
released from Pali Momi Medical Center. His mother Leslie 
Cabral, for herself and as personal representative of his estate, 
his father Leonard Cabral, Senior, and his brother Nicholas 
Cabral sued Pali Momi and others for medical malpractice. A jury 
found that Pali Momi was not negligent. Leslie, Senior, and FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nicholas appeal from the Final Judgment for Pali Momi entered by 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit.1 
We hold: (1) the trial court erred by granting summary 
judgment for Pali Momi on its potential vicarious liability for alleged professional negligence by a non-employee doctor who provided health care, under a contract with Pali Momi, to Junior while he was hospitalized; (2) the trial court did not err by granting summary judgment for Pali Momi on the Cabrals' claim for failing to obtain Junior's informed consent to treatment or to a procedure; and (3) the trial court did not err by denying the Cabrals' motion for new trial based on alleged juror misconduct. We affirm the Final Judgment in part, vacate in part, and remand for further proceedings. 
I. BACKGROUND 
On November 4, 2019, 31-year old Junior went to Pali 
Momi's emergency room, complaining of chest pain and shortness of breath. He signed Pali Momi's Consent for Treatment. He was examined and admitted to the hospital. He was released the next day, with instructions to follow up for further testing. He died on November 10, 2019. 
The Cabrals sued Pali Momi. Their amended complaint 
alleged counts for medical negligence, vicarious liability, and negligent infliction of emotional distress. 
The trial court granted Pali Momi partial summary 
judgment on the Cabrals' claims for vicarious liability and 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failure to obtain informed consent. Their claims for medical 
negligence and negligent infliction of emotional distress were tried to a jury.
2 
The jury was selected on Friday, January 12, 2024. 
Neither Leslie nor Senior testified during the Cabrals' case-in-chief. After the Cabrals rested, Pali Momi moved for judgment as a matter of law on Leslie's and Senior's individual claims. The trial court granted the motion, ruling that "a reasonable jury would not have a legally sufficient evidentiary basis to find for" Leslie and Senior. The court denied a motion for reconsideration, a motion to call Leslie and Senior as rebuttal witnesses, and a motion to reopen the Cabrals' case. 
The jury returned a verdict on Friday, January 19, 
2024. It found Pali Momi was not negligent. 
On January 29, 2024, the Cabrals moved to set aside the 
verdict. They claimed misconduct by the jury foreperson. The trial court entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order denying the motion. 
On March 15, 2024, the Cabrals moved for a new trial 
based on manifest weight of the evidence. The motion was denied. The Final Judgment was entered on May 24, 2024. This appeal followed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
The Cabrals state six points of error. They contend 
the trial court erred when it: (1) granted Pali Momi's motion for 
2 Consistent with the partial summary judgment on vicarious
liability, the jury was instructed: "Defendant is not liable for the acts or 
omissions of doctors who were not its employees." 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
partial summary judgment; (2) granted judgment as a matter of law 
for Pali Momi against Leslie and Senior; (3) denied their motion to reconsider the judgment as a matter of law against Leslie and Senior; (4) denied their request to reopen their case-in-chief; (5) denied their motion for a new trial based on juror misconduct; and (6) denied their motion for a new trial because the jury verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Motion for Summary Judgment 
We review a grant of summary judgment de novo. Ralston 
v. Yim, 129 Hawai# i 46, 55, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285 (2013). Summary 
judgment is appropriate if the evidence shows there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
Id.
When (as here) the summary judgment movant does not 
bear the burden of proof at trial, it has the burden to show (1) there is no genuine issue of material fact on the essential elements of the claim addressed by the motion, and (2) the uncontroverted facts entitle it to judgment as a matter of law. Id. at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286. 
Once the movant satisfies its burden, the non-moving 
party must "demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." Id. 
at 56-57, 292 P.3d at 1286-87. 
The evidence must be viewed in 
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. at 56, 292 
P.3d at 1286. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. Juror Misconduct 
We review a trial court's inquiry into potential juror 
misconduct for abuse of discretion. State v. Grewer, 157 Hawai# i 
104, 110, 575 P.3d 737, 743 (2025). "The trial court abuses its 
discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id.
IV. DISCUSSION 
We address Pali Momi's motion for partial summary 
judgment first, because it affected the scope of the trial. After the discovery cutoff, Pali Momi moved for partial summary judgment on the Cabrals' claims for (a) vicarious liability for acts or omissions of non-employees and (b) failure to obtain Junior's informed consent to treatment or to a procedure. The trial court granted the motion. 
A. Pali Momi was not entitled to summary
judgment on its potential vicarious liabilityfor alleged professional negligence by itscontracted hospitalist or house physician. 
Under the respondeat superior theory of vicarious 
liability, an employer can be liable for its employee's 
negligence if the employee's act or omission happened in the scope of employment. Wong-Leong v. Hawaiian Indep. Refinery, 
Inc.
, 76 Hawai#i 433, 438, 879 P.2d 538, 543 (1994). 
Attached to Pali Momi's motion for summary judgment was 
a report by the Cabrals' expert witness, Ahvie 
Herskowitz, M.D. 
He opined that Shayne Castanera, M.D., John Kao, M.D., and Nurse 
Practitioner Kate Deans breached standards of care. Pali Momi 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had stipulated to be bound by Dr. Kao's and N.P. Deans's acts or 
omissions because they were Pali Momi's employees. The issue presented by the motion was whether Pali Momi could be vicariously liable for Dr. Castanera's alleged professional negligence. 
Pali Momi supported its motion for summary judgment 
with its risk manager's declaration stating that Dr. Castanera was not a Pali Momi employee. The risk manager authenticated portions of Pali Momi's Agreement for Hospitalist and House Physician Services with Hawaii Hospital Physicians, Inc. (HHP) 
which, although not mentioning Dr. Castanera by name, was 
apparently the contract under which he provided "in-house hospitalist and house physician coverage" at Pali Momi Medical Center.
3 
Pali Momi's risk manager also authenticated the Consent 
for Treatment that Junior signed on November 4, 2019. It stated: 
I understand that I will receive a bill from this medical 
facility. The physician(s) may also bill me separately fortheir services provided to me while at this facility. I 
further understand not all physicians are employees of this
medical facility . 
(emphasis added). 
Pali Momi thus sustained its burden as summary judgment 
movant under the law set forth in Wong-Leong. Ralston, 129 
Hawai#i at 56, 292 P.3d at 1286. The burden then shifted to the 
Cabrals to "demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general 
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial." Id. 
3 Pali Momi's contract with HHP, which was apparently subject to a
protective order, was redacted, and only three pages of the 12-page contract
were attached to the risk manager's declaration. 
6  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 56-57, 292 P.3d at 1286-87. Or to argue an alternative legal 
basis for imposing vicarious liability, which is what they did. 
Dr. Herskowitz opined that: Junior had a heart attack 
and coronary artery spasm while hospitalized at Pali Momi; Dr. Castanera misdiagnosed Junior with pericarditis or myocarditis or cardiomyopathy; and the misdiagnosis and failure to treat Junior for his heart attack and coronary artery spasm "directly led to his death on November 10
th, 2019." According to 
Dr. Herskowitz: 
If [Junior] was accurately diagnosed and treated within the
standard of care, he would have been told that he hadsuffered a heart attack, and educated on how best to avoid a recurrence. He would have undergone risk stratificationduring hospitalization and sent home on specific heartmedications. The medical literature clearly shows thatcoronary artery spasm is a treatable disorder that respondswell to calcium channel blockers, nitroglycerin and anti-platelet therapy. The goal of treating coronary arteryspasm is to prevent the spasm, relieve the chest pain, andprevent new heart injury. 
The Cabrals argued the trial court should adopt the 
ruling in Bynum v. Magno, 125 F. Supp. 2d 1249 (D. Haw. 2000). 
The issue in Bynum was: "under what circumstances may a hospital be liable for the allegedly negligent acts of its independent contractor doctors?" Id. at 1265. After noting that "Hawaii has 
not squarely addressed this question," the federal district court predicted that Hawai# i would recognize vicarious liability for 
hospitals under the theory of apparent authority if a plaintiff 
"establish[es] that (1) he/she had a reasonable belief that [the] physician was [an] agent/employee of the hospital, (2) the belief was generated by some affirmative act of the hospital or physician, and (3) the patient justifiably relied on the 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
representation of authority." Id. at 1265-66; see also Raymond 
v. Wilcox Mem'l Hosp., 403 F. Supp. 3d 868, 884-85 (D. Haw. 2019); cf. Bartholomew v. Burger King Corp., 15 F. Supp. 3d 1043, 1048–49 (D. Haw. 2014) (applying vicarious liability based on apparent agency, citing Restatement (Second) of Agency § 267 (1958) and Cho Mark Oriental Food, Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 516, 836 P.2d 1057, 1062 (1992)). 
Under Hawai# i law, vicarious liability is not limited 
to the employer-employee context. 
One may be vicariously liable 
in tort for acts or omissions of another under agency theories of actual authority or implied actual authority. State v. Hoshijo 
ex rel. White, 102 
Hawai#i 307, 318-19, 76 P.3d 550, 561-62 
(2003). 
Hoshijo addressed whether the University of Hawai# i 
could be held vicariously liable in tort for misconduct by a non-employee agent — the men's basketball team's student manager. The supreme court noted that an agency relationship can be created through actual or implied actual authority, 102 Hawai# i 
at 318, 76 P.3d at 561, but agency status alone does not make a principle "ipso facto
 liable" for an agent's actions, id. at 319, 
76 P.3d at 562. Generally, "a principal can only be held vicariously liable for the actions of an agent under the theory of respondeat superior." Id."Vicarious liability under the 
respondeat superior doctrine ordinarily requires some kind of employment relationship or other consensual arrangement
 under 
which one person agrees to act under another's control." Id. 
(underscoring added). 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pali Momi's contract with HHP provided: 
HHP shall be an "independent contractor" with the authority
and responsibility to control and direct the performance anddetails of the work and services required under thisAgreement . . . . All persons hired or used by HHP shall beHHP's employees and agents and HHP shall ensure that suchpersons are qualified to engage in the activities andservices in which they participate. HHP shall be responsible for the accuracy, completeness and adequacy ofany and all work and services performed by HHP's employeesand agents and shall ensure that all applicable licensingand operating requirements of federal, state, county andmunicipal governments, and all applicable accreditation andother standards of quality generally accepted in the fieldof HHP's activities, are complied with and satisfactorilymet. 
The contract required HHP, not Pali Momi, to control 
Dr. Castanera's medical practice. The Cabrals did not proffer 
evidence showing that HHP or Dr. Castanera agreed to let Pali Momi control Dr. Castanera's exercise of professional judgment or his diagnosis or treatment of Junior. Under Hoshijo, Pali Momi could not be vicariously liable for Dr. Castanera's negligence under theories of actual or implied actual authority. 
The supreme court in Hoshijo specifically declined to 
consider vicarious liability under the apparent authority
 theory 
of agency. 102 Hawai# i at 318, 76 P.3d at 561. Under Hawai# i 
law: 
Apparent authority can occur under the following
circumstances: 
(1) The principal has manifested his consent to the
exercise of such authority or has knowingly permittedthe agent to assume the exercise of such authority; 
(2) the third person knew of the principal's actions and,acting in good faith, had reason to believe, and didactually believe, that the agent possessed suchauthority; and 
(3) the third person, relying on such appearance ofauthority, has changed his position and will beinjured or suffer loss if the act done or transactionexecuted by the agent does not bind the principal. 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cho Mark, 73 Haw. at 517, 836 P.2d at 1062 (cleaned up) 
(formatting altered). 
Apparent authority thus 
arises when the principal does something or permits the
agent to do something which reasonably leads another tobelieve that the agent had the authority he was purported tohave. The critical focus is not on the principal andagent's intention to enter into an agency relationship, buton whether a third party relies on the principal's conductbased on a reasonable belief in the existence of such a relationship. 
State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Pac. Rent-All, Inc., 90 Hawai# i 
315, 326–27, 978 P.2d 753, 764–65 (1999) (cleaned up) (quoting 
Cho Mark, 73 Haw. at 516-17, 836 P.2d at 1062). 
But Cho Mark and Pacific Rent-All were contract cases. 
Cho Mark involved a commercial real property lease. Pacific 
Rent-All involved tort subrogation claims, but the apparent authority issue concerned the scope of a settlement agreement, which is a contract. The Cabrals' medical malpractice claim against Pali Momi sounds in tort. Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawai# i 
399, 411–12, 77 P.3d 83, 95–96 (2003); HRS § 671-1 (2016) (defining "medical tort"). The Hawai
#i Supreme Court has not 
decided whether vicarious tort liability can be imposed under the apparent authority theory of agency, a question left open by Hoshijo, 102 Hawai# i at 318, 76 P.3d at 561. 
Other jurisdictions have considered the issue. In 
Cefaratti v. Aranow, 141 A.3d 752 (Conn. 2016), Aranow performed gastric bypass surgery on the plaintiff at Middlesex Hospital. He left a surgical sponge in her. 
She sued Aranow and Middlesex. 
Middlesex moved for summary judgment because Aranow was not its employee. The trial court granted summary judgment. The 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appellate court affirmed, citing its own precedent that "the 
doctrine of apparent authority cannot be used to hold a principal liable for the tortious actions of its alleged agent." Cefaratti v. Aranow, 105 A.3d 265, 293 (Conn. App. Ct. 2014), rev'd, 141 A.3d 752 (Conn. 2016). The Supreme Court of Connecticut granted the plaintiff's petition for certification to decide whether to "recognize the doctrine of apparent agency in tort actions[.]" Cefaratti, 141 A.3d at 754. 
The Connecticut supreme court noted that "[t]he rules 
of vicarious liability respond to a specific need in the law of torts: how to fully compensate an injury caused by the act of a single tortfeasor. 
Upon a showing of agency, vicarious liability 
increases the likelihood that an injury will be compensated, by providing two funds from which a plaintiff may recover. If the ultimately responsible agent is unavailable or lacks the ability to pay, the innocent victim has recourse against the principal." Id. at 761 (cleaned up). It held, "[b]ecause a hospital may be held vicariously liable for the medical malpractice of its agents and employees under the doctrine of respondeat superior, it may also be held vicariously liable under the doctrine of apparent agency." Id. at 763. The court explained, "when an entity has held itself 
out as providing certain services to the public — and, indeed, may have made great efforts to persuade members of the public to avail themselves of those services, and benefited from doing so — and has selected the specific individual who will provide those services to particular members of the public, we do not believe 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it is unfair to hold that entity liable for the individual's 
negligence." Id. at 769–70 (footnote omitted). 
The Connecticut court also noted, in response to the 
argument its ruling would "transmute hospitals into excess insurers of those physicians who are neither employees nor actual agents of the hospital[,]" that "a principal that is held vicariously liable for another's negligence under the doctrine of apparent agency may be able to seek indemnification from the tortfeasor[.]" Id. at 763 n.14. Here, Pali Momi submitted only 
three pages of its 12-page contract with HHP; we don't know whether the contract contained an indemnity agreement, a requirement that HHP add Pali Momi as an additional insured to HHP's professional liability and excess liability insurance policies, or other risk-transfer provisions. In addition to common law joint tortfeasor indemnification, those are ways a hospital can protect itself against vicarious liability for medical torts committed by non-employee doctors whom the hospital allows to treat its patients. 
Other jurisdictions have also applied vicarious tort 
liability under the apparent authority theory of agency to a hospital or other health care provider. See, e.g., Wilson v. 
Anonymous Defendant 1, 183 N.E.3d 289 (Ind. 2022) (applying Restatement (Second) of Agency § 267 (1958)); Arrendale v. Am. Imaging & MRI, LLC, 183 N.E.3d 1064 (Ind. 2022) (applying Restatement (Second) of Torts § 429 (1965)); Wilkins v. Marshalltown Med. & Surgical Ctr., 758 N.W.2d 232 (Iowa 2008) (applying Restatement (Second) of Agency § 267 (1958) and 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 429 (1965)); Popovich v. Allina 
Health Sys., 946 N.W.2d 885 (Minn. 2020); Eads v. Borman, 277 P.3d 503 (Or. 2012). 
We hold that a hospital can be vicariously liable for 
professional negligence by an independent contractor physician under the apparent authority theory of agency if the plaintiff proves: 
(1) the plaintiff reasonably believed that the hospital
authorized the physician to treat them; 
(2) the hospital did something or allowed the physician todo something that led to this belief; and 
(3) the plaintiff relied on the physician's apparentauthority. 
Cf. Cho Mark, 73 Haw. at 517, 836 P.2d at 1062. 
Here, viewed in the light most favorable to the 
Cabrals, the evidence showed that Pali Momi contracted with HHP 
to have Dr. Castanera treat Pali Momi's patients. Pali Momi required that Junior sign its Consent for Treatment form, which stated: 
I wish to receive medical care and treatment at Pali Momi 
Medical Center. Accordingly, I consent to the procedures,which may be performed during this hospitalization or clinicvisit, including emergency treatment. I authorize and consent to any of the following: X-ray examination,laboratory procedure, other diagnostic procedures, medicalor surgical treatment, or other clinical and hospitalservices as directed by my physician(s) or my physician's(s)assistants, which my physician(s) believes are advisable toevaluate or treat me, and to other services rendered underthe general and special instructions of my physician(s). 
A reasonable jury could find that Pali Momi's use of 
the Consent for Treatment led Junior to believe the doctors 
treating him in Pali Momi's hospital were authorized by Pali Momi to do so, even if they may not all be Pali Momi employees. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record does not show that Dr. Castanera was 
Junior's personal physician. A reasonable jury could thus find 
that Junior's signing of Pali Momi's Consent for Treatment showed he reasonably relied on Pali Momi allowing Dr. Castanera to provide him with medical care. 
On this record, the trial court erred by granting Pali 
Momi's motion for partial summary judgment on its potential vicarious liability for Dr. Castanera's alleged professional negligence. 
B. Pali Momi was entitled to summary judgment on
the Cabrals' claim for failure to obtain Junior's informed consent to a treatment or procedure. 
The other issue presented by Pali Momi's motion was 
whether Pali Momi failed to obtain Junior's informed consent to 
treatment or to a procedure. Under the common law doctrine of informed consent, physicians had a duty to disclose to patients "all relevant information concerning a proposed treatment, including the collateral hazards attendant thereto, so that the patient's consent to the treatment would be an intelligent one based on complete information." Ngo v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 136 
Hawai#i 54, 63, 358 P.3d 26, 35 (2015). 
The common-law doctrine was supplanted by Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 671-3(b). Garcia v. Robinson, 137 
Hawai#i 388, 396 n.7, 375 P.3d 167, 175 n.7 (2016). HRS § 671-3 
(2016) provides: 
(b) The following information shall be supplied to
the patient or the patient's guardian or legal surrogate
prior to obtaining consent to a proposed medical or surgical
treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure : 
(1) The condition to be treated; 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) A description of the proposed treatment or
procedure; 
(3) The intended and anticipated results of theproposed treatment or procedure; 
(4) The recognized alternative treatments orprocedures, including the option of notproviding these treatments or procedures; 
(5) The recognized material risks of seriouscomplications or mortality associated with: 
(A) The proposed treatment or procedure; 
(B) The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures; and 
(C) Not undergoing any treatment or procedure;and 
(6) The recognized benefits of the recognizedalternative treatments or procedures. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Pali Momi argued that physicians, not hospitals, are 
obligated to obtain a patient's informed consent to treatments 
and procedures. HRS § 671-3(a) imposes the duty to give information on "health care providers." HRS § 671-1 (2016) defines "health care provider" to include a health care facility as defined in HRS § 323D-2. The HRS § 323D-2 (2022) definition includes "hospitals." And in Mroczkowski v. Straub Clinic & Hospital, 6 Haw. App. 563, 732 P.2d 1255 (1987), the hospital was the only defendant. We applied HRS § 671-3(b) (1976) and held: 
Mroczkowski was required to prove the specifically itemized
components of the statutory general standard. More specifically, Mroczkowski was required to prove by properevidence that the harm he is complaining about was aprobable risk of the August 12, 1980 operation and thatStraub knew or should have known of that fact. 
Id. at 568, 732 P.2d at 1259 (emphasis added). 
Pali Momi thus had a duty to obtain its patient's 
informed consent to a proposed medical or surgical treatment or a 
diagnostic or therapeutic procedure to be performed at Pali Momi. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We held that Pali Momi could potentially be vicariously 
liable for Dr. Castanera's alleged medical negligence under the 
apparent authority theory of agency. To prove a claim for Dr. Castanera's failure to obtain Junior's informed consent to a treatment or procedure, the Cabrals had to produce evidence that Dr. Castanera "proposed [a] medical or surgical treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure[.]" HRS § 671-3(b). 
The Cabrals argued: "The medical records confirm that 
none of these medical doctors discussed Junior's Troponin levels or myocarditis (or any other diagnosis) with Junior/Plaintiffs. They told him he was fine and sent him home with instructions to change his diet and lifestyle (an all-too-common practice in healthcare, especially here in Hawai# i)." The Cabrals did not 
offer Junior's medical records or any other evidence to support their argument. 
Nor did the Cabrals offer evidence that Dr. Castanera 
proposed a medical or surgical treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure for Junior that would have triggered his duty to provide information under HRS § 671-3(b). We hold, on this record, that the trial court did not err by granting partial summary judgment for Pali Momi on the Cabrals' claim for failure to obtain Junior's informed consent to a treatment or procedure under HRS § 671-3.
4 
We next address the trial court's denial of the 
Cabrals' motion for a new trial based on alleged juror 
4 The Cabrals' opening brief makes arguments that weren't made to
the trial court in opposition to Pali Momi's motion for partial summary
judgment. Arguments made for the first time on appeal are deemed waived.Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai #i 438, 500, 164 P.3d 696, 758
(2007). 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misconduct, because it could impeach the jury's finding that Pali 
Momi was not negligent based on Dr. Kao's and N.P. Deans's acts or omissions. 
C. The trial court did not err by denying the
motion for new trial based on alleged juror
misconduct. 
Ten days after the jury returned its verdict, the 
Cabrals moved for a new trial. They alleged misconduct by the 
jury foreperson. The motion was supported by Senior's declaration and some exhibits. Senior declared: 
3. On January 19, 2024, after the verdict, I
searched for . . . the foreperson, on the internet and
eventually landed on the site www.mylife.com. When I looked him up on that site, I was shocked to see that [theforeperson] had already viewed my profile onwww.mylife.com[.] Attached hereto is a copy of my profileand the screenshot proving that he viewed my profile. 
. . . . 
8. I truly believe [the foreperson] was influenced
by his search of my profile. He likely concluded I was some
sort of deadbeat dad based on my prior DUI arrest and thatwe were trying to profit from the death of our son based onour past financial troubles as set forth on www.mylife.com. For example, at the beginning of trial, he would politelysmile at us if we saw him outside of the courtroom. Towards the end of the trial, he refused to make eye contact. It cannot be because he did not like our testimony, as my wifeand I did not testify. 
Exhibit 1 to the motion (we redacted the foreperson's 
name) was: 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Senior's declaration did not authenticate Exhibit 1, although he 
refers to it as "the screenshot proving that [the foreperson] viewed my profile." Senior did not testify at the hearing on the motion for new trial. His name appears nowhere on Exhibit 1, and there is nothing on Exhibit 1 tying it to Senior. It does not contain a date or any identifying information, such as a URL or website address, revealing its origin or tying it in any way to mylife.com. 
Exhibit 1, viewed in the light most favorable to the 
Cabrals, shows that someone input "[foreperson's name] 69, Ewa Beach, HI" into a search engine to see who had accessed something called a "Background Report" about "[foreperson's name] 69, Ewa Beach, HI," and found that no one had, no websites were selling 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the foreperson's information, and there had been no data 
breaches. No reasonable person could interpret Exhibit 1 as showing that someone with the foreperson's name had "viewed [Senior's] profile on www.mylife.com" as alleged in Senior's declaration. 
Exhibit 2 appears to be information from 
https://www.mylife.com about "Leonard Cabral, 55" including an unredacted date of birth, several addresses and telephone numbers, and other information. It is undated. Senior's declaration appears to describe it — although he never refers to "Exhibit 2" — as "a copy of my profile[.]" Nothing on Exhibit 2 shows that the foreperson — or any person other than Senior — ever viewed it. 
"The trial judge, at a hearing on a motion for new 
trial, acts as the trier of fact." State v. Furutani, 76 Hawai# i 
172, 179, 873 P.2d 51, 58 (1994). 
The Cabrals' statement of the 
points of error does not challenge the trial court's findings. See Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(C). 
Unchallenged findings of fact are binding on appeal. Okada 
Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai# i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 
73, 82 (2002). 
The trial court found: 
21. In support of their Motion, Plaintiffs offered
Exhibit 1 — an alleged screenshot taken by Leonard
Cabral, Sr. of the mylife.com website. Leonard Cabral, Sr.admitted to searching the internet AFTER the verdict wasentered to find out information about [the jury foreperson].There are three columns of information on Exhibit 1. In the third column, there is the name "[foreperson], 69, EwaBeach, Hawaii." Plaintiffs' counsel represented that aprogram called "Snagit" was used to capture the screenshot. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
22. Exhibit 1 has no date on it. 
23. Exhibit 1 has no identifying information to
determine where it came from. 
24. Exhibit 1 does not indicate a date and time when 
"[foreperson], 69, Ewa Beach, Hawaii" allegedly accessed
Leonard Cabral, Sr.’s profile on mylife.com. 
25. Exhibit 1 does not state that [foreperson's
name], the juror, conducted a search of Leonard Cabral,Sr.'s mylife.com profile. 
26. Leonard Cabral, Sr. was not able to recreate
Exhibit 1. 
27. Plaintiffs' counsel was not able to recreate 
Exhibit 1. 
28. Plaintiffs' counsel did not know and was unable 
to provide the Court with the search engine that LeonardCabral, Sr. allegedly used to view the information containedin Exhibit 1. 
29. In support of their Motion, Plaintiffs' [sic]
also offered Exhibit 2 - an alleged a [sic] screenshot ofLeonard Cabral, Sr.'s mylife.com profile with the name"Leonard Cabral" appearing a fifth of the way down the page,but no way to confirm it is the same as Leonard Cabral, Sr. 
. . . . 
31. Neither Exhibit 1 nor 2 confirm that [the
foreperson] even accessed the mylife.com website or what
[the foreperson] allegedly saw or viewed (assuming accessoccurred). There is also no information in either Exhibits 1 or 2 regarding when [the foreperson] allegedly accessedthe mylife.com website. 
Even if those findings of fact had been properly 
challenged, the record contains substantial evidence supporting 
them, and they were not clearly erroneous. See Cowan v. Exclusive Resorts PBL1, LLC, 156 Hawai# i 268, 272, 574 P.3d 288, 
292 (2025) (stating the clearly erroneous standard of review for findings of fact). 
The Cabrals contend the trial court applied the wrong 
legal standard because, before applying the two-step test described in Oishi v. Ganel, No. CAAP-18-0000036, 2024 WL 278962 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Haw. App. Jan. 25, 2024) (SDO),  the court found "the record 
failed to establish a credible allegation that [the jury 
foreperson] engaged in juror misconduct before the verdict was reached."
6 They argue: "This was a clear abuse of discretion 
since the lower court ignored applicable, controlling precedent to impose an unnecessary requirement of its own." They contend the trial court should have assumed the jury foreperson searched mylife.com for information about Senior before the verdict was returned. Their argument relies on a misreading of supreme court precedent. 5
Grewer involved a murder trial. During jury selection, 
"Prospective Juror 20 expressed to the courtroom bailiff a desire to be excused from service, stating that she 'already had [her] opinion.'" 157 Hawai# i at 107, 575 P.3d at 740. While being 
questioned by the trial court outside the presence of the other 
5 Oishi, an unpublished summary disposition order, quoted the test
articulated in State v. Chin, 135 Hawai #i 437, 445, 353 P.3d 979, 987 (2015): 
[T]he initial step for the trial court to take is to
determine whether the nature of the alleged deprivationrises to the level of being substantially prejudicial. If it does not rise to such a level, the trial court is underno duty to interrogate the jury. And whether it does rise to the level of substantial prejudice is ordinarily aquestion committed to the trial court's discretion. 
Where the trial court does determine that such alleged
deprivation is of a nature which could substantiallyprejudice the defendant's right to a fair trial, arebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised. The trial judge is then duty bound to further investigate the totalityof circumstances surrounding the alleged deprivation todetermine its impact on jury impartiality. The standard to be applied in overcoming such a presumption is that thealleged deprivation must be proved harmless beyond areasonable doubt. 
2024 WL 278962, at *3 (emphasis omitted). 
6 The Cabrals' motion for new trial made other arguments, but their
opening brief only challenges the jury foreperson's alleged internet searchfor Senior. Their other arguments are waived. 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
potential jurors, Prospective Juror 20 said three other potential 
jurors heard her say "I wish I didn't have to be here. I — literally I caretake for my uncle. I have — he just got out of the hospital." Id.
The supreme court advised: 
When determining if jury misconduct deprives a criminal
defendant[7] of an impartial jury, the following "conceptual
framework" guides our analysis: 
[W]hen a defendant in a criminal case claims adeprivation of the right to a fair trial by animpartial jury, the initial step for the trial courtto take is to determine whether the nature of the alleged deprivation rises to the level of beingsubstantially prejudicial. If it does not rise to such a level, the trial court is under no duty tointerrogate the jury. And whether it does rise to the level of substantial prejudice is ordinarily aquestion committed to the trial court's discretion. 
Where the trial court does determine that such alleged
deprivation is of a nature which could substantiallyprejudice the defendant's right to a fair trial, arebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised. The trial judge is then duty bound to further investigatethe totality of circumstances surrounding the allegeddeprivation to determine its impact on juryimpartiality. The standard to be applied inovercoming such a presumption is that the allegeddeprivation must be proved harmless beyond areasonable doubt. 
The defendant bears the initial burden of making a
prima facie showing of a deprivation that couldsubstantially prejudice his or her right to a fair
trial by an impartial jury . But once a rebuttable 
presumption of prejudice is raised, the burden of
proving harmlessness falls squarely on theprosecution. 
Id. at 111, 575 P.3d at 744 (underscoring omitted) (bold italics 
added) (quoting State v. Bailey, 126 Hawai# i 383, 399–400, 271 
P.3d 1142, 1158–59 (2012)). 
A prima facie showing of a deprivation is thus part of 
the first step. The showing must include "some specific, 
7 The framework applies in civil cases as well. Ricapor-Hall v.
Philip Morris USA Inc., Hawai #i , , P.3d , ,
No. SCAP-24-0000313, slip op. at 23 (Aug. 6, 2026). 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial evidence showing the occurrence of the outside 
influence that may have possibly biased the juror." Ricapor-Hall v. Philip Morris USA Inc., ___ Hawai# i ___, ___, ___ P.3d ___, 
___, No. SCAP-24-0000313, slip op. at 22 (Aug. 6, 2026) (emphasis added) (quotation marks omitted) (quoting Chin, 135 Hawai# i at 
443 n.10, 353 P.3d at 985 n.10); State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai# i 
356, 381, 60 P.3d 306, 331 (2002) (party claiming juror misconduct should "first present some specific, substantial evidence showing a juror was possibly biased"). 
Here, the Cabrals did not sustain their step-one 
burden. The trial court found, and the evidence supported, that "[n]either Exhibit 1 nor 2 confirm that [the jury foreperson] even accessed the mylife.com
 website or what [the foreperson] 
allegedly saw or viewed (assuming access occurred). There is also no information in either Exhibits 1 or 2 regarding when [the foreperson] allegedly accessed the mylife.com website." 
The Cabrals argue "the Hawaii test for juror misconduct 
and undue influence is not limited to cases where the facts of the misconduct are undisputed or uncontested." Grewer
 and the 
previous Hawai# i cases on the issue involved conduct that was 
undisputed.8 But that doesn't mean undisputed conduct must be 
8 See Grewer, 157 Hawai #i at 107, 575 P.3d at 740 (Juror 20's
comments were confirmed by the bailiff); State v. Pitts, 146 Hawai #i 120,
131-32, 456 P.3d 484, 495-96 (2019) (during deliberations, jury cut open
sealed evidence bag and found "evidence that had not been presented in court,for which no foundation had been laid, and which had not been properlyadmitted into evidence"); Chin, 135 Hawai #i at 440-41, 353 P.3d at 982-83
(during trial, juror approached witness about possible employment); Bailey,126 Hawaii # at 385, 271 P.3d at 1144 (during deliberations, one juror informed
the others that defendant had previously been charged with and/or convicted ofmurder); State v. Yamada, 108 Hawai #i 474, 475, 122 P.3d 254, 255 (2005)
(juror fell asleep during defendant's closing argument); Pauline, 100 Hawai #i 
at 382, 60 P.3d at 332 (alternate juror made statements to defendant's counselsuggesting she had predeliberation discussions with jurors who actually
continue... 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shown before the two-step test can be applied. As part of step 
one, there just has to be a prima facie showing "of some specific, substantial evidence showing the occurrence of the outside influence that may have possibly biased the juror." Chin, 135 Hawai# i at 443 n.10, 353 P.3d at 985 n.10 (quotation 
marks omitted); Pauline, 100 Hawai# i at 381, 60 P.3d at 331. 
There may be a dispute about what happened, but with "specific, substantial evidence" of an outside influence a court can conduct the first-step analysis. 
Here, the trial court expressed frustration during the 
hearing on the motion for new trial: 
Okay. The Court is reluctantly ready to rule. I will start off with saying the record is extremely
imperfect in the Court's estimation. All of the case law 
before today involved cases where there is no dispute thatjuror misconduct occurred. And then we have this case. And none of the lawyers appear to appreciate how different thiscase is from every other appellate case on the question ofjuror misconduct. 
This case was different because the Cabrals failed to 
sustain their step-one burden to show specific, substantial 
evidence of an outside influence that could have substantially prejudiced their right to a fair trial by an impartial jury. We 
8...continue 
deliberated); Furutani, 76 Hawai #i at 177, 873 P.2d at 56 (during
deliberations, general comments were made about defendant's failure to
testify); State v. Williamson, 72 Haw. 97, 99, 807 P.2d 593, 595 (1991)(dictionary was found in jury room after trial court denied jury request for adictionary and two definitions); Lopez v. Sears Roebuck & Co., 70 Haw. 562,563–64, 777 P.2d 715, 715–16 (1989) (in suit for negligent assembly ofbicycle, jury foreperson went to defendant's store, watched assembly process,then reported to the other jurors "he was now certain that Sears was 100% freefrom fault or liability"); State v. Larue, 68 Haw. 575, 578, 722 P.2d 1039,1042 (1986) (during deliberations in rape trial, jury foreperson vouched for,and attempted to secure acceptance by other jurors of, reliability ofstatements by child complainant based on foreperson remembering being"touched" when she was three); State v. Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. 356, 357, 569P.2d 891, 893 (1977) (newspaper published article about defendant's previousrobbery convictions during non-sequestered jury trial). 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hold that under these circumstances, the trial court did not 
abuse its discretion by denying the Cabrals' motion for new trial based on alleged juror misconduct of which there was no specific, substantial evidence. 
D. The Cabrals waived their appeal from the
denial of their motion for new trial based on manifest weight of the evidence. 
The Cabrals also moved for a new trial arguing the 
verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence. See 
Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai# i 475, 488, 904 P.2d 489, 502 (1995). 
The trial court denied the motion. Although stated as a point of 
error, the Cabrals present no argument on the point. The point is waived. See
 HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be 
deemed waived."). 
We need not address the points relating to the judgment 
as a matter of law on Leslie's and Senior's individual claims because they were mooted by the jury's finding that Pali Momi was not negligent. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The May 24, 2024 Final Judgment
 is affirmed in part and 
vacated in part. The judgment for Pali Momi and against the Cabrals on the jury's finding that Pali Momi was not negligent based on acts or omissions of its employees, including Dr. Kao and N.P. Deans, is affirmed. The February 8, 2024 Order Granting Defendant Pali Momi Medial Center's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Informed Consent and Vicarious Liability is affirmed as to the claim for failure to obtain informed consent, but vacated as to the claim for vicarious liability. 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This case is remanded for further proceedings on the 
claims by Leslie, Junior's estate, Senior, and Nicholas that Pali 
Momi is vicariously liable for acts or omissions by Dr. Castanera under the theory of apparent authority, including their claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress. 
We note that a Stipulation for Partial Dismissal with 
Prejudice of Defendant Shayne M. Castanera, M.D. and to Amend Caption  was entered on October 31, 2023; we express no opinion on 
the effect of the stipulation, if any, on remand. 
On the briefs: 
Kai Lawrence, 
Sergio Rufo,for Plaintiffs-Appellants Leslie Cabral, as Personal Representative,and Nicholas Cabral. 
Gail Y. Cosgrove,
Deirdre Marie-Iha,Maegan A. Ruggles,Lindsey N. Barrios,for Defendant-AppelleePali Momi Medical Center. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
26
 