   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000011
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JOEL JORDAN, Plaintiff-Appellant, and
CATHY JORDAN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. DONALD ADKINS, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC10-1-11014)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant Joel Jordan
 
1
(Joel) appeals from the December 27, 2012 Judgment  of the
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District
 
Court), ordering him to pay $975 plus $30 in filing fees to
 
Defendant-Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee Donald Adkins (Adkins)
 
and dismissing counterclaims against Plaintiff-Counterclaim
 
Defendant Cathy Jordan (Cathy).2
 
1
 The notice of appeal states that Joel is appealing from an order
entered on November 27, 2012. However, the order entered on November 27, 2012
does not order Joel to pay $975 plus a filing fee. As the December 27, 2012Judgment does include such an order, we interpret the notice of appeal asappealing from this judgment instead. Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai' i 289, 294, 75
P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003) ("[A] mistake in designating the judgment should notresult in loss of the appeal as long as the intention to appeal from aspecific judgment can be fairly inferred from the notice and the appellee isnot misled by the mistake.") (citations, internal quotation marks, andellipsis omitted).
The Honorable Philip Doi presided over the trial that resulted in
the December 27, 2012 Judgment.
 
2
 Together, Joel and Cathy will be referred to as the Jordans.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Joel raises five points of error and alleges
 
that the District Court erred by: (1) denying his oral motion to
 
dismiss Adkins's counterclaim; (2) allowing witness "Ronnie
 Adkins" to testify; (3) allowing Adkins to behave in a way that
 violated courtroom decorum; (4) not allowing a police officer
 called by the Jordans to testify; and (5) entering a judgment of
 $975 plus fees in favor of Adkins when he had already been paid
 by Joel.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Joel's points of error as follows:
 
(1)&(5) Points of error 1 and 5 are both based on the
 
argument that Adkins was not entitled to the award of $975 plus
 fees because the Jordans already paid him; thus, Joel argues, any
 claim by Adkins was brought not on behalf of himself, but on
 behalf of third parties who were not parties to the counterclaim.
 
As to Joel's first point, we conclude that the District
 
Court did not err in denying the oral motion to dismiss Adkins's
 counterclaim, which was made after Joel's attorney, Anthony
 Locricchio (Locricchio), questioned Adkins at trial. Adkins
 
testified that although his counterclaim was for about $9000,
 
$8025 of that amount was owed to other persons while only $975
 was owed to him personally.
3 He testified that he received four
 
checks from Joel, for $1500, $2000, $1500, and $1000. Joel
 apparently stopped payment on the fourth check for $1000. 
Adkins indicated that he used the money from the other three
 checks to pay the other individuals who worked on the Jordans'
 condominium. Joel argued that because Adkins did not have a
 "personal stake" in the entire amount prayed for in the
 counterclaim, the counterclaim was "misfiled." When asked to
 address Adkins's claim that he was still personally owed $975,
 Joel argued, through counsel, that "at this point [Adkins] says
 
3
 Adkins testified that the $975 was owed for his work hanging
cabinets in the kitchen and bathroom of the Jordans' condominium.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he was paid that amount of money. So he can't file a
 
counterclaim for it. He admits he took the 975." However, the
 court did not clearly err when it determined that this statement
 misstated the evidence. Adkins's testimony was that the three
 checks he received from Joel which were not cancelled were used
 to pay others, not to satisfy the $975 that he alleged was owed
 to him personally. Although Adkins may not have been entitled to
 recover the entire amount he initially claimed, on the grounds
 that it was not due to him, his claim that he was owed $975 for
 his personal services was properly allowed. Thus, the District
 Court did not err in denying the oral motion to dismiss.
 
Similarly, Joel's fifth point of error alleges that 
"[w]hat was owed to Mr. Adkins was $975.00 and this $975.00 was already paid by Plaintiff Joel Jordan from the first $5,000.00 check[s] that he got from Joel Jordan. The checks were written out in his name, he accepted it and cashed it." Again, Adkins's testimony was that the checks totaling $5000 were used to pay other workers. His position was that he was still owed $975 for his installation of the Jordans' cabinets. The District Court was entitled to rely on this testimony and we will not disturb its assessment of the credibility of the witness's testimony. Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
("It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
(2) Preliminarily, we note that, although trial
 
apparently took place on six different days, the record on appeal
 only contains complete transcripts for the first day of trial,
 November 18, 2011, and the last day of trial, November 27, 2012. 
It also includes a partial transcript of the trial on June 20,
 2012. Joel's failure to provide complete transcripts of the
 proceedings, failure to present comprehensible legal arguments,
 
3
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and failure to cite where in the record certain errors occurred
 
make it difficult to review the arguments on appeal.4
 
In his second point of error, Joel alleges that the 
District Court erred by allowing "Ronnie Adkins" to testify over the objection of the Jordans' counsel. The opening brief cites to the partial transcript of June 20, 2012 as the place in the record where the error allegedly occurred. The excerpt provided 
shows that Locricchio objected to the testimony of "THE WITNESS" 
based on relevance. However, this short excerpt fails to illuminate who "THE WITNESS" is, the testimony which was allegedly irrelevant, or the District Court's ruling on the objection. It is the appellant's duty under Hawai
'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 11(a) to provide a record on 
appeal that is sufficient to review the points of error 
asserted.5 The record is insufficient to support Joel's argument 
that the District Court erred. See State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 
333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). 
(3) Joel's third point of error complains about
 
Adkins's decorum in the courtroom and the District Court's
 alleged failure to curb his behavior. However, the opening brief
 fails to present any argument as to how these alleged errors bear
 on Joel's request that this court vacate the District Court's
 
4
 Although Joel filed an appendix to his opening brief, it does not
contain any transcripts that were not already included in the JIMS record on
appeal.
 
5
 HRAP Rule 11(a) states:
 
(a) Duty of Appellant. After the filing of the notice of
appeal, the appellant, or in the event more than one appealis taken, each appellant, shall comply with the applicableprovisions of Rule 10 and shall take any other actionnecessary to enable the clerk of the court to assemble andtransmit the record. It is the responsibility of eachappellant to provide a record, as defined in Rule 10 and theHawai'i Court Records Rules, that is sufficient to review
the points asserted and to pursue appropriate proceedings inthe court or agency from which the appeal is taken tocorrect any omission. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment. We deem this point of error waived. HRAP Rule
 
28(b)(7).6
 
(4) Joel contends that the District Court erred by not
 
allowing a police officer to testify about a tape recording.7 In
 
support of this argument, the opening brief cites to the partial
 transcript of June 20, 2012. However, the short excerpt cited is
 wholly unhelpful and indeed, does not reveal the Jordans' request
 or the District Court's ruling denying the request. Joel has
 failed to provide a sufficient record under HRAP Rule 11(a) to
 warrant relief based on this alleged error.
 
Finally, although not properly raised in Joel's points
 
of error, Joel argues that the District Court erred because: (1)
 Adkins's counterclaim should have been dismissed because it
 claimed more than $1000 for the work of an unlicensed contractor;
 (2) the District Court should not have allowed the trial to
 proceed with Adkins acting as a lawyer for third parties; and (3)
 "[t]he court did not give complete credence to Plaintiff's
 testimony imputing the fact that Plaintiff's Counsel was creating
 new testimony that was never introduced at trial." 
Although no authority is cited on appeal, Joel appears
 
8
to rely on Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 444-22 (2013),  which
precludes unlicensed contractors from recovering damages in a
 
civil action for work performed in violation of any provision of
 HRS Chapter 444. We note, however, that certain exemptions may
 
6
 HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) states that the appellant shall submit an
opening brief containing "[t]he argument, containing the contentions of the
appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to
the authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on. The argument may
be preceded by a concise summary. Points not argued may be deemed waived."
 
7
 It appears from the record that the tape recording purportedly
contained a statement from Adkins's son saying that Adkins never paid him out
of the money that Adkins received from the Jordans. 
8
 HRS § 444-22 reads: 
The failure of any person to comply with any provision of
this chapter shall prevent such person from recovering for
work done, or materials or supplies furnished, or both on a
contract or on the basis of the reasonable value thereof, in
a civil action, if such person failed to obtain a license
under this chapter prior to contracting for such work.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
apply. Joel's reference to a $1000 limit refers to HRS § 444­
2(4) (2013), which states that the provisions of HRS Chapter 444
 will not apply to "[a]ny project or operation for which the
 aggregate contract price for labor, materials, taxes, and all
 other items is not more than $1,000." The District Court
 apparently agreed with Joel that HRS § 444-2(4), called the
 handyman exemption, did not apply. Although not explicitly
 stated, it appears that the District Court was of the opinion
 that Adkins could pursue his claim because of the "owner-builder"
 exemption under HRS § 444-2.5(a) (Supp. 2010).
9 Joel's brief
 
does not make any argument as to why the owner-builder exemption
 did not apply. We do not discern any basis to disturb the
 District Court's ruling.
 
Joel's next assertion assumes that the District Court
 
allowed Adkins to "act as a lawyer" for the other persons to whom
 the Jordans allegedly owed money. However, as discussed, the
 District Court only awarded Adkins the money he allegedly was
 
9
 At the time that Adkins alleged that the Jordans owed him for his
services (September 23, 2010), HRS § 444-2.5(a) read as follows:
 
(a) This chapter shall not apply to owners or lessees of
property who build or improve residential, farm, industrial,
or commercial buildings or structures on property for their
own use, or for use by their grandparents, parents,
siblings, or children and who do not offer the buildings or
structures for sale or lease[.]
 
Minor changes were made in 2013 to remove industrial and
commercial buildings from the purview of this exception. See HRS § 444-2.5(a)
 
(2013).
 
At the end of the trial, the District Court apparently credited
testimony that Joel was acting as an owner-builder in this case.
Specifically, the District Court stated:
The question as to whether a contractor's license was
required or not boils down to the agreement of the parties.
It just goes back right to the beginning. Mr. Jordan, his
testimony is that he hired a contractor to . . . a licensed
contractor – what he thought was a licensed contractor at
the time. Mr. Adkins' testimony is I . . . signed on as a
laborer and I thought Mr. Jordan was an owner/builder. . . .
But some other things are also clear. Mr. Jordan did
 
act as an owner/builder on at least two other occasions. He
 said he got Ronnie Adkins back to work on – on the floors
afterwards. There was - no - no one ever claims that he or
 she thought that Ronnie Adkins was a contractor so that must
have been as laborer, and it must have been labor for an
owner/builder.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
owed for his personal services. The allegation that the District
 
Court allowed him to represent others who were not joined as
 parties to the case is without merit. Finally, the last
 allegation is incomprehensible and Joel provides no record
 citations which would aid this court in determining where this
 error allegedly occurred. 
For these reasons, the District Court's December 27,
 
2012 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 9, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Anthony P. Locriccho
for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Donald Adkins 
Defendant-Appellee 
7
 