 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000556 06-FEB-2025 07:55 AM Dkt. 64 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000556  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
 RICHARD BALSIMO, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT  
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 3DTA-22-00154)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Richard J. Balsimo appeals from 
the Amended Judgment and Notice of Entry of Amended Judgment 
(Amended Judgment ), filed on August 24, 2022, by the District 
Court of the Third Circuit, North and South Kona Division 
(district court).1 Following a bench trial, t he district court 
found Balsimo guilty of Operating a Vehi cle Under the Influence 
of an Intoxicant ( OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (2020). 
1 The Honorable Kimberly Taniyama presided over the case.   
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Balsimo raises a single point of error , 
contending that the district court erred in convicting him of 
OVUII because there was insufficient evidence that Balsimo 's 
operation of a vehicle "[w]hile under the influence of alcohol " 
was "in an amount sufficient to impair [his] normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for [himself] and guard against 
casualty. " HRS § 291 E-61(a)(1).2 
Upon careful review of the record , briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities , and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Balsimo's point of error as follows . 
We consider the evidence adduced at trial "in the 
strongest light for the prosecution" when "pass[ing] on the 
legal sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction." 
State v. Kalaola , 124 Hawaiʻi 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citations omitted). The test on appeal is whether there was 
2 HRS § 291 E-61(a)(1) provides that, 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates 
or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental 
faculties or ability to care for the person and 
guard against casualty . . . . 
Balsimo does not contend that there was insufficient evidence to 
establish he was under the influence of an intoxicant, or that he operated or 
assumed actual physical control of a vehicle. 
2   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
    
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial evidence to support the conviction. Id. (citations 
omitted). 
"Substantial evidence" is "credible evidence which is 
of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (cleaned up ). 
The trial judge in a bench trial , as the trier of fact, "is free 
to make all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts 
in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." State v. 
Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 249, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) (citation 
omitted). 
Considering the evidence adduced at trial in the 
strongest light for the prosecution, we conclude that Balsimo's 
conviction for OVUII is supported by substantial evidence. 
Hawaiʻi County Police Department ( HPD) Officer Thomas 
Koyanagi (Officer Koyanagi ) testified that on January 8, 2022 , 
after pulling Balsimo's vehicle over during a traffic stop for a 
defective brake light and expired registration and safety, he 
observed , inter alia , that Balsimo had "red, watery, glassy 
eyes," and that he "could smell the odor of [an] alcoholic 
beverage coming from the vehicle." 
HPD Officer Len Hamakado (Officer Hamakado ), who was 
called to assist Officer Koyanagi with the traffic stop, also 
observed that Balsimo had "red, watery , glassy eyes, " and the 
smell of "an intoxicating beverage" coming from the vehicle. 
3   
 
 
   
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Hamakado also testified that Balsimo agreed to 
participate in a standardized field sobriety test (SFST). 
Officer Hamakado administered the three -part SFST , and testified 
at trial as to Balsimo's conduct and actions while performing 
the SFST . "[E]vidence of a driver's conduct and physical 
actions while performing a SFST is not only relevant to probable 
cause for an arrest, but is also admissible as indicia of 
whether a driver was OVUII beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. 
Jones, 148 Hawaiʻi 152, 172, 468 P.3d 166, 186, (2020). 
Officer Hamakado observed all three clues indicating 
impairment  during Balsimo's performance of the horizontal gaze 
nystagmus test: a lack of smooth pursuit in both eyes; distinct 
and sustained nystagmus at the maximum deviation of both eyes; 
and an onset of nystagmus prior to 45 degrees in both eyes. 
Officer Hamakado observed the following clues indicating 
impairment  during Balsimo's performance of the walk-and-turn 
test: missing a heel-to-toe step on both the first and second set of nine; stepping off the line; raising his arms; conducting 
an improper turn; and having stopped  walking on his ninth step. 
And Officer Hamakado observed two clues of impairment  –  swaying, 
and "raising his arms" - during  Balsimo's performance of  the 
one-leg stand test. In sum, Officer Hamakado observed that 
Balsimo had exhibited a total of 14 out of 18 possible clues of 
impairment.  
4   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HPD Officer Jason Foxworthy (Officer Foxworthy ), who 
observed portions of the SFST, further testified that "it looked 
like [Balsimo] was unable to keep his balance," "was unsteady," 
and "stopped more than . . . once to catch his balance" during 
the walk -and-turn test. Officer Foxworthy testified that, 
during the one -leg stand test, "it looked like [Balsimo] wa s 
swaying while the test was being performed." 
Based on the testimony of Officers Koyanagi, Hamakado, 
and Foxworthy, we conclude that there was substantial evidence 
that Balsimo 's operation of a vehicle while under the influence 
of alcohol was in an amount sufficient to impair his normal 
mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard 
against casualty. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Amended 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 6,  2025.  
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
 Acting Chief Judge  
William H. Jameson, Jr.,   
Deputy Public Defender,  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
for Defendant-Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Stephen L. Frye,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney  Associate Judge 
County of Hawaiʻ i,  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  
5 