NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000545
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JAMES W. TUCKER, JR., Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-1785)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellee James W. Tucker, Jr., (Tucker) with fraudulent
 
1/
use of credit card (Count 1)  and unauthorized possession of
confidential personal information (UPCPI) (Count 2). The UPCPI
 charge in Count 2 alleged a violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 708-839.55 (2014).
2/  Tucker moved to dismiss the UPCPI
 
1/ Tucker ultimately pleaded no contest to Count 1 and that charge is
not at issue in this appeal.
 
2/ HRS § 708-839.55 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized possession
of confidential personal information if that person intentionally
or knowingly possesses, without authorization, any confidential
personal information of another in any form, including but not
limited to mail, physical documents, identification cards, or
information stored in digital form.
 
HRS § 708-800 (2014) defines the term "confidential personal
information" as follows:
 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest, including
but not limited to a driver's license number, a social security
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
charge on the grounds that (1) the statutes defining the UPCPI
 
offense, HRS § 708-839.55 and the definition of "confidential
 personal information" set forth in HRS § 708-800 (UPCPI
 statutes), were unconstitutional in that they were overbroad,
 vague, and violated due process; and (2) the UPCPI charge was
 defective and failed to provide fair notice of the essential
 elements of the charged offense because it did not include the
 statutory definition of the term "confidential personal
 information." A declaration of Tucker's counsel, filed in
 connection with his motion to dismiss, stated that the UPCPI
 charge against Tucker appeared to be based on reports indicating
 that he possessed and used a Macy's credit card, without the
 authorization of its owner, to buy a watch from Macy's. The
 credit card owner was later contacted and reported that she had
 previously lost the credit card and that it may have been taken
 when her vehicle was stolen.
 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
3/
Court) dismissed the UPCPI charge in Count 2 with prejudice on
the grounds that the UPCPI statutes were unconstitutionally vague
 and overbroad and violated due process. The Circuit Court,
 however, denied the portion of Tucker's motion that sought
 dismissal of Count 2 on the ground that the charge was defective
 for failing to include the statutory definition of the term
 "confidential personal information." The Circuit Court
 memorialized its decision in its "Order Granting in Part, and
 Denying in Part, Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Charge for
 Unconstitutionally Broad, Vague and Punitive Statute, and for
 Violation of Due Process" (Order Dismissing UPCPI Charge) filed
 on July 1, 2016.
 

 
2/(...continued)
number, an identifying number of a depository account, a bank

account number, a password or other information that is used for
accessing information, or any other name, number, or code that is
used, alone or in conjunction with other information, to confirm
the identity of a person.
 
3/ The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. 
The State appeals from the Order Dismissing UPCPI 
Charge. On appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court erred 
in concluding that the UPCPI statutes are unconstitutionally vague and overbroad and violate due process. Based on the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. Pacquing, 139 
Hawai'i 302, 389 P.3d 897 (2016), and this court's decision in 
State v. Mank, CAAP-16-0000342, 2017 WL 432898 (Hawai 'i App. Jan. 
31, 2017) (SDO), Tucker concedes error. We agree with this concession of error. 
II.
 
In Pacquing, the supreme court held that (1) the UPCPI 
statutes are not facially overbroad and (2) the UPCPI statutes were unconstitutionally vague as applied to certain aspects of Pacquing's conduct, but were not unconstitutionally vague as applied to other aspects of Pacquing's conduct. Pacquing, 139 
Hawai
'i at 309-20, 389 P.3d at 904-15. The supreme court further 
concluded that the portions of the UPCPI statutes that were unconstitutionally vague could be excised in a manner that would render the remaining portions constitutional. Id. at 318-20, 389 
P.3d at 913-15. To eliminate the unconstitutional aspects of the UPCPI statute, the supreme court excised the HRS § 708-800 definition of "confidential personal information" as follows: 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest,
including but not limited to a driver's license number, a
social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, [or] a bank account number, a password
or other information that is used for accessing information,
or any other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of a person.
 
Id. at 319, 389 P.3d at 914.
 
The supreme court concluded that "[a]fter the deletion
 
of the unconstitutional portions of HRS § 708-800's definition of
 
'confidential personal information,' its meaning would be
 circumscribed to the enumerated classes of information preceded 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by 'including' and information similar to those already
 
enumerated." Id. The supreme court explained that "[t]his means
 
that a non-enumerated item of 'information in which an individual
 has a significant privacy interest' would qualify as
 'confidential personal information' only if that non-enumerated
 item is similar in nature and character to those already
 enumerated in HRS § 708-800." Id. at 319-20, 389 P.3d at 914-15.
 
The supreme court held that after the unconstitutional portions
 of the definition of "confidential personal information" were
 excised, the remaining portions of the UPCPI statutes were
 constitutional. Id. 
In Mank, we concluded that "a credit card number is an
 
item of information that is similar in nature and character to a
 bank account number and an identifying number of a depository
 account, and that a credit card number falls within the
 definition of 'confidential personal information,' as excised in
 Pacquing." Mank, 2017 WL 432898, at *3.
 
III.
 
Based on the supreme court's opinion in Pacquing and
 
our analysis in Mank, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 dismissing Count 2 with prejudice based on its determination that
 the UPCPI statutes were unconstitutional. 
We further note that the UPCPI charge in this case is 
virtually identical to the UPCPI charge in Pacquing. The State in Pacquing conceded that the UPCPI charge was defective because it did not include the statutory definition of "confidential personal information," and the supreme court agreed with the State's concession and held that the charge was legally insufficient. Pacquing, 139 Hawai
'i at 308-09, 389 P.3d at 903­
04. We conclude, based on Pacquing, that the Circuit Court also
 
erred in denying the portion of Tucker's motion that sought
 dismissal of Count 2 on the ground that the charge was defective.
 
In light of these circumstances, we vacate the Order
 
Dismissing UPCPI Charge in its entirety, and we remand the case
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this
 
Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 26, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Brian R. Vincent 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
James S. Tabe Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
5
 