NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000120
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN K. IOPA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-443)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John K. Iopa (Iopa) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on October 28,
 
2010 by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court)1
 
convicting him of one count of Robbery in the First Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-840(1)(b) (Supp.
 
2 3
2012), and/or § 702-221(2)(c) (1993 Repl.)  and/or § 702-222(1)
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. By order of the circuit court,
Iopa's sentence has been stayed pending this appeal. 
2
 HRS § 708-840(1)(b) states, in relevant part:
 
§708-840 Robbery in the first degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of robbery in the first degree if, in the course of
committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle: 
. . . 
(b) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument and:
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1993 Repl.).4
 
On appeal, Iopa challenges his conviction by raising
 
the following points of error: (1) he was denied his due process
 
rights because the pre-trial identifications of him were tainted
 
by suggestiveness; (2) he was denied his due process rights
 
because the State failed to present clearly exculpatory evidence
 
to the grand jury; (3) he was denied his right to due process and
 
equal protection of the laws because the circuit court failed to
 
enumerate each element of the substantive jury instruction as to
 
conduct, result of conduct, and attendant circumstances; and
 
(4) the circuit court erred in denying his motion for judgment of
 
acquittal. 
We initially note that the opening brief fails to 
comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. 
2(...continued)
(i)	 The person uses force against the person of anyone
present with intent to overcome that person's physical
resistance or physical power of resistance; or
(ii) The person threatens the imminent use of force against
the person of anyone present with intent to compel
acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with the
property[.]
3 HRS § 702-221(2)(c) (1993 Repl.) states, in relevant part:
 
§702-221 Liability for conduct of another. . . 
(2)	 A person is legally accountable for the conduct of
another person when:
 . . .
 
(c)	 He is an accomplice of such other person in the
commission of the offense.
4 HRS § 702-222(1) (1993 Repl.) states, in relevant part:
 
§702-222 Liability for conduct of another; complicity. A
 
person is an accomplice of another person in the commission of an
offense if:
 
(1)	 With the intention of promoting or facilitating the
commission of the offense, the person:
(a)	 Solicits the other person to commit it; or
(b)	 Aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other person in
planning or committing it; or
(c)	 Having a legal duty to prevent the commission of the
offense, fails to make reasonable effort so to do[.] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
First, HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) requires "a copy of the judgment,
 
decree, findings of fact and conclusions of law, order, opinion
 
or decision relevant to any point on appeal" to be appended to
 
the appellant's opening brief, unless otherwise ordered by the
 
court. Iopa fails to attach to his opening brief the judgment or
 
any orders relevant to this appeal. Second, in violation of HRAP
 
Rule 28(b)(4), Iopa's asserted points of error fail to state
 
where in the record alleged errors occurred and where in the
 
record alleged errors were objected to or the manner in which the
 
alleged errors were brought to the attention of the circuit
 
court. Third, one of Iopa's points of error challenges jury
 
instructions but, in violation of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(B), Iopa
 
fails to quote or identify the challenged jury instruction(s) or
 
to indicate if any objection was made by Iopa at trial. Because
 
of this court's preference to address cases on the merits if
 
possible, we will consider Iopa's points of error to the extent
 
they can be discerned. However, Iopa's counsel, Vaughan S.
 
Winborne Jr., is put on notice and cautioned that future non­
compliance with HRAP Rule 28 may result in sanctions.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Iopa's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Iopa sought to preclude admission of evidence
 
about the pre-trial identification of him by joining in co­
defendant Kawa Salas's "Motion to Suppress the Pre-Identification
 
of Defendants; Motion to Dismiss Indictment." The circuit court
 
did not err in denying the motion to suppress the pre-trial
 
identification of Iopa.5
 
5
 In reviewing the circuit court's denial of Iopa's motion to suppress,
we consider both the evidence presented at the hearing on the motion and at
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Following multiple hearings on the motion to suppress,
 
the trial court denied the motion and issued findings of fact
 
(FOF), conclusions of law (COL) and an order. The circuit
 
court's detailed FOFs set forth specifics regarding the incident
 
at the complaining witnesses' (CWs) campsite, the CWs'
 
interaction with police after the incident and away from the
 
campsite, and the circumstances when three of the CWs –- Scott
 
Desa (Desa), Lucas Mead (L. Mead), and Benjamin Mead (B. Mead) -­
returned to the campsite, at which time Desa, L. Mead, and
 
B. Mead identified Iopa and Salas as having been involved in
 
earlier confronting and accosting the CWs. The circuit court's
 
findings expressly state that Desa, L. Mead, and B. Mead went
 
back to the campsite to pack up and collect their belongings, and
 
that their focus was on making sure that they had all of their
 
camping gear. The circuit court further found that, upon hearing
 
Iopa speaking and recognizing Iopa and Salas, Desa, L. Mead, and
 
B. Mead approached police "of their own initiative" and
 
identified Iopa and Salas as being the individuals who had
 
confronted the CWs earlier. Moreover, in FOF 38, the circuit
 
court found:
 
38.	 The on scene identification of Defendant Salas and
 
Defendant Iopa was made independent of any officiated
identification procedure. Desa, L. Mead and B. Mead
returned to the scene to collect and catalogue their
possessions and not for the purposes of taking part in
a police orchestrated identification procedure. There
 was no coercion on the part of the police, or any
effort to influence or to direct the identification of
 the Defendants by the victims. Desa, L. Mead and
B. Mead each made individual identifications based on
 their respective perceptions and independent
recollection of events. There is no evidence of
 collusions among the victims to identify Defendant
Iopa and Defendant Salas as participants in the
confrontation. There was no discussion between
 victims to confirm and/or corroborate the
identification.
 
5(...continued)
trial. State v. Vinuya
, 96 Hawai' i 472, 481, 32 P.3d 116, 125 (App. 2001). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The circuit court thereafter made the following
 
relevant COLs:
 
1.	 The on-scene identification of Defendant Iopa and
Defendant Salas on September 1, 2008 was made
spontaneously by Desa, B. Mead, and L. Mead, and not
as a result of any officiated identification. There
 was no "show up".
 
2.	 Even if the on scene identification was a "show up",
it was not impermissibly suggestive. State v.
 
Okumura, 78 Haw. 383, 391, 894 P.2d 80, 88 (1995).
 
3.	 Even if the on-scene identification was a "show up"
and if it was impermissibly suggestive, it was
nonetheless reliable under the totality of the
circumstances. State v. Masaniai, 63 Haw. 354, 365
and 362, 628 P.2d 1018, 1026 and 1025 (1981). 
4.	 The photographic lineup identification of Defendant
Iopa and Defendant Salas by Desa and L. Mead was not
impermissibly suggestive. There is no substantial
 likelihood of irreparable misidentification. Biggers,
 
409 U.S. 188, 197, 93 S.Ct. 375, 381 (1972).
 
5.	 Because the photographic arrays do not evidence
suggestiveness and the procedure employed to conduct
the photographic lineup was not suggestive, the Court
need not address the reliability of the
identifications. State v. Malani, 59 Haw. 167, 170,
578 P.2d 236, 238 (1978).
 
6.	 Even if the photographic arrays were suggestive, under
the totality of the circumstances, including this
Court's evaluation of the credibility of the
witnesses, the identification of the Defendants by
Desa and L. Mead are reliable. 
Questions regarding the suggestiveness and reliability
 
of a pre-trial identification are questions of law reviewed de
 
novo	 on appeal. State v. Okumura,  78 Hawai' i 383, 391, 894 P.2d 
80, 88 (1995), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Cabagbag,
 
127 Hawai' i 302, 277 P.3d 1027 (2012). 
When the defendant challenges admissibility of eyewitness
identification on the grounds of impermissibly suggestive
pre-trial identification procedure, he or she has the burden
of proof, and the court, trial or appellate, is faced with
two questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether, upon
viewing the totality of the circumstances, such as
opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the degree of
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
attention, and the elapsed time, the witness's identification is
deemed sufficiently reliable so that it is worthy of presentation
to and consideration by the jury.
 
State v. Araki, 82 Hawai' i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 (1996) 
(quoting Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 391, 894 P.2d at 88). However, 
answering these questions involves determinations of fact by
the court. Appellate review of factual determinations made
by the trial court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal
case is governed by the "clearly erroneous" standard. A
 finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made.
 
Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 392, 894 P.2d at 89 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Iopa does not challenge the circuit court's FOFs and
 
the FOFs do not appear to be clearly erroneous. Thus, based on
 
our review of the record and the findings of the circuit court,6
 
the motion to suppress was properly denied.
 
An out-of-court identification should only be 
suppressed where the identification procedure was impermissibly suggestive and "gave rise to a very substantial likelihood of 
irreparable misrepresentation." State v. Malani, 59 Haw. 167, 
170, 578 P.2d 236, 238 (1978) (block quote format altered; citations omitted); see also Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188, 198 
(1972). Otherwise, "the weight of the identification testimony 
and the credibility of the witnesses [are] for the jury to 
determine." Araki, 82 Hawai' i at 486, 923 P.2d at 903 (quoting 
State v. Masaniai, 63 Haw. 354, 365, 628 P.2d 1018, 1026 (1981)). Although the CWs' testimony as to the on-scene identification 
varies somewhat, substantial evidence exists to support the 
circuit court's factual findings that the identifications were 
6
 Iopa does not expressly challenge any of the findings of fact
supporting the court's legal conclusions nor does he specify which conclusions
of law were error. Unchallenged findings of fact are binding on this court.State v. Rapozo, 123 Hawai' i 329, 334 n.4, 235 P.3d 325, 330 n.4 (2010). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not the result of suggestive procedures or actions employed by
 
the police. Given the evidence and the unchallenged findings,
 
the circuit court properly concluded as a matter of law that the
 
on-scene identifications were not suggestive. As such, this
 
court need not reach the question of the reliability of such
 
identifications. See State v. Mitake, 64 Haw. 217, 221, 638 P.2d
 
324, 327 (1981).
 
Likewise, the circuit court properly concluded that the
 
photographic lineup identifications were not impermissibly
 suggestive. We therefore reject Iopa's argument that these
 
identifications were tainted by the earlier on-scene
 
identification. Because Iopa fails to show that the photographic
 
lineup identifications were impermissibly suggestive, we need not
 
reach the question of the reliability of such identifications. 
See id. 
(2) Iopa next contends that his due process rights
 
were violated because the State failed to present exculpatory
 
evidence to the grand jury.
7 In addressing this issue, the
 
circuit court denied Iopa's Motion to Dismiss Indictment.8 This
 
7 Iopa argues that "[t]he statements of Wayne Leighton-Young, Raina
Midel and Damien Bentosino, and the admissions by Kameron Wilbourne and Rylan
Torres-Acia all inculpate Wilbourne and Torres-Acia as opposed to John Iopa
and Kawa Salas." Iopa does not specify which particular statements of the
witnesses to which he refers, nor does he provide citations to the record
containing such statements.
8 With regard to Iopa's Motion to Dismiss, the trial court concluded in
relevant part that:
 
7.	 There was no prosecutorial misconduct at the Grand
Jury proceedings.
 
8.	 The prosecutor did not fail to present clearly
exculpatory evidence at the Grand Jury that would
warrant dismissal. Evidence that Damien Bentosino
 identified Kameron Wilbourn and Kameron Wilbourne
 [sic] and Raylan Torres-Acia as being responsible
parties is not clearly exculpatory in light of the
live testimony of the victims at the Grand Jury
positively identifying Defendant Salas and Defendant
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court reviews the circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss 
indictment for an abuse of discretion. State v. Akau, 118 
Hawai'i 44, 51, 185 P.3d 229, 236 (2008); see also State v. Wong, 
97 Hawai' i 512, 517, 40 P.3d 914, 919 (2002). 
With regard to claims of prosecutorial misconduct at a 
grand jury proceeding, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that 
[a] grand jury proceeding is not adversary in nature. An
 
application of this principle is found in the rule that an
indictment may not be attacked on the ground of the
incompetency of the evidence considered by the grand jury,
where prosecutorial misconduct is not involved. The
 function of a grand jury to protect against unwarranted
prosecution does not entail a duty to weigh the
prosecution's case against that of the defense, or even to
determine that the prosecution's case is supported by
competent evidence. 
On the other hand, an indictment that is the result of
 
prosecutorial misconduct or other circumstances which
 
prevent the exercise of fairness and impartiality by the
 grand jury may be successfully attacked.
 
State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 282, 288-89, 949 P.2d 122, 128-29 
(1997) (internal citations omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
has 
rejected an approach to claims of prosecutorial misconduct
that would require the prosecutor to put before the grand
jury any and all evidence that might tend to exculpate the
defendant, or that would merely tend to negate guilt, and
has concluded a court should dismiss an indictment only when
the prosecutor failed to present evidence that clearly would
have negated guilt or presented evidence that would
undermine the authority of the grand jury to act at all.
 
Wong, 97 Hawai' i at 526, 40 P.3d at 928 (internal citations, 
quotations marks, and brackets omitted) (emphasis added). The 
focus of the court's inquiry is "the prejudicial character of the 
prosecutor's conduct[,]" and must not involve passing upon the 
credibility of grand jury witnesses nor upon the competency or 
8(...continued)
Iopa as participants in the confrontation with the
victims in front of Desa's tent on August 31,
2008/September 1, 2008.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
adequacy of the evidence adduced. Chong, 86 Hawai' i at 289 n.3, 
949 P.2d at 129 n.3 (citation omitted). 
Iopa fails to meet his burden of proving prosecutorial 
misconduct. See State v. Griffin, 126 Hawai' i 40, 53, 266 P.3d 
448, 461 (App. 2011). The evidence that Iopa argues should have 
been presented was not clearly exculpatory. This evidence 
included witness statements implicating suspects other than Iopa 
and Salas. These statements did not "clearly negate" Iopa's 
guilt on the charges. First, there is evidence, and the circuit 
court found, that males other than Iopa and Salas were involved 
in the incident.9 Second, given that Iopa was charged also with 
accomplice liability, the involvement of others would not have clearly negated Iopa's guilt. Therefore, the circuit court 
properly denied Iopa's Motion to Dismiss. 
(3) Iopa fails to demonstrate that the unobjected-to
 
jury instructions were in error.
 
"With respect to jury instructions, it is the duty of 
the trial court to ensure that the jury is properly instructed." 
State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011). 
There is "a presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct[.]" State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d 
974, 984 n.6 (2006). "[I]f the appellant overcomes the presumption that the instructions were correctly stated, the rule 
is that such erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and 
are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from 
the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id. 
(citation, internal quotation mark and emphasis omitted). 
9
 Iopa does not specifically challenge any of the circuit court's
findings of fact, and thus, these findings are binding on this court. See 
Rapozo, 123 Hawai' i at 334 n.4, 235 P.3d at 330 n.4. FOF 18 states that 
"[a]bout 7 feet behind Defendants Salas and Iopa were other males, one with abaseball bat or wooden object resembling a baseball bat." 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Iopa does not identify the particular jury
 
instruction(s) he is challenging on appeal. Rather, Iopa argues
 
generally that the trial court improperly instructed the jury
 
because each element of the offense was not characterized as
 
conduct, attendant circumstances, or results of conduct, which
 
resulted in the jury guessing as to which state of mind applied
 
to each element. Iopa does not provide any authority requiring
 
the court to characterize each element in its instructions as he
 
suggests, nor does he assert that the elements of each offense
 
were otherwise defective or erroneous. Therefore, Iopa has
 
failed to demonstrate that the jury instructions were erroneous. 
(4) In Iopa's final point of error, he contends that
 
the circuit court erred in denying his motion for judgment of
 
acquittal. In this regard, he argues on appeal that there is
 
insufficient evidence as to the theft component of the Robbery in
 
the First Degree offense. Specifically, Iopa asserts that
 
"[m]erely asking if you have wallets, drugs, juice, etc. is not
 
the same as saying, 'if you do not give me your wallets, drugs,
 
juice, etc. harm will come to you.'" Iopa argues that the
 
evidence shows an intent to get the CWs to relocate their
 
campsite or "just to raise cain[,]" but that the evidence was not
 
sufficient to show an intent to steal. Iopa's arguments are not
 
meritorious.
 
There was sufficient evidence to support the theft
 
component of the Robbery in the First Degree offense and the
 
circuit court did not err in denying the motion for judgment of
 
acquittal. When reviewing the grant or denial of a post-verdict
 
motion for a judgment of acquittal, 
we employ the same standard that a trial court applies to
such a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed in
the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full
recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full
play to the right of the fact finder to determine
credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable
inferences of fact. 
State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai' i 108, 112-13, 952 P.2d 865, 869-70 
(1997) (quoting State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai' i 472, 481, 927 P.2d 
1355, 1364 (1996) (emphasis added)). 
The theft component for Robbery in the First Degree
 
requires that the prosecution prove that Iopa was "in the course
 
of committing theft." HRS § 708-840(1)(b). In turn, HRS § 708­
842 (Supp. 2012) provides that:
 
§708-842 Robbery; "in the course of committing a
theft".  An act shall be deemed "in the course of committing
a theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle" if it
occurs in an attempt to commit theft or non-consensual
taking of a motor vehicle, in the commission of theft or
non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle, or in the flight
after the attempt or commission.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Here, there was sufficient evidence that Iopa's actions
 
were "in the course of committing theft." At trial, Desa
 
identified Iopa as the "vocal" male who threatened him on the
 
night of the incident. Desa testified that he awoke to someone
 
repeatedly yelling "Get out of your fuckin' tents, you fuckin'
 
haoles. Get out of your tents." Two males approached their
 
camping area. One male was shadowboxing and bouncing back and
 
forth as if he was going to fight and the other more vocal male,
 
later identified by Desa as Iopa, repeatedly said, "Get the fuck
 
out of your tents," "You fuckin' haoles," "We hate haoles." He
 
continuously stated, "You fuckin' haoles. We hate haoles. Um,
 
give us your fuckin' money. You guys get drugs? I know you guys
 get drugs. I know you guys have money[.]" Desa testified that
 
Iopa demanded money, asked for drugs, and asked for juice.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At trial, B. Mead positively identified Iopa as the
 
"vocal male" with a nasally voice who demanded items from him on
 
the night of the incident. That night, he awoke to males yelling
 
"Come on, you haoles. Let's go. You fuckin' haoles, you –- you
 
stole our land. Come on. Let's –- let's go. It's –- I'm gonna
 
pound you out." The males approached their tents. The more
 
"vocal" male, later identified by B. Mead as Iopa, said things
 
like "Come on, you fuckin' haoles. Let's go. I'm gonna pound
 
you out. Get out of your tents. Let's go." He also said he was
 
going to kick B. Mead in the mouth and demanded wallets, money,
 
flashlights, drugs, and juice.
 
At trial, L. Mead positively identified Iopa as the
 
"vocal male" who threatened him on the night of the incident.
 
That night, he awoke to shouting and fighting. A group of males
 
then approached their campsite. From what he could tell, they
 
were saying, "Fuckin' haoles. Uh, you guys come into our land. 
Um, you guys stole our land." Then they stated "Get out the
 
tents. Get out the tents. Open the tents." The more "vocal"
 
male was closest to his tent and continuously stated "Get out of
 
the tent" and "What, you fuckas?" L. Mead testified that the
 
"vocal" male wanted flashlights, juice, alcohol, and wallets, and
 
L. Mead felt extremely threatened when these things were being
 
demanded.
 
Based on the evidence in the record, there is
 
sufficient evidence as to the challenged theft component of
 
Robbery in the First Degree.
 
Moreover, with regard to Iopa's intent to attempt
 
theft,
 
although a defendant's state of mind can rarely be proved by
direct evidence, proof by circumstantial evidence and
reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding
the defendant's conduct is sufficient. Thus, the mind of an
alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and
inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances.
 
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Gomes, 117 Hawai' i 218, 227, 177 P.3d 928, 937 (2008) 
(citations, quotation marks, and ellipsis omitted). The 
circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from 
the circumstances surrounding Iopa's conduct are sufficient to 
establish Iopa's requisite state of mind for the offense. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on October 28, 2010 in the Circuit Court of
 the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 4, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Vaughan S. Winborne Jr.
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Darien W.L.C. NagataDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
13
 