NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000406
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
FUCHE CORPORATION, INC.,
dba C&J BBQ & Ramen, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BILL HIN BI LEUNG and NOGUCHI & ASSOCIATES, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0280)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Fuche Corporation, Inc., dba C&J
BBQ & Ramen (Fuche Corp.) appeals from the Final Judgment, filed
on April 30, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(circuit court).1  Judgment was entered in favor of Fuche Corp.
and against Defendants-Appellees Bill Hin Bi Leung (Leung) and
Noguchi & Associates (Noguchi)(together Leung and Noguchi) for
special damages, but not for other damages claimed by Fuche Corp.
This appeal arises out of a civil action brought by
Fuche Corp., a sole proprietorship owned by John Chen (Chen),
alleging professional malpractice of insurance agents, Leung and
1  The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Noguchi, and breach of contract due to their failure to procure
insurance coverage for water damage arising from flooding
incidents which occurred from December 1, 2004 through
November 17, 2005 at C&J BBQ & Ramen.
On appeal Fuche Corp. contends that the circuit court
erred when it (1) granted summary judgment in favor of Noguchi
and judgment as a matter of law in favor of Leung on Fuche
Corp.'s claim for punitive damages, (2) granted remittitur,
reducing general damages to zero, and after Fuche Corp. opted for
a new trial, erred when it granted summary judgment in favor of
Leung and Noguchi on Fuche Corp.'s claim for general damages, and
(3) denied Fuche Corp.'s motion for pre-judgment interest.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant case law, we resolve Fuche Corp.'s appeal as
follows:
(1) Fuche Corp. contends that the circuit court erred
in granting Leung and Noguchi's motion for judgment as a matter
of law (JMOL Motion) in favor of Leung on Fuche Corp.'s claim for
punitive damages because (1) the circuit court failed to review
the evidence and inferences in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party, (2) the circuit court had previously denied
Leung's motion for summary judgment based on the same evidence
and argument, and (3) the circuit court applied the wrong
standard by requiring Fuche Corp. to prove by clear and
convincing evidence.
At the hearing on Leung and Noguchi's Motion for
Partial Summary Judgment on Claim for Punitive Damages (Partial
MSJ) on August 7, 2013, the circuit court denied the Partial MSJ
as to Leung, concluding that there were genuine issues of
material fact "regarding what actually transpired in the phone
calls and the possible notification . . . . [and there were]
clearly multiple times that [are alleged] that [Leung] was
informed of the flood insurance issues which causes genuine
issues of material fact as to whether or not [there was] a
conscious indifference or wanton lack of care."  At trial,
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
following the close of Fuche Corp.'s case, Leung and Noguchi
moved for judgment as a matter of law arguing, inter alia, that
Fuche Corp. had failed to provide a sufficient evidentiary basis
for a reasonable jury to find in favor of Fuche Corp. as to its
claim seeking recovery for punitive damages.  The circuit court
granted the JMOL Motion, holding that the evidence presented at
trial did not support an award of punitive damages against Leung.
On October 29, 2013, the circuit court entered its Order Granting
in Part and Denying in Part Defendants Bill Hin Bi Leung and
Noguchi & Associates, Inc.'s HRCP Rule 50 Motion for Judgment as
a Matter of Law Filed October 18, 2013 (Order Granting JMOL
Motion).
We review the circuit court's granting of Leung and
Noguchi's JMOL Motion de novo  and apply the same standard as the
trial court.  Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. Hirayasu, 110
Hawai#i 248, 251, 131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006) (quoting Miyamoto v.
Lum, 104 Hawai #i 1, 6–7, 84 P.3d 509, 514–15 (2004) (internal
citations omitted)).
"A [motion for JMOL] may be granted only when after
disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non-moving
party's evidence all the value to which it is legally
entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which may
be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party's favor, it
can be said that there is no evidence to support a jury
verdict in his or her favor." [ Miyamoto , 104 Hawai #i] at 7, 84
P.3d at 515 (quoting Tabieros [v. Clark Equipment Co. ], 85
Hawai#i [336,] 350, 944 P.2d [1279,] 1293 [(1997)]).
Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai #i 253, 262, 259 P.3d
569, 578 (2011).
To prevail on a claim for punitive damages, a
plaintiff,
must prove by clear and convincing evidence that the
defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or with such
malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal
indifference to civil obligations, or where there has been
some wilful misconduct or that entire want of care which
would raise the presumption of a conscious indifference to
consequences.
Masaki v. General Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 16–17, 780 P.2d 566,
575 (1989).
In determining whether an award of punitive damages is
appropriate, the inquiry focuses primarily upon the
defendant's mental state, and to a lesser degree, the nature
of his conduct.  In the case of most torts, ill will, evil
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
motive, or consciousness of wrongdoing on the part of the
tort-feasor are not necessary to render his conduct
actionable.  In a negligence action, for example, the
defendant may be required to make compensation if it is
shown that he failed to comply with the standard of care
which would be exercised by an ordinary prudent person, no
matter how innocent of desire to harm.  In contrast, to
justify an award of punitive damages, "a positive element of
conscious wrongdoing is always required."  Thus, punitive
damages are not awarded for mere inadvertence, mistake, or
errors of judgment.  Restatement (Second) of Torts § 908,
comment b; [W.P. Keeton,] Prosser [& Keeton on the Law of
Torts § 2], at 10 [5th ed. 1984)].  "Something more than the
mere commission of a tort is always required for punitive
damages."  Prosser, at 9 .
Id., at 7, 780 P.2d at 570-71.
Fuche Corp. contends that the evidence provided at
trial supports its allegations that Leung attempted to coverup
his failure to add coverage for water damage caused by sewer
backups to Fuche Corp.'s policy, that Leung repeatedly made
misrepresentations to Chen, and that Leung purposefully acted to
mislead Chen into thinking that Leung had procured flood damage
coverage when Leung had failed to do so.  Fuche Corp. argues that
Leung's alleged actions and omissions constituted a conscious
indifference to consequences and wanton lack of care in support
of Fuche Corp.'s claim for punitive damages.
At trial, Chen testified that after notifying Leung of
the first flooding incident on December 1, 2004, Leung had
informed Chen that the flooding incident was not covered by his
insurance policy and that because his policy was already in
effect, Leung would not be able to include the additional flood
coverage until the policy was renewed in September 2005.  After
the third flooding incident on September 4, 2005, Chen called
Leung to report the flood and told Leung to add the flood
coverage when Leung renewed the policy.  Leung visited the
restaurant the next day to inform Chen that he would be able to
add flood coverage to the policy and on September 7, 2005, Leung
stopped by the restaurant to pick up a check to renew the
insurance policy, which was more than Chen had previously paid
for insurance.
Chen further testified that on November 16, 2005, after
the fourth flood was reported to Leung, Leung came to the
restaurant and represented to Chen that he did not need to worry
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
because he was covered under his insurance policy.  Leung further
represented to Chen that because he was covered for the flooding
incident, he should shut down the restaurant and wait for a
response on his claim from the insurance company before repairing
any damage and reopening.  In January 2006, Chen went to Leung's
office to check on the status of his insurance claim, at which
time Leung informed Chen that his insurance policy did not cover
the flood damage.
Cindy Lee (Lee), an employee at C&J BBQ & Ramen,
provided testimony at trial that corroborated Chen's testimony
regarding the multiple times that they had contacted Leung during
and after the various flooding incidents.  Bill Souza, an
insurance adjuster, testified as an expert witness stating that
additional coverage can be added mid-policy by a simple
endorsement and that "if the insurer denies the endorsement, the
agent can cancel and find another one."
Leung, who was called as an adverse witness, testified
that when initially asked during a deposition whether he received
a telephone call from Chen or Lee on December 1, 2004, after the
first flood, Leung had denied that a telephone call had ever been
received on that date.  However, when confronted with telephone
records, he acknowledged receiving a call from Chen that lasted
six minutes but denied that Chen reported the flood that occurred
that day and could not recall the content of the conversation.
Leung further denied receiving any calls from Chen or Lee after
the third flood on September 4, 2005, until he was again
confronted with phone records which indicated that he had
received a telephone call from C&J BBQ & Ramen on that day which
lasted six minutes.  Leung indicated that his written log for
Fuche Corp. did not include any entries for flooding incidents
due to the sewer back-ups prior to November 18, 2005, at which
time he then submitted a claim on behalf of C&J BBQ & Ramen.
When the claim was denied, Leung assisted Fuche Corp. with the
purchase of a policy that provided coverage for the sewer
backups.
Based on the testimony presented at trial, giving Fuche
Corp.'s evidence all the value to which it is legally entitled,
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
and indulging every legitimate inference which may be drawn from
the evidence in Fuche Corp.'s favor, there was sufficient
evidence to support an award of punitive damages by the jury
against Leung.  Therefore, the determination of whether Fuche
Corp. presented clear and convincing evidence of wilful
misconduct or an entire want of care raising a presumption of a
conscious indifference to consequences by Leung should have been
submitted to the jury.  Accordingly, we conclude that the circuit
court erred when it granted Leung and Noguchi's JMOL Motion in
favor of Leung on Fuche Corp.'s claim for punitive damages.2
Finally, Fuche Corp. contends that the circuit court
erred in granting Leung and Noguchi's Partial MSJ in favor of
Noguchi on Fuche Corp.'s claim for punitive damages because
genuine issues of material fact existed as to whether Noguchi
approved, authorized, or ratified Leung's alleged actions and
omissions, thereby making Noguchi liable to Fuche Corp. for
punitive damages.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has explained that "[t]he
deterrent or retributive effect of punitive damages must be
placed squarely on the shoulders of the wrongdoer."  Lauer v.
Young Men's Christian Ass'n of Honolulu, 57 Haw. 390, 402, 557
P.2d 1334, 1342 (1976).  "A wrongdoer in this context includes a
person superior in authority who expressly authorizes, ratifies
or condones the tortious act of the employee."  Id.
In this case, Fuche Corp. did not provide sufficient
evidence to prove that genuine issues of material fact existed as
to whether Noguchi approved, authorized, or ratified Leung's
activities.  Liability under a ratification theory requires that
"the act complained of be done on behalf of or under the
authority of the employer, and there must be clear evidence of
the employer's approval of the wrongful conduct."  Sharples v.
State, 71 Haw. 404, 406, 793 P.2d 175, 177 (1990) (citing Costa
v. Able Distributors, Inc., 3 Haw. App. 486, 490, 653 P.2d 101
2  Because we conclude that the circuit court erred when it granted
Leung and Noguchi's JMOL Motion as to punitive damages, we need not address
the other arguments raised by Fuche Corp. regarding the circuit court's
decision on the JMOL Motion.  
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
105 (1982)).  Here, there was nothing to indicate that Noguchi
was aware of Leung's actions during the various flooding
incidents at the restaurant.  Furthermore, Fuche Corp. failed to
produce any evidence as to Noguchi's knowledge of Leung's acts
and representations in the procurement of insurance and
submission of a claim at the time these incidents occurred.
Fuche Corp. argues that Noguchi was reckless in
employing Leung and in continuing to retain him as an insurance
agent after acquiring knowledge of his alleged negligence. 
However, we conclude that Fuche Corp. did not adduce or provide
any evidence suggesting that Noguchi's actions were wilful or
indicated an entire want of care raising a presumption of
conscious indifference on the part of Noguchi with respect to
utilizing Leung's services nor did the evidence show Noguchi
acted recklessly in its retention of Leung.  Given the record, we
conclude that Fuche Corp. failed to raise a genuine issue of
material fact that Noguchi had approved, authorized or ratified
Leung's alleged actions that would warrant an award of punitive
damages against Noguchi.  Therefore, the circuit court did not
err in granting partial summary judgment in favor of Noguchi on
Fuche Corp.'s claim for punitive damages.
(2) Fuche Corp. contends that the circuit court erred:
(1) when it granted remittitur, reducing general damages to zero; 
and (2) when after Fuche Corp. opted for a new trial, it granted
summary judgment in favor of Leung and Noguchi on the issue of
general damages.
The special verdict form and its accompanying jury
instruction included general damages, over Leung and Noguchi's
objection.  On October 22, 2013, the jury returned its special
verdict form in favor of Fuche Corp. on its claims for
professional negligence and breach of contract awarding Fuche
Corp. special damages in the amount of $39,500 and finding that
Fuche Corp. suffered general damages in the amount of $110,000
(less 10% for contributory negligence).
Following entry of the Final Judgment, Leung and
Noguchi moved for a new trial (New Trial/Remittitur Motion) on
the issue of general damages or in the alternative, a remittitur
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
setting aside the jury's award of general damages.  On April 24,
2014, the circuit court entered its order granting in part and
denying in part Leung and Noguchi's motion for new trial,
holding:
The motion is GRANTED on the basis of a lack of any
substantial evidence sustaining an award of general damages.
Based on the totality of the circumstances, the Court finds
that the evidence produced by Plaintiff FUCHE at trial and
relied upon by the jury for its award of general damages was
slight, conclusory in nature, and void of any reasoned
methodology to support the calculation of such an amount. 
As such, the Court therefore concludes that the jury's award
of general damages is noticeably unsupported by the dearth
of evidence .
The circuit court granted remittitur of the jury's award of
general damages from $110,000 to zero, or in the alternative,
ordered a new trial on general damages.  In response to the
circuit court's order, Fuche Corp. refused remittitur and
demanded a new trial which was scheduled to be held on May 26,
2015 only as to the issue of general damages.
On November 3, 2014, Leung and Noguchi moved for
summary judgment arguing that Fuche Corp. had failed to present
any evidence that it had suffered any general damages.  On
March 5, 2015 the circuit court entered its Order Granting
Defendants Noguchi & Associates, Inc. and Bill Hin Bi Leung's
Motion for Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's claim for General
Damages, Filed on November 3, 2014 (Order Granting MSJ),
concluding that no genuine issue of material fact existed as to
Fuche Corp.'s claim for general damages.
Fuche Corp. contends that the circuit court erred in
granting Leung and Noguchi's New Trial/Remittitur Motion because
it is inconsistent with the circuit court's prior ruling allowing
for jury instructions on general damages and the inclusion of
general damages in the special verdict form.
"Under [Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)] Rule
59, when the trial court believes that the judgment for damages
is excessive and against the weight of the evidence, it may order
remittitur and alternatively direct a new trial if the plaintiff
refuses the remittitur."  Au v. Kelly , 2 Haw. App. 534, 537, 634
P.2d 619, 621 (1981).  "Both the grant and the denial of a motion
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
for new trial is within the trial court's discretion, and [the
appellate court] will not reverse that decision absent a clear
abuse of discretion."  Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri
Prods., 86 Hawai #i 214, 251, 948 P.2d 1055, 1092 (1997) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).  "A court abuses its
discretion whenever it exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party."  Abastillas v. Kekona, 87 Hawai# i 446,
449, 958 P.2d 1136, 1139 (1998) (internal quotation marks,
citation, and ellipsis omitted).  We hold that the circuit court
did not abuse its discretion when it conditionally granted Leung
and Noguchi's New Trial/Remittitur Motion and ordered a new trial
on general damages in lieu of a remittitur.3
Fuche Corp. further contends that the circuit court
erred in granting Leung and Noguchi's Motion for Summary Judgment
as to Fuche Corp.'s claim for general damages because evidence
provided by Fuche Corp. supported an award for general damages,
or at the very minimum, created a genuine issue of material fact,
and that the circuit court's granting of the motion denied Fuche
Corp. the right to a jury trial on general damages.
We review a trial court's grant of summary judgment de
novo.  Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai #i
92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008).
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.  The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.  In other words, this court must view all
of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the
light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
Id. (brackets omitted)(quoting Price v. AIG Hawaii Ins. Co. # , 107
3  We limit our discussion to the circuit court's grant of a new trial
and decline to review the amount of remittitur ordered by court.  See Rainbow
Island Productions, Limited v. Leong, 44 Haw. 134, 138, 351 P.2d 1089, 1092
(1960) ("Here we are reviewing the setting aside of the verdict, not the
amount of the remittitur.  Though the acceptance of the remittitur would have
eliminated the entry of the new trial order, since it was not accepted it is
functus.").   
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i 106, 110, 111 P.3d 1, 5 (2005)).
"'General damages encompass all the damages which
naturally and necessarily result from a legal wrong done, . . .
and include such items as pain and suffering, inconvenience, and
loss of enjoyment which cannot be measured definitively in
monetary terms.'"  Kanahele v. Han , 125 Hawai`i 446, 451 n.8, 263
P.3d 726, 731 n.8 (2011) (quoting Bynum v. Magno , 106 Hawai‘i 81,
85, 101 P.3d 1149, 1153 (2004)).
In this case, Fuche Corp. stated in its Trial Brief
filed on September 30, 2013 that it was "entitled to general
damages in an amount to be proven at trial related to injury to
its business including, but not limited to, reputational harm and
lost customers due to business closure."  Lee testified that
Fuche Corp.'s business suffered when C&J BBQ & Ramen reopened in
February 2006, following the floods in November 2005.  She
further testified that C&J BBQ & Ramen had regular customers
before the flood, but that after reopening in February 2013,
Fuche Corp. suffered a drop-off in its "volume" of business.
Additionally, Fuche Corp. provided testimony of Kimo Todd, CPA,
who had testified at trial as to his opinion of the amount of
damages incurred by Fuche Corp. as a result of the flood
incidents, which included the impact to its business reputation.
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party, there are genuine issues of material fact
precluding summary judgment.  At minimum, Leung and Noguchi did
not establish that Fuche Corp. had no valid claim as to
reputational harm sustained during the several months the
restaurant was shut down while Chen was awaiting to hear from
Leung on the insurance claim.4  We therefore conclude that the
circuit court erred when it granted Leung and Noguchi's summary
judgment motion and determine that Fuche Corp.'s claim for
general damages should have been submitted to the jury for
determination of the facts surrounding the general damages claim.
See Washington State Physicians Ins. Exchange & Ass'n v. Fisons
4  We note that on remand, Fuche Corp. would need to show that its
alleged reputational harm was caused by the lack of coverage as opposed to the
underlying drain back-up causing the floods. 
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Corp. 122 Wash.2d 299, 332, 858 P.2d 1054, 1071 (1993). ("Damages
for loss of professional reputation are not the type of damages
which can be proved with mathematical certainty and are usually
best left as a question of fact for the jury.").
(3) Fuche Corp. contends that the circuit court erred
in denying its November 22, 2013 Motion for Prejudgment Interest,
asserting that it is entitled to receive an award of prejudgment
interest pursuant to HRS § 636-16 due to delays in rendering a
final judgment.
Prejudgment interest, where appropriate, is awardable under
HRS § 636-16 [1993] in the discretion of the court.
Generally, to constitute an abuse of discretion it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
Schmidt v. Bd. of Dirs. of the Ass'n of Apartment Owners of the
Marco Polo Apartments, 73 Haw. 526, 533, 836 P.2d 479, 483 (1992)
(citations omitted).
HRS § 636-16 (2016) provides
In awarding interest in civil cases, the judge is authorized
to designate the commencement date to conform with the
circumstances of each case, provided that the earliest
commencement date in cases arising in tort, may be the date
when the injury first occurred and in cases arising by
breach of contract, it may be the date when the breach first
occurred.
The Hawaii Supreme Court has recognized that the
"purpose of the statute . . . [is] to allow the court to
designate the commencement date of interest in order to correct
injustice when a judgment is delayed for a long period of time
for any reason, including litigation delays." Schmidt, 73 Haw. at
534, 836 P.2d at 483 (citing Leibert v. Finance Factors, Ltd., 71
Haw. 285, 293, 788 P.2d 833, 838 (1990)).#
In this case, the circuit court declined to grant
prejudgment interest to Fuche Corp. because there was "no
purposeful delay on the part of the non-moving party" and that
Fuche Corp. "is responsible for any delay that has resulted" due
to its decision not to name Noguchi and/or Leung in Fuche Corp.'s
prior lawsuit filed against its landlord.  There is no evidence
in the record to indicate that any delays in the proceeding were
purposeful or that any such delays would warrant the imposition
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
of prejudgment interest.  Therefore, we conclude that the circuit
court did not abuse its discretion in denying Fuche Corp.'s
request for prejudgment interest.  See Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 137, 839 P.2d 10, 36
(1992)(holding that the circuit court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Defendant's prejudgment interest because
there was no evidence in the record that any of non-movant's
conduct unduly delayed the proceedings in the case).
Based on the foregoing, the Final Judgment filed on
April 30, 2015, is affirmed in part and vacated in part.  Final
Judgment is vacated in part with respect to the (1) Order
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants Bill Hin Bi Leung
and Noguchi & Associates, Inc.'s HRCP Rule 50 Motion for Judgment
as a Matter of Law Filed October 18, 2013 entered on October 29,
2013 and (2) Order Granting Defendants Noguchi & Associates, Inc.
and Bill Hin Bi Leung's Motion for Summary Judgment as to
Plaintiff's claim for General Damages, Filed on November 3, 2014
entered on March 5, 2015 and remanded to the circuit court for
further proceedings in accordance herewith.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 8, 2018.
On the briefs:
Peter Van Name Esser
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Richard B. Miller,
Patricia Kehau Wall and
(Tom Petrus & Miller LLLC)
Christopher Shea Goodwin
for Defendants-Appellees.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
12