   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000865 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
GREG BOWERS, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAMES M. WINQUIST, TRANCITA K. WINQUIST,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants
and 
TIMOTHY I. MAC MASTER,
Real Party in Interest-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-1677; 1CC141001677) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Real Party in Interest-Appellant Timothy I. Mac Master 
(
Mac Master) appeals from the November 7, 2017 "Order Granting in 
Part and Denying in Part . . . 
Mac Master's Motion to Enforce 
Attorney's Lien Filed September 8, 2017" (Order), entered in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1/ 
Mac Master and Plaintiff-Appellee Greg Bowers (Bowers) 
had an attorney-client relationship under the terms of a 
contingent fee agreement. Mac Master withdrew as Bowers's counsel after Bowers decided to reject a Court Annexed Arbitration Program (CAAP) award of $21,200 and to request a 
trial de novo on his claim against Defendants-Appellees James M. 
Winquist and Trancita M. Winquist. Mac Master ended his 
1/ The Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
representation of Bowers based on a purported right under the 
contingent fee agreement to terminate the attorney-client relationship at any time for any reason. Bowers then hired new counsel who did further work on his case and ultimately helped Bowers settle his claim for $24,000. 
Following the settlement, Mac Master filed a motion to 
enforce an attorney's lien in the amount of $7,800 (Motion).  
After a hearing on the Motion, the Circuit Court ordered that the 
attorney's lien be enforced in the amounts of $4,000 in attorney's fees and $515 in case costs, and denied the Motion as to all other claimed fees and case costs. 
On appeal, Mac Master contends that the Circuit Court 
erred in: (1) denying Mac Master's request for an evidentiary hearing governed by the Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE); (2) 
adjudicating the Motion without first conducting an evidentiary 
hearing governed by the HRE; (3) disregarding the requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 507-81(b)(1) (quoted infra); and 
(4) denying Mac Master's request for findings of facts and 
conclusions of law supporting the Order. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Mac Master's points of error as follows and affirm. 
(1) Mac Master's first two points of error rely on his 
assertion that HRE Rule 101 and the due process clause of article 1, section 5 of the Hawai# i Constitution "required [that] the 
Circuit Court conduct an evidentiary hearing governed by the [HRE] before deciding the Motion." This argument is without merit. 
HRE Rule 101 provides that the Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
"govern proceedings in the courts of the State of Hawaii, to the extent and with the exceptions stated in rule 1101." 
HRE Rule 
1101, in turn, states in relevant part that "[t]hese rules apply to all courts of the State of Hawaii except as otherwise provided by statute[,]" and "[t]hese rules apply generally to civil and criminal proceedings." Nothing in HRE Rules 101 or 1101 requires a trial court to conduct an 
evidentiary hearing before deciding a 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion to enforce an attorney's lien or other motion governed by 
the HRE. Further, Mac Master cites no Hawai# i case law or other 
authority construing the HRE to require an evidentiary hearing in these circumstances. There is none. 
Rather, Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
43(e) provides: 
Evidence of motions . When a motion is based on facts 
not appearing of record the court may hear the matter on
affidavits presented by the respective parties, but thecourt may direct that the matter be heard wholly or partlyon oral testimony or depositions. 
See also Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai# i 
(RCCH
) Rule 7(g) ("In lieu of an affidavit, an unsworn 
declaration may be made by a person, in writing, subscribed as 
true under penalty of law, and dated, in substantially the [prescribed] form[.]") Here, again, nothing in HRCP Rule 43(e) requires a trial court to conduct an evidentiary hearing before deciding a motion to enforce an attorney's lien, and contrary to Mac Master's assertion, there is no conflict between HRCP Rule 43(e) and HRE Rule 1101. Trial courts in Hawai# i routinely 
decide motions on the basis of affidavits or declarations, subject to the HRE as applicable, without taking oral testimony or having documentary evidence introduced through live witnesses. See, e.g., HRCP Rule 56(e). 
In a similar vein, Mac Master cites no Hawai# i case 
law or other authority construing the Hawaii Constitution's due process clause to require an evidentiary hearing in analogous circumstances. 
There is none. "[D]ue process is not a fixed 
concept requiring a specific procedural course in every situation." In re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawai# i 236, 
241, 151 P.3d 717, 722 (2007) (quoting State v. Guidry, 105 Hawai# i 222, 234, 96 P.3d 242, 254 (2004)). Rather, due process 
requires "notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation of a significant liberty interest." Id. (quoting 
State v. Bani, 
97 Hawai# i 285, 293, 36 P.3d at 1255, 1263 (2001)). 
Here, on September 8, 2017, Mac Master filed the 
Motion, along with a supporting declaration, several attached 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
exhibits, and a memorandum of law, pursuant to HRCP Rules 7(b) 
and 17, and consistent with HRCP Rule 43(e) and RCCH Rule 7(g). On October 12, 2017, the Circuit Court heard the Motion. Before hearing oral argument, the court stated its "inclination . . . to enforce the attorney's lien, but not in the amount requested by Mr. Mac Master." The court explained: 
And the Court's reasoning is, that all contracts for legal
services are subject to the Hawaii Rules of ProfessionalConduct. And, in fact, paragraph 13 of Mr. Mac Master's feeagreement acknowledges this. 
The Court reviewed the fee agreement, and several of
the provisions appear to be potentially contrary to therequirements of the Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct.And also, paragraph 7 appears to be contrary to FormalOpinion 28 of the Office of Disciplinary Counsel, as well asto Rules 1.6 and 1.16 of the Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct. 
Now, in addition, the Court notes that paragraph 11 of
the fee agreement appears to be contrary to ProfessionalConduct Rule 1.2(a). 
Paragraph 9 of the fee agreement, which is the
provision at issue, violates Professional Conduct Rule 1.16to the extent it gives the lawyer the unilateral right toterminate representation of the client, quote, for anyreason, end quote. 
The Court notes that if Mr. Mac Master had moved to 
withdraw, based upon the record presented on this motion,the Court would likely have denied the withdrawal based onProfessional Conduct Rule 1.2(a), which states, A lawyershall abide by a client's decision whether to settle amatter; and also based on Professional Conduct Rule 1.16(b)regarding when a lawyer may withdraw from representing aclient. 
So Mr. Mac Master's reply memo correctly states that
the issue for the Court to determine on this motion is whether $7,800 is a reasonable fee for the services that Mr.Mac Master provided to Mr. Bowers. And the Court notes that that's not totally correct, because the fee being claimed is$7,000, and $800 represents the costs, as the Courtunderstands the argument. 
So in making the determination of the reasonableness
of the fee, the Court is guided by the factors set forth by
the court of appeals in Riley , . . . against Osako , . . .
and by Professional Conduct Rule 1.5. 
Rule 1.5 states that 
a lawyer shall not collect an unreasonable fee. 
The non-exhaustive list of factors to consider under 
Rule 1.5 includes, quote, the fee customarily charged in the
locality for similar legal services; the amount involved andthe results obtained; the experience and ability of thelawyer performing the services; and in contingency feecases, the conscionability of the fee in light of the netrecovery to the client. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition to the rule, the court of appeals
instructs the Court to look at, among other things, the
skill requisite to properly conduct the cause and the amountinvolved in the controversy and the benefits resulting tothe client from the services. 
So the Court expects that lawyers should manage their
client's expectations by explaining the law as applied tothe facts known at the time, including, when applicable, theprinciple and effect of modified comparative negligence inthis jurisdiction. 
The Court notes, that, based upon a review of the
documentation provided by Mr. Bowers, as the Courtunderstands the facts of the case, the potentiallyrecoverable special damages at the time the Complaint w[as]filed were only $16,175.91. . . . 
. . . . 
. . . [E]ven if the lawsuit had been filed on the eve
of the statute of limitations, . . . the specials would onlyhave been $
22,923.86. However, what this indicates is that
there may have been a failure to manage Mr. Bowers'reasonable expectations at the beginning of the lawsuit, andthat may have affected the relationship between attorney andclient after the CAAP award came out. 
Now, the Court also notes that Arbitration Rule 19
allows the arbitrator to award costs. . . . So the Court finds that the failure to request costs as part of a CAAPproceeding calls into question the experience and theability of the lawyer. 
So the primary factor the Court is looking at -- or
the primary factors the Court is looking at is, because thisis a contingency case, the Rule 1.5 factor ofconscionability of the fee in light of the net recovery to
the client; and also under the Riley  case, the amount
involved in the controversy -- or the Court should state,
the amount reasonably involved in the controversy and thebenefits resulting to the client from the services. 
So it's the Court's inclination to, as I said, enforce
the lien, but at a reduced amount. 
Mr. Mac Master, I'll hear argument from you first. 
The Circuit Court then heard extensive oral argument 
from Mac Master, as well as argument from the parties, before 
ruling on the Motion. It was not until after Mac Master completed his oral argument that he stated: "Just for the record, we . . . are requesting an evidentiary hearing, Your Honor." Mac Master did not identify any additional evidence that he sought to make part of the record via an evidentiary hearing or otherwise indicate why an evidentiary hearing was necessary. The Circuit Court denied Mac Master's request for an evidentiary hearing. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that under these circumstances, Mac Master 
was afforded an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and 
in a meaningful manner with respect to the Motion, and that due process did not require an evidentiary hearing. See In re 
Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawai# i at 241, 151 P.3d at 722; 
see also Gold v. Harrison, 88 Hawai# i 94, 106-07, 962 P.2d 353, 
365-66 (1998) (the circuit court did not deny a sanctioned attorney due process by failing to hold an evidentiary hearing on the sanctions, where the attorney received notice and a hearing on the sanctions motion and "did not explain what evidence he planned to introduce or otherwise indicate why an evidentiary hearing was necessary"). Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mac Master's request for an evidentiary hearing or in deciding the Motion without an evidentiary hearing. 
(2)
 In his third point of error, Mac Master contends 
that the Circuit Court erred "when it disregarded the requirements of HRS § 507-81(b)(1), which entitles Mr. Mac Master to an attorney's lien in the amount of '[t]he fees and compensation specifically agreed upon with the client.'" (Formatting and capitalization altered.) This argument is also without merit. 
HRS § 507-81 (2018) states, in relevant part: 
Attorney's lien upon actions and judgments.  (a) An
attorney has a lien upon: 
(1) Actions, suits, and proceedings after
commencement of the action or arbitration 
proceeding; 
(2) Judgments, decrees, orders, settlements, and
awards entered by the court or an arbitrator infavor of the client; and 
(3) Any proceeds paid in satisfaction of the
judgment, decree, order, settlement, or award. 
(b) The lien shall be for: 
(1) The fees and compensation specifically agreed
upon with the client; 
(2) The reasonable value of the services of the 
attorney, if there is no fee agreement; 
(3) Any costs advanced by the attorney; and 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) Any fees or commissions taxed or allowed by the
court. 
In Riley v. Osaka, No. CAAP-15-0000399, 2016 WL 3615610 
(Haw. App. June 30, 2016) (SDO), this court summarized the 
prevailing case law regarding the enforcement of an attorney's lien under HRS § 507-81(b)(1) as follows: 
Before granting a contractually-based award of
attorney's fees, the circuit court is required to consider
the reasonableness of the fees. See Booker v. Midpac LumberCo., 65 Haw. 166, 172, 649 P.2d 376, 381 (1982) (holding,where an attorney was discharged without cause prior to theconclusion of a personal injury case, that "a contingent feeagreement, without more, is not good reason for boosting anattorney's compensation or denying him a fee that adequatelycompensates him for actual services performed"). In general, an appellate court must "examine the circumstancesunder which the circuit court approved the [attorney's] feeto determine whether its exercise of discretion was consistent with the tenets enunciated in Sharp [v. HuiWahine, Inc., 49 Haw. 241, 413 P.2d 242 (1966)]." Booker,65 Haw. at 170–71, 649 P.2d at 379. In Sharp, the Hawai #i 
Supreme Court put forth the following guidelines fordetermining the reasonableness of attorney's fees when thefees are provided for by contract: 
Comprehensive discussions of the numerous factors tobe considered in determining a reasonable attorney'sfee are to be found in Annotations in 143 A.L.R. 672 and 56 A.L.R.2d 13. Canon 12 of the Canons of Professional Ethics adopted by the American BarAssociation has set up the following guidelines to beconsidered in determining the real value of theservices performed by an attorney so as to be able tofix the reasonable compensation for such services: 
"In determining the amount of the fee, it isproper to consider: (1) the time and laborrequired, the novelty and difficulty of thequestions involved and the skill requisiteproperly to conduct the cause; (2) whether theacceptance of employment in the particular casewill preclude the lawyer's appearance for othersin cases likely to arise out of the transaction,and in which there is a reasonable expectationthat otherwise he would be employed, or willinvolve the loss of other employment whileemployed in the particular case or antagonismswith other clients; (3) the customary charges ofthe Bar for similar services; (4) the amountinvolved in the controversy and the benefitsresulting to the client from the services; (5)the contingency or the certainty of thecompensation; and (6) the character of theemployment, whether casual or for an establishedand constant client. No one of these considerations in itself is controlling. Theyare mere guides in ascertaining the real valueof the service." 
7  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
It closes with the admonition that: 
"In fixing fees it should never be forgotten
that the profession is a branch of theadministration of justice and not a meremoney-getting trade." 
The Canons have been adopted as governing the conductof the members of the Hawaii Bar by Rule 16(a) of thiscourt. 
Booker, 65 Haw. at 170 n.2, 649 P.2d at 379 n.2 (quotingSharp, 49 Haw. at 244–45, 413 P.2d at 245–46). The considerations delineated in Sharp are to be considered"mere guides in ascertaining the real value of the service[rendered]." Booker, 65 Haw. at 172, 649 P.2d at 381. 
In sum, the Hawai #i Supreme Court has held: 
Where the efforts of an attorney who was
employed under a contingent fee contract would have atendency to advance the client's claim or to enhancethe possibility of a favorable result, we would alsoconclude the contract and the reasonably estimatedvalue of the case should be considered in fixing areasonable attorney's fee. 
Booker, 65 Haw. at 172, 649 P.2d at 381. "'[T]he real valueof the service' encompasses 'the benefits resulting to theclient.'" Id. (quoting Sharp, 49 Haw. at 244–45, 413 P.2d
at 245). 
Id. at *1-2. 
Here, the Circuit Court expressly considered the 
principles set forth in Riley, as well as Hawai# i Rules of 
Professional Conduct (HRPC
) Rule 1.5,  to determine the 2/
2/ HRPC Rule 1.5 states, in relevant part: 
Rule 1.5. FEES. 
(a) Reasonableness of Fee. A lawyer shall not make an
agreement for, charge, or collect an unreasonable fee or an
unreasonable amount for expenses. The factors to be considered in determining the reasonablenessof a fee include the following: 
(1) the time and labor required, the novelty anddifficulty of the questions involved, and the skillrequisite to perform the legal service properly; 
(2) the likelihood, if apparent to the client, that
the acceptance of the particular employment willpreclude other employment by the lawyer; 
(3) the fee customarily charged in the locality for
similar legal services; 
(4) the amount involved and the results obtained; 
(continued...) 
8 (continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonableness of the contractually-based fee award requested in 
the Motion. After stating its inclination and hearing oral argument, the Circuit Court ruled as follows: 
[I]n a case like this where a contingency fee agreement is
involved, the amount of time spent is not the sole or eventhe primary determining factor of the reasonableness of afee. Rather, as mandated by Rule 1.5, and as reinforced by
the Riley  case, a lawyer's fee must be reasonable. And in 
determining reasonableness of a fee, in contingency fee
cases the net recovery to the client is a primary factor,and also the benefit resulting to the client from theservices. 
And another factor is the fee customarily charged in
the locality for similar legal services. 
And the Court 
takes judicial notice that in enumerable cases that theCourt has been involved in both in private practice and as asettlement judge, counsel have adjusted their fees, whenappropriate under the circumstances, to effectuate asettlement. 
So I'm going to rule on . . . two matters separately.
On the lien for fees, the lien shall be enforced. The Court finds that a reasonable fee for Mr. Mac Master, under thecircumstances as shown by the record in this case, is$4,000. 
On the claim for costs, other than the amount of the
filing fee, which is going to be shown in the court file --the documentation in the court file, the costs are deniedbecause there has not been any evidentiary foundation ordocumentation supplied. 
Thus, based on the relevant facts and circumstances, 
including that Bowers ultimately recovered a $24,000 settlement 
after Mac Master withdrew as his counsel, the Circuit Court  
applied HRPC Rule 1.5 and the principles set forth in Riley to determine that a reasonable fee for Mac Master's services was $4,000. The court also awarded $515 in case costs to Mac Master based on the documentation in the court file. 
(5)
 the time limitations imposed by the client or by
the circumstances; 
(6) the nature and length of the professional
relationship with the client; 
(7) the experience, reputation, and ability of the
lawyer or lawyers performing the services; and 
(8) whether the fee is fixed or contingent, and in
contingency fee cases the risk of no recovery and theconscionability of the fee in light of the netrecovery to the client. 
9   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mac Master argues that he and Bowers "made an oral 
agreement that the amount of Mr. Mac Master's attorney's lien 
would be reduced to, and fixed at, $7,800." (Formatting and capitalization altered.) However, the fees requested pursuant to this alleged oral agreement, which was itself a product of the written contingent fee agreement,
3/ were subject to the Circuit 
Court's determination of their reasonableness. Riley, 2016 WL 
3615610, at *1. On this record, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in determining that a reasonable fee for Mac Master's services was $4,000. We further conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in enforcing Mac Master's lien in the amounts of $4,000 in attorney's fees and $515 in case costs, and in denying the Motion as to all other claimed fees and case costs. 
(3) In his fourth point of error, Mac Master contends 
that "[t]he failure of the Circuit Court to issue an Order that contains adequate findings of fact and conclusions of law violates . . . Mac Master's [a]rticle 1, [s]ection 5 rights to due process and prevents proper appellate review of the Circuit Court's actions[.]" This argument also lacks merit. 
Mac Master cites no Hawai# i case law or other authority 
construing the Hawai
#i Constitution's due process clause to 
require a trial court to issue written findings of facts and conclusions of law in analogous circumstances. Cf. HRCP Rule 
52(a) ("Findings of fact and conclusions of law are unnecessary on decisions of motions under Rules 12 or 56 or any other motion except as provided in subdivisions (b) and (c) of this rule."). Further, we reject Mac Master's assertion that the absence of written findings of fact and conclusions of law in these circumstances "impedes effective judicial review." During the hearing on the Motion, the Circuit Court provided a thorough 
3/ Mac Master terminated his representation of Bowers pursuant to the
written contingent fee agreement. Moreover, Mac Master stated in his
declaration supporting the Motion that "[t]he agreement to reduce theattorney's lien amount" was made in part because "$7,000 represents about onethird (i.e. 33.3%) of the CAAP award that Mr. Mac Master helped Mr. Bowers
obtain[,]" i.e. , the same percentage of the client's ultimate recovery that
Mac Master was to receive under the written contingent fee agreement.
(Capitalization altered.) 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
explanation of the factors and reasoning supporting its decision. 
The Circuit Court's oral explanation of its ruling, in conjunction with the record, is sufficient to enable meaningful appellate review of the issues raised by Mac Master. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mac Master's request for findings of facts and conclusions of law supporting the Order. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the November 7, 
2017 "Order Granting In Part And Denying In Part . . . Mac Master's Motion to Enforce Attorney's Lien Filed September 8, 2017," entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 29, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
11 Timothy I. Mac Master,Real Party in Interest-Appellant. 
James J. Bickerton and Nathan P. Roehrig(Bickerton Dang, LLLP)for Plaintiff-Appellee. 