NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000008
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
NATIONSTAR MORTGAGE LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ERWIN F. CHASE, III; KATHLEEN E. CHASE,
Defendants-Appellants, and HFS FEDERAL CREDIT
UNION; CACH, LLC; JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE
ENTITIES 1-50; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0452)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Erwin F. Chase III (Chase)
1 appeals
 
from the December 14, 2015 Judgment (Judgment) entered on the
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order Granting Plaintiff's
 Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for
 Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure filed August 5, 2015 (Order)
 by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
2 (Circuit Court).
 
On appeal, Chase alleges that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting summary judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee
 Nationstar Mortgage LLC (Nationstar) because (1) the Property at
 issue was not subject to foreclosure; (2) the documents attached
 
1
 Chase attempted to assert an appeal on behalf of Kathleen E.
Chase. However, Chase is not an attorney. Persons who are not licensed to 
practice law in Hawai 'i "are not permitted to act as 'attorneys' and represent
other natural persons in [t]heir causes." Oahu Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd.
v. Kona Constr., Inc., 60 Haw. 372, 377, 590 P.2d 570, 573 (1979). ThereforeChase may not assert this appeal on behalf of Kathleen E. Chase.
 ,
2
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Nationstar's Verified Complaint for Foreclosure (Complaint)
 
constituted inadmissible hearsay; (3) the assignments of the
 mortgage were invalid; and (4) Nationstar was not entitled to
 enforce the Adjustable Rate Note (Note) executed by Chase.
 
After a careful review of the record on appeal and the
 
relevant legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the
 issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we
 resolve these points of appeal as follows:
 
Chase argues that the documents attached to the
 
Complaint are hearsay that did not comply with the requirements
 of Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(6), and are
 therefore inadmissible to support Nationstar's motion for summary
 judgment.
 
In order to prove entitlement to foreclose, the
foreclosing party must demonstrate that all conditions
precedent to foreclosure under the note and mortgage are
satisfied and that all steps required by statute have been
strictly complied with. See 55 Am. Jur. 2d Mortgages § 575
 
(Nov. 2016 Update). This typically requires the plaintiff
to prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the
agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the
agreement, and giving of the cancellation notice. See Bank
 
of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson
, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654
P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982) (citing 55 Am. Jur. 2d Mortgages
§ 554 (1971)). A foreclosing plaintiff must also prove its
entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage. HRS § 490:3­301 (providing who is entitled to enforce an instrument);
see id. § 490:3-308 (concerning proof of signatures and
status as a holder in due course); id. cmt. 2 (noting that
"[i]f a plaintiff producing the instrument proves
entitlement to enforce the instrument, either as a holder or
a person with rights of a holder, the plaintiff is entitled
to recovery unless the defendant proves a defense or claim
in recoupment").
 
A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement
to enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of
standing in foreclosure actions as "[s]tanding is concerned
with whether the parties have the right to bring suit."
Mottl v. Miyahira, 95 Hawai 'i 381, 388, 23 P.3d 716, 723
(2001). Typically, a plaintiff does not have standing to
invoke the jurisdiction of the court unless the plaintiff
has suffered an injury in fact. Id.
 at 391, 23 P.3d at 726.
A mortgage is a conveyance of an interest in real property
that is given as security for the payment of the note. HRS
 § 490:9-102 (defining "mortgage"). A foreclosure action is
 a legal proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the
property for satisfaction of a note that is in default and
secured by a lien on the subject property. HRS § 667-1.5
(providing for foreclosure by action); id. 490:9-601(a)
(providing that after default, a secured party "[m]ay reduce
a claim to judgment, foreclose, or otherwise enforce the
claim, security interest, or agricultural lien by any
available judicial procedure"). See generally 55 Am. Jur.
2d Mortgages § 573 (Nov. 2016 Update) (discussing the nature
and purpose of a foreclosure suit). Thus, the underlying
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"injury in fact" to a foreclosing plaintiff is the
mortgagee's failure to satisfy its obligation to pay the
debt obligation to the note holder. Accordingly, in
establishing standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must
necessarily prove its entitlement to enforce the note as it
is the default on the note that gives rise to the action.
See HRS § 490:9-601 (providing for a secured party's rights
after default).
 
. . . As standing relates to the invocation of the
court's jurisdiction, it is not surprising that standing
must be present at the commencement of the case. Sierra
 
Club v. Haw. Tourism Auth., 100 Hawai 'i 242, 257, 59 P.3d
877, 892 (2002) (noting that "standing must be established
at the beginning of the case").
 
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i 361, 367-68, 390 
P.3d 1248, 1254-55 (2017) (footnotes omitted).
 
Nationstar alleged in its Complaint that on November 6,
 
2006, Chase executed the Note in favor of Lehman Brothers Bank,
 
FSB. Although not alleged in the Complaint, the purported copy
 of the Note attached to the Complaint appears to bear a stamp,
 executed by E. Todd Whittemore, Vice President for Lehman
 Brothers Bank, FSB, indorsing the Note to Lehman Brothers
 Holdings, Inc. and another stamp, executed by "Paul E. Sveen,
 Authorized Signatory" for Lehman Brothers Holdings, Inc.
 indorsing the Note in blank. Neither indorsement bears a date.
 
HRE Rule 803(b)(6) provides:
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarant
immaterial. The following are not excluded by the hearsay
rule, even though the declarant is available as a witness:
 
. . . .
 
(b) Other exceptions. 
. . . . 
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity. A
 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any
form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses,
made in the course of a regularly conducted activity, at or
near the time of the acts, events, conditions, opinions, or
diagnoses, as shown by the testimony of the custodian or
other qualified witness, or by certification that complies
with rule 902(11) or a statute permitting certification,
unless the sources of information or other circumstances
 indicate lack of trustworthiness.
 
Thus, under HRE Rule 803(b)(6), "[t]he proponent must
 
establish (1) that the record evidences acts, events, conditions,
 
opinions, or diagnoses; (2) that the record was made in the
 course of a regularly conducted activity; and (3) that the record
 was made at or near the time of the acts or events that are
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recorded." State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai' i 354, 365, 227 P.3d 
520, 531 (2010) (quotation marks omitted). Foundation for the 
admission of documents may be established by a qualified witness. "A person can be a 'qualified witness'. . . even if he or she is not an employee of the business that created the document, or has no direct, personal knowledge of how the document was created." Id. at 366, 227 P.3d at 532. 
"The witness need only have enough 
familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business in 
question to explain how the record came into existence in the ordinary course of business." Id. (quoting 5 Joseph McLaughlin, 
Weinstein's Federal Evidence § 803.08[8][a] (2d ed. 2009)). 
"Records received from another business and 
incorporated into the receiving business' records may in some circumstances be regarded as 'created' by the receiving business." Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai' i 37, 
45, 414 P.3d 89, 97 (2018) (citing U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai
'i 26, 32, 398 P.3d 615, 621 (2017)). 
Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)
when a custodian or qualified witness testifies [1] that the
documents were incorporated and kept in the normal course of
business, [2] that the incorporating business typically
relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the documents,
and [3] the circumstances otherwise indicate the
trustworthiness of the document.
 
Id.
 
In the present case, Nationstar filed its December 5,
2014 Complaint, attaching a Verification of Complaint for
 
Foreclosure (Verification). In this Verification, Fred Turner
 (Turner), declared that he was a Document Execution Specialist
 with Nationstar. Turner's Verification states, in part:
  
1. I have knowledge of and I am competent to testify
to the matters stated herein by virtue of my employment for
Plaintiff Nationstar Mortgage LLC ("Plaintiff"). I have
 been trained to use and understand the record keeping system
utilized for this loan. I know that pursuant to normal
business practices, the entries in the business records are
made at or near the time of the occurrence by the person
with actual knowledge of the occurrence being recorded in
the business record. I have also been trained to use and
 understand the entries in the record and am familiar with
 the same. My knowledge is based on my review of the
business records and files related to the mortgage loan
which is the subject of this foreclosure.
 
2. On about November 6, 2006, [Chase] for value
received, duly made, executed and delivered to Lehman
Brothers Bank, FSB, A Federal Savings Bank a promissory note
("Note") in the amount of $520,000.00. A true and correct
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
copy of the Indorsed Note is attached as Exhibit "A". I
 
confirmed that [Chase] is the proper defendant in this
action.
 
. . . .
 
7. Plaintiff is in possession of the Note. As
 
evidenced by the recorded Mortgage and applicable
assignments, Plaintiff is also the record assignee of the
Mortgage. As such, Plaintiff is the proper plaintiff in
this matter.
 
. . . .
 
11. All documents, memoranda, reports and records of
data compilation (collectively, "Records of Acts") that are
attached as Exhibits "A"-"G" to my Verification, as well as
all other factual information contained herein, represent
records of regularly conducted business activity relating to
the subject loan.
 
12. The Records of Acts were and are made in the
 
course of Plaintiff's and Plaintiff's servicing agent's
regularly conducted business activity of mortgage lending
and mortgage servicing.
 
13. All herein referenced Records of Acts were and
 
are made at or near the time of the acts reported. Entries
 into these records are made by persons having personal
knowledge of such event, and are reviewed to ensure accuracy
and completeness, and are relied upon by Plaintiff and its
servicing agent in the conduct of its business.
 
14. I am familiar with the referenced Records of Acts,
which is used to record and track events and documents by
Plaintiff and its servicing agent that are relevant to this loan.
These records are routinely made in the ordinary course of
business in a filing and computer system that I have access to,
have been trained to use and understand, and with which I am
familiar.
 
Amongst the "Records of Acts" attached to the Verification were
 
copies of the Note, Mortgage, First Assignment of Mortgage, and
 Second Assignment of Mortgage.
 
Nationstar does not point to any additional documents
 
or sworn statements in support of its argument that the evidence
 was sufficient to support the Circuit Court's grant of summary
 judgment.
3
 
Turner's Verification does not establish a sufficient
 
foundation as either a custodian of records or a qualified
 witness for a receiving business under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
3
 Nationstar does note that, its November 9, 2015 Supplemental
Declaration [Re: Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties
and For Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure] "stated that the original Note
was in the possession of [Nationstar's] counsel." However, this declaration
does not state when Nationstar received the original Note.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Turner did not claim to be the custodian of the loan records. 
Although Turner states that the documents attached to the
 Complaint were made at or near the time of the acts reported,
 entries were made by persons having personal knowledge of the
 event, are reviewed for accuracy and completeness and are relied
 upon by Nationstar, he does not state that Nationstar did these
 acts. Nor does Turner state that, if these acts were not done by
 Nationstar, he was familiar with the record-keeping systems of
 the entity or entities that created the documents or aver as to
 the foundational requirements necessary to establish that
 Nationstar incorporated the records into its own. Thus, taking
 the documents proffered by Nationstar in the light most favorable
 to Chase, as we must for the purposes of reviewing a summary
 judgment ruling, there was a genuine issue of material fact as to
 whether Nationstar was entitled to enforce the Note at the time
 the Complaint was filed. Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in
 granting Nationstar's motion for summary judgment.
 
Based upon the foregoing, we vacate the December 14,
 
2015 (1) Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order Granting
 Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and
 for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure filed August 5, 2015 and
 (2) the Judgment entered thereon, and remand this case for
 further proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 27, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Al Thompson,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Charles R. Prather and
 Aaron Masser,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 