 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001056
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
JENNIFER H. STUMP, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DARYL MARK STUMP, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-M NO. 10-1-6375)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Daryl Mark Stump (Husband) appeals
 
from the following orders by the Family Court of the First
 
Circuit (Family Court): (1) Order Re: Defendant Daryl Mark
 
Stump's Motion to Modify Judgment Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS)] HRS 580-47 Filed July 3, 2012, entered on October
 
29, 2012; and (2) Order Re: Motion to Modify Judgment Pursuant to
 
HRS 580-47, entered on November 2, 2012.1
  
I. Background Facts
 
Husband and Plaintiff-Appellee Jennifer H. Stump (
Wife)
 
were married on June 9, 1990 in Shippensburg, Pennsylvania. The
 parties have three children together, LS, MS, and DS. Husband is
 a Personnel Specialist with the United States Army. Husband was
 
1
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio and the Honorable Nancy Ryan
presided, each during different parts of the proceedings. 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
stationed in Hawai 'i, and he brought the family over in May 2004; 
however, Husband left Hawai 'i approximately four years later 
because of military orders transferring him to Virginia. Wife 
and their three children, though, remained in Wahiawa, Hawai 'i. 
Wife cited several reasons for staying in Hawai 'i, including LS 
being "able to stay in the same school," her work at Hale Kula, and DS being able to "graduate at the same high school she started as a Freshman." 
On October 21, 2009, the parties were divorced pursuant
 
to a Final Decree of Divorce entered in the City of Alexandria
 Circuit Court, State of Virginia. However, the Virginia court
 
did not address any issues relating to child custody, support, or
 
property division. Wife then filed a Motion for Post Decree
 Relief in the Family Court, on November 3, 2010, seeking custody,
 child support, alimony, and division of the marital estate. On
 September 15, 2011, Husband's then-fiancée gave birth to a child,
 PMS. On October 26, 2011, the Family Court entered an Amended
 Divorce Decree granting sole legal and physical custody of the
 three children (LS, MS, and DS) to Wife, with reasonable
 visitation rights for Husband, and awarding Wife alimony and
 child support from Husband. Husband did not appeal the Amended
 Divorce Decree. 
Eight months later, on July 3, 2012, Husband filed a
 
Motion to Modify Judgment Pursuant to HRS § 580-47,2
 claiming 
2
 HRS § 580-47 (2006 & Supp. 2013) states, in relevant part, the
following:
 
§ 580-47 Support orders; division of property.
 
(a) Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if,
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2(...continued)
in addition to the powers granted in subsections (c)
and (d), jurisdiction of those matters is reserved
under the decree by agreement of both parties or by
order of court after finding that good cause exists,
the court may make any further orders as shall appear
just and equitable (1) compelling the parties or
either of them to provide for the support,
maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties; (2) compelling either party to provide for
the support and maintenance of the other party; (3)
finally dividing and distributing the estate of the
parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether community,
joint, or separate; and (4) allocating, as between the
parties, the responsibility for the payment of the
debts of the parties whether community, joint, or
separate, and the attorney's fees, costs, and expenses
incurred by each party by reason of the divorce. . . . 
(b) An order as to the custody, management, and
division of property and as to the payment of debts
and the attorney's fees, costs and expenses incurred
in the divorce shall be final and conclusive as to
 both parties subject only to appeal as in civil cases.
The court shall at all times, including during the
pendency of any appeal, have the power to grant any
and all orders that may be necessary to protect and
provide for the support and maintenance of the parties
and any children of the parties to secure justice, to
compel either party to advance reasonable amounts for
the expenses of the appeal including attorney's fees
to be incurred by the other party, and to amend and
revise such orders from time to time.
 
(c) No order entered under the authority of
subsection (a) or entered thereafter revising so much
of such an order as provides for the support,
maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties shall impair the power of the court from time
to time to revise its orders providing for the
support, maintenance, and education of the children of
the parties upon a showing of a change in the
circumstances of either party or any child of the
parties since the entry of any prior order relating to
the support, maintenance, and education. . . .
 
(d) Upon the motion of either party supported by
an affidavit setting forth in particular a material
change in the physical or financial circumstances of
either party, or upon a showing of other good cause,
the moving party, in the discretion of the court, and
upon adequate notice to the other party, may be
granted a hearing. . . . The court, upon such hearing,
for good cause shown may amend or revise any order and
shall consider all proper circumstances in determining
the amount of the allowance, if any, which shall
thereafter be ordered.
 
(e) The responsible parent or the custodial
parent shall have a right to petition the family court
or the child support enforcement agency not more than
once every three years for review and adjustment of
the child support order without having to show a
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that exceptional circumstances and good cause existed to modify
 
the terms of the Amended Divorce Decree. In particular, Husband
 argued that he had another child to support (PS), DS was in
 college and no longer living with Wife, and Husband's
 relationship with his other two minor children (LS and MS) was
 being harmed by him not being able to contact them regularly. 
Husband sought: (1) a reduction in child support due to the
 birth of PS; (2) sole physical custody of LS; (3) joint legal
 custody of MS, with a specific visitation schedule; (4)
 termination of child support for DS, as she was attending college
 on the mainland; (5) a visitation schedule for LS and MS; and (6)
 a tax dependency exemption for LS and alternating yearly for MS. 
Wife opposed the motion in its entirety. 
On October 3, 2012, a hearing was held before Judge
 
Nancy Ryan. The Family Court ordered Wife to pay her adult
 daughter all of the court-ordered child support that she received
 each month on her daughter's behalf and to provide proof of
 payment. The Family Court also ordered Wife to submit proof of
 daughter's full-time enrollment in an accredited college to
 Husband. Additionally, it ordered both Husband and Wife to file
 memoranda regarding child support and changed circumstances. The
 issue of tax exemption was reserved pending the court's decision
 on custody, and the custody issue was continued for a further
 
2(...continued)
change in circumstances. The responsible or custodial
parent shall not be precluded from petitioning the
family court or the child support enforcement agency
for review and adjustment more than once in any
three-year period if the second or subsequent request
is supported by proof of a substantial or material
change of circumstances.
. . . .
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
hearing on November 2, 2012. 
On October 29, 2012, the Family Court issued an Order
 
Re: Defendant Daryl Mark Stump's Motion to Modify Judgment
 
Pursuant to HRS 580-47 Filed July 3, 2012. It noted that there
 was a "material change in circumstances justifying a review of
 [Husband's] child support payments" because Husband had a fourth
 child after evidence was taken on July 22, 2011. However, the
 Family Court also found that there was no material change in
 circumstances to warrant reopening the issue of child custody,
 except for the separate issue of visitation. A trial was
 scheduled to be held on November 2, 2012, limited to the issues
 of child support and visitation. 
On November 2, 2012, the Family Court issued an Order
 
Re: Motion to Modify Judgment Pursuant to HRS 580-47. The Order
noted that the court clerk made three calls for Husband and his
 attorney during a hearing in front of Judge Catherine H. Remigio,but because they were not present and did not appear by 11:20
 a.m. (for a hearing that was supposed to have started at 11:00
 a.m.), Husband was defaulted, and the motion regarding child
 support and visitation was denied. On November 30, 2012, Husbandtimely filed a Notice of Appeal. 
 

 

 
On January 28, 2013, the Family Court entered Findings
 
of Fact (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law (COLs). In the COLs, the
 
Family Court concluded, inter alia: (1) that a moving party must
 
show a substantial change in relevant circumstances in order to
 modify an existing child custody order; (2) that Husband had to
 show this substantial change; (3) that Husband failed to show a
 substantial change warranting custodial modification; and (4)
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that Husband's tax exemption request should be denied. The court
 
also concluded that: for existing child support order
 modification, the moving party must show a substantial change in
 relevant circumstances, unless at least three years have elapsed
 since the prior child support order; the birth of Husband's
 fourth child, PMS, was a substantial change in relevant
 circumstances justifying child support payment review; a trial
 was scheduled for November 2, 2012 regarding the issues of child
 support and visitation; and the court denied Husband's
 modification motion regarding child support and visitation
 because Husband and his attorney failed to appear at the trial,
 thus warranting a default against Husband. 
II. Points of Error on Appeal
 
Husband raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1) the Family Court erred in its application of the
 
statutory requirements for a change in custody;
 
(2) the Family Court erred in requiring a material
 
change in circumstances in the context of a post-hearing motion; 
(3) the Family Court denied due process to Husband by
 
disallowing his telephonic testimony at the continuation of the
 hearing on his Motion to Modify;
 
(4) the Family Court's FOFs are clearly erroneous; and 
(5) the Family Court's COLs are erroneous. 
III. Standards of Review
   
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated the following 
regarding decisions of the Family Court: 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decision will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted).
 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
reviewable de novo. Furthermore, our statutory construction
is guided by established rules[.] When construing a statute,
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to
the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute itself.
And we must read statutory language in the context of the
entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with
 its purpose. This court may also consider the reason and
spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the
legislature to enact it to discover its true meaning.
 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190-91, 20 P.3d 616, 623-24 (2001) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, ellipses, and original
 
brackets omitted; format altered). 
A "family court's determination of what is or is not in
 
a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clear error." 
Id. at 190, 20 P.3d at 623 (citations omitted). Additionally,
 
the concept of the best interests of the child
is one that is without any measuring rod, relying on
the wisdom and discretion of the family court. . . .
[W]e note that the court may look to the past and
present conditions of the home and natural parents so
as to gain insights into the quality of care the child
may reasonably be expected to receive in the future.
Other factors for consideration may include the
child's own desires and his emotional and physical
needs. The court is given much leeway in its
examination of reports concerning the child's care,
custody and welfare, and its conclusion, if supported
by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on
appeal.
 
Woodruff v. Keale, 64 Haw. 85, 99, 637 P.2d 760, 769 (1981)
 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Questions of constitutional law are reviewed de novo
 
under the right/wrong standard. In re Guardianship of Carlsmith ,
 
113 Hawai 'i 236, 239, 151 P.3d 717, 720 (2007). Thus, an 
appellate court must "exercise[] its own independent
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case." Id.
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal
under the "clearly erroneous" standard. A FOF is
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)
despite substantial evidence in support of the
finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been
 made. "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence
 which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. On the other hand, the family court's COLs
are reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong
standard. COLs, consequently, are not binding upon an
appellate court and are freely reviewable for their
correctness.
 
Kakinami v. Kakinami , 127 Hawai 'i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 705 
(2012) (citations and brackets omitted; format altered). 
"[I]t is well settled that an appellate court will not
 
pass upon issues dependent upon credibility of witnesses and the
 
weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." 
Booth v. Booth , 90 Hawai 'i 413, 416, 978 P.2d 851, 854 (1999) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103(a) provides, in
 
relevant part, that "[e]rror may not be predicated upon a ruling
 which admits or excludes evidence unless a substantial right of
 the party is affected." 
Schiller v. Schiller , 120 Hawai 'i 283, 
288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 (App. 2009) (internal quotation marks
 omitted).
 
IV. Discussion
 A. The Family Court's Custody Determination
 
Husband argues that the Family Court erred in its
 
application of the statutory requirements for a change in
 
custody, stating that "[t]here was no submittal of any kind
 regarding the best interests of the children, and no reason for
 an award of sole physical or legal custody to [Wife]." He
 
8
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserts that this was "a departure from the statutory guidelines
 
and an abuse of discretion." He also argues that he did not need
 to show a material change in circumstances in order to modify the
 child custody order here because he was challenging only "'the
 original custody determination in the context of a post-hearing
 motion'" (namely, his Motion to Modify Judgment). 
HRS § 580-47(b) states that "[a]n order as to the 
custody, management, and division of property and as to the payment of debts and the attorney's fees, costs and expenses incurred in the divorce shall be final and conclusive as to both parties subject only to appeal as in civil cases." 
The Hawai 'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) require that a notice of 
appeal be filed within 30 days of the judgment or order. See 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) ("When a civil appeal is permitted by law, the 
notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the judgment or appealable order."). Thus, Husband had 30 days to appeal the Family Court's October 26, 2011 custody determination to attempt to remedy any perceived non-compliance with the applicable law regarding the best interests of the child.
3 
3 HRS § 571-46 (Supp. 2013) governs, inter alia, the criteria for
awarding custody, and it states, in relevant part, the following: 
§ 571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding
custody and visitation; best interest of the child. 
(a) In actions for divorce, separation, annulment, separate
maintenance, or any other proceeding where there is at issue
a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the court,
during the pendency of the action, at the final hearing, or
any time during the minority of the child, may make an order
for the custody of the minor child as may seem necessary or
proper. In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided
by the following standards, considerations, and procedures:
 
(1)	 Custody should be awarded to either parent
or to both parents according to the best
interests of the child, and the court also
(continued...)
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Husband did not appeal the October 26, 2011 Amended Divorce
 
Decree, and he instead (over 6 months later, on July 3, 2012)
 filed a Motion to Modify Judgment Pursuant to HRS § 580-47. 
Therefore, with regard to the issue of whether the Family Court
 properly considered the "best interests of the children" in its
 original custody determination, Husband's objection is too late
 and cannot be sustained on appeal.
 
B.	 The Family Court's Application of the Material Change
of Circumstances Test
 
Husband contends that the Family Court erred when it
 
applied the "material change in circumstances" test to his motion
 
to modify judgment. He argues that the Family Court erred in
 failing to apply Hawai
'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 60(b)4 
3(...continued)
 
may consider frequent, continuing, and
meaningful contact of each parent with the
child unless the court finds that a parent
is unable to act in the best interest of
 the child;
 
. . . . 
4	 HFCR Rule 60(b) states the following:
 
Rule 60. Relief from judgment or order. 
. . . . 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect;
 
newly discovered evidence; fraud. On motion and upon
such terms as are just, the court may relieve a party
or a party's legal representative from any or all of
the provisions of a final judgment, order, or
proceeding for the following reasons: (1) mistake,
inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect; (2)
newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could
not have been discovered in time to move for a new
 trial under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore
denominated intrinsic or extrinsic),
misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse
party; (4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgment has
been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior
judgment upon which it is based has been reversed or
otherwise vacated, or it is no longer equitable that
the judgment should have prospective application; or
(6) any other reason justifying relief from the
operation of the judgment. The motion shall be made
 
(continued...)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
standards to his motion, as well as failing to consider the best
 
interests of the children standard. 
The Hawai 'i Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) has 
held "[t]hat a person seeking a change of custody must show a material change of circumstances since the previous custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in the best interest of the child." Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 
861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993) (emphasis added); see Turoff v. Turoff, 56 Haw. 51, 55, 527 P.2d 1275, 1278 (1974) (explaining that the "question is whether substantial change has occurred since the initial Decision and Order requiring modification or change in the award of custody of the minor child"); In re Guardianship of Doe, 93 Hawai
'i 374, 388, 4 P.3d 508, 522 (App. 2000) (stating 
that "[a] person seeking a change in visitation must show a material change in circumstances since the previous visitation order" (citation omitted)). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court also has 
distinguished requests for "modification in custody" (where the "material change of circumstances" rule would apply) from those "challenging the original custody determination in the context of a post-hearing motion" (where the rule does not apply). See Doe 
v. Doe, 98 Hawai
'i 144, 153, 44 P.3d 1085, 1094 (2002). 
In the present case, Husband urges this court to 
4(...continued)
within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1), (2),
and (3) not more than one year after the judgment,
order, or proceedings was entered or taken. For
reasons (1) and (3) the averments in the motion shall
be made in compliance with Rule 9(b) of these rules. A
motion under this subdivision (b) does not affect the
finality of a judgment or suspend its operation. This
rule does not limit the power of a court to entertain
an independent action to relieve a party from a
judgment, order, or proceeding, or to set aside a
judgment for fraud upon the court.
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consider his request in the latter category, stating that the
 
Family Court "erred in requiring that [he] prove a material
 change in circumstances in the context of his Motion to Modify
 Judgment, which should have been considered under HRFC [sic] Rule
 60(b)." First, we note that Husband's post-decree Motion to
 Modify Judgment only sought relief under HRS § 580-47, and not
 based on HFCR Rule 60(b). Husband fails to cite to any authority
 that required the Family Court to sua sponte consider his motion
 for relief under HRS § 580-47 as a HFCR Rule 60(b) motion. In
 fact, the ICA held, in De Mello v. De Mello, that "[a] party who
 does not file a motion for relief under Rule 60(b) . . . may not
 on appeal complain of the failure to award her relief under Rule
 60(b)." 3 Haw. App. 165, 168, 646 P.2d 409, 411-12 (1982)
 (explaining that because the party did not make a Rule 60(b)
 motion, instead choosing "to rely solely on her erroneous
 assertion that the family court retained jurisdiction under HRS
 [§] 580-47," she was precluded from complaining on appeal "of the
 failure to award her relief under Rule 60(b)"). Thus, the Family
 Court did not err in treating Husband's motion as a motion for a
 change in custody, as stated in the motion, and Husband was
 required to show a material change of circumstances since the
 original custody determination. 
As stated in the Family Court's unchallenged findings
 
(8&9), Husband's arguments in favor of a change in custody were,
 in sum: (1) LS "should live with him for the next two to three
 years so they can reestablish their relationship and he can then
 fully enjoy the benefits and burdens of parenting his son and his
 son can enjoy the benefits and burdens of living with his father
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
again," and (2) as to MS, Husband "rarely gets to speak to her
 
and wants to have a meaningful relationship" with her. Weighing
 both parents' affidavits and arguments, the Family Court
 concluded that Husband "failed to show a substantial change in
 relevant circumstances" as to warrant a trial on the modification
 of custody. 
On appeal, Husband does not challenge these findings or
 
the conclusion that there was no material change in circumstances
 since the prior custody order. Instead, as discussed above, he
 argues that the Family Court erred in requiring him to bring
 forward evidence of a material change in circumstances. Having
 already rejected Father's argument that he did not bear the
 burden on establishing a material change in circumstances, we
 further conclude that there is no evidence in the record,
 argument presented, or legal authority supporting Father's
 contention that we should vacate the Family Court's conclusion
 that he failed to show a substantial change in circumstances
 warranting a modification of the existing custody order. As
 "material change in circumstances" and "best interests of the
 child" must both be established for a change in custody, we need
 not address Husband's arguments regarding the latter issue. 
C.	 The Family Court's Refusal of Husband's Telephonic
Testimony at the Continuation Hearing for Husband's
Motion to Modify
 
Husband argues that the Family Court denied him due
 
process by disallowing his telephonic testimony at the
 
continuation of the hearing on his Motion to Modify, on
 November 2, 2012. He argues that he was denied a fundamental
 liberty interest with regard to the care and control of his
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
children and that the Family Court did not indicate that he would
 
be disallowed from participating by telephone. 
There is no question that parents in Hawai 'i "have a 
substantive liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of their children protected by the due process clause of article 1, section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution."5 Hamilton ex rel. Lethem 
v. Lethem, 126 Hawai 'i 294, 302, 270 P.3d 1024, 1032 (2012) 
(citing In re Doe, 99 Hawai 'i 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 (2002)). 
The existence of this liberty interest does not guarantee a particular outcome regarding custody determinations. See Fisher 
v. Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 41, 47, 137 P.3d 355, 361 (2006) (showing 
that "the child's best interests" govern custody determinations, despite considerations about parental rights). Due process also requires that parents be afforded "notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner" before their significant parental rights are denied. See In re Doe, 99 
Hawai
'i at 533, 57 P.3d at 458; State v. Bani, 97 Hawai 'i 285, 
293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 (2001) (citations omitted). 
In the present case, it appears that Husband had notice
 
of and the opportunity to attend the November 2, 2012 Family
 Court hearing. 
He was represented by counsel, and there is no
 
motion or other indication in the record that, in advance of the
 
5
 The due process clause of article 1, section 5 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution states the following: "No person shall be deprived of life,
liberty or property without due process of law[.]" Substantive due processinvolves the protection of "those fundamental rights and liberties which are,objectively, deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition, andimplicit in the concept of ordered liberty[.]" Washington v. Glucksberg, 521
U.S. 702, 720-21 (1997) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).Procedural due process involves the protections of "notice and an opportunityto be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner beforegovernmental deprivation of a significant liberty interest." State v. Bani, 
97 Hawai' i 285, 293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 (2001) (citations omitted). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
hearing, he asked the court to allow him to testify
 
telephonically. His attorney failed to make a timely appearance
 at the hearing, even after the matter was called a second time. 
As he was represented by counsel, who was not present, it is
 unclear to this court whether or how Husband proposed to give
 testimony, or whether Husband merely wished to make arguments on
 his own behalf, in light of his counsel's absence. No motion for
 reconsideration was made, based on excusable neglect by counsel
 or otherwise, explaining counsel's lack of appearance and/or the
 lack of a prior request to take testimony telephonically. 
Husband provides no pertinent authority for the proposition that
 the Family Court was required to allow him to appear via
 telephone, without his counsel of record and without a timely
 motion, aside from general propositions regarding due process. 
There are situations in which Hawai
'i courts have ruled 
that a family court violated a party's due process rights by denying them the opportunity to participate telephonically; yet, those situations are distinguishable from the present one. In In re T.H., the ICA ruled that an incarcerated father was deprived of his due process right to participate by telephone at a hearing. 112 Hawai
'i 331, 335, 145 P.3d 874, 878 (App. 2006). 
However, In re T.H. is distinguishable from the present one because it involved the complete termination of parental rights, which is clearly more significant to parental rights than the present case, where the hearing involved a proposed modification to the parental visitation schedule, and the incarcerated father's counsel was present at the hearing. Id. Similarly, in 
the case of Stomber v. Stomber, the ICA ruled that the family 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court had denied a father his due process rights when it
 
initially advised him that he would be permitted to appear at a
 hearing by telephone, but then reversed its decision on the day
 of the hearing without giving him any reasonable opportunity to
 appear in person. Stomber v. Stomber, No. 29064 (App. Aug. 27,
 
2009) (unpublished summary disposition). Again, this is
 distinguishable from the present case where there was no prior
 request for permission to appear telephonically, and therefore no
 procedures in place to maintain the integrity of the proceedings,
 and a represented party was apparently seeking to appear on his
 own behalf, and to give (presumably sworn) testimony on his own
 behalf without the aid of his attorney. 
Trial courts, in conjunction with their inherent
 
judicial powers, must be given significant discretion to control
 the courtroom and the litigation process as a whole. See State
 
v. Sakamoto, 101 Hawai
'i 409, 415, 70 P.3d 635, 641 (2003) 
(Acoba, J., concurring) (explaining that "courts have inherent equity, supervisory, and administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the litigation process before them" (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)); see also 98 C.J.S. Witnesses § 448 (West 2014) (stating that "[t]he manner or
 mode in which testimony of a witness is to be given is largely
 within the discretion of the trial court"). Affording trial
 courts discretion in this regard also reflects cognizance on the
 part of appellate courts about the real concerns that trial
 courts may have over the use of telephonic testimony or
 appearances that are not pre-planned and subject to reasonable
 limitations and/or protections. See Eric Croft, Telephonic
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Testimony in Criminal and Civil Trials , 14 H ASTINGS COMM.  &  ENT.
 
L.J.  107, 117-18 (1991) (explaining common areas of judicial
 
concern over telephonic testimony, such as the lack of control
 
and the inability to see the witness to discern credibility). 
Thus, for the foregoing reasons, under the circumstances
 presented by the record in this case, the Family Court did not
 err regarding the telephonic testimony issue.
 
D. The Family Court's Findings of Fact
 
Husband contends that the Family Court's FOFs are
 
clearly erroneous, challenging FOFs 2, 4, 21, and 28 and arguing
 
that "they do not reflect the factual allegations or testimony by
 the parties." 
Husband challenges the part of FOF 2 stating the 
following: 
"In or about 2009, Father who had been stationed in 
Hawaii was re-assigned to Virginia." Husband points to Wife's statement that the parties were separated in May 2008, as well as the fact that the Family Court found that Husband was a Hawai
'i 
resident from 2004 to 2008. However, these facts do not contradict the Family Court's FOF 2 because the date of the couple's separation was not necessarily the same date as Husband's departure to Virginia, and Husband does not explain how the court's general date range of 2004 to 2008 was inaccurate. The Family Court also used the language, "[i]n or about 2009," which connotes a general time period, and Husband does not dispute that he was in Hawai
'i for at least part of 2008 and then 
moved to Virginia by 2009. Moreover, even if the FOF were deemed erroneous, the error would be harmless because it is unclear (and Husband provides no explanation) as to how this alleged error 
17
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affected one of his "substantial rights" or in any way affected 
the outcome of the Family Court's decision. See HRE Rule 103(a); 
Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai 'i 283, 288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 
(App. 2009) (stating that "[e]rror may not be predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a substantial right of the party is affected" (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
Husband also challenges FOF 4, which states: "After
 
numerous hearings with the last being on July 22, 2011, this
 Court entered an Amended Divorce Decree on October 26, 2011,
 awarding Mother with sole legal and physical custody of the
 children subject to Father's rights of reasonable visitation. 
This ruling was not appealed." Husband objects to the use of the
 language regarding "numerous hearings" because he states that "it
 implies that 'numerous hearings' were held on the issue of
 custody." However, it appears from the record that there were in
 fact multiple hearings leading up to the court's entry of the
 Amended Divorce Decree on October 26, 2011. Thus, this FOF is
 not clearly erroneous. 
Husband challenges FOF 21, which states: "In short, 
the children are thriving in [Wife's] care. There is no evidence to the contrary." Husband contends that the children are not thriving because Wife is basically "permitting [the children's] relationship with [him] to deteriorate" and not allowing him enough input into their lives. However, "it is well settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." Booth v. Booth, 90 Hawai
'i 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
413, 416, 978 P.2d 851, 854 (1999) (citations, internal quotation
 
marks, and brackets omitted). On the record of this case, we
 will not second-guess the evidentiary and credibility findings of
 the Family Court in this regard. 
Finally, Husband challenges FOF 28's statement that
 
"[o]n November 2, 2012, Father and his counsel failed to appear
 for trial." Husband claims that he did appear for trial because
 he was on the telephone, "but Judge Remegio [sic] did not permit
 him to participate be [sic] telephone." We cannot conclude that
 this FOF is clearly erroneous. The court's minutes from the
 hearing on November 2, 2012 state: 
Three calls at 11:11 a.m. for Daryl Stump and Attorney
Sandra Lynch with no response. Ms. Lynch did call at 10:50
a.m. & said she was running late. It is now 25 minutes
 since her call. . . . No further indication as to why Ms.
Lynch was not present. Defendant was not given permission
to appear via telephone.
 
Accordingly, due to the foregoing, all of the Family
 
Court's FOFs are affirmed. 
E. The Family Court's Conclusions of Law
 
Finally, Husband argues that the Family Court's COLs
 
"are erroneous and do not properly state the law of Hawaii
 
regarding modification of Orders regarding child custody and
 support." Husband appears to challenge all of the court's COLs;
 however, he specifically provides arguments for only four of
 them. Thus, Husband's objections to the remaining four COLs for
 which he provides no argument (COLs E-H) are deemed waived. See
 
HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Husband objects to COLs A-C, stating that they "are in
 
error as they do not state that the second prong of the
 determination involves a question of the best interests of the
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
child." COL A states that "[t]o warrant a modification of an
 
existing child custody order, the Movant must show a substantial
 change in relevant circumstances." COL B states, in relevant
 part, that "[Husband] must show a substantial change in relevant
 circumstances since [the Family Court's] issuance of the Amended
 Divorce Decree." COL C states, in relevant part, that "[Husband]
 has failed to show a substantial change in relevant circumstances
 warranting a trial on the modification of the custodial
 arrangement."
 
As stated above, this court has held "[t]hat a person 
seeking a change of custody must show a material change of circumstances since the previous custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in the best interest of the child." Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. at 121, 861 P.2d at 759; see In re 
Guardianship of Doe, 93 Hawai
'i at 388, 4 P.3d at 522. Husband 
is correct in asserting that this is a two-part requirement. However, both requirements are necessary to warrant a change in custody. The Family Court concluded that Husband failed to meet the first part of the test and therefore did not address the second. The Family Court did not err regarding COLs A-C. 
Finally, Husband objects to COL D, which states: 
"Consequently, based on the Court's October 3, 2012 Order, that
 the issue of requested tax exemptions is deferred pending the
 determination of child custody, [Husband's] request for tax
 exemptions is also denied." He argues that the Family Court
 "made no such determination [about tax exemptions] at the
 November 2, 2012 hearing on the record" and that Husband "has not
 yet resubmitted this issue to the Court for its consideration." 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, Husband's assertion that the Family Court erred by
 
resolving the tax exemption issue is without merit. The issue of
 tax exemptions was deferred pending a determination about child
 custody, and the child custody (visitation) issue was resolved at
 the November 2, 2012 hearing, thereby allowing the court to
 subsequently rule on the tax exemption issue. As there was no
 change in custody or visitation, no corresponding change in tax
 exemptions was warranted. Accordingly, and because Husband
 provides no authority to otherwise support his allegation of
 error, the Family Court's COL D is not wrong. 
VI. Conclusion
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's
 
October 29, 2012 and November 2, 2012 Orders denying Husband's
 
Motion to Modify Judgment Pursuant to HRS § 580-47.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: Sandra D. Lynch
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Rebecca A. Copeland
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
21
 