  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000107
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRIAN PAUL SIMON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(North and South Kona Division)
(Case No. 3DTA-10-00395
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brian Paul Simon (Simon) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on January 27, 2011, in the District
 
Court of the Third Circuit (District Court).1 Simon was
 
convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 291E-61(a)(1) and (a)(3) (Supp. 2008).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr., presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (a)(3) provide:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of [OVUII] if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty; [or]
 
. . . . 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Simon argues that the District Court erred 
in: (1) denying his motions to suppress evidence and dismiss the 
case (Motions to Suppress/Dismiss) because the arresting officer violated Simon's right to due process by failing to note material facts in the police report; (2) failing to dismiss the amended complaint on the ground that Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) failed to comply with the District Court's order to include the applicable subsections of HRS § 291E-61; and (3) failing to compel the State to permit Simon to make a copy of the operator's manual for the radar device used by the arresting officer, after the State permitted Simon to review the manual. We affirm. 
I.
 
We resolve Simon's arguments on appeal as follows:
 1. Simon argues that the arresting officer violated 
Simon's right to due process by failing to document in the police report that the officer conducted a field Intoxilyzer test and also made a traffic stop of another vehicle en route to the police station after Simon's arrest. Simon claims that the failure to document these matters violated his right to receive "evidence favorable to the accused" that is "material to guilt or punishment." State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 383, 401, 894 P.2d 80, 
98 (1995); Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 87 (1963). Simon argues that the District Court should have granted his Motions to Suppress/Dismiss based on the asserted due process violation. We disagree. 
The information regarding the field Intoxilyzer test
 
and the traffic stop en route to the police station was not
 exculpatory and was not material to Simon's guilt or punishment. 
Indeed, the arresting officer suggested that results of the field
 Intoxylyer test were inculpatory. The officer also testified
 that he did not rely on the field Intoxylzer test to establish
 
2(...continued)
liters of breath[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probable cause for Simon's arrest, and a review of the record
 
reveals that there was sufficient probable cause for Simon's
 arrest independent of any field Intoxylzer test. Simon knew that
 the arresting officer had made a traffic stop of another vehicle
 en route to the police station after Simon's arrest. Simon was
 able to question the arresting officer about this traffic stop
 and did not elicit information favorable to the defense. 
Simon provides no authority to support the proposition
 
that a police officer violates a defendant's due process rights
 by failing to document all relevant information in a police
 report. We conclude that the District Court did not err in
 denying Simon's Motions to Suppress/Dismiss. 
2. The amended complaint tracks the language of the 
relevant portions of HRS § 291E-61. However, prior to trial, the District Court ordered and directed the State to further amend the amended complaint to include the relevant subsections of HRS § 291E-61. The State concedes that it failed to comply with the District Court's order. While we certainly do not condone the State's non-compliance, we conclude that the District Court did not err in failing to dismiss the charge based on the State's non-compliance. See Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 7(d) 
(2008) ("Formal defects, including erroneous reference to the statute, rule, regulation or other provision of law, or the omission of such reference, shall not be ground for dismissal of the charge or for reversal of a conviction if the defect did not prejudice the defendant."). 
3. Simon was charged with OVUII after he was stopped
 
for speeding. Consistent with its discovery policy, the State
 permitted Simon to review the operating manual for the radar
 device used by the arresting officer to record Simon's speed
 prior to stopping him, but the State did not permit Simon to make
 a copy of the manual. We conclude that the District Court did
 not abuse its discretion in declining to compel the State to
 permit Simon to make a copy of the manual. See State ex rel.
 
Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 313-18, 788 P.2d 1281, 1286-88
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1990) (holding in a non-felony case that the trial court
 
exceeded its authority by ordering the State to disclose
 manufacturer's manuals for the Intoxilyzer device).
 
II. 
We affirm the Judgment of the District Court. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 26, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Robert D.S. Kim 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 