 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000661
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STANLEY K. HUIHUI, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 10-1-27K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Stanley K. Huihui (
Huihui) appeals
 
from an August 10, 2011, Family Court of the Third Circuit
 
(Family Court) Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence for Abuse
 
of Family or Household Member, Terror Threat in the Second
 
Degree, and Unlawful Imprisonment in the Second Degree.1
 
Huihui raises two points of error on appeal: (1) the
 
Family Court erred in precluding Huihui from testifying about the
 
complaining witness's (CW's) prior attempts to hurt herself; and
 
(2) the Family Court improperly considered Huihui’s failure to
 
make a statement to the police in assessing his credibility and
 
thereby adjudging him guilty.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Huihui's points of error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Huihui maintains that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it refused to allow him to testify about CW's
 
alleged suicidal tendencies (i.e., alleged attempts to harm
 
herself) pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 404(a)
 
and (b). Huihui asserts that this failure deprived him of a
 
complete defense and fair trial.
 
HRE 404(a) provides: 
(a) Character evidence generally. Evidence of a person's character
or a trait of a person's character is not admissible for the
purpose of proving action in conformity therewith on a particular
occasion, except:
 
. . .
 
(2)
 Character of victim. Evidence of a pertinent trait of
character of the victim of the crime offered by an accused 
. . .
 
HRS § 626-1, HRE Rule 404 (emphasis added).
 
Huihui contends that CW's suicidal tendencies became a
 
"pertinent trait" with regards to factual disputes over CW's
 
rationale for allegedly jumping out of the truck, as well as in
 
explaining the nature and extent of her injuries and his use of
 
force upon her. 
As stated in State v. Maddox, 116 Hawai' i 445, 457-60, 
173 P.3d 592, 604-07 (App. 2007), character evidence may be 
properly excluded where it does not support a factual dispute at 
the time the defendant seeks to introduce the evidence. In this 
case, the dispute involved whether CW's attempts to exit the 
truck constituted purposeful acts to hurt herself or whether they 
were merely something else, such as an attempt to halt the 
alleged abuse or simply an act of exiting a stopped vehicle. The 
Family Court found that Huihui had not introduced sufficient 
evidence at that point in the trial to support his contention 
that CW's actions were suicidal, stating "[y]ou need more 
foundation in order to establish that the acts in this case were 
suicidal." Requiring more foundation was not an abuse of 
discretion. At that point in the trial, there had been no other 
evidence or assertion by Huihui that CW was specifically and 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deliberately trying to harm herself. Moreover, Huihui did not
 
make any offers of proof (such as a suicidal statement by CW) to
 
supplement his contentions of suicide, and the matter was
 
subsequently dropped and not reintroduced. 
HRE 404(b) provides: 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a
person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It may,
however, be admissible where such evidence is probative of another
fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action,
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake or
accident . . .
 
HRS § 626-1, HRE Rule 404 (emphasis added).
 
Huihui argues that CW's alleged prior attempts to harm
 
herself also are admissible under HRE 404(b). Specifically,
 
Huihui argues that knowledge of her prior attempts at self-harm
 
were probative of his intent and his belief that his actions (in
 
pulling her back into the truck traveling rapidly down the
 
highway) were necessary to avoid imminent harm. Essentially,
 
Huihui asserts a "choice-of-evils" defense under HRS § 703­
2
302(1) and argues that this defense was inhibited by his lack of
an ability to present evidence about CW's past acts of self-harm. 
HRE 404(b) provides that an act may "be admissible
 
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
 
consequence to the determination of the action" (such as, among
 
other things, intent and knowledge). 
However, regardless of CW's
 
reasons for exiting the truck, if the trier-of-fact had found his
 version of the events to be credible, Huihui arguably would have
 
been justified under a "choice-of-evils" defense in stopping her
 
2
 HRS § 703-302 states:
 
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to
avoid an imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another is
 justifiable provided that:
(a)	 The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be
prevented by the law defining the offense
charged . . .
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and preventing severe injury from her jumping out of a truck
 
traveling 55 miles per hour down a highway. See HRS § 703-302.
 
Therefore, CW's alleged suicidal tendencies appear largely
 irrelevant, as Huihui presumably would have pulled her hair to
 
bring her back into the vehicle even without his knowledge of the
 
alleged prior suicidal attempts. For these reasons, we conclude
 
that the court did not abuse its discretion in precluding
 
evidence of CW's alleged prior attempts to harm herself. 
(2) Huihui also maintains on appeal that the Family
 
Court’s inquiry into whether he made a statement to the police
 
constituted improper burden-shifting in violation of his
 
constitutional rights to due process and to remain silent. 
Huihui claims that the Family Court's statement, after he was
 
found guilty of the charges, that "one would think that if you
 
had just saved a person's life, you would have mentioned that to
 
the police officers" was prejudicial error because (1) the
 
statement was not a permissible inference based on trial
 
evidence; and (2) the statement evidenced an unconstitutional
 
burden-shifting from the prosecution to the defense. Huihui
 
asserts that the implication of the Family Court's comment was
 
that, if he had actually introduced evidence of a police
 
statement, the Family Court would have found his story more
 
believable, which effectively shifted the burden of proof onto
 
Huihui to show that CW was lying. Additionally, Huihui contends
 
that the Family Court’s inquiry into his lack of a police
 
statement infringed upon his constitutionally-protected right to
 
remain silent.
 
While the Family Court's off-hand inquiry (prefaced by
 
"I'm just curious", and noting, "this is after I’ve already
 
decided the case”) was arguably inappropriate, there is no
 
evidence or any reasonable inference that the Family Court found
 
Huihui guilty based even in part on whether or not Huihui gave a
 
statement to the police. There was ample evidence in the record
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to support the conviction. On appeal, Huihui acknowledges this,
 
stating "there may be substantial evidence to support the family
 
court’s findings." Such evidence includes the injuries to the
 
CW, which were consistent with her testimony that Huihui hit her
 
repeatedly, which testimony the Family Court apparently found to
 
be credible. We presume that the Family Court was not influenced
 
by incompetent evidence or improper considerations and that it
 
determined the case based only on the competent evidence before
 
it, which was substantial and sufficient evidence. See, e.g.,
 
State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 353, 615 P.2d 101, 107 (1980).
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's August 10, 2011,
 
Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 27, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5 