____________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000389
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RICHARD MARVIN, III and AMY MARVIN,
individually and as Next Friend of IVY MAE MARVIN,
SADIE MARVIN, SAVANNAH MARVIN, minors;
WYLIE HURD; NICHOLAS FRED MARVIN, individually and as Next
Friend of ALANA MARVIN; AARON MARVIN;
BARBARA C. NELSON, Trustee of the Barbara C. Nelson
Family Trust dated 12/15/91, as amended;
JEFFREY MCBRIDE; MARETA ZIMMERMAN, individually and
as Next Friend of TEVA DEXTER and LIKO MCBRIDE, minors,
Plaintiffs/Appellees,
v.
 
JAMES PFLUEGER, individually and in his
representative capacity; PFLUEGER PROPERTIES;
PILA'A 400, LLC; and DOES 1 through 10,
Defendants/Appellants
 
JAMES PFLUEGER, PFLUEGER PROPERTIES,
PILA'A 400, LLC,
Counterclaim Plaintiffs,
 
v.
 
RICHARD MARVIN, III, AMY MARVIN, and
NICHOLAS FRED MARVIN,
Counterclaim Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 02-1-0068)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth, J. and
Circuit Judge Lee, in place of 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, Leonard, and
Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs/Appellants James 
Pflueger, Pflueger Properties, and Pila 'a 400, LLC (collectively,
Pflueger) appeal from the "Order Granting Plaintiffs and 
Counterclaim Defendants [/Appellees] Richard Marvin, III, Amy 
Marvin, Nicholas Fred Marvin and Barbara C. Nelson, Individually and on Behalf of the Barbara C. Nelson Revocable Trust [(collectively, Plaintiffs)], As Amended, Motion For Writ of 
Assistance and Execution," entered March 21, 2013 in the Circuit 
1
Court of the Fifth Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Pflueger contends the circuit court:
 
(1) erred when it ordered Pflueger to execute a Grant 
of Non-Exclusive Easement (
Grant of Easement) per a prior circuit 
court order affirmed by the Hawai 'i Supreme Court; 
(2) erred when it ordered Pflueger to pay attorneys'
 
fees and costs "as a sanction because the Order to Execute the
 
Recordable Grant of Easement was in Error"; and 
(3) violated Pflueger's "rights to due process, by
 
refusing to consider [Pflueger's] arguments," and by erroneously
 holding that the easement issue had been decided.
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Prior litigation between the parties.
 
This case arises from litigation initiated in 2002,
 
which culminated in Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai
'i 490, 493, 280 
P.3d 88, 91 (2012). Marvin provides the following background:
 
Plaintiffs Richard Marvin, III; Amy Marvin; Nicholas Fred
Marvin; and Barbara Nelson ("plaintiffs") are landowners andresidents of Pila' a Bay, Kaua' i. They live on Haena Kuleana,
a kuleana
2 adjacent to property owned by one of the named
defendants, Pila' a 400, LLC. In 1965, prior to plaintiffs'
purchase of the property, the kuleana was partitioned;plaintiffs own two-thirds of Haena Kuleana and HeidiHuddy–Yamamoto ("Huddy–Yamamoto"), not a party to theaction, owns the remaining one-third of Haena Kuleana. 
A. The Trial Court's Proceedings
 Plaintiffs filed an action for damages and injunctive relief
on April 12, 2002 after James Pflueger graded the bluff on
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
 "'Kuleana' means 'a small area of land such as were awarded in fee 
by the Hawaiian monarch, about the year 1850, to all Hawaiians who madeapplication therefor.'" Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 45 n.5, 85 P.3d 150,
[152] n.5 (2004) (citation omitted).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his property above the Haena Kuleana, causing a mudslide in
November 2001 that covered plaintiffs' kuleana, and
neighboring kuleana, with mud. Huddy–Yamamoto was asked to
join the lawsuit, but she specifically refused to
participate. Over the course of four years, plaintiffs
amended the complaint twice, and defendants filed a
counterclaim and two amended counterclaims. The Circuit
 Court of the Fifth Circuit ("trial court") dismissed most of
the claims with prejudice due to the parties' stipulation,
and dismissed other claims as a matter of law.
 
On June 6, 2006, plaintiffs filed a motion for partial
summary judgment and/or preliminary injunction on their
cause of action for an easement by necessity. On July 28,
2006, the trial court filed an order holding the motion in
abeyance pending an evidentiary hearing scheduled for August
9, 2006.
 
On Friday, August 4, 2006, five days before the scheduled
hearing, defendants filed a position statement raising, forthe first time, Huddy–Yamamoto's absence. Defendants arguedthat the court should dismiss the action in its entirety orstay the motion pending joinder of Huddy–Yamamoto. However,defendants did not file a [Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule] 12(b)(7) motion to dismiss for failure to joina party under [HRCP] Rule 19. 
Beginning on Wednesday, August 9, 2006, the trial court held
four days of hearings on plaintiffs' motion for partialsummary judgment. At the beginning of the first day ofhearings, plaintiffs' counsel objected to the positionstatement, arguing that it was not a position statement, butrather that it was a whole new brief because it raised new arguments. As the trial court properly noted, "The purposeof a position statement is to summarize your respectivepositions, not to bring up new issues." Noting theplaintiffs' objection, the court instructed the parties tomove forward with the hearings, and heard testimony ofthirteen witnesses over four days. Plaintiffs testified about the difficulty they have experienced in accessingtheir property, and they called kama' aina
3 witnesses to 
testify about historical access to the property. Defendants called two expert witnesses: Attorney Robert Graham, Jr.testified about Hawaiian land and water law, and CivilEngineer Leland Y.S. Lee testified about defendants'proposed access route. Defendants also called kama' aina 
witnesses and other witnesses familiar with the area. Huddy–Yamamoto participated in the hearings as a witness fordefendants. She testified that she wanted to participate inthe case as a party. However, she also testified that shehad been asked to join the lawsuit from the beginning, andthat she had declined. Though she testified that sheunderstood the hearings to involve access and water rightsfor the kuleana she shares with the Marvins, and though shetestified that she had an attorney, Huddy–Yamamoto neverfiled a motion to intervene in the proceedings. 
After the conclusion of the proceedings, the trial court
found that Huddy–Yamamoto was not an indispensable party to
the action. It therefore issued an order granting
plaintiffs' partial motion for summary judgment regarding
 
3
 "A kama' aina witness is a person 'familiar from childhood with any
locality.'" State by Kobayashi v. Zimring, 58 Haw. 106, 145 n.8, 566 P.2d
725, 747 n.8 (1977) (quoting In Re Boundaries of Pulehunui, 4 Haw. 239, 245(1879)). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the easement, granting plaintiffs' motion for a temporary
restraining order preventing defendants from interfering
with the property's water system, and requiring defendants
to execute a recordable grant of easement in favor of
plaintiffs [(circuit court's 2007 Order)]. Accompanying the
order were 159 Findings of Fact and 15 Conclusions of Law
("FOF/COL"). This opinion reviews the relevant FOF/COL in
Section III.B.3, infra.
 
B. The [Intermediate Court of Appeals' (ICA)] June 8, 2010
Memorandum Opinion
 
On appeal to the ICA, defendants' first point of error
stated:
 
A. The circuit court erred in granting the Marvin
Parties' motion for summary judgment in the absence of
non-parties whose interests in their adjacent real
property (the other part of a partitioned kuleana)
could be affected by the resulting order. In its
 January 4, 2007 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
Law; Order ("Order"), the court stated:
 
12. The Court finds the Huddy family is not an
indispensable party as they are not prejudiced
by the instant proceeding, and they refused to
participate in the instant lawsuit.
 
Order, R. V.25 at 42. [ . . . ]
 
In the section analyzing this point of error, defendants
cited to FOF/COL 102, which states "There are no facts in
the record to suggest that the Huddy family will be
prejudiced by not participating in the instant lawsuit.
Indeed, they were asked to participate, and refused."
Defendants argued that the point of the lawsuit was to
determine access and water rights for the entire Haena
Kuleana and that Huddy–Yamamoto's participation is required
because her property is part of the kuleana.
 
In addition to plaintiffs' substantive arguments in support
of the judgment below, they argued that defendants' briefdid not comply with [Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP)] Rule 28 because, while defendants challengedconclusions of law, defendants did not challenge anyfindings of fact in their points of error, as [HRAP] Rule28(b)(4) requires. 
On June 8, 2010, the ICA filed its memorandum opinion.
Marvin v. Pflueger, No. 28501, 123 Hawai' i 299, 2010 WL
2316274 (App. June 8, 2010) (mem.). In the opinion, the ICA
cited plaintiffs' [HRAP] Rule 28 argument without comment or
analysis. Id. at *17. The ICA then noted that [HRAP] Rule
28(b)(4) also permits the appellate court to "notice a plain
error not presented," and stated that it would review
defendants' arguments for plain error. Id.  The ICA then 
conducted a de novo [HRCP] Rule 19 analysis, concluding that
Huddy–Yamamoto was a party to be joined if feasible, andthat the trial court erred by not ordering her to be joined.
Id. at *27. On June 30, 2010, the ICA filed its Judgment on
Appeal. On September 28, 2010, plaintiffs filed a timelyapplication for writ of certiorari. 
Marvin, 127 Hawai 'i at 493-95, 280 P.3d at 91-93 (emphasis added 
and some footnotes omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Marvin primarily addressed two issues in their
 
application for writ of certiorari: "The first question presented 
concerns pleading standards of appellate briefs, and the remaining questions address the trial court's determination of which parties must participate in a lawsuit, and the procedure an appellate court should follow when reviewing that determination." Marvin, 127 Hawai
'i at 492, 280 P.3d 88, 90. Regarding the 
latter issues, Marvin held the ICA committed grave error in concluding the circuit court erred by not ordering Huddy–Yamamoto to be joined. Marvin, 127 Hawai
'i at 498, 280 P.3d at 96. 
Consequently, Marvin reversed the ICA's holding and affirmed the circuit court's 2007 Order. Id. at 512, 280 P.3d at 110. 
B. The case at hand.
 
On October 12, 2012, Plaintiffs submitted a Grant of 
Easement to Pflueger, asking for a signature and a return of the document for recordation per the circuit court's 2007 Order and Marvin. On October 26, 2012, Pflueger's counsel indicated Pflueger would not be signing the easement and cited Pila
'a 400, 
LLC v. Andrade, No. 28854 (App. Nov. 30, 2010) (mem.)4 as 
justification. On December 28, 2012, Plaintiffs filed a "1) Motion for Writ of Assistance and Execution, 2) Order to Show Cause, and 3) Order of Contempt and Sanctions" (2012 Motion). 
Plaintiffs' 2012 Motion asked the circuit court to (1)
 
compel Pflueger's compliance with the circuit court's 2007 Order,
 and (2) find Pflueger "in contempt of court and order sanctions
 
4
 Andrade held:
 
On appeal, however, Pila' a 400 only contests the portion of
the order granting Andrade's [motion for summary judgment
(MSJ)] requiring recordation. For the first time, Andradeasserted in his Written Closing Argument that he was"entitled to a non-exclusive recorded easement of reasonable vehicular access to the Waterfall [K]uleana." He providedno authority or further argument for this assertion. This relief had not been requested in Andrade's counterclaim, hisMSJ, or his motion for a preliminary injunction. Neither the circuit court nor Andrade cited to any authority tosupport the recordation requirement, and we find none. COL 17 is wrong, and the circuit court erroneously requiredrecordation. Our holding does not concern the remainder ofthe Order Grant/Deny Andrade's MSJ because Pila' a 400 does 
not contest the remainder of the order as it relates to the MSJ. 
Andrade, mem. op. at 8.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against [Pflueger], including, but not limited to, a per diem
 
fine for each day following the order of contempt that [Pflueger]
 refuse to comply with section 3 of the [circuit court 2007 Order]
 and reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred by [Plaintiffs]
 as a result of [Pflueger's] unjustifiable refusal to comply with
 the [circuit court 2007 Order]." Pflueger responded that the
 "[m]otion should be denied in full because, as made clear by the
 opinion of the [ICA] in [Andrade], the [circuit court] is without
 authority to grant the relief Plaintiffs seek." Pflueger also
 objected to language in the easement requiring him to maintain
 the easement.
 
On February 20, 2013, the circuit court orally granted
 
Plaintiffs' 2012 Motion. The circuit court found Marvin to be a
 final decision on the matter, and concluded, in effect, that
 issue preclusion barred it from reaching the merits of Pflueger's
 arguments:
 
The [circuit court]: All right. The [c]ourt reviewed
the motion, the opposition, and the reply, and the [c]ourt
does not even get to the Andrade opinion. The [c]ourt is inagreement with the Plaintiffs' position that there is afinality here as to the [Hawai' i] Supreme Court's order. 
The [c]ourt is in agreement that there should have
been -- if there was any question by [Pflueger], thereshould have been a motion for reconsideration filed with the [Hawai'i] Supreme Court. Given the arguments made to the
[c]ourt, given this [c]ourt's familiarity, of course, withthe events -- and, Mr. McCorriston, I want to ensure youthat this [c]ourt not only read the opinion a number oftimes, but whatever decisions from this [c]ourt go up onappeal, this [c]ourt also listens to the oral arguments, ifthere are any. And this [c]ourt takes very seriouslydecisions that are made at the appellate level. 
Given all of your arguments, there is no question in
this [c]ourt's mind that the Plaintiffs' relief that theyare seeking are fully warranted with the final decision bythe [Hawai' i] Supreme Court. 
On March 21, 2013, the circuit court entered an order granting
 
the 2012 Motion and ordering Pflueger to pay fees and costs. 
Pflueger appealed to this court on April 5, 2013.
II. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err when it ordered
 
Pflueger to execute the Grant of Easement.
 
Pflueger contends the circuit court "erred in ordering
 
[Pflueger] to execute the Grant of Easement because there is no
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority that requires or supports execution or recordation of 
an implied easement under kuleana or common law, much less the requirement that the [burdened] estate owner maintain the easement for the benefit of, or indemnify, the [benefitted] estate holder." As Pflueger points out in his opening brief, he made this same objection on appeal to the ICA from the circuit court's 2007 Order. Pflueger contended the circuit court erred by "requiring [Pflueger] to execute a recordable [Grant of Easement] in favor of [Plaintiffs] where no such recorded easement is required under [Hawaii Revised Statutes §] 7-1 (2009 Repl.)." Marvin v. Pflueger, No. 28501 (App. June 8, 2010) 
(mem.) at 2, rev'd by Marvin. Pflueger argues since the ICA did not reach the merits of the recorded easement issue, as it vacated the circuit court's decision on other grounds, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's review also did not address the issue and 
as a result, the recorded easement issue was never resolved, so issue preclusion cannot apply. 
Issue preclusion applies where a party establishes
 
that: 
(1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication is identical
to the one presented in the action in question; (2) there is a
final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue decided in the prior
adjudication was essential to the final judgment; and (4) the
party against whom issue preclusion is asserted was a party or in
privity with a party to the prior adjudication.
 
See Bremer, 104 Hawai 'i at 54, 85 P.3d at 161 (quoting Dorrance 
v. Lee, 90 Hawai 'i 143, 149, 976 P.2d 904, 911 (1999) (brackets 
omitted). 
Here, the issue is whether Plaintiffs are entitled to a 
recorded easement over Pflueger's property. The circuit court's 
2007 Order held that Plaintiffs were entitled to a recorded easement over Pflueger's property. See Marvin, 127 Hawai
'i at 
493-95, 280 P.3d at 91-93. The issue litigated and parties involved in the prior action are identical to those in the case at hand. The circuit court's 2007 Order was a final adjudication on the merits and the recorded easement issue was essential to the circuit court's resolution of the motion for partial summary judgment. Id. Consequently, issue preclusion barred the circuit 
court from re-addressing the merits of Pflueger's claim. See 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Dupont De Nemours & Co., 104
 
Hawai'i 358, 364, 90 P.3d 250, 256 (2004) (issue preclusion seeks 
to limit a litigant to one opportunity to litigate aspects of the
 case to prevent inconsistent results and multiplicity of suits,
 and to promote finality and judicial economy).
 
Pflueger contends the Hawai
'i Supreme Court overlooked 
Andrade in Marvin. Andrade was issued on November 30, 2010 and
 
Marvin was decided two years later. See Andrade and Marvin. At
 
the February 20, 2013 hearing on the 2012 Motion, counsel for
 Pflueger incorrectly asserted that Marvin remanded the case to
 the circuit court:
 
What we don't agree with Ms. Tico is you -- because this
case was remanded to you by the [Hawai' i] Supreme Court, you
do have continuing jurisdiction over implementation of yourjudgmentand order. 
In the intervening time, you had considered the
Andrade case, and you came to the same consideration there.
Andrade asked you for recordable easement. You gave it to
him. That went up to the ICA. The ICA said no, there is no
recordable easement allowable under [Hawai' i] law. 
It wasn't a question of fact that the ICA said -- they
say we -- no case or no law has been presented where a court
can issue an order requiring a recordable easement, and
there was none presented, and there has been none presented
to you as of now.
 
So the Andrade case which is on four -- all four
 
corners with this case here on the question as to whether or
not a court can order a recordable easement for a historic
 ingress and egress right, that's the only law that you have.
 
. . . .
 
You have continuing jurisdiction to enforce the
judgment of this case. That's why we are here today.
Between the time you originally decided this case and now,
the Andrade case has come down with a four score precedent
on the issue of recordable easement, which says that courts
in [Hawai' i] do not have jurisdiction, inherent power, or
otherwise to order a recordable easement. That is the 
holding in the Andrade case.
 
You not only have the authority, the right, you have
the duty and obligation when there is intervening appellate
law contrary to your decision in your judgment over which
you have continuing jurisdiction to alter or amend that
judgment to conform with the prevailing law.
 
Marvin affirmed the circuit court's decision. It did not remand
 
the case to the circuit court. See Marvin, 127 Hawai 'i at 512, 
280 P.3d at 110.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pflueger's contention that the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
did not affirm the circuit court's 2007 Order in whole is without
 
basis. Marvin explicitly provided what the circuit court held
 
before affirming that holding:
 
Before we can evaluate the trial court's finding that
Huddy–Yamamoto was not an indispensable party, we must first
articulate exactly what the trial court decided. The court's
order in this case stated:
 
1.
 The [c]ourt, therefore, hereby grants Plaintiffs'
Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Re: Easement By
Necessity and/or Order Issuing Preliminary Injunction
and enters an Order Enjoining and Restraining
[Pflueger] from interfering with, blocking or
otherwise making Plaintiffs' access unreasonable or
unsafe.
 
2. The [c]ourt, therefore, hereby grants Plaintiffs'
Motion for Temporary Restraining Order and enters an
Order Enjoining and Restraining [Pflueger] from
interfering with, dismantling, damaging and/or
destroying Plaintiffs' water system that brings water
from the western stream and spring to their kuleana.
 
3. The Plaintiffs shall present to [Plfueger], and
[Pflueger] shall execute, a recordable [Grant of
Easement] in favor of Plaintiffs, as set forth above.
 
This order effected the following: (a) it establishedplaintiffs' entitlement to an easement over defendant Pila' a 
400 LLC's property; (b) it enjoined [Pflueger] frominterfering with plaintiffs' access; (c) it enjoined[Pflueger] from interfering with plaintiffs' water system;(d) it required defendant Pila' a 400 LLC to execute a 
recordable [Grant of Easement]. 
The injunctions serve the purpose of restraining defendants
from actions which impair the plaintiffs' access to their
property or endanger their water system. There is no
evidence that Huddy–Yamamoto has any involvement in these
provisions of the order. Instead, the trial court's relevant
findings of fact on the matter show a pattern of defendants'
conduct towards plaintiffs in which Huddy–Yamamoto was not
involved. For example, the trial court found:
 
118. [Nick Marvin] testified, "We changed roads
because Mr. Pflueger is the big land owner and if we
go against him, he'll make our life miserable. He's
made our life miserable many times."
 
[ . . . ]
 154. Testimony from Plaintiffs and their witnesses
established intentional blocking of access by
[Pflueger].
 
[ . . . ]
 157. Defendant James Pflueger has caused the access
road at Pila' a to be blocked without notice since the 
lawsuit was filed in this case, including fencing offthe access, blocking the access with machinery,blocking the access with trucks, tractors, portapotties, cows and bulls, and interfering with access 
9
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by running sprinklers on the Marvin children's
pedestrian access and placing water troughs and piles
of chicken manure next to the access.
 
158. After this [c]ourt entered an Order preventing
[Pflueger] from blocking Plaintiffs' access without
providing 24 hours advance notice, Defendant James
Pflueger, on Admissions Day, blocked the Marvin's
lower access road by parking his truck next to their
property line, and turning off the ignition. Even when
he backed up the road to the parking plateau, he again
blocked the Marvin's access by stopping his vehicle
and preventing Richard Marvin from driving through.
 
The circumstances surrounding the injunction show that
Huddy–Yamamoto was not involved in the conduct necessitating
the injunction, nor would she be affected by the court's
injunction of this conduct.
 
The court's order also establishes that the plaintiffs have
a right to access to their property. As Conclusion of Law 3
summarizes:
 
3. As owners of a kuleana at Pila' a, Kaua' i, Hawai' i,
that is landlocked and traceable to the Great Mahele,Plaintiffs Richard Marvin III, Nicholas Marvin, andBarbara C. Nelson are entitled to an easement bynecessity, and reasonable use of water for drinking,domestic and agricultural purposes. 
. . . .
 
Based upon the foregoing analysis, the judgment of the [ICA]
is reversed, and the trial court's decision is hereby
affirmed.
 
Marvin, 127 Hawai 'i at 504-12, 280 P.3d at 102-10 (emphasis 
added). Consequently, the circuit court did not err when it
 
ordered Pflueger to execute the Grant of Easement. See Chun v.
 
Bd. of Trustees of Emp. Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai 'i, 106 Hawai 'i 
416, 439, 106 P.3d 339 (2005) ("It is the duty of the trial
 court, on remand, to comply strictly with the mandate of the
 appellate court according to its true intent and meaning[.]")
 (brackets omitted); see also In re Smith, 68 Haw. 466, 470, 719
 P.2d 397, 401 (1986) ("[W]rits of assistance are a method of
 enforcing a judgment of the court directing a specific act.").
 
Pflueger essentially asks this court to review a
 
decision of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court, i.e., to find Marvin 
erroneous for affirming the circuit court's decision and not
 remanding the case. This, we cannot do. See State v. Kimmel,
 
No. 28893 (App. Jan. 23, 2009) (SDO) at 3 ("It is not the role of
 the [ICA] to determine, in any case, that the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court erred in its legal analysis.")
 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 The circuit court did not err when it ordered
 
Pflueger to pay attorneys' fees and costs.
 
Regarding attorneys' fees and costs, the circuit court
 
held:
 
Given all of your arguments, there is no question in
this [c]ourt's mind that the Plaintiffs' relief that they
are seeking are fully warranted with the final decision bythe [Hawai' i] Supreme Court. 
Ms. Tico, in particular, the [c]ourt is -- in addition
to that, because this is very clear to this [c]ourt, I am
granting fees and costs for the bringing of this motion.
 
Pflueger contends the circuit court erred by awarding fees "as a 
sanction against [Pflueger] because . . . the underlying requirement that [Pflueger] execute the Grant of Easement was itself erroneous." For reasons discussed above, Pflueger is precluded from re-litigating this issue. Pflueger raises various other contentions regarding the award of fees and costs but fails to show where such issues were raised in the circuit court and we find none in the record. As such, these issues are deemed waived. See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea 
Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) 
("Legal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal.") Pflueger provides no other basis for this court to conclude the circuit court abused its discretion when it awarded fees and costs under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 603-21.9(6) (1993).
5 
C.	 The circuit court did not violate Pflueger's due
process rights by holding that the easement issue
had already been decided.
 
Pflueger contends:
 
The circuit court also erred by holding that the
[Hawai'i] Supreme Court's opinion disposed of the question
of the recordable easement, even though that opinion did not
address the issue. Based on this erroneous premise, thecircuit court erroneously refused to consider [Pflueger's]arguments, including its arguments based on this Court'sintervening decision in Andrade. These errors constitute a violation of [Pflueger's] procedural due process rights. 
5
 Plaintiffs brought the 2012 Motion under HRCP Rules 7 and 70, and
HRS § 603-21.9.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Emphasis added.) Pflueger's reply brief maintains this
 
position: 
Due process required that, after the [Hawai' i] Supreme
Court disposed of the previous appeal without addressing the
recordable easement question, the circuit court in
exercising its continuing jurisdiction should have
considered [Pflueger's] related arguments, including the
intervening opinion in Andrade.
 
(Emphasis added.) For the reasons discussed above, this
 
contention is meritless. Further, Andrade was decided on
 November 30, 2010, before Marvin was decided on April 27, 2012.
III. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the "Order Granting Plaintiffs and
 
Counterclaim Defendants Richard Marvin, III, Amy Marvin, Nicholas
Fred Marvin and Barbara C. Nelson, Individually and on Behalf of
 the Barbara C. Nelson Revocable Trust, As Amended, Motion For
 Writ of Assistance and Execution," entered March 21, 2013 in the
 Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit, is affirmed.
  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 10, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
William C. McCorriston
 
David J. Minkin
 Scot Z. Matayoshi(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon)
for Defendants/Counterclaim
Plaintiffs/Appellants.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Peter Van Name Esser
 and 
Teresa Tico
 
for Plaintiffs/Counterclaim
Defendants/Appellees. Acting Associate Judge
 
12
 