     
   
  
        
     NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  PACI FIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000718 17-FEB-2026 11:59 AM Dkt. 81 SO 
NOS.  CAAP-23-0000718  and  CAAP-23-0000724 
(consolidated) 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF   APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
COUNTY  OF  KAUA I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
B  &
  D  PROPERTIES,  LLC,  dba  NORTH  DAKOTA  HOLDINGS, 
Defendant-Appellant,  and 
JOHN  DOES  1-25;  JANE  DOES  1-25;  DOE  PARTNERSHIPS  1-25; 
DOE  CORPORATIONS  1-25;  DOE  ENTITIES  1-25;  and 
DOE  GOVERNMENTAL  UNITS  1-25,  Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT
 OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 5CCV-22-0000013) 
MEMORANDUM  OPINION 
(By: Leonard,  Presiding Judge,
 Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
In  this   consolidated  appeal  in  an  eminent  domain  case, 
Defendant-Appellant  B  &  D  Properties,  LLC  dba  North  Dakota 
Holdings  (B&D)  appeals  from  the  December  11,  2023  Final  Judgment 
(Judgment )  entered  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Fifth  Circuit 
(Circuit  Court).   B&D  also  challenges  the  Circuit  Court's 
November  9,  2023  Findings  of  Fact,  Conclusions  of  Law,  Order  and 
Preliminary  Judgment  (FOFs/COLs  &  Order).   B&D  contends  the 
Circuit  Court  erred  in  its  valuation  of  the  subject  property 
(Property ).   For  the  reasons  discussed  below,  we  vacate  the 
Judgment  and  FOFs/COLs  &  Order. 1
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.          
          
             
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND 
The  Property  is  an  approximately  23.5  acre  vacant 
parcel  located  in  Kīlauea,  Kaua i  County.   It  is  currently  zoned 
for  agriculture  and  the  State's  land  use  designation  is  also 
agricultural,  but  it  has  been  identified  in  the  Kaua i  County 
General  Plan  and  the  Kīlauea  Town  Plan  for  future  urban 
expansion.  
In  September  2019,  Adam  Roversi  (Roversi ),  then  newly-
appointed  Director  of  the  Kaua i  County  Housing  Agency,  saw  a 
billboard  advertising  the  Property  for  sale,  indicating  it  "was 
zoned  commercial  in  part  and  residential  in  part,  which  Roversi 
knew  to  be  false."   Roversi  called  the  number  and  spoke  with 
Leland  Bertsch  (Bertsch ),  B&D's  managing  director,  who  admitted 
the  Property  was  not  zoned  for  commercial  or  residential  use  and 
declined  to  provide  a  purchase  price.   In  November  2019, 
Plaintiff-Appellee  County  of  Kaua i  (County)  contracted  with  CBRE 
to  provide  a  "restricted  appraisal"  of  the  Property  to  see  if  the 
County  could  purchase  it.   Nathan  Alexander  (Alexander )  conducted 
the  appraisal  in  which  he,  among  other  things:  recognized  the 
Property  was  "designated  for  future  development  in  the  Kauai 
General  Plan  and  Kilauea  Town  Plan;"  "analyzed  the 
probabilities,"  time,  and  cost  of  changing  the  land  use  and 
zoning  status  from  agriculture;  noted  that  the  Property  lacked 
sufficient  water  and  roadway  access  to  support  increased 
density;  and  thus  determined  "a  potential  buyer  would  not  want 
to  pay  for  the  enhanced  value  that  would  result  from  entitlement 2
2 It appears that at least the roadway access concern was resolved 
in May of 2021, when the County accepted dedication of a road extension that 
provides access to the Property. 
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
       
        
       
         
         
        
       
        
            
          
        
                  
   
        
        
         
          
        changes  which  had  not  yet  been  realized."   Alexander  concluded 
the  Property  was  worth  $3,270,000  as  of  October  2019,  based  on 
the  highest  and  best  use  of  the  Property  as  being  subdivided  into 
agricultural  estate  lots  (Agricultural  Lots).   The  County  later 
requested  a  full  appraisal,  which  Alexander  provided  in  January 
2021,  in  which  he  employed  the  same  analysis  and  determined  the 
Property  was  worth  $3,835,000  as  of  September  2020.   Roversi 
presented  the  $3,835,000  figure  to  Bertsch,  who  rejected  it  as 
"offensive."  
At
 an August 18, 2021 Kaua i County  Council Meeting, 
Councilmember KipuKai Kuali i moved  for passing of Resolution No. 
2021-27 (Resolution ), "authorizing the acquisition of land for 
public use, to wit, the [Property], and determining and declaring 
the necessity of the acquisition thereof by eminent domain." 
Roversi provided the council an "overview" of the Resolution, 
representing that the "Housing Agency's intention in seeking 
acquisition of [the Property] is to develop affordable housing 
both for rent and sale," that he and Bertsch have "been unable to 
come to an agreement on the purchase price," and the "eminent 
domain proceeding simply provides a vehicle" to acquire the 
Property "with the court involved in deciding what a fair 
purchase price would be." The Resolution passed unanimously on 
October 6, 2021. 
On March 23, 2022, the County filed the underlying 
complaint against B&D for condemnation of the Property, alleging, 
among other things, that "[t]he acquisition of [the Property] is 
necessary for a public use, to wit: the development of workforce 
housing and related public infrastructure." The case proceeded 
3
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
       
         
         
        
          
           
     
     
        
          
         
      
        
          
       
       
         
         
          
        
           
       
         
          
        
       
        to a bench trial. As a trial exhibit, the County provided an 
updated appraisal (County Trial Appraisal ) in which Alexander 
"conducted the same analysis" as the prior appraisal, brought it 
"current by accounting for increases in the market generally and 
analysis of new comparable properties," and valued the Property 
at $4,470,000. As stated in the FOFs/COLs & Order, Alexander 
determined that the highest and best use of the Property was to 
be subdivided into Agricultural Lots. 
B&D's expert witness, Curtis Bedwell (Bedwell ), 
provided an appraisal valuing the Property at $22,500,000 (B&D 
Trial Appraisal ). The Circuit Court found that in reaching this 
value, Bedwell determined that there was no risk that the 
entitlements necessary for residential development would be 
obtained. Accordingly, Bedwell concluded that the Property was 
worth $23,000,000 less "a discount of $500,000 to account for the 
estimated cost to obtain the entitlements necessary for 
residential development." Bedwell had previously appraised the 
Property for Bertsch in 2017, for purposes of obtaining financing 
(Financing Appraisal ). At that time, he had concluded the 
"as-is" value of the Property was $4,210,000, and that as of 
October 2022, the "prospective value with the assumption of 
having altered the land use and zoning would be $8,110,000." In 
the Financing Appraisal, Bedwell "applied various discounts to 
his land sales comparison analysis to account for the uncertainty 
of obtaining changes in the Subject entitlements," but he did not 
apply such discounts in the B&D Trial Appraisal. 
Following an October 2023 bench trial, the Circuit 
Court adopted the County's valuation of $4,470,000 as just 
4
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
          
          
         
      
      
            
        
        
           
         
         
          
         
        
          
        
           
         
       
     
   
        
        compensation for the Property. The Circuit Court found 
"Alexander to be credible based on his reports and his responses 
to questions on direct and cross examination, as well as his 
demeanor in court." The Circuit Court found that "Bedwell's 
testimony lacks credibility, and his valuation appraisal 
conclusions are unreliable and misleading," particularly because 
Bedwell valued the Property as if it were upzoned, but he did not 
clarify that upzoning was a hypothetical condition. 
B&D  appealed  from  the  FOF/COL  &  Order,  creating  CAAP-
23-718.   B&D  also  appealed  from  the  Judgment,  creating  CAAP-23-
724.   The  appeals  were  consolidated  under  CAAP-23-718. 
II. POINTS  OF  ERROR 
B&D
 raises five points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred by: (1) failing to make an 
independent determination of the highest and best use of the 
Property; (2) failing to consider and determine whether it was 
reasonably probable the Property could be upzoned to a higher and 
more valuable use; (3) failing to consider the evidence which 
overwhelmingly showed it is reasonably probable the Property may 
be upzoned to a higher and more valuable use for residential 
development; (4) failing to make a determination of the 
Property's fair value as of the date of summons; and (5) basing 
its $4,470,000 award of just compensation on comparisons to sales 
of other agriculturally-zoned properties, which do not represent 
the Property's highest and best use. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A trial court's FOFs are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard. Gordon v. Maesaka-Hirata ,
 143 Hawai i 335, 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
    
       
        
         
         
         
           
          
           
        
     
        
       
  
       
         
         
         
       
       
      
          
         
          
        
           346,  431  P.3d  708,  719  (2018),  overruled  on  other  grounds  by 
Eason  v.  State,  157  Hawai i  252,  576  P.3d   765  (2025).    "A  finding 
of  fact  is  clearly  erroneous  when,  despite  evidence  to  support 
the  finding,  the  appellate  court  is  left  with  the  definite  and 
firm  conviction  in  reviewing  the  entire  evidence  that  a  mistake 
has  been  committed."   Id.   The  appellate  court  reviews  the  trial 
court's  COLs  de  novo.   Bhakta  v.  Cnty.  of  Maui,  109  Hawai i  198, 
208,  124  P.3d  943,  953  (2005).   A  COL  that  is  supported  by  the 
trial  court's  FOFs  and  that  reflects  an  application  of  the 
correct  rule  of  law  will  not  be  overturned.   Id. 
In an eminent domain trial, 
any competent evidence of matters, not merely speculative, 
which would be considered by a prospective vendor or 
purchaser or which tend to enhance or depreciate the value 
of the property taken is admissible. The only question, 
then, is one of competence of the witnesses and their 
testimony. If there is then a conflict as to the highest 
and best use of the property, the question is properly one 
left to the jury. Thus, the proffered uses that should be 
excluded from jury consideration are those that are illegal, 
illogical, physically or financially unfeasible, or 
otherwise so remote or improbable as to not figure 
materially in the considerations of the hypothetical willing 
buyer and seller. 
City  &  Cnty.  of  Honolulu  v.  Victoria  Ward,  Ltd.,  153  Hawai i  462, 
488,  541  P.3d
  1225,  1251  (2023)  (cleaned  up). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
B&D  first   argues  that  the  Circuit  Court  clearly  erred 
by  failing  to  independently  determine  the  highest  and  best  use  of 
the  Property.   The  Hawai i  Supreme   Court  has  explained: 
Eminent domain proceedings are intended to award landowners 
an amount of just compensation which as nearly as possible 
approximates the value which a free market would attach to 
the taken property. A standard valuation method in eminent 
domain cases calculates just compensation as the difference 
between the fair market value of condemned property 
immediately before the taking (i.e., the condition 
unaffected by the taking) and the fair market value of the 
remaining property after the taking. The fair market value 
of the property in both the before and after conditions is 
calculated by estimating the highest and best use, defined 
as the use of property that will generate the most profit. 
6          
            
    
   
 
        
      
             
             
      
           
    
       
         
        
            
        
          
           
        
         
        
         
          
          
        
         
        
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The highest and best use of a property is the one that is 
physically possible, legally permissible, financially 
feasible, and maximally productive. 
Id. at 485-86, 541 P.3d at 1248-49 (cleaned up). 
The supreme court has repeatedly clarified that 
"highest and best use need not be the use at the time of taking 
or even the zoning at the time of taking" and that it may be 
established through testimony and studies regarding the 
feasibility of prospective future uses. Id. at 488, 541 P.3d at 
1251 (cleaned up). 
Here, the Circuit Court's findings and conclusions were 
based on Alexander's determination that the highest and best use 
of the Property as currently designated was for Agricultural 
Lots. As the County argues, a trial court need not provide a 
detailed itemization of its analysis regarding highest and best 
use. However, there is nothing in the Circuit Court's findings 
to indicate that it considered any use of the Property other than 
for Agricultural Lots, notwithstanding ample evidence that it was 
likely that the Property would be developed for, inter alia, 
residential housing. Although a factfinder may properly consider 
such evidence and determine that a use is not reasonably 
probable, here, there is no indication that the Circuit Court did 
so. Rather, the Circuit Court found Alexander's opinion to be 
supported and credible, and adopted his "as-is" value. 
Accordingly, it appears that B&D's argument has merit insomuch as 
the Circuit Court did not determine that the as-currently-
designated value was the highest and best use of the Property. 
7
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
        
 
         
        
        
        
           
       
         
         
        
            
           
            
        
         
         
       
         
          
         
         
       
       
          
         
         Points of Error (POEs) 2, 3, and 5 raise issues related 
to and overlapping with B&D's arguments concerning highest and 
best use. 
In POE 2, B&D argues as follows. Hawaii Revised 
Statues (HRS) § 466K-4(a) (2013) requires Hawai i  real property  
appraisers to comply with the Uniform Standards of Professional 
Appraisal Practice (USPAP), and USPAP Standards Rule 1-3 requires 
an appraiser to identify and analyze the effect on use and value 
of "existing land use regulations" and "reasonably probable 
modifications of such land use regulations." Under Hawai i case 
law,
 a condemnation valuation must consider potential uses of the 
property and whether it is reasonably probable the subject 
property could be rezoned to a higher and more valuable use. See 
Victoria Ward, 153 Hawai i at 486,  541 P.3d at 1249; see also, 
e.g., Hawaii Cnty. v. Sotomura , 55 Haw. 176, 185, 517 P.2d 57, 64 
(1973). Alexander's valuation did not comply with USPAP 
Standards Rule 1-3 or relevant Hawai i cases, and  the Circuit 
Court erred by failing to independently determine whether it was 
reasonably probable the Property could be upzoned. 
In
 POE 3, B&D argues that the evidence presented at 
trial overwhelming supported that the highest and best use of the 
Property was as residential development. For example, the 2000 
Kaua i General  Plan called to expand Kīlauea Town for additional 
"residential community," including the Property. In addition, 
Kaua i County  Planning Director Ka aina Hull  testified the 
Property would "most likely" be upgraded to a mix of commercial 
and residential zoning. The 2006 Kīlauea Town Plan designates 
the Property for residential use. Bertsch had commissioned a 
8
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
         
          
       
        
        
       
       
      
         
         
           
       
        
        
         
      
          
    
       
           
           
          
        
        
           
          
           
        
     
           conceptual plan to develop the Property for residential housing. 
Roversi testified the County wanted to condemn the Property "to 
develop affordable housing both for rent and for sale." The 
Resolution stated the public purpose supporting eminent domain 
was "the development of workforce housing and related public 
infrastructure." Thus, the evidence demonstrated it was "highly 
probable" the Property would be reclassified and rezoned. 
Regarding POE 5, which challenges the Circuit Court's 
consideration of "comparable sales" of agricultural properties, 
B&D points to cases in other jurisdictions that have reversed 
awards of just compensation that were based on comparisons to 
sales that do not reflect the correct highest and best use. 
Alexander admitted the agricultural lots he selected as 
comparisons could not be upzoned for residential or commercial 
development, could not be subdivided into smaller lots for 
development, were limited to the agricultural use stated in the 
condominium property regime's governing documents, were not 
located adjacent to an existing town, and were not designated for 
urban expansion and residential development. 
In
 Hawai i condemnation  proceedings, the question of a 
property's market value "is not limited to the value for the use 
to which the land is actually devoted, but it may have a 
potential use value." State v. Dillingham Corp., 60 Haw. 393, 
406, 591 P.2d 1049, 1057 (1979) (citation omitted). 
"[C]ompensation must be estimated as the fair market value 
[(FMV)] of the property at the time of the taking[.] This 
market value is not to be ascertained by what the property 
would bring at a forced sale, but by what it would fairly 
bring for any purpose if the owners themselves, without 
pressure, should offer it for sale." 
Hous. Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Harold K.L. Castle Found., 79 Hawai i 
9
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
       
         
         
          
           
        
        
        
          
       
          
        
   321,  327,  901  P.2d  1300,  1306  (App.  1995)  (quoting  United  States 
v.  Thurston,  4  U.S.  Dist.  Ct.  Haw.  16,  20–21  (1912)). 
"In  determining  potential  use  value,  'any  competent 
evidence  of  matters,  not  merely  speculative,  which  would  be 
considered  by  a  prospective  vendor  or  purchaser  or  which  tend  to 
enhance  or  depreciate  the  value  of  the  property  is  admissible.'"   
City  &  Cnty.  of  Honolulu  v.  Market  Place,  Ltd.,  55  Haw.  226,  242, 
517  P.2d  7,  19  (1973)  (cleaned  up). 
Just compensation includes all elements of value that 
inhere in the property, but it does not exceed market 
value fairly determined. The sum required to be paid 
the owner does not depend upon the uses to which he 
has devoted his land but is to be arrived at upon just 
consideration of all the uses for which it is 
suitable. The highest and most profitable use for 
which the property is adaptable and needed or likely 
to be needed in the reasonably near future is to be 
considered, not necessarily as the measure of value, 
but to the full extent that the prospect of demand for 
such use affects the market value while the property 
is privately held. 
Sotomura,  55  Haw.  at  185,  517  P.2d  at  63-64  (emphasis  added).   As 
discussed  above,  "the  highest  and  best  use  [is]  defined  as  the 
use  of  property  'that  will  generate  the  most  profit.'"   Victoria 
Ward,  Ltd.,  153  Hawai i  at  486,  541  P.3d   at  1249  (citation 
omitted).   That  said,  the  supreme  court  has  held: 
Evidence  of  other  transactions  to  aid  the  trier 
of  fact  in  determining  value  is  generally  admitted 
where  they  are  sufficiently  near  in  time,  the 
purportedly  comparable  tracts  are  located  sufficiently 
near  the  land  to  be  valued,  and  these  tracts  and  the 
subject  property  are  sufficiently  alike  in  character, 
situation,  usability,  and  improvements.   At  first 
blush,  a  transaction  three  years  removed  from  the 
condemnation  hardly  appears  close  enough  for 
comparison  purposes.   Yet  where  there  was  an  apparent 
paucity  of  comparable  sales,  the  allowance  of  a 
discussion  of  a  transaction  occurring  several  years 
after  the  subject  property's  condemnation  was  not 
necessarily  an  abuse  of  discretion,  particularly  where 
the  jury  was  apprised  of  the  circumstances  and  the 
appraiser  took  market  trends  into  account.   We  do  not 
find  the  trial  court's  action  in  this  regard 
constituted  error;  the  possible  untimeliness  of  the 
transaction  was  a  matter  affecting  the  weight  of  such 
evidence  rather  than  its  admissibility . 
10          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
       
     
          
          
        
          
 
         
          
           
           
           
          
           
           
           
       
       
        
       
         
        
          
            
          
              
              
             
            
            
             State v. Pioneer Mill Co., 64 Haw. 168, 174-75, 637 P.2d 1131, 
1136–37 (1981) (citation and footnote omitted; emphases added). 
Thus, notwithstanding that a court's ultimate 
determination of fair market value must be based on a property's 
highest and best use, as discussed above, we conclude that the 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in considering 
agricultural property sales, as the issue is one of weight, not 
admissibility. 
Finally, in POE 4, B&D argues that the Circuit Court 
failed to determine the Property's fair market value as of the 
date of summons. However, B&D does not identify where in the 
record it objected to the County's valuation on the basis that it 
did not represent the Property's fair market value as of the date 
of service of the summons.3 Therefore, the argument is waived 
for the purpose of this appellate review. See Ass'n of Apt. 
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd.,
 100 Hawai i 97, 
107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) ("Legal issues not raised in the 
trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal."). 
In sum, nothing in the Circuit Court's findings 
indicates that it independently considered any use of the 
Property other than for Agricultural Lots, notwithstanding the 
ample evidence that the Property would likely be developed for, 
inter alia, residential housing. Although a factfinder may 
properly consider such evidence and determine that a use is not 
3 In its proposed FOFs & COLs, B&D included: "14. HRS § 101-24 
provides in relevant part that '[f]or the purpose of assessing compensation 
and damages, the right thereto shall be deemed to have accrued at the date of 
summons[.]' See Haw. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 101-24." However, B&D does not point 
to any argument to the Circuit Court on this issue and the inclusion of 
proposed COL 14 was not sufficient to apprise the Circuit Court that B&D 
objected to the County's proposed valuation on the basis that it did not 
represent the Property's value as of the date of service of the summons. 
11          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
         
         
           
         
        
       
          
       
         
       
       
           
    reasonably probable, here, there is no indication that the 
Circuit Court did so. Rather, it merely found Alexander's 
opinion of the Property as "currently designated" to be credible, 
and adopted his as-is market value. Particularly in light of the 
fact that the County specifically sought to condemn the Property 
for the express purpose of residential development and related 
public infrastructure, consistent with the Kaua i General Plan 
and
 the Kīlauea Town Plan, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
clearly erred in adopting Alexander's agricultural use valuation, 
without regard to the Property's highest and best use, in 
determining the fair market value of the Property. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's December 11, 
2023 Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded to the Circuit 
Court for a new trial. 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai  i,  February   17,   2026. 
On  the  briefs: 
Bruce  D.  Voss, 
Ciarra  B.  Sapigao, 
(Lung  Rose  Voss  &  Wagnild), 
for  Defendant-Appellant. 
Matthew  M.  Bracken, 
County  Attorney, 
County  of  Kauai 
and 
David  J.  Minkin, 
Brett  R.  Tobin, 
Sara  M.  Hayden, 
(McCorriston  Miller  Mukai 
MacKinnon  LLP), 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/  Katherine  G.   Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Kimberly  T.  Guidry 
Associate  Judge 
12 