 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001047
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHARLES L. BOVEE, Defendant-Appellant, and
ADAM J. APILADO, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-1748)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Charles L. Bovee (Bovee) appeals
 
from the July 9, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for
 
methamphetamine trafficking in the second degree (Methamphetamine
Trafficking 2), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 712-1240.8 (2014 Repl.), entered in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Bovee contends the circuit court erred (1)
 
when it instructed the jury on the elements of Methamphetamine
 
Trafficking 2 because the instruction allegedly failed to
 "correctly reconcile the statutory elements of the offense"; and
 (2) when it instructed the jury on the elements of the lesser
 included charge, promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree
 (HRS § 712-1243 (2014 Repl.)) (PDD 3), for the same reason.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Bovee's
 
appeal is without merit. 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial. However, error is not to be
viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract.
It must be examined in the light of the entire proceedings
and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be
entitled. In that context, the real question becomes
whether there is a reasonable possibility that error may
have contributed to conviction. If there is such a
 reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment of
conviction on which it may have been based must be set
aside.
 
State v. Frisbee, 114 Hawai 'i 76, 79-80, 156 P.3d 1182, 1185-86 
(2007) (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 
327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006)). 
Bovee argues that the circuit court erred when it gave
 
its jury instruction on Methamphetamine Trafficking 2 "because

 
(1) it failed to set out that the elements are, at a minimum,
 
conduct and attendant circumstances; and (2) it allowed the jury
 to conclude guilt without finding that [Bovee] committed each
 element of the offense with the requisite state of mind." Bovee
 also argues that the circuit court erred because it did not
 include a state of mind instruction for "knowingly."
 
The circuit court instructed on Methamphetamine
 
Trafficking 2 as follows:
 
[Bovee], is charged with the offense of
[Methamphetamine Trafficking 2].
 
A person commits the offense of [Methamphetamine
Trafficking 2] if he knowingly distributes methamphetamine
in any amount.
 
There is one material element of the offense of
 
[Methamphetamine Trafficking 2], which the prosecution must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
The element is as follows:
 
1.	 That on or about the 26
th day of November, 2013,
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of
Hawaii, the Defendant distributed
methamphetamine in any amount, and he was aware
that he was doing so.
 
"To distribute" means to sell, transfer, prescribe,
give, or deliver to another, or to leave, barter, or
exchange with another, or to offer or agree to do the same.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court instructed on the lesser included
 
charge of PDD 3 as follows:
 
If and only if you find [Bovee] not guilty of
[Methamphetamine Trafficking 2], or you are unable to reach
a unanimous verdict as to this offense, then you must
consider whether [Bovee] is guilty or not guilty of the
included offense of [PDD 3].
 
A person commits the offense of [PDD 3] if he
knowingly possesses methamphetamine in any amount.
 
There is one material element of the offense of [PDD
3], which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
The element is as follows:
 
1.	 That on or about the 26
th day of November, 2013,
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of
Hawaii, [Bovee] possessed methamphetamine in any
amount, and he was aware that he was doing so.
 
The circuit court gave its jury instruction based on
 
its reading of State v. Aganon,  97 Hawai 'i 299, 36 P.3d 1269 
(2001).
 
In Aganon, the defendant challenged her conviction for
 
murder in the second degree, arguing in relevant part that 
the jury instructions on second degree murder were plainly
erroneous inasmuch as (a) they failed to set out that the
elements are conduct and result, (b) they improperly claimed
that state of mind is a material element, (c) they failed to
require the jury to find that the state of mind applies to
each element of the offense, and (d) they allowed the jury
to conclude guilt without finding that Aganon committed each
element of the offense with the requisite state of mind[.]
 
Aganon, 97 Hawai 'i at 300, 36 P.3d at 1270. 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the jury 
instruction was erroneous because it required that the jury only 
find the defendant intentionally or knowingly "caused the death" of the victim, which improperly combined the conduct and result elements of the offense. That is, the jury should have been instructed to find that the defendant (1) intentionally or knowingly engaged in conduct that caused the death of the victim, and (2) intended that death should result from her conduct. 
The supreme court also noted that pursuant to HRS 
§ 702-205 (2014 Repl.), the requisite state of mind for an offense is not a material element of that offense. Aganon, 97 
Hawai
'i at 303, 36 P.3d at 1273 ("Although the circuit court 
erroneously listed the requisite state of mind as a 'material 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
element,' contrary to HRS § 702-205, the error did not adversely 
affect Aganon's substantial rights." (internal citation omitted)); see State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai
'i 577, 584 n.3, 994 P.2d 
509, 516 n.3 (2000) ("[U]nder HRS § 702-205, state of mind is not an 'element' of a criminal offense.") 
Pursuant to HRS § 712-1240.8, when a defendant is
 
accused of Methamphetamine Trafficking 2, the prosecution must
 prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant "knowingly
 distribute[d] methamphetamine in any amount." HRS § 712­1240.8(1). The circuit court decided that the offense
 constituted a single material element: conduct constituting the
 distribution of methamphetamine in any amount.
 
Regardless of whether the circuit court's jury 
instruction was technically correct or incorrect, the jury instruction was substantively correct and therefore was not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. For example, in Aganon, even where the trial court improperly conflated the conduct and result material elements of murder in the second degree, the supreme court observed that "the [jury instruction] error did not adversely affect Aganon's substantial rights. The court's jury instructions were consonant with the spirit of HRS § 702–204 [(2014 Repl.)], which prescribes that the requisite state of mind applies to each element of the offense. Thus, the jury instructions were substantively, if not technically, correct." Aganon, 97 Hawai
'i at 303, 36 P.3d at 
1273. 
Bovee's main defense was that he had no knowledge of
 
the methamphetamines in the cigarette pack. Bovee testified
 numerous times to that and his closing argument focused in part
 upon his alleged lack of knowledge as to the contents of the
 cigarette pack. A reasonable jury would understand that the
 offense required that Bovee distributed methamphetamine in any
 amount. The jury clearly disbelieved Bovee's testimony as to his
 knowledge of the methamphetamines within the cigarette pack and
 found him guilty of knowingly distributing those
 methamphetamines.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bovee argues that the circuit court's jury instruction
 
for PDD 3 was erroneous for the same reasons that the
 
Methamphetamine Trafficking 2 instruction was erroneous, namely
 that "[t]he [circuit] court did not identify this attendant
 circumstance element[, awareness of the possession of
 methamphetamine,] as a separate element, nor did [the circuit
 court] define it for the jury."
 
Bovee's second alleged point of error is without merit
 
for the same reasons underlying the first alleged point of error.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the July 9, 2014 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 9, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
5
 