NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0002226
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARTIN YOUNG, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1580)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Martin Young (Young) was arrested
 
after he attempted to sell a stolen guitar back to its original
 
owner. Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged Young 
with second-degree theft for intentionally receiving, retaining,
 or disposing of property of the complaining witness (CW), the
 value of which exceeded $300, knowing the property had been
 stolen, with the intent to deprive the CW of the property, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-831(1)(b) (Supp.
 
2013).1 A jury found Young guilty as charged. The Circuit Court
 
1HRS § 708-831(1)(b) provides: "(1) A person commits the
offense of theft in the second degree if the person commits
theft: . . . (b) Of property or services the value of which
exceeds $300[.]" (Format altered.) HRS § 708-830(7) (Supp.
2013) provides, in relevant part: "A person commits theft if the
person . . . intentionally receives, retains, or disposes of the
property of another, knowing that it has been stolen, with intent
to deprive the owner of the property."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced Young to a five-
year term of probation, subject to a special condition that he

 
serve a six-month term of imprisonment. The Circuit Court
 
entered its Judgment on June 28, 2013.
 
Young's theory of defense at trial was that he did not
 
know the guitar was stolen. 
On appeal, Young contends that his
 
trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to mount
 the additional defenses: (1) that the value of the stolen guitar
 did not exceed $300; and (2) that Young did not know that the
 value of the guitar exceeded $300. We affirm the Circuit Court's
 Judgment.
 
BACKGROUND
 
The following evidence was adduced at trial. On July 2
 
or 3, 2012, the CW's house was burglarized and numerous items,
 including his Taylor GS Mini guitar, was stolen. The CW had
 purchased the guitar six months earlier from Island Guitars for
 $522.50. The evening after his guitar was stolen, the CW
 searched craigslist and found two items posted by people looking
 to buy a GS Mini guitar. The CW contacted those people and asked
 them to inform the CW if someone responded to their craigslist
 posts. On July 6, 2012, a person named "Karl" informed the CW
 that Karl had been contacted by someone offering to sell a GS
 Mini guitar. Karl forwarded a picture of the guitar being
 offered for sale, and the CW was "pretty sure" it was his guitar.
 The person attempting to sell the guitar to Karl had sent him an
 e-mail using the name "D.P." 
The CW called the police, and Karl made arrangements to
 
meet the prospective seller in front of Macy's at Windward Mall
 at about 6:00 p.m. The CW went to Windward Mall in place of
 Karl, with the police conducting surveillance. The CW approached
 Young, who appeared to be looking for someone. The CW asked
 Young if he was selling a guitar. Young said yes and asked the
 CW if his name was "Karl." Young took the CW to Young's van and
 
2The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pulled out a guitar, which was in a case. The CW unzipped the
 
case, examined the guitar, and confirmed that it was his guitar
 by checking the serial number. The CW asked Young how long Young
 had owned the guitar. According to the CW, Young said "oh, its
 not mine, or something like that."
 
The CW signaled the police who came to the van. The
 
police asked the CW if the guitar was his guitar. When the CW
 answered "yes," Young said, "What, is it stolen?" Honolulu
 Police Department (HPD) Sergeant Maverick Kanoa (Sergeant Kanoa)
 instructed another officer to arrest Young. Young reacted by
 "look[ing] at [Sergeant Kanoa] surprised and [Young] asked what
 was going on[.]" Sergeant Kanoa told Young that he was being
 arrested for "detaining stolen property."
 
HPD Detective Michael Garcia (Detective Garcia) was
 
qualified as an expert in appraising personal property. He
 received training from, and was certified by, the Certified
 Appraisers Guild of America; he determined the fair market value
 of property in theft and robbery cases as part of his duties as a
 detective; and he had previously testified as an expert in the
 field of general property appraising. In appraising the Taylor
 GS Mini guitar at issue in this case, Detective Garcia
 did online research, reviewed periodical articles, and determined
 whether the guitar was rare or common, the market trends, the
 supply and demand, and how badly people wanted the guitar. 
Detective Garcia concluded that the guitar's fair market value
 was $400.
 
On the night of Young's arrest, at about 11:30 p.m., 
HPD Detectives Mitchell Tomei and Jack Snyder interviewed Young at the K
ane'ohe Police Station. The interview was recorded, and 
relevant portions of the interview were played at trial. Young initially stated that a guy named "Pena" asked if Young wanted to make $50 by taking a guitar and selling it for $350 to a "guaranteed buyer" that Pena had found on craigslist. Young stated that Pena told him that the guitar was not stolen. Later in the interview, Young stated that D.P., and not Pena, had given 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
him the guitar. Young said he made up the name "Pena" because
 
D.P. was his son's friend and Young was trying to protect D.P. 
When asked whether D.P. committed the burglary in which the
 guitar was taken, Young stated, "I'm pretty sure. I don't know." 
Young also stated that D.P. "mentioned [the guitar] was from a
 [burglary]." Young told the detectives that he had picked up
 D.P. with the guitar, then dropped D.P. off before going to
 Windward Mall.
 
Young testified in own defense at trial. 
Young stated 
that D.P. was a friend of Young's son and had also dated his
 daughter. According to Young, while he was giving D.P. a ride to
 Windward Mall, D.P. asked Young to help him sell a guitar and
 offered to pay Young $50 and gas money. D.P. mentioned the price
 of $350 for the guitar. At Windward Mall, Young met with the CW
 and showed him the guitar, and then the police arrived.
 
Young testified that prior to the arrival of the
 
police, he did not know that the guitar had been stolen. Young
 had "heard rumors" about D.P. being involved in burglaries, but
 D.P. did not tell Young that D.P. had been involved in the
 burglary in which the guitar was stolen. In fact, Young thought
 that D.P. told him the guitar was not stolen. However, after the
 police arrived, Young put things together and concluded that D.P.
 had been involved in the burglary.
 
Young testified that during his police interview, the
 
detectives kept badgering him and refused to accept his
 statements that he "had nothing to do with it[.]" Because of the
 badgering and his desire to "get out of there[,]" Young stated
 that half of the time, he did not even know what he said. Young
 indicated that he had to say that "[h]e had something to do with
 it just to get out of there[.]" Young repeated that he did not
 know the guitar was stolen until the police arrived and the CW
 said that the CW was the owner of the guitar. According to
 Young, that is why he reacted by asking if the guitar was stolen.
 
The jury found Young guilty as charged of second-degree
 
theft.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
On appeal, Young contends that his trial counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance in two respects: (1) by failing
 
to mount a defense that the value of the stolen guitar did not
 exceed $300, which is the threshold amount for second-degree
 theft; and (2) by failing to mount a defense that Young did not
 know that the value of the guitar exceeded $300. We conclude
 that Young has failed to meet his burden of demonstrating that
 his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance.
 
II.
 
A defendant who raises a claim of ineffective 
assistance of counsel bears the burden of showing: (1) "specific errors or omissions of defense counsel reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment or diligence"; and (2) "that these errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348–49, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980); State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). "General 
claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and every action or omission is not subject to inquiry." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 
442, 462, 848 P .2d 966, 976 (1993). As a general rule, "matters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." Richie, 88 
Hawai
'i at 39–40, 960 P.2d at 1247–48 (1998) (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted). If counsel's allegedly erroneous actions or omissions have "an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case[,]" they "will not be subject to further scrutiny." Briones, 74 Haw. at 462–63, 848 P.2d at 976. 
III.
 
To prove the charged offense of second-degree theft,
 
the prosecution was required to establish, among other things,
 that Young: (1) knew the guitar had been stolen; (2) that the
 value of the guitar exceeded $300; and (3) that Young knew that
 the value of the guitar exceeded $300. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Young's theory of defense at trial was that he did not
 
know the guitar had been stolen. In opening statement, Young's
 
counsel informed the jury that "Martin Young is not guilty of
 Theft in the Second Degree in this case because he did not know
 that the Taylor GS mini guitar was stolen."
 
In closing argument, Young's counsel asserted that the
 
case boiled down to whether Young knew the guitar was stolen. 
Counsel argued that there was no evidence to suggest that Young
 stole the guitar, that the evidence showed that D.P. had set up
 the sale of the guitar, and that all Young did was take the
 guitar to meet the prospective buyer. Citing the legal
 definition for the "knowing" state of mind, counsel argued that
 while Young's mental state may have been negligent or reckless as
 to whether the guitar was stolen, it did not rise to the level of
 the knowing mental state required for conviction. Counsel argued
 that the evidence of Young's surprised reaction and his asking
 whether the guitar was stolen when the police arrived
 demonstrated that Young did not know at that time that the guitar
 had been stolen. Counsel also discounted Young's interview
 statement to the HPD detectives, asserting that "it was taken
 sometime after [Young] was arrested, he was sitting in his
 cellblock the entire time, it was close to midnight, he was
 tired, he was being questioned by two trained detectives at the
 time. You know, what he said was taken out of context." 
Counsel argued that the State had failed to meet its burden of
 proving beyond a reasonable doubt that Young knew the guitar had
 been stolen.
 
IV.
 
Young contends that in addition to asserting the
 
defense that he did not know the guitar was stolen, his trial
 counsel should have mounted defenses based on the additional
 claims that the value of the stolen guitar did not exceed $300
 and that Young did not know the value of the guitar exceeded
 $300. We conclude that Young has not demonstrated that his trial 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel provided ineffective assistance for failing to mount 
defenses based on these additional claims. 
A. 
The State presented strong evidence that the value of
 
the stolen guitar exceeded $300. The CW testified that he had
 paid $522.50 for the guitar six months before it was stolen, an
 expert appraiser valued the guitar at $400, and Young himself
 told HPD detectives that he had been instructed to sell the
 guitar for $350. Young offers no evidence that the fair market
 value of the guitar did not exceed $300. Given the State's
 strong evidence that the value of the guitar exceeded $300 and
 the absence of contrary evidence, we conclude that Young has not
 shown that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by
 failing to mount a defense based on a challenge to the value of
 the guitar. See Antone, 62 Haw. at 348–49, 615 P.2d at 104.
 
B.
 
We are not privy to the communications between Young
 
and his trial counsel, and Young was not specifically asked at
 trial if he knew whether the value of the guitar exceeded $300. 
Certainly, Young's trial counsel cannot be faulted for failing to
 "mount a defense" based on Young's asserted lack of knowledge
 that the value of the guitar exceeded $300 if Young in fact knew
 that the value of the guitar exceeded $300.
 
To the extent that Young argues that his trial counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance for failing to argue that the
 evidence presented at trial was insufficient to show he had
 knowledge that the value of the guitar exceeded $300, we conclude
 that this argument lacks merit. The decision on what defense or
 defenses to assert from among the possible defenses available to
 a defendant involves considerations of trial strategy and tactics
 and the exercise of judgment. Defense counsel is not required to
 assert every possible defense. Indeed, asserting multiple or
 weak defenses may have an adverse effect on the defendant's case
 by distracting the jury's attention from a substantial defense or 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
causing the jury to question the credibility of the defendant's
 
positions.
 
Here, from the outset of the case, the sole theory of
 
defense presented to the jury was that Young did not know the
 guitar had been stolen. This defense, if accepted by the jury,
 would have resulted in Young's acquittal of second-degree theft
 and all lesser included offenses, which all require proof that
 the defendant knew the guitar had been stolen. On the other
 hand, the defense that Young did not know that the value of the
 guitar exceeded $300, even if accepted by the jury, would still
 have exposed Young to conviction for the lesser included offenses
 of third-degree theft (value not exceeding $100) and fourth-
degree theft (any value not in excess of $100). See HRS § 708­
832 (Supp. 2013); HRS § 708-833 (1993). In addition, Young's
 trial counsel may have concluded that the defense that Young
 lacked knowledge that the guitar was stolen would be more
 attractive to a jury, because it would show the absence of
 criminal culpability, whereas the defense that Young simply
 lacked knowledge of the stolen item's value could be viewed by
 the jury as a less attractive, technical defense. Furthermore,
 the State presented evidence that Young told the HPD detectives
 that he had been instructed to sell the guitar for $350, and
 Young himself testified at trial that D.P. mentioned the price of
 $350 for the guitar. Thus, Young's trial counsel would have had
 to overcome this evidence in arguing to the jury that the trial
 evidence did not show that Young knew the value of the guitar
 exceeded $300.
 
Under the circumstances of this case, we cannot say
 
that the defense strategy of focusing on a theory of defense that
 Young did not know the guitar had been stolen was unreasonable or
 constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. We decline to
 second-guess or micro-manage the judgment of Young's trial
 counsel in making strategic choices relating to trial strategy
 regarding the choice of what defense to assert. See Richie, 88 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i at 39–40, 960 P.2d at 1247–48; Briones, 74 Haw. at 
462–63, 848 P.2d at 976.
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Glenn D. Choy Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 for Defendant-Appellant
 
Sonja P. McCullen

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
9
 