FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
FRED E. WILLIAMS, also known as
FREDERICK ERNEST WILLIAMS, JR., Defendant-Appellee
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001518
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0025)

 
SEPTEMBER 22, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
I.

 
In this drug and drug paraphernalia prosecution, 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals from the 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting 
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence (Suppression Order) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
1
Court)  on May 21, 2013.
On appeal, the State maintains that the Circuit Court

 
erred in granting Defendant-Appellee Fred E. Williams's
 (Williams) Motion to Suppress Evidence. The Circuit Court
 suppressed evidence seized from Williams at the time of his
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arrest as unlawful fruit of an illegal arrest effected in
 
violation of the limitations contained in the bench warrant. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in interpreting the terms
 of the bench warrant, vacate the Suppression Order, and remand
 for further proceedings.
 
II.
 
The arresting police officer learned of the outstanding
 
2
bench warrant for Williams's arrest  on January 2, 2013, while in
the process of citing Williams for remaining in Cartwright Park
 after the closing time stated on posted signs in the park.
3 The
 
December 8, 2011 warrant for Williams's arrest stated that it
 could not be executed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
 a.m. "on premises not open to the public." After Williams was
 placed in handcuffs, the arresting police officer found "a
 cylindrical glass pipe with a bulbous end[,]" two lighters, and
 "a small plastic Ziploc type baggie" on Williams's person.
 
In granting Williams's motion to suppress, the Circuit
 
Court ruled that the police officers' execution of the subject
 bench warrant exceeded its scope and therefore suppressed the
 evidence seized as a result of a search incident to that arrest. 
The Circuit Court reasoned that, as the warrant specified that it
 could not be executed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
 a.m. "on premises not open to the public," and Cartwright Park
 was closed at the time the warrant was executed, the park was not
 "open to the public" and therefore the warrant did not authorize
 Williams's arrest.
 
The time limitation contained in the warrant was 
mandated by Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 9(b), 
which provides in relevant part: 
(1) WARRANT. The warrant shall be in such form as
 
may be prescribed by the issuing court and shall
 
. . . .
 
2
 The bench warrant was issued for failing to "appear, make payment
and/or comply with the court's order" in the pending prosecution for the
misdemeanor offense of Assault in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes § 707-712(1)(a) (1993).
 
3
 Cartwright Park is a public park; signs posted state that the park
closes at 10:00 p.m. and reopens at 5:00 a.m.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(vii) contain a prohibition against execution of the
warrant between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on premises not
open to the public, unless a judge of the district or
circuit court permits execution during those hours in
writing on the warrant[.]
 
"When interpreting rules promulgated by the court,
 
principles of statutory construction apply. Interpretation of a
 
statute is a question of law which we review de novo." Molinar
 
v. Schweizer, 95 Hawai 'i 331, 334-35, 22 P.3d 978, 981-82 (2001) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Generally speaking, "where the terms of a statute are plain, unambiguous and explicit, we are not at liberty to look beyond that language for a different meaning." State v. Haugen, 104 Hawai
'i 71, 75, 
85 P.3d 178, 182 (2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted; block quote format altered). However, where "a literal construction would produce an absurd and unjust result[,]" Id. 
at 77, 85 P.3d at 184 (citation, internal quotation marks, and emphasis omitted; block quote format altered), resort to the legislative history to discern the intent behind the language is permissible. 
The State argues that the Circuit Court's
 
interpretation "produces an absurd and illogical result." The
 Circuit Court suggested, in its oral ruling, that the police
 should have cited Williams for being in the park after it was
 closed and then arrested him pursuant to the warrant only after
 he exited the park grounds. There is nothing about the boundary
 between a public park and the public sidewalk outside of the park
 that provides any greater expectation of privacy once the park is
 closed for the night. Given the prohibition against entrance
 into a public park during certain night hours, it would defy
 logic to conclude that a person illegally within a closed, but
 public, park is simultaneously intended to be protected from
 execution of a warrant because he or she was present in the
 closed park.
 
The Judicial Council of Hawaii's Committee on Revision
 
of the Rules of Criminal Procedure (June 1975) proposed the
 language present in the current HRPP Rule 9(b)(vii). The
 Committee's Note to Rule 9 stated that the proposed Rule
 9(b)(vii) "prohibits execution on non-public premises during the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nighttime hours unless allowed by the judge. A similar provision
 
is in [District Court Rules of Criminal Procedure] 17, but its
 phrasing referring to 'private' premises is not used to avoid
 questions of technical title." The State argues that the "use of
 the expression 'premises not open to the public' [by HRPP Rule
 9(b)(vii)] was intended to merely serve as a substitute for the
 expression 'private premises' to 'avoid questions of technical
 title.'"
 
We agree with the State that the phrase "open to the
 
public" was meant by the drafters to include public places and
 not to limit the execution of arrest warrants to particular hours
 of operation. Indeed, to confine execution of such warrants on
 public property only to those hours the property is technically
 "open" is to make the exception a nullity. To the extent public
 property has hours of operation, those hours are not likely to
 include the prohibited time period between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
 a.m. Moreover, the reason to restrict the nighttime execution of 
warrants -- society's abhorrence of nighttime intrusions into a person's home, based on a "greater expectation of privacy that individuals possess in their homes at night" and recognition that "ordinarily a nighttime search [poses] a heightened safety risk since people may tend to overreact to an entry by force in the dead of night[,]" and "darkness may exacerbate [their] reaction or heighten confusion inherent in a search[,]" see State v. Richardson, 80 Hawai
'i 1, 7, 904 P.2d 886, 892 (1995) -- is 
absent when the execution of the warrant is done on public property. 
Williams argues that the Circuit Court's decision
 
should be affirmed on other grounds because Williams was detained
 by Officer Kim "for a longer period than was absolutely
 necessary" to complete the investigation and issue a citation for
 being in a public park after hours in violation of Revised
 Ordinances of Honolulu § 10-1.2(a)(12). However, as the Circuit
 Court did not find that the police detained Williams longer than
 necessary to issue the citation and did not rule on this basis,
 we decline to consider the argument for the first time on appeal. 
See State v. Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 56 n.2, 760 P.2d 670, 676 n.2
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1988) (factors in recognizing plain error include whether
 
consideration of the issue requires additional facts).
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the May 21, 2013
 
Suppression Order entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
5
 