 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000596 07-DEC-2023 08:17 AM Dkt. 70 AMSDO 
NO.  CAAP-22-0000
 596  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEAL
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I  S 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff -Appellee, 
v. 
JAMES GREEN, JR. , Defendant -Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-21-0000417) 
AMENDED SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant -Appellant James Green, Jr. ( Green) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment ), entered 
by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on September 13, 2022.1 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs submitted by 
the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised, we affirm without prejudice to 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Green's filing of a Hawai ‘i Rules of Penal Procedure ( HRPP) 
Rule 40 petition, and remand for further proceedings . 
I. Background 
On April 14, 2021, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaiʻi 
(State) charged Green by criminal indictment with two counts of 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-732(1)(b) (2014),  as follows,  2
COUNT 1: On or about October 8, 2020, in the City and 
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaiʻi, JAMES GREEN, did 
knowingly subject to sexual contact, [complaining witness 
(CW)], a person who was less than fourteen years old, by 
placing his hand on her buttock, thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree, in violation 
of Section 707 -732(1)(b) of the Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes.  
. . . . 
COUNT 2: On or about October 8, 2020, in the City and 
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaiʻi, JAMES GREEN, did 
knowingly subject to sexual contact, [CW], a person who was 
less than fourteen years old, by placing his hand on her 
genitalia, thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault 
in the Third Degree, in violation of Section 707 -732(1)(b) 
of the Hawai ʻi Revised Statutes.  
Following a four-day trial, the jury returned a 
verdict finding Green guilty of both counts. On September 13, 
2022, the circuit court sentenced Green to an indeterminate 
2 HRS § 707-732(1)(b) (2014) states, in pertinent part, 
Sexual assault in the third degree. (1) A person commits 
the offense of sexual assault in the third degree if: 
. . .. 
(b) The person knowing ly subjects to sexual contact 
another person who is less than fourteen years old 
or causes such a person to have sexual contact 
with the person [.] 
2   
 
  
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
five-year term of imprisonment for each count, with both terms 
to run concurrently. 
Green contends on appeal that the circuit court 
committed plain error, and that Green's court -appointed trial 
counsel was ineffective. We consider these contentions in turn, 
and conclude that no plain error was committed below, and affirm 
the Judgment without prejudice to Green's filing of a petition 
for post -conviction relief, pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. 
II. Discussion 
A. Plain Error 
"[A]n appellate court may recognize plain error when 
the error committed affects substantial rights of the 
defendant." State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawaiʻi 206, 222, 297 P.3d 
1062, 1078 (2013) (cleaned up); see  HRPP  Rule 52(b). This court 
"will apply the plain error standard of review to correct errors 
which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public 
reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of 
justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai ʻi 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(citations omitted). An appellate court's "power to deal with 
plain error is one to be exercised sparingly and with caution 
because the plain error rule represents a departure from a 
presupposition of the adversary system--that  a party must look 
to  his or her counsel for protection and bear the cost of 
3   
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel's mistakes." Metcalfe, 129 Hawaiʻi at 222, 297 P.3d at 
1078  (citation omitted).   Green contends three points of plain 
error, as follows,    3
(1) Green contends that "[p]lain error occurred where 
the Court began jury empaneling with only 25 prospective jurors 
present, leaving room for only 11 of those prospective jurors to 
be excused while still meeting the 12 -jurors-plus-2-alternates 
requiremen t." Green contends that, despite the selection of a 
jury panel of 12 jurors and 2 alternates, the "small pool" of 25 
prospective jurors created "challenges" for counsel. 
The record reflects that the State and Green could 
have each exercised three peremptory challenges.4 The State 
exercised three, and Green exercised one. Green does not 
contend that he would have exercised additional peremptory 
strikes had the jury pool been larger. Moreover, Green does not 
contend that, of the twelve jurors and two alternates who were 
empaneled, any should have been dismissed for cause. 
The selection of jurors from a 25 -person pool of 
potential jurors does not, without more, constitute a "per se" 
violation of Green's right to a fair and impartial jury. Even 
3 Green asks this court to find plain error because he did not 
object to the contentions of error below. See State v. Kelekolio , 74 Haw. 
479, 515, 849 P.2d 58, 75 (1993) ("where plain error has been committed and 
substantial rights have been affected thereby, the error may be noticed even 
though it was not brought to the attention of the trial court"). 
4 Pursuant to HRPP Rule 24, in criminal jury trials "each side is 
entitled to 3 peremptory challenges." HRPP Rule 24. 
4   
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assuming that a smaller -than-average jury pool constitutes an 
irregularity in the jury selection process, Green does not show 
improper motive or prejudice. State v. Mara , 98 Hawaiʻi 1, 12, 
41 P.3d 157, 168 (2002) (" [I]f the jury finally impaneled in the 
case at bar consisted wholly of qualified jurors, a mere 
irregularity in the process is not itself a ground for reversal, 
absent a showing of improper motive or prejudice .") We 
conclude, on this record, that the selection of jurors from a 
25-person jury po ol was not plainly erroneous. 
(2) Green contends that "[p]lain error occurred where 
the Cour t allowed an expert opinion from [the State's] expert 
despite no foundation being laid, and where the Court allowed an 
expert opinion outside of [the expert's] expertise." 
The record reflects that the State, without objection, 
called Penny Kremer ( Kremer) to testify as an expert in serology 
and forensic DNA testing. Green agrees that Kremer was 
qualified as an expert in serology and DNA testing. Kremer 
testified that she is a criminalist, and that she works at the 
Honolulu Police Department's ( HPD) Scientific Investigation 
Section, Forensic Biology Unit. She earned her Ph.D. in cell 
and molecular biology from the University of Hawaiʻi at Manoa, 
and her "duties and responsi bilities" for HPD include 
"examin[ing] items of evidence for DNA." Kremer testified that 
she has performed DNA analyses "hundreds of times," and that HPD 
5   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
has an accredited DNA laboratory that meets "national and 
international standards for DNA testing ." She testified that 
DNA testing was performed in the laboratory, and that all 
standard operating procedures were followed to conduct the DNA 
testing. She testified, moreover, that her work was reviewed by 
another analyst before she documented that work. 
Kremer testified that she took a dozen DNA samples 
from CW's blanket taken at the crime scene, that two of the 
samples contained a protein found in semen, and that Green 
"could not be excluded" from one of the samples.5 Kremer 
explained that she had also done a statistical analysis because 
"[w]hen we find someone --or a comparison that can't be 
excluded, we do stats on --to find out what would be the 
probability of a person having all those markers." Kremer 
testified that probability to be "one in greater than 8 
trillion [,]" meaning that Kremer "would have to test greater 
5 Kremer explained that Green "could not be excluded" from the 
sample as follows, 
That means when I compared him –-his profile, his known 
profile, through that profile I obtained from that sample, 
that he had all the markers. Even though it was partial, 
he had all those markers. So he could not be excluded. 
 . . .. 
[W]hen we develop a profile, it's like an individual's 
telephone number, so you've got different numbers. It's 
represented by numbers at different sections. So –-and 
his profile will have different numbers at each section. 
And so when I put them next t o each other and I compared 
them, he has all the markers that were on that questioned 
sample. 
6   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
than 8 trillion people to find someone that . . . could not be 
excluded from that sample." 
Green did not object to Kremer's testimony during 
trial and, accordingly, we deem the issue waived. "[O]bjections 
to the admission of incompetent evidence, which a party failed 
to raise at trial, are generally not subject to plain error 
review." Metcalfe, 129 Hawaiʻi at 225, 297 P.3d at 1081 (citing 
State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai ʻi 382, 410, 910 P.2d 695, 723 (1996))  
("It is the general rule that evidence to which no objection has 
been made may properly be considered by the trier of fact and 
its admission will not constitute ground for reversal. It is 
equally established that an issue raised for the first time on 
appeal will not be considered by the reviewing court. Only 
where the ends of justice require it, and fundamental rights 
would otherwise be denied, will there be a departure from these 
principles.") On that basis, we conclude that the circuit court 
did not plainly err in its admission of Kremer's unobjected-to expert testimony, including the statistical analysis.  
(3) Green contends that "[p]lain error occurred where 
the Court failed to sufficiently support its reasoning behind 
Appellant's five -years-of-imprisonment sentence." Green agrees 
that the circuit court "'addressed' each of the factors [a court 
7   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considers in imposing a sentence],"  but contends that "it did 
not 'articulate' anything relative to those factors[.]"   Green 
relies upon State  v. Kong, 131 Hawai ʻi 94,  102,  315 P.3d 720, 728
(2013), to support his contention.   7 6 
 
In Kong, the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court held, in the context 
of a trial court's imposition of a consecutive term  sentence of 
imprisonment that,  
[Defendant] characterizes the circuit court's justification 
for imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment as "terse, 
conclusory, and lasting two words." However, the 
sentencing court is not required to articulate and explain 
its conclusions with respect to every factor listed in HRS 
§ 706-606. Rather, it is presumed that a sentencing court 
will have considered all factors before imposing concurrent 
or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706 -606. 
Thus, the sentencing court is required to articu late its 
6   It appears that Green references the "[f]actors to be considered 
in imposing a term of probation" set forth by HRS § 706 -621(2) (2014), and 
the "[f]actors to be considered in imposing a sentence" set forth by HRS 
§  706-606 (2014).  
7   The circuit court explained, in imposing the sentence,  
 
Having considered all the statements this morning as 
well as the arguments of counsel, in determining whether or 
not probation is the appropriate sentence in this case, the 
Court is guided by Hawaii Revised Statutes Section 706 -621.  
 
There are ten factors to weigh to determine whether 
or not probation is appropriate. The tenth factor, 706 -
621(2)(j) is not applicable 'cause this is not expedited 
sentencing.  
 
With respect to the other nine factors to balance and 
consider, (2)(e) weighs in favor of a probation term in that the defendant has no history of criminal activity and 
has led a law -abiding life prior to the commission of this 
crime.   All other factors weigh in favor of imprisonment.  
 And accordingly, in Counts 1 and 2, Mr. Green is 
sentenced to serve the indeterminate terms of incarceration of five years in each case. He will get credit for time 
served.   All of the terms are concurrent with each other 
and any other term that defendant might have to serve. The 
mittimus will issue forthwith.  
8   
 
  
 
  
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasoning only with respect to those factors it relies on 
in imposing consecutive sentences .  
131 Hawaiʻi at 102, 315 P.3d at 728 (cleaned up ) (emphasis 
added). When imposing non -consecutive terms of imprisonment, 
the sentencing court is not required to "articulate and explain 
its conclusions" with regard to every sentencing factor. Id. 
The circuit court sentenced Green to two indeterminate five -year 
terms of imprisonment, with both terms to run concurrently . The 
circuit court did not plainly err with respect to its imposition 
of Green's indeterminate concurrent prison sentence. 
B. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
Green next contends that his appointed trial counsel 
was ineffective.   Pursuant to article I, section 14 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution, and the Sixth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution, defendants in a criminal proceeding have a 
constitutionally guaranteed right to the effective assistance of 
counsel at every critical stage of the prosecution. State v. 
Salavea, 147 Hawai ʻi 564, 576, 465 P.3d 1011, 1023 (2020).  
Green raises the issue of ineffective assistance of 
counsel for the first time in this direct appeal. In such 
cases, "the appellate court may consider the merits of the 
appeal de novo if the record is sufficiently developed to 
determine whether there has been ineffective assistance of 
counsel." Id. at 575, 465 P.3d at 102 2 (cleaned up ). 
9   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"The standard for determining the adequacy of 
counsel's representation is whether, when viewed as a whole, the 
assistance provided is within the range of competence demanded 
of attorneys in criminal cases." Id.  at 576, 465 P.3d at 1023  
(cleaned up). "The burden of establishing ineffectiveness  rests 
with the defendant[,]" and "[defendant's] claim of inadequate 
assistance will be upheld only if he can show there were 
specific errors or omissions . . . reflecting counsel's lack of 
skill, judgment, or diligence, and these errors or omissions 
resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a 
potentially meritorious defense." State v. Smith, 68 Haw. 304, 309, 712 P.2d 496, 500 (1986) (cleaned up).  
Green specifically alleges the following: 
(1) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
failed to object to the absurdly low number of prospective 
jurors called for jury duty, and where he also only used 1 of a 
total of 4 peremptory challenges on the jury venire"; 
(2) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
failed to elicit testimony that the children in question had 
twice before falsely accused [Green]"; 
(3) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
failed to ask any questions of [CW] and [CW's brother] regarding 
discrepancies in their stories"; 
(4) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
failed to argue that the DNA could have come from the White 
10   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Claw, and where counsel never questioned the DNA expert as to 
other origins of the DNA besides semen";8 
(5) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
failed to voir dire or object to [the State's] expert witness"; 
(6) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
offered no objection and no counter to [mother's] speculative 
and unfounded testimony"; 
(7) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
apparently had zero trial experience as he made no motions for 
judgment of acquittal"; 
(8) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
did not utilize the statements taken by police from the children 
in question"; 
(9) "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
essentially offered no argument at sentencing versus 12 pages of 
argument presented by [the State] ";9 and, 
8 Green's reference to "the White Claw," is to an alcoholic 
beverage can that Green testified to allegedly finding "partly under [CW's] 
leg." On appeal, Green appears to contend that trial counsel should have 
argued below that the DNA on the blanket, which Kremer testified as 
containing a protein found in semen, could have com e from DNA on the White 
Claw can. 
9 We disregard this contention because Green's opening brief 
presents no discernible argument on this point of error. Kahoʻohanohano v. 
Dep't of Hum. Servs. , State of Haw. , 117 Hawaiʻi 262, 297 n.37, 178 P.3d 538, 
573 n.37 (2008) ( Hawaiʻi appellate courts will "disregard a particular 
contention if the appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that 
position ") (cleaned up) ; Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
11   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(10)  "Court-appointed counsel was ineffective where he 
allowed his client to enter stipulated facts negating [the 
State's] requirement to prove DNA chain-of-custody and DNA 
testing procedure, and where counsel stipulated to the grant of 
all of [the State's] motions in limine and motion to determine 
voluntariness."  
We conclude that the record is not sufficiently 
developed for this court to determine whether Steven Slavitt's 
(Slavitt) representation was ineffective as to contentions 2 
through 8, and 10. We reject Green's first contention, relating 
to counsel's lack of objection to the "low" number of 
prospective jurors, for the reasons discussed supra. We deem 
Green's ninth contention waived, as explained in footnote 9. 
State v. Silva , 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592 (1993) 
("[N]ot every trial record is sufficie ntly developed to 
determine whether there has been ineffective assistance of 
counsel; indeed, a defendant is often only able to allege facts 
that, if proved, would entitle him or her to relief [.]"). 
On this record, we are unable to discern as to whether 
"the assistance provided is within the range of competence 
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases [,]" "there were specific 
errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, 
judgment, or diligence [,]" and these "errors or omissions 
resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a 
12   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
potentially meritorious defense." See Salavea, 147 Hawai ‘i at 
576, 465 P .3d at 1023 (cleaned up) . 
We thus affirm the Judgment without prejudice to 
Green's filing of a petition for post -conviction relief, 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, to allow for the development of a 
factual record as to those contentions of ineffective 
assistance. Silva, 75 Haw. at 439, 864 P.2d at 592 -93 ("[W]here 
the record on appeal is insufficient to demonstrate ineffective 
assistance of counsel, but where: (1) the defendant alleges 
facts that if proven would entitle him or her to relief, and (2) 
the claim is not patently frivolous an d without trace of support 
in the record, the appellate court may affirm defendant's 
conviction without prejudice to a subsequent Rule 40 petition on 
the ineffective assistance of counsel claim ."). 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court's 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on September 13, 
2022, is affirmed, without prejudice to Green's filing of an 
13   
 
       
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRPP  Rule 40 petition, and remanded for further proceedings 
consistent  with this amended summary disposition order.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, December 7, 2023. 
14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Kai Lawrence, Presiding Judge 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Brian R. Vincent, Associate Judge 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 