  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000037
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOSEPH S. CURCIO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-04791)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joseph S. Curcio appeals from the
 
Notices of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment,
 
filed on December 12, 20161/ and May 15, 2018,2/ in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division ("District Court"). 
Curcio was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence
 of an Intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 section 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2014).
3/ On appeal, Curcio contends
 
that there was insufficient evidence to convict him. 
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. 
2 The Honorable Rebecca A. Copeland presided. 
3 HRS section 291E-61(a) states: 
Operating a vehicle under the influence of an 
intoxicant.  (a)  A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under 
the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1) 	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and
guard against casualty[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Curcio's point of error as follows, and affirm.
 
In reviewing a challenge to the sufficiency of the 
evidence at trial, appellate courts are obliged to consider the evidence in the strongest light for the prosecution. State v. 
Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007). 
Here, there was substantial evidence to support Curcio's conviction. 
Honolulu Police Department ("HPD") Sergeant James Rahe 
testified that on October 21, 2015, at approximately 12:45 a.m., Curcio was stopped because he was driving the wrong way on a one-way section of Monsarrat Avenue, which is a public street in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i. Sergeant Rahe 
observed that Curcio had red, watery, and droopy eyes and an odor of alcohol on his breath. Curcio stated to Sergeant Rahe that he had some drinks earlier in the night. Sergeant Rahe also observed that Curcio was a "little bit wobbly on his feet[,]" and swayed back and forth when exiting his vehicle. 
HPD Officer Jesse Takushi testified that he
 
administered the standardized field sobriety tests to Curcio. 
Before Officer Takushi requested that Curcio take any test,
 Curcio stated to him "I've been drinking, I'll be honest with
 you, I'm drunk, I don't even need to take any tests, I will admit
 to you I'm drunk." Nonetheless, Curcio agreed to participate in
 the standardized field sobriety tests. 
During the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmust test, Curcio
 
swayed a few inches back and forth. Curcio lost his balance six
 times while in the instructional position of the walk-and-turn
 test and twice started early. In the first half of the test,
 Curcio missed all heel-to-toe steps, stepped off the line, raised
 his arms about 45 degree from his leg, turned right and lifted
 both feet during a turn, stumbled two steps back and almost fell.
 In the second half, he missed the heel-to-toe steps, stepped off
 the line, and raised his arms. Curcio's actions were contrary to
 Officer Takushi's instructions on the walk-and-turn test. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
During the one-leg stand test, Curcio swayed throughout
 
the entire 30 second test. Contrary to Officer Takushi's
 
instructions, Curcio raised his arms and put his foot down twice
 and hopped once. Based on his observations, Officer Takushi
 believed that Curcio was not fit to operate a vehicle safely. 
Based on the aforementioned observations of Sergeant 
Rahe and Officer Takushi, the District Court did not err in concluding that there was sufficient evidence that Curcio was under the influence of alcohol, pursuant to HRS section 291E­61(a)(1), in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against casualty when he operated or assumed actual physical control of his vehicle on a public way, street, road, or highway in the County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i. 
Therefore, the Notices of Entry of Judgment and/or
 
Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on December 12, 2016 and May 15,
 2018, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 20, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
John R. Foster,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Justin P. Haspe,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 