 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000547 16-JAN-2025 07:45 AM Dkt. 52 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000547 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
IN THE INTEREST OF B.M., Respondent-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(FC-J NO. 94575)  
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant State of Hawai‘i appeals from the 
Family Court of the Second Circuit's (1) July 19, 2021 order 
granting Respondent-Appellee B.M.'s motion to dismiss and 
(2) September 9, 2021 findings of fact, conclusions of law 
(COL), and order denying the State's motion for reconsideration.  1
In 2021, the State petitioned the family court 
alleging B.M., then 24 years old, violated the law while he was 
a minor. In particular, the petition asserted four counts of 
1 The Honorable James R. Rouse presided.   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual assault in the first degree and one count of sexual 
assault in the third degree. B.M. moved to dismiss the 
petition, which the family court granted with prejudice. The 
State moved for reconsideration, which the family court denied. 
On appeal, the State contends the family court "erred 
when it concluded that it had no punishment or treatment options 
for an adult charged for conduct that occurred when the adult 
was a child[,]" specifically challenging COL 3. (Formatting altered.) 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below, and vacate and remand. 
In COL 3, the family court concluded: "The Court has no punishment or treatment options 
for an adult that is being charged for an alleged 
conduct that occurred when he was a child." 
This conclusion was wrong. See State v. Roman
, 119 Hawai‘i 468, 
477, 199 P.3d 57, 66 (2008) (explaining that conclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard). 
The family court has exclusive original jurisdiction 
in cases where any person is alleged to have violated the law 
before turning 18 years old: 
2   
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§  571-11 Jurisdiction; children.   Except as otherwise 
provided in this chapter, the court shall have exclusive 
original jurisdiction  in proceedings:  
(1) Concerning any person who is alleged to have 
committed an act prior to achieving eighteen years of age 
which would constitute a violation or attempted violation 
of any federal, state, or local law or municipal 
ordinance. . . . 
Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-11 (2006) (formatting 
altered, some emphases added). 
The family court retains such 
jurisdiction after a minor turns 18 years old: 
§  571-13 Retention of jurisdiction.   Except as otherwise 
provided in this chapter, jurisdiction obtained by the court  in the case of a minor may be retained by it, for the 
purposes of this chapter, after the minor becomes eighteen years of age until the full term for which any order 
entered shall have expired. Further, in the case of any
person who is alleged to have committed an offense under 
section 571- 11 prior to reaching eighteen years of age, the 
court shall have jurisdiction after the person becomes 
eighteen  for the purpose of holding hearings and/or 
entering orders of disposition conc erning the alleged 
offenses or for the purpose of making and issuing orders for pre- trial detention of persons aged eighteen years or 
older to an adult correctional facility, when the person is alleged to have committed an act or acts during the 
person's minority that would constitute a vio lation of 
section 571- 11(1).  This section shall not be construed, 
however, to confer any jurisdiction upon the family court 
over a person for any criminal act committed after the 
person achieves eighteen years of age.  
HRS § 571-13 (2006) (some emphasis added). 
And where a person is adjudicated as a law violator 
under HRS § 571-11(1), the family court may order restitution or 
community service: 
3   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 571-48 Decree, if informal adjustment or diversion to 
a private or community agency or program has not been 
effected. When a minor is found by the court to come 
within section 571- 11, the court shall so decree and in its 
decree shall make a finding of the facts upon which the 
court exercises its jurisdiction over the minor. Upon the decree the court, by order duly entered, shall proceed as 
follows: 
 . . . . 
(11) The court may order any person adjudicated pursuant 
to section 571- 11(1) to make restitution of money or 
services to any victim who suffers loss as a result of the child's action, or to render community service[.] 
HRS § 571-48(11) (2006, Supp. 2008) (formatting altered, some 
emphases added). 
Because HRS § 571-48 allows the family court to order 
"any person" adjudicated under HRS § 571-11(1) to make restitution or render community service, and "any person" 
necessarily includes "an adult that is being charged for an 
alleged conduct that occurred when he was a child[,]" COL 3 was 
wrong. Thus, to the extent the family court relied on COL 3, 
COL 3 was not a valid basis for dismissing the case with 
prejudice and denying the State's motion for reconsideration. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the family court's 
(1) July 19, 2021 order granting B.M.'s motion to dismiss and (2) September 9, 2021 findings of fact, conclusions of law, and 
order denying the State's motion for reconsideration. We remand 
4   
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this case to the family court for further proceedings consistent 
with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, January 16, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
 Presiding Judge 
Gerald K. Enriques,  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
County of Maui, Associate Judge 
for Petitioner-Appellant.  
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal, Associate Judge 
Bradley J. Sova, 
Deputy Public Defenders, 
for Respondent-Appellee. 
5 