 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0001075
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SHANNON MANO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 10-1-1356)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Shannon Mano (Mano) was charged
 
with first-degree terroristic threatening for committing
 
terroristic threatening with the use of a dangerous weapon, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-716(1)(e) (Supp.
 2010).
1 A jury found Mano guilty as charged. The Circuit Court
 
1 At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-716 provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening
in the first degree if the person commits terroristic threatening:
 
. . .
 
(e) With the use of a dangerous instrument[.]
 
In addition, at the time relevant to this case, HRS § 707-715 (1993) defined
the offense of terroristic threatening, in pertinent part, as follows: 
A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening if
the person threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury
to another person or serious damage to property of another or to
commit a felony:
 
(1)	 
With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless disregard

(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced Mano to probation
for five years, subject to the condition that she serve 43 days

 
in jail, with credit for time already served.
 I.

 
Mano and the complaining witness (CW) had been in a
 
romantic relationship and had been living together in an
 
apartment along with two other roommates. On August 11, 2010,
 Mano and the CW had mutually agreed to end their relationship. 
The CW planned to stay at the apartment for another week before
 he returned to the mainland. However, in the early morning on
 August 12, 2010, Mano and the CW got into an argument, with Mano
 demanding that the CW leave the apartment and the CW refusing to
 do so. 
According to the CW, Mano was drunk, and she grabbed a
 
"big butcher knife," pointed the knife at the CW, and threatened
 to stab the CW if he did not leave. Mano made a downward jab
 with the knife at the CW and kept moving toward him. The CW
 grabbed Mano's hand, wrestled the knife from her, and threw the
 knife in the bathroom.
 
A roommate (Roommate) who shared the apartment with
 
Mano and the CW called the police. Roommate testified that she
 heard Mano say, "I'm going to stab you, get the fuck out of the
 house." Roommate initially stayed in her room because she was
 afraid. When Roommate came out of her room, she observed that
 Mano appeared to be intoxicated. Roommate testified that the CW
 was generally very passive and not easy to anger, whereas Mano
 seemed nice some of the time but became violent when she had been
 drinking.
 
II.
 
Mano appeals from the Judgment entered by the Circuit
 
Court on November 21, 2011. On appeal, Mano argues that: (1) 
1(...continued)
of the risk of terrorizing, another person[.]
 
2The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr., presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court erred in permitting Mano to only introduce
 
evidence of four incidents of the CW's alleged prior acts of
 violence in support of her claim of self-defense, and precluding
 Mano from introducing evidence of other alleged incidents; (2)
 the Circuit Court committed plain error in instructing the jury
 on the law of self-defense; (3) the prosecutor's remarks in
 closing argument constituted prosecutorial misconduct; and (4)
 her trial counsel failed to provide effective assistance of
 counsel. As explained below, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 Judgment.
 
III.
 
We resolve Mano's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
A.
 1.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in limiting Mano to introducing four incidents of the
 CW's alleged prior acts of violence in support of Mano's claim of
 self-defense. Prior to trial, Mano filed a motion in limine
 seeking a pre-trial determination by the Circuit Court regarding
 the admissibility of (1) seven prior acts of violence allegedly
 committed by the CW against Mano; and (2) Mano's understanding of
 the CW's criminal history for felony assault in the State of
 Washington. The Circuit Court ruled that the seven proffered
 prior acts of violence were admissible on the issues of first-
aggressor and self-defense, but that the introduction of all
 seven incidents would be cumulative. The Circuit Court therefore
 ruled that Mano would be permitted to introduce four of the seven
 alleged incidents, with Mano determining which four she wanted to
 introduce. 
With respect to Mano's understanding of the CW's
 
criminal history for felony assault, Mano conceded that she did
 not have personal knowledge of the CW's alleged criminal history. 
Instead, Mano informed the Circuit Court that her understanding
 of the CW's criminal history was based on "things that she
 learned later on." The Circuit Court ruled that based on its
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permitting Mano to introduce evidence of four incidents of
 
violence committed by the CW against Mano, it viewed the evidence
 of the CW's alleged criminal history as inadmissible hearsay. 
The Circuit Court therefore denied Mano's request to introduce
 the criminal history evidence. The Circuit Court made clear that
 its in limine rulings were without prejudice to the parties
 moving for reconsideration during trial "[i]n the event that
 [they] have information during trial that opens the door to the
 proper introduction of such evidence[.]"
 
2.
 
Evidence of the CW's prior acts of violence were 
relevant for two purposes: (1) to show the reasonableness of Mano's apprehension of immediate danger and thereby support her use of force in self-defense; and (2) to show that the CW was the first aggressor. See Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404 
(Supp. 2013); State v. Lui, 61 Hawai
'i 328, 329-30, 603 P.2d 151, 
154 (1979); State v. Basque, 66 Haw. 510, 513-15, 666 P.2d 599, 
602-03 (1983); State v. Adam, 97 Hawai 'i 413, 418-19, 38 P.3d 
581, 586-87 (App. 2001). Mano's argument on appeal is limited to the first purpose. Mano contends that the evidence excluded by the Circuit Court was relevant to showing her state of mind regarding fear of imminent harm and therefore was critical to her claim of self-defense. Mano argues that because evidence of her state of mind was critical to her claim of self-defense, the Circuit Court erred by only permitting her to introduce evidence of four of the CW's prior acts of violence and not allowing her to introduce all the evidence on this issue that she sought to introduce. We disagree. 
The Circuit Court excluded evidence of three (of seven)
 
prior incidents of violence and Mano's understanding of the CW's
 criminal history for felony assault. While the excluded evidence
 was relevant to Mano's state of mind, we conclude that the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in ruling that such
 evidence could not be introduced. HRE Rule 403 (1993) provides
 that "[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
 
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
 jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
 needless presentation of cumulative evidence." (Emphasis added.) 
The Circuit Court ruled that evidence beyond four of the prior
 incidents of alleged violence by the CW against Mano would be
 cumulative, and it limited Mano to introducing four prior
 incidents of her choice. 
None of the seven prior incidents of alleged violence
 
by the CW against Mano apparently resulted in arrests or
 convictions, and the circumstances surrounding these incidents
 were subject to dispute. At trial, the CW disputed Mano's
 version of the four incidents Mano chose to introduce, with the
 CW denying Mano's claims that he had engaged in violent acts or
 asserting that certain of his acts were necessary to defend
 himself against violence perpetrated by Mano. The four incidents
 Mano introduced therefore resulted in mini-trials, with the CW
 and Mano providing conflicting testimony about what had
 transpired and who was to blame. The Circuit Court allowed Mano
 to select the four incidents most favorable to her case, and
 there is no basis for believing that the nature of the three
 excluded incidents was much different.
 
With respect to evidence of Mano's understanding of the
 
CW's criminal history for felony assault, Mano acknowledged that
 she did not have personal knowledge of the CW's alleged criminal
 history and that her understanding was based on "things that she
 learned later on." Mano did not proffer any details of what her
 understanding of the CW's criminal history for felony assault
 was, how she acquired this understanding, or what her proposed
 testimony would have been. This hampers our ability on appeal to
 evaluate her claim of error regarding the exclusion of her
 understanding of the CW's criminal history. In any event, it
 would appear that evidence of specific acts of violence committed
 by the CW directly against Mano would be more probative of Mano's
 state of mind in apprehending the immediate danger posed by the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW than her understanding of a criminal history of felony
 
assault.3
 
Under these circumstances, we cannot say that the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion in limiting Mano to
 introducing four incidents of the CW's alleged prior acts of
 violence in support of her claim of self-defense.
 
B.
 
Mano did not object at trial to the Circuit Court's
 
instruction on self-defense. However, on appeal, she argues that
 the Circuit Court committed plain error because its instructions
 on self-defense were prejudicially confusing and misleading. We
 disagree.
 
The Circuit Court gave two instructions on self-
defense. The first instruction was directed at self-defense when
 deadly force is used (Deadly Force Instruction) and the second
 was directed at self-defense when deadly force is not used (Non-
Deadly Force Instruction). Mano contends that the self-defense
 instructions were prejudicially confusing and misleading because:
 (1) the Deadly Force Instruction did not instruct the jury to apply the Non-Deadly Force Instruction if the jury found that Mano had not used deadly force; (2) it was not clear from the instructions when the jury should apply the Deadly Force Instruction versus the Non-Deadly Force Instruction; and (3) the Circuit Court used Hawai
'i Pattern Jury Instruction Criminal 
(HAWJIC) 7.01 on self-defense, which was repealed and replaced by HAWJIC 7.01A and 7.01B on April 4, 2011, instead of the more current HAWJIC 7.01A on the use of deadly force in self-defense. 
Mano's arguments are without merit. Reading the
 
instructions as a whole, it is clear that the Deadly Force
 
3Mano does not challenge the Circuit Court's exclusion of the criminal
history evidence on the theory that the evidence was necessary to show that
the CW was the first aggressor. We note that Mano acknowledged that she
lacked personal knowledge of the CW's alleged criminal history for felony
assault. It is therefore unclear how she could introduce substantive evidence
 to establish the CW's criminal history for the purpose of showing that he was
the first aggressor. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Instruction only applied if the jury found that Mano had engaged 
in the use of deadly force and that the Non-Deadly Force Instruction applied if the jury found that Mano had not engaged in the use of deadly force. The self-defense instructions given by the Circuit Court were based on HAWJIC 7.01, which was repealed in 2011. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that the 
repealed HAWJIC 7.01 is "fully consonant with the controlling statutory and case law of this state." State v. DeLeon, 131 
Hawai
'i 463, 487, 319 P.3d 382, 406 (quoting State v. Augustin, 
101 Hawai 'i 127, 127, 63 P.3d 1097, 1097 (2002)).4 We conclude 
that Mano failed to rebut the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct" or to show that the self-defense instructions were "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 327, 
334, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d 974, 981, 984 n.6 (2006). 
C.
 
Mano argues that the prosecutor's remarks in closing
 
argument constituted prosecutorial misconduct. Specifically,
 Mano argues that on three occasions, the prosecutor asked the
 jurors either to put themselves in the shoes of the CW or Mano,
 in making arguments to the jurors concerning the effect and
 reasonableness of the actions of the CW and Mano. 
Because Mano did not object to the prosecutor's remarks 
at trial, "we must, as a threshold matter, determine whether the alleged misconduct constituted plain error that affected [Mano's] substantial rights." State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai
'i 196, 208, 65 
P.3d 143, 155 (2003). Although inartfully phrased, we conclude that the prosecutor's remarks in closing argument did not affect Mano's substantial rights. The prosecutor's remarks were made in 
4Mano argues that the Deadly Force Instruction was erroneous because it
failed to include the language from HRS § 703-304(3) (1993) that "a person
employing protective force may estimate the necessity thereof under thecircumstances as [he/she] believes them to be[.]" However, the supreme courtin DeLeon concluded that a deadly force instruction similar to that used inthis case, which also excluded the quoted language from HRS § 703-304(3), wasnot erroneous. DeLeon, 131 Hawai' i at 475-76, 486-87, 319 P.3d at 394-95,
405-06. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the context of arguing to the jury that the evidence presented at
 
trial showed that Mano's act of brandishing the knife was
 objectively capable of causing fear; that the CW's reaction to
 Mano's brandishing the knife was reasonable; and that Mano did
 not reasonably believe that the use of force was immediately
 necessary. Given the context of the prosecutor's remarks, they
 "did not appeal improperly to the jurors' emotions or exhort them
 to decide the case on anything other than the evidence presented
 to them." State v. Bell, 931 A.2d 198, 215 (2007). In addition,
 
the Circuit Court instructed the jury that statements or remarks
 by counsel are not evidence and that the jury should not be
 influenced by pity for, or passion or prejudice against, the
 defendant in deciding the case. The failure of Mano's counsel to
 object to the prosecutor's remarks also indicates that trial
 counsel did not view the prosecutor's remarks as improper. Under
 these circumstances, we conclude that the prosecutor's remarks
 did not affect Mano's substantial rights. 
D.
 
Mano contends that her trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by failing to: (1) seek to introduce
 evidence of the CW's violent character that was listed in Mano's
 notice of intent to use HRE Rule 404 evidence (Notice of Intent),
 but not in her motion in limine; (2) object to the Circuit
 Court's in limine ruling, which excluded evidence of three of the
 seven prior incidents of alleged violent acts by the CW against
 Mano and Mano's understanding of the CW's criminal history of
 felony assault; (3) object to the self-defense instructions; and
 (4) object to the prosecutor's remarks in closing argument.
 
With respect to Mano's claims (2) through (4), our 
previous analysis shows that they are without merit. For the reasons previously stated, the asserted failures to object by trial counsel did not result in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense and therefore cannot support a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. See 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The background with respect to Mano's first claim is
 
that prior to filing her motion in limine, Mano filed a Notice of
 
Intent. In her motion in limine, Mano addressed much of the same
 evidence identified in the Notice of Intent. The motion in
 limine, however, did not include the following evidence listed in
 Mano's Notice of Intent: evidence of Mano's knowledge of (1)
 "[the CW's] character for violence, including witnessing multiple
 bar fights involving [the CW]"; and (2) "[the CW's] possessing
 and brandishing weapons, including a compact straight razor." 
After ruling on Mano's motion in limine, the Circuit Court stated
 its belief that Mano's motion in limine covered the same matters
 as the Notice of Intent, but offered to address anything specific
 Mano wished to go over concerning the Notice of Intent. In
 response, Mano's counsel agreed with the Circuit Court that it
 had addressed everything.
 
On appeal, Mano contends that her trial counsel was 
ineffective for failing to seek the admission of the two items of evidence listed in her Notice of Intent, but not her motion in limine. The existing record, however, does not contain a proffer that provides relevant details concerning these two items of evidence or the means by which Mano would be able to introduce them. The record also does not contain any statement by Mano's trial counsel concerning the reason why he did not pursue admission of this evidence, including whether his actions were based on strategic considerations. We therefore conclude that based on the existing record, Mano has failed to meet her burden of establishing that her trial counsel provided ineffective assistance in failing to seek admission of these two items of evidence. See Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247. Our 
decision is without prejudice to Mano asserting this claim on a more fully developed record. See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 
439, 864 P.2d 583, 592-93 (1993). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 