FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
MARILYN ALGHUSSEIN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
KENNETH T. KAAN, M.D., KENNETH T. KAAN, M.D., INC.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
DOE LLCS 1-5, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE NON-PROFIT 
ORGANIZATIONS 1-5, and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5,
Defendants 
NO. CAAP-17-0000058 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC141001624) 
MARCH 25, 2021 
HIRAOKA, PRESIDING JUDGE, WADSWORTH AND NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
Plaintiff-Appellant Marilyn Alghussein (
Alghussein) 
underwent surgery performed by Defendants-Appellees Kenneth T. 
Kaan, M.D., and Kenneth T. Kaan, M.D., Inc. (collectively,Dr. Kaan). There was a bad result. Alghussein sued Dr. Kaan, 
claiming he failed to obtain her informed consent for the 
surgery. The circuit court entered two orders granting summary FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 judgment in favor of Dr. Kaan.1 A Judgment was entered on 
January 6, 2017. Alghussein appealed. We hold that Alghussein 
presented evidence creating a genuine issue of material fact about whether Dr. Kaan fully complied with the Hawai# i medical 
informed consent statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS 
) § 671-3 
(Supp. 2008). We vacate the Judgment in part and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
BACKGROUND 
Alghussein, who was 62 years old, was experiencing low 
back pain. She saw Dr. Kaan, an orthopedic surgeon. Dr. Kaan diagnosed degeneration of the disc between Alghussein's 4th and 5th lumbar vertebrae. 
On April 20, 2009, Dr. Kaan performed L4-5 
fusion surgery using the "extreme lateral interbody fusion" (XLIF) procedure, in which the patient's spine is approached from 
the side. The surgery was performed at The Queen's Medical 
Center, using neuromonitoring equipment made by NuVasive, Inc.
2 
A NuVasive representative was present during the surgery. 
Alghussein signed a Consent Form four days before her 
surgery. The Consent Form stated, in relevant part: 
(4) I have been informed that there are many significant
risks, such as severe loss of blood, infection,cardiac arrest, and other consequences including:nerve/blood vessel damage, poor results, nonunion,loss of fixation that can lead to death or permanentor partial disability, which can result from anyprocedure. 
. . . . 
(10) I have been informed that a representative(s) of oneor more medical device manufacturer(s) or othercommercial vendor(s) ("Representative") may be presentat the time of my surgical procedure. 
I understand 
that the Representative(s) will not direct or performmy surgery, but may be available to my surgeon as aresource. I hereby consent to the presence of theRepresentative(s) at my surgical procedure. 
1 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided. 
2 Alghussein filed a separate lawsuit against NuVasive, Inc. and The
Queen's Medical Center in 2011. Much of the evidence presented on Dr. Kaan'smotions for summary judgment came from discovery conducted in that lawsuit. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
I agree that my doctor has informed me of the: 
. . . . 
(d) alternative forms of treatment available, including
non-treatment, with associated drawbacks andbenefits[.] 
(Underscored portions were handwritten onto the Consent Form.) 
After the surgery Alghussein experienced new weakness 
in her left quadriceps muscle. Dr. Kaan believed the muscle 
weakness was most likely caused by an injury to the L-3 nerve root or femoral nerve during surgery, possibly when a retractor
3 
pulled against the nerve. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
Alghussein filed a lawsuit against Dr. Kaan on July 25, 
2014. Her complaint alleged that she had "permanent lower extremity weakness and she has been relegated to use of a wheel-chair after the surgery" performed by Dr. Kaan. She claimed that she "did not give an informed consent to the XLIF surgery, and if she had been given the information would not have consented to the XLIF surgery performed by [Dr. Kaan]." 
Trial was set for the week of November 7, 2016. The 
trial setting order set deadlines for the parties to identify expert witnesses and exchange expert witness reports. After those deadlines passed, Dr. Kaan filed two motions for summary judgment. Each was supported by, among other things, a declaration by Dr. Kaan and exhibits, including excerpts from depositions taken in Alghussein's lawsuit against NuVasive, Inc. and The Queen's Medical Center. 
The first motion for summary judgment argued that 
Alghussein could not sustain her burden of proving that Dr. Kaan 
3 A "retractor" is a "surgical instrument[] [used] for holding
tissues away from the field of operation." Retractor, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/retractor  (last visited Mar. 22,
2021). 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to inform her of the material risks of the surgery, as 
required under HRS § 671-3(b)(5),4 because Alghussein's expert 
witness did not offer any opinions on the issue.5 Alghussein 
opposed Dr. Kaan's motion by submitting her own declarations and other evidence, including her interrogatory answers and excerpts from a number of depositions. The record does not contain a transcript of the hearing. On October 27, 2016, the circuit court entered an order granting in part and denying in part Dr. Kaan's first motion for summary judgment. The motion was granted as to Alghussein's claim under HRS § 671-3(b)(5), and "to the extent that [Alghussein] alleges that [Dr. Kaan] had a duty to disclose an alleged lack of experience with the subject medical device(s)[.]" 
Dr. Kaan's second motion for summary judgment addressed 
Alghussein's claims under HRS § 671-3(b)(2), (4), and (6). Alghussein opposed Dr. Kaan's second motion by submitting her own declaration. The circuit court granted Dr. Kaan's second motion for summary judgment in total by order entered on October 27, 2016. The Judgment was entered on January 6, 2017. This appeal followed. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
"Appellate courts review an award of summary judgment 
de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court." Garcia v. Robinson, 137 Hawai# i 388, 393, 375 P.3d 167, 172 
(2016) (citation omitted). 
"Summary judgment is appropriate if 
the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and 
4 The relevant portions of the statute are set forth below. 
5 The expert report proffered by Alghussein had been prepared by the
physician who was retained by Alghussein's employer to perform an independent
medical examination ( IME) in connection with Alghussein's workers compensation
claim. Although the IME doctor reviewed and summarized Dr. Kaan's medicalrecords, the report expressed no opinions on whether or not Dr. Kaan failed todisclose a material risk of XLIF surgery or otherwise complied or failed tocomply with HRS § 671-3(b). 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show 
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. (citations omitted). "A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Id. (citations omitted). "The moving party bears 
the burden of demonstrating that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact with respect to the essential elements of the claim or defense and must prove that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. at 393-94, 375 P.3d at 172-
73 (citation omitted). The evidence and inferences to be drawn therefrom must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. at 394, 375 P.3d at 173. 
DISCUSSION 
The issue presented by this appeal is whether the 
evidence presented on Dr. Kaan's motions for summary judgment, viewed in the light most favorable to Alghussein, created a genuine issue of material fact which should have precluded summary judgment. 
Medical Informed Consent 
The liability issues in this case involve the Hawai# i 
medical informed consent statute, HRS § 671-3. 
The statute 
prescribes the standard for a physician's duty to disclose 
information to a patient, supplanting the common-law formulation of the doctrine of informed consent. Garcia, 137 Hawai# i at 396 
n.7, 375 P.3d at 175 n.7 (citing Ngo v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 136 Hawai# i 54, 63-68, 358 P.3d 26, 34-40 (2015)). 
[A] plaintiff must prove the following elements for a claim
of negligent failure to obtain informed consent: 
(1) the physician owed a duty of disclosure under HRS
§ 671–3(b); 
(2) the physician breached that duty; 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) the patient suffered injury; 
(4) the physician's breach of duty was a cause of the
patient's injury in that 
(a) the physician's treatment was a substantial
factor in bringing about the patient's injuryand 
(b) a reasonable person in the plaintiff patient'sposition would not have consented to the treat-ment that led to the injuries had the plaintiffpatient been properly informed; and 
(5) no other cause is a superseding cause of the patient'sinjury. 
Garcia, 137 Hawai# i at 394, 375 P.3d at 173 (reformatted) (citing 
Ngo, 136 Hawai# i at 68-69, 358 P.3d at 40-41). 
HRS § 671-3 provides, in relevant part: 
(b) The following information shall be supplied to
the patient . . . prior to obtaining consent to a proposedmedical or surgical treatment[:] 
(1) The condition to be treated; 
(2) A description of the proposed treatment orprocedure ; 
(3) The intended and anticipated results of theproposed treatment or procedure; 
(4) The recognized alternative treatments orprocedures, including the option of notproviding these treatments or procedures ; 
(5) The recognized material risks of seriouscomplications or mortality associated with: 
(A) The proposed treatment or procedure; 
(B) The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures; and 
(C) Not undergoing any treatment or procedure;and 
(6) The recognized benefits of the recognizedalternative treatments or procedures . 
(The subsections at issue in this appeal appear in bold.) 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alghussein's Contentions on Appeal 
Alghussein contends that the evidence presented on 
Dr. Kaan's motions for summary judgment, viewed in the light most 
favorable to her, showed that: (1) Dr. Kaan failed to adequately 
describe the proposed treatment or procedure as required by HRS 
§ 671-3(b)(2); (2) Dr. Kaan failed to advise her of alternative 
treatment as required by HRS § 671-3(b)(4); (3) Dr. Kaan failed 
to advise her of the benefits of alternative treatment as 
required by HRS § 671-3(b)(6); and (4)  a reasonable person would 
not have consented to the XLIF surgery had there been disclosure of the matters required by HRS § 671-3(b)(2), (4), and (6). 
1. Description of the
Proposed Procedure 
HRS § 671-3(b)(2) requires that a physician supply the 
patient with "[a] description of the proposed treatment or 
procedure[.]" Dr. Kaan's declaration submitted in support of his first motion for summary judgment stated: 
2. I performed the lumbar fusion surgery on
[Alghussein] on April 20, 2009 using the Extreme Interbody
Lateral [sic] Fusion ("XLIF") procedure and employing neuro-monitoring equipment provided by NuVasive, Inc. 
3. Prior to the surgery, on or about April 16,
2009, I met with [Alghussein] to discuss the plannedsurgery. I explained the procedure to [Alghussein] and thatI would approach her spine from the side, fuse her in theback, and insert a prosthesis bone graft, BMP (bonemorphogenic protein) and screws from the back under afusion. 
4. Also on April 16, 2009, [Alghussein] signed and
initialed a form entitled "Physician's Record of PatientConsent to Operation, Post-Operative Care, Medical Treat-ment, Anesthesia, or Other Procedure ("ConsentForm")[.] . . . 
5. The Consent Form described the planned procedure
as "L4-5 extreme lumbar interbody fusion, posterolateralfusion, insertion pedicle screws and rods prosthesis, insertBMP, iliac crest bone graft, allograft." . . . The procedurewas also described, in ordinary or lay language, as "fusionof the spine, front and back, insert cage, screws, rods.Bone protein, bone from pelvis or donor bone." 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A copy of the Consent Form, bearing Alghussein's signature, was 
attached to Dr. Kaan's declaration. 
Alghussein did not dispute reading or signing the 
Consent Form. Her September 28, 2016 declaration stated: 
4. I was told that the surgery would involve me being
turned on my side for the surgery. . . . 
. . . . 
9. I was not told that Dr. Kaan would need to rely uponneuromonitoring equipment to do the XLIF surgery.. . . If I had been told about this reliance on the equipment rather than the surgery Dr. Kaan had donebefore, I would not have agreed to the surgery. 
Her October 12, 2016 declaration stated: 
3. On April 16, 2009, before my surgery, I was told onlythat I would be turned on my side for my surgery andthe surgery would approach my spine from the side. 
. . . . 
6. . . . I was not told that the XLIF would use the NuVasive [neuromonitoring] equipment[.] . . . I wasnot told that the NuVasive equipment was needed toperform the surgery that Dr. Kaan wanted to perform. 
Alghussein does not dispute that Dr. Kaan described the 
proposed surgery to her in both medical and lay terms; nor does 
she contend that Dr. Kaan incorrectly described the procedure. Her first point of error is based upon Dr. Kaan not telling her that he would be using NuVasive neuromonitoring equipment during the procedure, and that a technician would be placing electrodes on her legs. Thus, she raises the issue of how much specific information a physician must provide to adequately describe "the proposed treatment or procedure" under HRS § 671-3(b)(2). 
On that issue HRS § 671-3(a) provides, in pertinent 
part: 
§ 671-3 Informed consent.  (a) The Hawaii medical
board may establish standards for health care providers to
follow in giving information to a patient, . . . to ensurethat the patient's consent to treatment is an informedconsent. The standards shall be consistent with subsection (b) and may include: 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) The substantive content of the information to be 
given; 
(2) The manner in which the information is to be given by the health care provider; and 
(3) The manner in which consent is to be given bythe patient[.] 
There is no evidence that the Hawaii medical board "establish[ed] 
standards for health care providers to follow" for the "sub-stantive content of the information to be given" to a patient about lumbar interbody fusion surgery. It does not appear that the medical board has established any such standards. See Ngo, 
136 Hawai# i at 64, 358 P.3d at 36 (noting that board of medical 
examiners did not fulfill mandate of former version of HRS § 671–3 "to specifically itemize the probable risks and effects of each specific treatment or surgical procedure" because "there were too many medical and surgical procedures to provide such an itemization.") (quoting Mroczkowski v. Straub Clinic & Hosp., Inc., 6 Haw. App. 563, 567, 732 P.2d 1255, 1258-59 (1987); see also Leyson v. Steuermann, 5 Haw. App. 504, 514 n.7, 705 P.2d 37, 45 n.7 (1985), overruled by Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawai# i 362, 903 
P.2d 667 (1995) (adopting objective standard for determining whether patient would have undergone treatment had they been informed of the risk of the harm that in fact occurred); Hawaii Administrative Rules § 16-85-24 (stating the 
Hawai# i medical 
board "has determined that it is not practicable to set standards that include the substantive content of the information to be given a patient to insure that a patient's consent to treatment is an informed consent."). 
On the record before us, we decline to recognize a 
standard requiring a surgeon to supply a patient with information about: the specific surgical tools or equipment to be employed in a proposed treatment or procedure; how the tools or equipment are to be used; or which member of the surgical team will perform what function during the treatment or procedure, to comply with 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 671-3(b)(2).  We hold that the information Dr. Kaan 
supplied to Alghussein to describe the XLIF surgery complied with 
HRS § 671-3(b)(2), and Alghussein did not raise a genuine issue of material fact about whether Dr. Kaan complied with HRS § 671-3(b)(2). 6
2. Recognized Alternative
Treatments or Procedures 
HRS § 671-3(b)(4) requires that a physician supply the 
patient with information about "recognized alternative treatments 
or procedures, including the option of not providing these treat-ments or procedures[.]" 
A. Genuine issues of material fact. 
Dr. Kaan testified in deposition: 
Q. So what other procedures do you use besides XLIF
procedures? 
A. As far as doing an interbody fusion, another
approach is approaching it from the back; so you can say a
posterior lumbar interbody fusion. Or another approach isthe transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. 
Dr. Kaan signed a declaration stating: 
3. Prior to the surgery, on or about April 16,
2009, I met with [Alghussein] to discuss the plannedsurgery. I explained the procedure to [Alghussein] and thatI would approach her spine from the side. I told her that the other alternative to this XLIF approach was a posteriorapproach to the spine which would require more muscledissection and carried an increased risk of morbidity aswell as a longer recovery period. In contrast, I told her,the XLIF lateral approach was less intrusive and requiredless muscle dissection. Both approaches carried the samerisk of nerve injury. 
The Consent Form signed by Alghussein acknowledged that Dr. Kaan 
informed her of "alternative forms of treatment available, including non-treatment, with associated drawbacks and benefits[.]" 
6 But see discussion below concerning HRS § 671-3(b)(4) and (6). 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alghussein's October 12, 2016 declaration stated: 
2. I have been informed about the Declaration of 
Kenneth T. Kaan, M.D., (Dr. Kaan) dated October 4,2016, specifically paragraph 3. Dr. Kaan did not tell me about any alternative surgeries before my surgeryon April 20, 2009. 
3. On April l6, 2009, before my surgery, I was told onlythat I would be turned on my side for my surgery andthe surgery would approach my spine from the side. 
4. I was not told about an alternative approach. I was not told about a posterior approach. I was not told about the difference between the two types of surgery.Nothing was discussed about muscle dissection, orrecovery periods or increased risk of mobility [sic]with the posterior approach or the XLIF being lessintrusive. I was not told that both approachescarried the same risk of nerve injury. 
There is conflicting evidence about whether Dr. Kaan informed 
Alghussein about the posterior approach, which Dr. Kaan acknowledged in deposition was an alternative to the XLIF approach. The evidence in the record, when viewed in the light most favorable to Alghussein, shows a genuine issue of material fact about whether Dr. Kaan supplied Alghussein with information about the posterior approach as an alternative to the XLIF approach. The circuit court erred in granting summary judgment on Alghussein's claim under HRS § 671-3(b)(4). 
B. Sham declaration doctrine. 
The circuit court's order granting Dr. Kaan's second 
motion for summary judgment relied on the "sham declaration" doctrine: 
The Court, in viewing the totality of circumstances,
concludes that [Alghussein]'s declaration in support of her
Opposition to [Dr. Kaan's] Second  Motion for Summary
Judgment is a sham declaration. This is because [Alghussein]'s declaration was "(l) produced to avoidsummary judgment and (2) the inconsistencies [are] clear andunambiguous." See Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co., 133Hawai #i 332, 360, 328 P.3d 341, 369 (2014); 
[Alghussein]'s only evidence contradicting both the
Informed Consent Document and Dr. Kaan's testimony is[Alghussein]'s Declaration dated October 12, 2016 statingthat [Dr. Kaan] did not tell her of any alternatives to theXLIF approach, including the posterior approach, and that 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
she was not aware of any alternative approach to the XLIF
method. This testimony, however, directly contradicts
[Alghussein]'s own Memorandum in Opposition, of which herdeclaration is an attachment to. [Alghussein]'s Memorandumin Opposition to [Dr. Kaan's] Second  Motion for Summary
Judgment at Page 11 states that "[Alghussein] relied, inselecting  [Dr. Kaan] as her physician," on the fact that
[Dr. Kaan] had been performing the posterior method "for avery long time." Thus, [Alghussein] acknowledges in her ownmemorandum that she was aware of the posterior approach
before even selecting Dr. Kaan as her doctor . Thus, as
[Alghussein]'s declaration is a sham declaration, it failsto create a genuine issue of material fact. To this extent,[Dr. Kaan's second] Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED. 
(Bold text in original)(cleaned up)(bold underscoring added). 
In Lales v. Wholesale Motors Co., 133 Hawai# i 332, 328 
P.3d 341 (2014), the supreme court discussed "a federal doctrine 
prohibiting 'sham affidavits.'" Id. at 360, 328 P.3d at 369. 
In general, the "sham affidavit" doctrine applies when the
affidavit of a non-moving party in a motion for summaryjudgment contradicts or is inconsistent with [their]previous deposition testimony. Under this doctrine, a non-moving party generally cannot create a genuine issue of fact"simply by submitting an affidavit contradicting [their] ownprior testimony." 
The purpose of the "sham affidavit" doctrine is to
preserve "the utility of summary judgment as a procedure forscreening out sham issues of fact." However, the shamaffidavit doctrine does not prohibit the non-moving partyfrom "elaborating upon, explaining, or clarifying priortestimony elicited by opposing counsel on deposition" in[the non-moving party's] affidavit. 
Furthermore, the sham
affidavit doctrine does not prohibit attempts by the non-moving party to clarify inconsistencies that result from "anhonest discrepancy, mistake, or newly discovered evidence." 
The Ninth Circuit has held that two requirements must
be met before the court can strike an affidavit and grantsummary judgment: (1) the trial court must make a factualdetermination that the contradiction was indeed a "sham" produced to avoid summary judgment and (2) the incon-sistencies have to be clear and unambiguous to justifystriking the affidavit. If either requirement is not met,the court must consider the non-moving party's affidavit inits determination to grant or deny summary judgment. 
Id. (citations omitted). The supreme court then noted it had not 
explicitly adopted or rejected the sham affidavit doctrine, and did not need to resolve the issue in that case: "Even assuming arguendo that the sham affidavit doctrine is available, it would not be applicable in the instant case because Lales's declaration 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was not clearly and unambiguously inconsistent with his prior 
deposition and admissions." Id. 
Respectfully, we believe the circuit court misapplied 
the sham declaration doctrine. Alghussein submitted her own declaration in opposition to Dr. Kaan's first motion for summary judgment, stating: 
5. . . . Dr. Kaan did not tell me that he could do the 
surgery from the rear (posterior)[.] 
Alghussein's answers to Dr. Kaan's interrogatories, served before 
either motion for summary judgment was filed, stated: 
12. Identify and set forth each and every claim being
asserted against [Dr. Kaan] (e.g., assault,misrepresentation, etc.) 
Answer: Medical Malpractice; failure to properly
disclose material information known by
Dr. Kaan about surgery[.] 
He did not disclose: 
. . . . 
4. He did not tell me I had different choices about 
what surgery I could have and did not need to do the XLIF. 
Alghussein's second declaration did not contradict her 
first declaration or her interrogatory answers about whether 
Dr. Kaan discussed the alternative posterior approach with her. Nor did her deposition: 
Q. Okay. When you saw Dr. Kaan did he explain that
there were a number of alternatives, including surgery, that
could be pursued, or did he only advocate surgery? 
A. Well, I think at that point he only advocated
surgery. He was aware of my time spent with Dr. Katsura [aphysiatrist]. 
Q. So really the only options, treatment options that
you discussed with Dr. Kaan at that time were surgery? 
A. Yeah. . . . 
. . . . 
Q. Can you tell me in as much detail as you can
remember what Dr. Kaan said to you before the surgery andwhat it would involve? 
A. I knew it involved turning me. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Sorry, turning you? 
A. Yes, um-hum. 
Q. What do you mean by that? 
A. That I think they took a piece from your hip and
then I think you were on your side and then they laid you on
your stomach. I recall that being explained. And then theydid two incisions in your back. 
Q. (Attorney nods head.) 
A. And put in these two spacers on each side. 
Q. On each side of what? 
A. Your spine. 
Q. Anything else you can remember about how the
surgery was described to you by Dr. Kaan? 
A. Pretty much like that. And those spacers would
alleviate the pain. 
The deposition excerpts presented to the circuit court did not 
show that Alghussein was specifically asked whether Dr. Kaan explained to her the posterior approach or any other alternative to the XLIF procedure. Alghussein's October 12, 2016 declaration was not "clearly and unambiguously inconsistent with" her previous declaration, her interrogatory answers, or her deposition testimony. Lales, 133 Hawai# i at 360, 328 P.3d at 
369. Even if the sham declaration doctrine were to be recognized 
under Hawai# i law, the circuit court erroneously applied it to 
grant summary judgment for Dr. Kaan. 
3. Recognized Benefits of Recognized
Alternative Treatments or Procedures 
HRS § 671-3(b)(6) requires that a physician supply the 
patient with information about "[t]he recognized benefits of the 
recognized alternative treatments or procedures." 
A. Genuine issues of material fact. 
NuVasive's representative testified in deposition: 
Q. Okay. Did you speak to Dr. Kaan and did he tell
you that he was not comfortable with the [XLIF] procedure at
this point? 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. He said he wasn't comfortable with the procedure. 
Q. Okay. So that was [sic] would have been sometime
July — July, August or September of 2008, right? 
A. 
2008. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. 
Did Dr. Kaan indicate to you why he was not
comfortable with the procedure? 
A. Just because he's been using the stuff he's been
using for years and years and years, and it's a new
procedure to him. 
Q. You mean the prost -- posterior approach? 
A. Uh-huh. 
Q. That's what he did before? 
A. Yes. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. 
And so when you said he attempted an XLIF
in September, what did you mean by that? 
A. I think he -- I don't recall what I meant by that.
I mean, I remember of [sic] specifically of one of his firstcases that we went and we tried to position the patient, andhe didn't feel comfortable accessing the spine, so weaborted and he went to a traditional posterior. 
Before Dr. Kaan performed Alghussein's surgery, he had admittedly 
performed only four XLIF surgeries. NuVasive's representative testified: 
Q. [Referring to a document] And: "Dr. Kaan is 
committed to do 5 XLIF cases." Is that right. 
A. Yes. 
Q. Okay. So do you remember talking to Dr. Kaan and
he said he was committed to do 5 XLIF cases? 
A. I heard him saying that he wanted to give it a
shot and learn it, and he would do 5 and give it an
evaluation after that. 
Alghussein's surgery was Dr. Kaan's fifth XLIF case. 
Alghussein's October 12, 2016 declaration stated: 
2. I have been informed about the Declaration of Kenneth T. Kaan, M.D., (Dr. Kaan) dated October4, 2016, specifically paragraph 3. Dr. Kaan did 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not tell me about any alternative surgeries
before my surgery on April 20, 2009. 
3. On April l6, 2009, before my surgery, I was toldonly that I would be turned on my side for mysurgery and the surgery would approach my spinefrom the side. 
4. I was not told about an alternative approach. I was not told about a posterior approach. I was not told about the difference between the two types of surgery. Nothing was discussed aboutmuscle dissection, or recovery periods orincreased risk of mobility [sic] with theposterior approach or the XLIF being lessintrusive. I was not told that both approachescarried the same risk of nerve injury. 
5. If I had been told about alternative surgeryprocedures, I would have asked questions. 
. . . . 
7. I would have asked how much experience Dr. Kaanhad with each of the alternative approaches. . . . 
. . . . 
9. I would have asked Dr. Kaan about his experiencewith the posterior approach which I understandhe had done for many years before he decided totry the new XLIF surgery. 
. . . . 
12. . . . If I knew there were alternate procedures,I definitely would have asked him about hisexperience with XLIF. 
Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to Alghussein, 
the trier of fact could conclude that Dr. Kaan did not discuss the recognized benefits of the alternative posterior approach with Alghussein because he had committed to NuVasive that he would perform five XLIF procedures, and Alghussein's surgery would have been the fifth if Alghussein consented to it. 
B. Argument is not evidence. 
Dr. Kaan argues Alghussein "readily admitted that she 
knew about the posterior approach and specifically selected Dr. Kaan for that reason and purpose[.]" Dr. Kaan cites to Alghussein's memorandum in opposition to Dr. Kaan's second motion for summary judgment, which argued: 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Kaan did not disclose the obvious benefit of the 
posterior approach procedure, which was that he had beenperforming this procedure for a very long time. This was 
the procedure upon which Dr. Kaan had earned his reputationand upon which [Alghussein] relied in selecting him as herphysician. The benefit of this procedure is that he hadmuch more experience doing it. The evidence shows that Dr. Kaan wanted to use the XLIF procedure in his effort tolearn this new surgical procedure. 
(Underscoring added.) "[A]rgument of counsel in a memorandum of 
law is not evidence" for purposes of a motion for summary judgment. Leis Family Ltd. P'ship v. Silversword Eng'g, 126 
Hawai# i 532, 534 n.2, 273 P.3d 1218, 1220 n.2 (App. 2012) 
(cleaned up). Although Alghussein admittedly thought that Dr. Kaan had a good reputation as an orthopedic surgeon, there is no 
evidence in the record that Alghussein was aware of the 
alternative surgical approaches, or that Dr. Kaan's good reputation was based upon him performing a specific surgical approach, before she agreed to undergo XLIF surgery. 
C. Legal causation. 
Dr. Kaan argues that Alghussein's claims for lack of 
informed consent "are based upon collateral issues which have no causal relationship to the injury which she is now complaining of [sic]." 
We disagree. Dr. Kaan correctly contends that a 
plaintiff claiming negligent failure to obtain informed consent must prove that the physician's breach of duty to disclose under HRS § 671–3(b) was a cause of the patient's injury in that: "(a) the physician's treatment was a substantial factor in bringing about the patient's injury[;] and (b) a reasonable person in the plaintiff patient's position would not have consented to the treatment that led to the injuries had the plaintiff patient been properly informed[.]" Garcia, 137 Hawai# i 
at 394, 375 P.3d at 173 (citing Ngo, 136 Hawai# i at 68-69, 358 
P.3d at 40-41). 
However, the Hawai# i Supreme Court has noted 
that "Hawai# i courts have not required plaintiffs claiming the 
failure to disclose an alternative treatment to prove that they were injured by a risk that was not disclosed to them." Ray v. 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai# i 253, 266, 259 P.3d 569, 
582 (2011). 
Dr. Kaan argues that Alghussein proffered no expert 
opinion testimony to support her claims that the weakness in her 
left quadriceps muscle was caused by Dr. Kaan's improper performance of the XLIF surgery. But Alghussein's claim is not based upon surgical negligence; it is for failure to obtain informed consent. "[E]xpert testimony is not required to determine what a reasonable patient needs to hear in order to make an informed decision regarding proposed medical treatment." Ngo, 136 Hawai# i at 66 n.14, 358 P.3d at 38 n.14. 
Hawai #i courts have adopted the patient-oriented standard
for determining whether particular information must be
disclosed to a patient. This court has held that the "dispositive inquiry regarding the physician's duty todisclose in an informed consent case, therefore, is not whatthe physician believes [their] patient needs to hear inorder for the patient to make an informed and intelligentdecision; the focus should be on what a reasonable person
objectively needs to hear from [their] physician to allowthe patient to make an informed and intelligent decisionregarding proposed medical treatment ." 
Ray, 125 Hawai# i at 267, 259 P.3d at 583 (emphasis added) 
(quoting Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai# i 475, 485–86, 904 P.2d 489, 
499–500 (1995)). 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
Alghussein, the trier of fact could find that a reasonable person 
may "objectively need[] to hear" that their physician had only performed four XLIF surgeries like the one proposed, and that the physician was more experienced in, and had a track record of success while, using other approaches to interbody fusion surgery, "to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding proposed medical treatment." Ray, 125 Hawai# i at 267, 259 P.3d 
at 583 (citation omitted). 
In other words, a reasonable trier of 
fact could conclude that Alghussein objectively needed to hear from Dr. Kaan that the proposed XLIF procedure was a relatively new surgical approach (for him), and that he ordinarily used the posterior approach, to allow her to make an informed and 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intelligent decision whether she wanted Dr. Kaan to use the XLIF 
approach under the circumstances. 
D. Duty to disclose. 
Dr. Kaan cites Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai# i 84, 947 
P.2d 952 (1997) and Ray for the proposition that a physician has no duty to disclose to their patient their experience (or lack thereof) in performing the procedure at issue. Both cases are distinguishable. 
The defendant in Ditto was an ear, nose, and throat 
specialist and cosmetic surgeon who performed breast augmentation surgery on the plaintiff. The doctor did not disclose to the plaintiff that he was not a plastic surgeon and did not have hospital privileges. The supreme court held, as a matter of law, that "a physician does not have an affirmative duty to disclose [their] qualifications to a patient prior to providing treat-ment." Ditto, 86 Hawai# i at 90, 947 P.2d at 958. Unlike this 
case, Ditto did not involve the failure of the defendant to disclose that he had significantly more experience using one approach to breast augmentation surgery than another, so that the patient could make an informed decision about which approach she wanted the surgeon to take for her breast augmentation surgery. 
In Ray, the patient (a minor visiting Hawai# i with her 
parents) had severe lupus with brain involvement.
7 A Hawai# i 
physician proposed "steroid pulse therapy." The physician informed the patient's parents (the 
Rays) that persons treated 
with steroids had a risk of developing steroid myopathy (a form of muscle weakness), and that the risk of side effects from steroids generally increases with the dosage level. The physician did not advise the Rays about alternative dosing regimens. 
7 "Lupus is a disease that involves the inflammation of any part of
the human body. Lupus patients with brain involvement have a higher risk of
dying." Ray, 125 Hawai #i at 257, 259 P.3d at 573. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During the treatment period in Hawai# i the patient 
began experiencing muscle weakness. The steroid pulse therapy 
was discontinued and the patient returned home. The muscle weakness progressed. The patient was hospitalized for six months because she could not breathe on her own, was profoundly weak, and was severely limited in her ability to move. Four of her attending doctors opined that her weakness was caused by the steroids she had received in 
Hawai# i. 
The Rays filed a lawsuit, claiming (among other things) 
that the Hawai# i physician (an employee of the defendant medical 
group) failed to obtain their informed consent for treatment of their daughter. Their expert witness testified that although there were different ways of treating a lupus patient with steroids, he had never seen the pulse therapy treatment used by the Hawai# i
 physician.8 Over objection, the expert testified 
that "a very important part of informed consent is for the doctor to tell the patient or the parents what [the doctor's] experience has been with that form of treatment." Ray, 125 Hawai# i at 259, 
259 P.3d at 575. The Rays testified that they would not have consented to their daughter's treatment had they known of the Hawai# i physician's and the medical community's lack of 
experience with the treatment program. 
The jury returned a 
verdict for the Rays and both sides appealed. 
On the issue of informed consent, the supreme court 
held that the circuit court erred by allowing the Rays' expert to testify that the Hawai# i physician owed a duty to disclose her 
and the medical community's experience with the steroid pulse therapy treatment program. Ray, 125 Hawai# i at 268-69, 259 P.3d 
at 584-85. The supreme court based its decision on the language 
8 The Hawai #i treating physician testified that she had applied the
steroid treatment program to hundreds of patients, and that she had only seen
a small number of patients develop life-threatening side effects. 
She 
testified that, in the hundreds of patients she had treated using that method,she never encountered any muscle weakness that she thought was induced by thetreatment. Another doctor testified about a study which used the steroid moreaggressively than the Hawai #i doctor's method, and the 213 patients in that
study did not suffer acute steroid myopathy. 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the informed consent statute in effect at the time the Rays' 
daughter was treated. The statute required a physician to inform the patient of the "nature and character of the proposed treatment[.]" HRS § 671-3(b)(2) (1993). Referring to the plain meaning of the terms "nature" and "character," the supreme court held that a physician's "experience with pulse therapy is not a distinguishing feature or attribute of steroid pulse therapy." Ray, 125 Hawai# i at 269, 259 P.3d at 585. Thus, when the supreme 
court held that the Rays' expert's "testimony that a physician should disclose her experience with a treatment to properly obtain informed consent was contrary to Hawai
#i law[,]" id., the 
law referred to was HRS § 671-3(b)
(2) (1993), id. at 268-69, 259 
P.3d at 584-85. 
In 2003, HRS § 671-3(b)(2) was amended, effective 
January 1, 2004, by deleting the requirement that a physician disclose the "nature and character" of the proposed treatment, and replacing it with a requirement to provide a "description of the proposed treatment or procedure[.]" 2003 Haw. Sess. Laws. Act 114, § 2 at 221-22. Subsection (b)(2) has not been amended since. As discussed in section 1. above, as a matter of law Dr. Kaan complied with HRS § 671-3(b)(2). But Alghussein's claim that Dr. Kaan should have informed her he had significantly more experience performing posterior interbody fusion surgery, compared to his relatively new exposure to the XLIF approach, is not based on HRS § 671-3(b)(2); it is based on HRS § 671-3(b)(6), which requires that the patient be supplied with information about "[t]he recognized benefits of the recognized alternative treatments or procedures." 
The evidence in this case, viewed in the light most 
favorable to Alghussein, could show that there were at least two alternative approaches to interbody fusion surgery: posterior and XLIF, or "extreme lateral." Dr. Kaan had much experience performing the former, but had only completed four of the latter when he saw Alghussein. Under the patient-oriented standard applied in Hawai# i, the issue of whether Dr. Kaan breached his 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
duty under HRS § 671-3(b)(6) is for the trier of fact, which must 
decide whether a reasonable person in Alghussein's position would "objectively need[] to hear" that Dr. Kaan had only performed four XLIF surgeries like the one proposed, and that he was significantly more experienced in the posterior approach, "to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding proposed medical treatment." Ray, 125 Hawai# i at 267, 259 P.3d at 583 
(citation omitted). 
The circuit court erred by granting summary 
judgment on Alghussein's claim under HRS § 671-3(b)(6). 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons: the October 27, 2016 order 
granting in part and denying in part Dr. Kaan's first motion for summary judgment is affirmed as to Alghussein's claim under HRS § 671-3(b)(5), but vacated to the extent it ruled that Dr. Kaan did not have a duty to disclose his alleged lack of experience with the XLIF procedure; the October 27, 2016 order granting Dr. Kaan's second motion for summary judgment is affirmed as to Alghussein's claim under HRS § 671-3(b)(2), but vacated as to Alghussein's claims for alleged breach of HRS § 671-3(b)(4) and (6); and this case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
22 Charles H. Brower,for Plaintiff-AppellantMarilyn Alghussein. 
John S. Nishimoto,
Ronald T. Michioka,Ryan I. Inouye,for Defendants-AppelleesKenneth T. Kaan, M.D. andKenneth T. Kaan, M.D., Inc. 