NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000400
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
SARA A. CHAPPELL,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
KANE#OHE DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-02783)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
On August 5, 2016, the State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Sara A. Chappell (Chappell) with one count of
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII),
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1)
and/or (a)(3).  The District Court of the First Circuit, Kane #ohe
Division (district court) dismissed the charge against Chappell
without prejudice for violation of the speedy trial requirements
set forth in Rule 48 of the Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure
(HRPP).1  HRPP Rule 48(b) provides that "the court shall, on
motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without
1The Honorable Maura M. Okamoto presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within"
the time required by HRPP Rule 48.
On appeal, Chappell contends that the district court
erred in dismissing her charge without prejudice, instead of with
prejudice.  Specifically, Chappell argues that the district court
failed to make appropriate findings, including whether HRPP Rule
48 had already been violated, and failed to consider the factors
set forth in State v. Estencion , 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040
(1981).
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we vacate and remand
the case for further proceedings.
As we stated in State v. Hern, 133 Hawai #i 59, 60-61,
323 P.3d 1241, 1242-43 (App. 2013),
pursuant to the Hawai #i Supreme Court's decision in
[Estencion], in determining whether to dismiss a case with
or without prejudice for violation of the time limits set
forth in HRPP Rule 48, the trial court is required to
consider, among others, each of the following three factors:
(1) the seriousness of the offense; (2) the facts and the
circumstances of the case which led to the dismissal; and
(3) the impact of a reprosecution on the administration of
HRPP Rule 48 and on the administration of justice"
(hereinafter, the "[Estencion] factors"). . . . [T]he trial
court must clearly articulate the effect of the Estencion
factors and any other factor it considered in rendering its
decision.  We need not automatically remand every case in
which the trial court's findings are deficient, if the
record is otherwise sufficient for this court to determinate
whether the trial court abused its discretion.  However, we
will remand the case for the trial court to make the
appropriate findings where:  (1) the record affirmatively
shows that the trial court failed to consider the Estencion
factors; (2) the record is inadequate to permit meaningful
review of the trial court's exercise of discretion; or (3)
the trial court's findings are deficient and an inordinate
burden would be placed on this court to conduct a searching
review of the record necessary to determine whether the
trial court abused its discretion.
Id. (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
In dismissing Chappell's charge without prejudice, the
district court reasoned:
THE COURT:  And I will state that this is going
to be without prejudice, but it is based on the fact that
the court finds that the allegations of driving under the
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
influence are very serious and that we do consider this a
serious matter in that it um-- the potential for harm to the
general public who are driving as well as harm to defendant
himself sometimes is -- is there.
So we do consider this a serious matter.  For
that reason we would dismiss it without prejudice.  We also
do not feel that there is prejudice to defendant in this
matter and that it is in the interest of justice to do this. 
So for those reasons this is (inaudible) and continued
without prejudice -- I mean -- sorry -- dismissed.
We conclude that the district court erred in dismissing
Chappell's charge without prejudice, without first considering
all of the required Estencion  factors under the particular
circumstances of Chappell's case.  While it appears that the
district court considered the first Estencion  factor (the
seriousness of the offense) and, to a limited degree, the third
Estencion  factor (the impact of a reprosecution on the
administration of HRPP Rule 48 and on the administration of
justice),2 the district court did not consider the second
Estencion  factor (the facts and circumstances of the case which
led to the dismissal) in determining whether to dismiss
Chappell's charge with or without prejudice.  In addition, the
record is inadequate for this court to meaningfully review
whether the district court properly exercised its discretion in
dismissing Chappell's OVUII charge without prejudice.  With the
exception of the April 11, 2017 hearing in which the district
court dismissed the case without prejudice, the transcripts of
other hearings held in this case were not made part of the record
on appeal.
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the district court's
"Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment"
entered on April 11, 2017, and remand the case with instructions
that the district court (1) consider each of the Estencion
factors in determining whether to dismiss Chappell's OVUII charge
with or without prejudice, and (2) make findings that clearly
2In dismissing Chappell's charge without prejudice, the district
court stated that it "[did] not feel that there [was] prejudice to defendant
in this matter . . . ."  See State v. Kim, 109 Hawai #i 59, 64-66, 122 P.3d
1157, 1162-64 (App. 2005) (noting that "prejudice to the defendant" is
considered under the third Estencion factor).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
articulate the effect of the Estencion  factors and any other
factor it considered in rendering its decision.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 14, 2018.
On the briefs:
Richard L. Holcomb,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Keith M. Kaneshiro, 
Prosecuting Attorney, and
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
4