     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
  
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000354 07-APR-2026 08:01 AM Dkt. 55 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000354 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
MIGUEL ALFREDO AQUINO-MARTINEZ, also known as
MIGUEL AQUINO-MARTINEZ, also known as
MIGUEL AQUINO, also known as 
"Fernando from Badoo ", Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-23-0000212) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
In this prosecution of Defendant-Appellant Miguel 
Alfredo Aquino-Martinez ( Aquino-Martinez ) for first-degree 
electronic enticement of a child, Aquino-Martinez appeals from 
an order denying his motion to suppress evidence of text messages that Aquino-Martinez exchanged with an undercover agent posing online as a minor. We affirm.       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 Aquino-Martinez appeals from the "Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to 
Suppress Evidence Stemming from Violation of Constitutional Right to Privacy" ( Suppression Order ) filed on April 4, 2024, by 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ( Circuit Court ).
1 
On appeal, Aquino-Martinez raises two points of error 
(POEs), contending that the Circuit Court erroneously denied his motion to suppress ( motion) because (1) Aquino-Martinez's 
"constitutionally protected right to privacy was violated by police"; and (2) "the government violated Hawaii's Wiretap Act," 
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 803-42 ( Wiretap Act ),
2 "by 
engaging in electronic eavesdropping without a warrant."3 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve the contentions as follows. 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai ‘i (State) charged 
Aquino-Martinez in a May 2, 2023 Felony Information, with two counts of Electronic Enticement of a Child in the First Degree under HRS § 707-756(1),
4 arising out of an electronic enticement 
1 The Honorable Michelle L. Drewyer presided. 
2 HRS § 803-42 (2014) generally prohibits the interception, access,
and disclosure of wire, oral, or electronic communications in subsection (a).
Subsections (b)(1) through (b)(11) set forth various exceptions to thegeneral prohibition. 
3 We have numbered Aquino-Martinez's POEs. See  Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) (requiring numbered POEs). 
4 A person is guilty of electronic enticement of a child in the
first degree under HRS § 707-756 (2014) if the person "[i]ntentionally orknowingly communicates" while using an electronic device, "[w]ith anotherperson who represents that person to be under the age of eighteen years[,]""[w]ith the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of a felony[,]"and "[i]ntentionally or knowingly travels to the agreed upon meeting place at
the agreed upon meeting time[.]" 
2       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  operation during which undercover law enforcement officials 
posed online as minors so they could identify individuals pursuing sexual encounters with children. 
On February 13, 2024, Aquino-Martinez filed a motion 
to suppress evidence obtained through the sting operation, 
claiming violations of Aquino-Martinez's constitutionally 
protected privacy rights under article I, section 7 of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution.
5 
Following a March 1, 2024 hearing on the motion, on 
April 4, 2024, the Circuit Court issued its Suppression Order, 
which Aquino-Martinez timely appealed.
 (1) Aquino-Martinez argues that because the sting 
operation involved law enforcement "surreptitiously setting up false, misleading profiles as a fake 'third party' in order to induce persons online to engage in private 'sexting' conversations," Aquino-Martinez's reasonable expectation of 
privacy under article I, section 7 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution 
was violated.
6 Additionally, Aquino-Martinez argues that because 
the content of his messages was sexually explicit and revealed 
"intimate details" of his life, society would deem his privacy expectation reasonable. 
Aquino-Martinez relies on State v. Walton, 133 Hawai ‘i 
66, 96-97, 324 P.3d 876, 906-07 (2014), where the Hawai ʻi Supreme 
Court held that disclosure of information to third parties does not automatically place it beyond the scope of constitutional 
5 This constitutional provision protects a person's right "against
unreasonable searches, seizures and invasions of privacy" and requires
probable cause to support a warrant for such searches and seizures. Haw. Const. art. I, § 7. 
6 Aquino-Martinez also cites article I, section 6 of the Hawai ‘i 
Constitution but does not argue its applicability to the facts of this case.
See
 HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
3       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  
  privacy protections. The Walton court explained that where 
information has been voluntarily disclosed to third parties, the relevant inquiry as to whether that information is protected by a constitutional right to privacy is "whether [the defendant] h[as] a legitimate expectation that such information would not 
be shared with others." Id. at 97, 324 P.3d at 907 (citations 
omitted). 
Aquino-Martinez's reliance on Walton is inapt because 
Walton involved disclosure of private information to a third party. This case involves a consensual participant recording, 
which has been upheld in Hawai ʻi. See State v. Lee, 67 Haw. 307, 
309, 686 P.2d 816, 817 (1984) ("[T]here is no reasonable 
expectation of privacy in consensual recording[.]"). In Lee, where an undercover officer posing as a patient made warrantless recordings of visits to a defendant doctor suspected of illegal 
drug promotion, the Hawai ʻi Supreme Court held that because the 
officer "consented to the recordings," "was a participant in the 
conversations[,]" and was "free to testify in court" about the 
conversations' contents, "the recordings [were] merely reliable corroboration of the conversations" and should not be suppressed. 
Id. at 310, 686 P.2d at 818. 
Here, the undercover agent was a direct participant in 
conversations with Aquino-Martinez, and the recordings served to 
corroborate a conversation that she participated in, consented 
to, and could freely testify about, for which there was no reasonable expectation of privacy. See id. The evidence at 
issue was recovered from law enforcement resources ( e.g., a 
screenshot of online chats taken from the device used by the undercover agent) and was not taken from Aquino-Martinez's cell phone. 
The Circuit Court correctly denied Aquino-Martinez's 
motion to suppress by concluding that Aquino-Martinez's privacy 
4       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
 
  right under article I, section 7 of the Hawai ʻi Constitution was 
not violated. See State v. Pickell, 154 Hawai ʻi 50, 53, 544 P.3d 
1287, 1290 (2023) (reviewing motion to suppress ruling de novo). 
(2) Aquino-Martinez argues that the Wiretap Act's 
participant recording exception7 is inapplicable here because 
"the conversation in this case was specifically between the 
Defendant and the fictitious persona 'Kenna,'" and thus the undercover agent "was not a party to the conversations as defined under the statute" and "illegally interceded as a third party without a warrant[.]" This argument is unpersuasive. 
Under the plain language of HRS § 803-42(b)(4), "a 
person acting under color of law" such as the undercover agent in this case, is specifically excluded from the Wiretap Act. The undercover agent's deception is not relevant to determine whether the participant recording exception under HRS § 803-42(b)(4) applies. The Circuit Court correctly concluded that the exception applied. See id. (reviewing conclusions of law 
under the right/wrong standard). The Circuit Court's denial of 
the motion to suppress on this ground was correct. See id.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the April 4, 2024 
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence Stemming from Violation 
7 HRS § 803-42(b)(4) (2014), the participant recording exception in
the Wiretap Act, permits a law enforcement officer who participates in the
communication to intercept that communication, as follows: "[i]t shall not be
unlawful under this part for a person acting under color of law to intercepta wire, oral, or electronic communication, when the person is a party to thecommunication[.]" 
5       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 of Constitutional Right to Privacy," filed by the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, April 7, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Brandon M. Segal, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Chief Judge
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge 
6
 