NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000777
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MOHAMAD A. ZOWAIL, Defendant-Appellant_
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1DCC-17-0017396)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Mohamad A. Zowail ( Zowail) appeals
from the September 12, 2018 Judgment and Notice of Entry of
Judgment ( Judgment) entered by the District Court of the First
Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).   Zowail was
convicted of Use unlawful for certain business purposes, in
violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu ( ROH) Sec. 29-5.1
(1990), and sentenced to pay a $100.00 fine.1
On appeal, Zowail contends that there was insufficient
evidence to support his conviction.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
1The Honorable Florence Nakakuni presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Zowail's contentions as follows:
ROH Sec. 29-5.1 provides:
Sec. 29-5.1  Use unlawful for certain business purposes.
(a)It is unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to
engage in business on any public street, sidewalk or
mall where such person's operation tends to, or does
impede or inconvenience the public or any person in
the lawful use of such street, sidewalk or mall.
(b)"Solicitor or canvasser," as used in this article,
means any person, traveling by foot, or any other type
of conveyance, or by wagon, automobile, motor truck,
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods,
wares, merchandise or other personal property for
future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such person
carries or exhibits any samples or collects advance
payments on sales. The term shall also include any
person who, for oneself or for another hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, room,
shop, vehicle or any other place for the sole purpose
of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery.
Zowail argues that there was insufficient evidence that
he was a solicitor or canvasser within the meaning of ROH Sec.
29-5.1(b).  The evidence at trial included testimony of two law
enforcement officers, which the District Court found to be
credible, and which included the following:  Zowail was set up on
a sidewalk in front of the Galleria on Kalakaua Avenue in
Waikiki, a public way, street, road or highway, in the City and
County of Honolulu.  He was doing an art performance, speaking to
a crowd through a headset and speaker, spraying his canvas on a
four foot by two foot table that had various spray paint cans, a
blow torch, art supplies, canvasses, and pens, and there was a
"donation box" in the front.  Zowail was heard by the officers
saying to people that the canvases cost $75, that people could
take the canvasses with them, and they came with protective tubes
so that the canvases would not get damaged on the plane ride
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
home.  Notwithstanding Zowail's testimony that he was not selling
his artwork, and his argument that the officers did not see any
transactions take place, viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prosecution, we conclude that there was
sufficient evidence that Zowail was a solicitor or canvasser
within the meaning of ROH Sec. 29-5.1(b).  See, e.g., State v.
Richie, 88 Hawai#i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (stating
the standard of review on a challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence at trial).
Zowail also argues that his operation did not impede or
inconvenience the public or any person by virtue of the crowd
that gathered around his table and even taking the crowd into
consideration, the State failed to establish that Zowail's
operation had impeded or inconvenienced a person in the use of a
public sidewalk.  In addition to the above, Officer Aaron Luther
testified that, over a period of about ten minutes, he observed a
large crowd forming around Zowail's table and he noticed that
people were having a hard time accessing and using the sidewalk. 
The crowd was several people deep, and passers-by, including at
least one male in a wheelchair and approximately three mothers
with strollers, were forced to enter the Galleria behind the
sidewalk to get around the back of the crowd.  Sargeant Zane
Hamrick testified that he also watched Zowail's operation for
five to ten minutes, that the crowd around Zowail blocked the
entire sidewalk, that it was packed so tightly that a person
would have to pry his or her way through the crowd, and that
there was no space on the sidewalk that a wheelchair or stroller
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
could pass through.  Notwithstanding contrary evidence, inter
alia, that at times the crowd was smaller and the public was not
fully impeded in its use of the sidewalk, viewing the evidence in
the light most favorable to the prosecution, we conclude that
there was sufficient evidence that Zowail's operation tended to,
or did, impede or inconvenience the public or any person in the
lawful use of a public sidewalk, as proscribed by ROH Sec. 29-
5.1(b).
Accordingly, the District Court's September 12, 2018
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, October 11, 2019.
On the briefs:
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
4Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.