NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
NO. CAAP-18-0000031 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
NATHAN PACO, Pro Se, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
MARY K. MYERS, doing business as MARY K. MYERS, PH.D., 
doing business as MARY MYERS, PH.D., INC., 
also known as MARY K. MYERS TRUST; 
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH IN THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, 
a domestic non-profit corporation, Defendants-Appellees, 
and DOES 1-10, Defendants. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
 (CASE NO. 1CC14-1-000108) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
 
 
  Plaintiff-Appellant Nathan Paco (Paco), appeals from 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's December 22, 2017 Final 
Judgment granting summary judgment in favor of Defendant-
Appellee Mary K. Myers, Ph.D. (Dr. Myers).1  On appeal, Paco 
raises as his sole point of error that "[t]he [c]ircuit [c]ourt 
                                                           
1  The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
2 
 (continued . . .) should have granted only a partial summary judgment on [his] 1st 
Cause of Action and should have had a trial on [his] 2nd Cause 
of Action and on those other valid defenses that have genuine 
issues as to material facts."  (Emphasis omitted and format altered.) 
  Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issue raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve Paco's 
point of error as discussed below, and affirm.   
  As an initial matter, we note that it was difficult to 
identify in Paco's complaint a first and second cause of action, 
but he appeared to challenge architectural barriers and altered 
portions of Dr. Myers' office.
2  He claimed nine aspects of 
Dr. Myers' facilities did not comply with the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA), and cited generally to "28 CFR part 36" 
and "42 ADA U.S.C. Section 1210 et seq."3  He then requested an 
                                                           
2  In accordance with the policy of affording self- represented litigants 
the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, we address Paco' s 
arguments to the extent they are discerni ble.  O' Connor v. Diocese of 
Honolulu, 77 Hawai‘ i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994) (explaining that the 
Hawai‘i Supreme Court has established a general policy of affording self-
represented litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits 
where it is possible to do so). 
 
3  In particular, Paco asserts the following violations:   
(1) "the door knob of the front entry door is not ADA 
compliant" ;  
 
(2) "the pressure of the front entry door is too high"; 
  
(3) "the width of the passage way from the front entrance 
through the reception area is too narrow"; NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
3 
 "injunction ordering the defendants to fully comply with ADA 
requirements within ninety (90) days[,]" monetary damages, and 
expert and attorney fees.   
  After answering Paco's complaint, Dr. Myers moved for summary judgment asserting that the lawsuit is barred by the 
two-year statute of limitations because Paco first observed her 
office on September 6, 2011 and regularly visited her for 
consults, but did not file his complaint until January 15, 2014.
4  
Dr. Myers also asserted that it was unlikely Paco would again use her services, and attached, among other things, a letter 
from Paco directing her to cancel all future appointments and 
declaring his love for her.  Dr. Myers explained that Paco's 
                                                           
(. . . continued.) 
(4)
 "the doorway to the back office is too narrow" ;  
 
(5) "the height of the threshold to the back office is too 
high" (Back-office Threshold) ;  
 
(6) "the items that are stored in the bathroom make it 
inaccessible to a disabled person"; 
 
(7) "the door to the bathroom is too narrow" ;  
 
(8) "the bathroom does not have any grab bars"; and  
 
(9) "the door knob of the bathroom and the handles of the 
water faucets are not ADA compliant." 
 
(Emphasis added.)  
4  Dr. Myers also moved to have Paco declared a vexatious litigant, 
which the circuit court granted, as this was one of four lawsuits he filed 
against her. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
4 
 communications first annoyed then worried her, and she never 
responded to these communications. 
  In his opposition to Dr. Myers' motion for summary 
judgment, Paco argued that one of the nine violations he presented in his complaint was not barred by the statute of 
limitations.  He stated that "[t]he padded carpets that had 
covered her offices' floors where [sic] replaced by hardwood 
floors on or about December, 2013 [sic] or January, 2013."  Paco 
explained that he "got stuck with his wheelchair on the raised 
threshold sometime in January 2013" and filed his lawsuit "about 
only a year later - January 15, 2014." 
Paco stated that "[w]hen [he] finally was allowed to 
inspect [Dr. Myers'] office, he found that the threshold was brought into conformance . . . ."
5  Also, Paco attested in his 
declaration, "[w]hen I finally was allowed to inspect [Dr. Myers'] office, I found that the threshold was lowered."  Paco 
did not address the other eight alleged violations he listed in 
his complaint and, instead, stated that Dr. Myers' "allegation 
that my causes of action are barred by the statute of 
limitations is based upon [her] intentional lies to this Court."   In her reply, Dr. Myers explained that she "testified 
(without contradiction) that a number of her other wheelchair 
                                                           
5  In this statement, Paco also asserted that "the sliding door, the 
entry door and the bathroom were not" brought into conformance.  Paco, 
however, made no claim in his complaint as to the sliding door, and the 
issues regarding the entry door and the bathroom were among the issues Paco 
acknowledged as time-barred. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
5 
  
. . . .  
(continued . . .) patients have had no problems at all with the threshold."  She 
also pointed out that Paco failed "to state the (in effect) 
starting height, or the ending height, of the threshold." 
  The circuit court granted Dr. Myers' motion for 
summary judgment with prejudice. 
As stated earlier, Paco contends on appeal that "[t]he 
[c]ircuit [c]ourt should have granted only partial summary 
judgment on [his] 1st Cause of Action and should have had a 
trial on [his] 2nd Cause of Action and on those other valid 
defenses that have genuine issues as to material facts" 
(emphasis omitted and format altered).  Paco identifies the 
first cause of action as relating to existing barriers and the 
second cause of action as relating to alterations.  Paco, thus, acknowledges that the circuit court did not err in granting 
summary judgment as to the existing barriers (first cause of 
action), and the matter Paco presents to this court is limited 
to the alteration (second cause of action), and more 
specifically, to the Back-office Threshold. 
As to the Back-office Threshold, Paco cites for the 
first time on appeal "42 U.S. Code § 12183(a)(2)"
6 and "28 CFR 
                                                           
6  42 U.S.C. § 12183(a)(2), which is within Title III of the ADA, 
provides in relevant part:   
 
Except as provided in subsection (b), as applied to public 
accommodations and commercial facilities, discrimination for 
purposes of section 12182(a) of this title includes— NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
6 
 36.403," and argues that because he filed his lawsuit within a 
year of discovering this violation, summary judgment based on 
the statute of limitations was improper.  Paco further argues 
that regardless of how unlikely it is that he would face similar harm in the future, he is entitled to an injunction compelling 
Dr. Myers to bring the office space she rents into compliance 
with the ADA. 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo."  Villaver v. Sylva, 145 Hawai‘ i 29, 34, 445 
P.3d 701, 706 (2019) (quoting Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai‘ i 90, 96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008)).  
When reviewing a grant or denial of summary judgment, an appellate court's consideration of the record is "limited to 
those materials that were considered by the trial court in 
                                                           
(. . . continued) 
 
(2)  with respect to a facility or part thereof that is 
altered by, on behalf of, or for the use of an 
establishment in a manner that affects or could affect the 
usability of the facility or part thereof, a failure to make alterations in such a manner that, to the maximum 
extent feasible, the altered portions of the facility are 
readily accessible to and usable by individuals with 
disabilities, including individuals who use wheelchairs. 
Where the entity is undertaking an alteration that affects or could affect usability of or access to an area of the 
facility containing a primary function, the entity shall also make the alterations in such a manner that, to the 
maximum extent feasible, the path of travel to the altered 
area and the bathrooms, telephones, and drinking fountains serving the altered area, are readily accessible to and 
usable by individuals with disabilities where such 
alterations to the path of travel or the bathrooms, 
telephones, and drinking fountains serving the altered area 
are not disproportionate to the overall alterations in terms of cost and scope (as determined under criteria 
established by the Attorney General). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
7 
 ruling on the motion."  Assoc. of Apartment Owners of Wailea 
Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai‘ i 97, 108, 58 P.3d 
608, 619 (2002).   
The Hawai‘ i Supreme Court explained the burdens of the 
moving and non-moving parties with respect to a motion for 
summary judgment as follows: 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment 
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as 
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment 
as a matter of law.  This burden has two components. 
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support 
for its claim that:  (1) no genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim 
or defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the 
motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it 
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.  Only 
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of 
production does the burden shift to the non- moving party to 
respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that 
present a genuine issue worthy of trial. 
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of persuasion.  This burden always remains with the moving 
party and requires the moving party to convince the court 
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the 
moving [party] is entitled to summary judgment as a matter 
of law. 
 
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai‘ i 462, 470, 99 
P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004) (quoting GECC Fin. Corp. v. 
Jaffarian, 79 Hawai‘ i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 (App. 
1995)) (emphasis omitted). 
To the extent Paco argues that his cause of action 
arising from the floor change "is not barred by the statute of 
limitations," Paco is correct.  Dr. Myers admitted that the 
owners of the unit had the new floors "installed in December NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
8 
 2012 or January 2013" and, thus, Paco could not have discovered 
an ADA violation arising from this alteration to Suite 3206 
until his visit in January 2013.  Thus, Dr. Myers failed to 
demonstrate that the Back-office Threshold issue was barred by the statute of limitations, and that she was entitled to a 
judgment as a matter of law on that basis.   
Because the issue was not time-barred, there was a 
question of whether the altered threshold of the back office 
complied with the ADA.  But, in his declaration attached to his 
memo in opposition to the motion for summary judgment, Paco 
attested that: 
 10.  The alterations that my complaint refers to are 
the [M]ovant's replacement of her padded carpet flooring 
with bamboo hardwood flooring which lowered the level of 
her floors. 
 As a result, the height of the threshold to 
the Movant's consultation room was raised. 
 
 11.  When I finally was allowed to inspect the 
Movant's office, I found that the threshold was lowered.  
Indeed, Paco's memo in opposition conceded that the threshold 
had been "brought into conformance[.]"  This admission settled 
the remaining factual question before the circuit court of 
whether the Back-office Threshold violated the ADA.   
And without the transcript from the October 19, 2016 
hearing on the motion for summary judgment, which Paco failed to 
provide to this court, we will not infer or assume error.  See 
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai‘ i 333, 334, 3 P.3d 499, 500 (2000) 
(explaining that "appellant[s] bear[] the burden to show error 
by reference to matters in the record, and . . . has the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
9 
 responsibility of providing the relevant transcript" and the 
appellate court "cannot presume error in the absence of the 
record").   
Given Paco's admission that the Back-office Threshold 
was brought into compliance, Paco's request for injunctive relief is moot.
7      
  For the above reasons, we affirm the First Circuit Court's December 22, 2017 Final Judgment. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, December 12, 2022. 
 
On the briefs: 
 Nathan Paco, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se. 
 Fred Paul Benco, for Defendant-Appellee. 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
                                                           
7  Paco's complaint alleges entitlement to monetary damages under Hawaii 
Revised Statutes § 347-13.5 (2015), but he makes no discerni ble argument on 
appeal related to his claim for monetary damages.   
 
And even if he did, "[m]onetary relief . . . is not available to 
private individuals under Title III of the ADA" and "[a] private individual 
may only obtain injunctive relief for violations of a right granted under Title III; he cannot recover damages."   Powell v. Nat'l Bd. of Med. Exam'rs, 
364 F.3d 79, 8 6 (2d Cir. 2004). /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge  
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 