NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000096 12-DEC-2023 08:12 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO. CAAP-20-0000096 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
NATIONSTAR MORTGAGE LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
DONNA M. AMINA, AS THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF
MARY ANN NEULA LIM, also known as MARY A.N. LIM and MARY LIM,
DECEASED, Defendant-Appellant, SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT, Defendant-Appellee, and JOHN DOES 1-20; JANE DOES
1-20; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20; DOE ENTITIES 1-20; AND DOE
GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-20, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 3CC181000120) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Self-represented Defendant-Appellant Donna M. Amina, 
personal representative of the estate of Mary Ann Neula Lim, 
deceased, appeals from the Judgment  of foreclosure in favor of 
Plaintiff-Appellee Nationstar  Mortgage LLC entered by the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit on January 29, 2020.  We vacate the 
Judgment and remand for further proceedings. 1
Lim died in 2017. 
On May 22, 2018, Nationstar sued 
Amina, Lim's personal representative, to foreclose on a reverse 
mortgage of real property owned by Lim. Nationstar moved for summary judgment and an interlocutory decree of foreclosure. 
1 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Amina didn't oppose the motion. The circuit court granted the 
motion and entered the judgment of foreclosure. Amina filed a timely notice of appeal. 
Even if a motion for summary judgment is unopposed, it 
should be granted only if the movant shows there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. v. Verhagen
, 149 Hawai#i 315, 328 
n.12, 489 P.3d 419, 432 n.12 (2021); 
Arakaki v. SCD-Olanani 
Corp.
, 110 Hawai#i 1, 6, 129 P.3d 504, 509 (2006) ("[A] party 
need not affirmatively oppose a motion for summary judgment that fails to show prima facie (1) that the undisputed facts foreclose genuine issues as to any material facts and (2) that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." (cleaned up)). 
A foreclosing plaintiff must show it had standing to 
sue when it filed the lawsuit. 
Verhagen, 149 Hawai#i at 327, 489 
P.3d at 431. The plaintiff in Verhagen showed it had standing with a declaration showing that the indorsed-in-blank note was sent to plaintiff's counsel "a mere six weeks before the filing of the complaint[.]" Id. at 327-28, 489 P.3d at 431-32. Here, Nationstar's Assistant Secretary ( Randazzo ) submitted a 
declaration stating that he reviewed the indorsed-in-blank note and authenticating a bailee letter showing that the note was sent to Nationstar's counsel on March 5, 2018, 11 weeks before Nationstar filed its complaint. Cf. Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. v. Yata, 152 Hawai #i 322, 336, 526 P.3d 299, 313 (2023) (holding 
that foreclosure plaintiff didn't show standing where it certified it was holder of the note nine months before filing of the complaint, and no bailee letter showed note was sent to plaintiff's counsel). This case is closer to Verhagen than to Yata. Nationstar showed it had standing to foreclose when its complaint was filed. 
But Nationstar was not the original lender; Golden 
Empire Mortgage, Inc. dba Senior Independence Hawaii was. 
Randazzo's declaration attempted to state that Golden Empire's 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
records for Lim's reverse mortgage had (eventually) been 
incorporated into those of Nationstar. 
Incorporated records are admissible under [Hawaii Rules of
Evidence] Rule 803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualifiedwitness testifies that [1] the documents were incorporatedand kept in the normal course of business, [2] that theincorporating business typically relies upon the accuracy ofthe contents of the documents, and [3] the circumstances 
otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the document . 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai#i 37, 45-46, 414 
P.3d 89, 97-98 (2018) (emphasis added) (citations omitted). 
Randazzo's declaration did not show circumstances 
indicating the trustworthiness of Nationstar's documents. The 
note that Lim signed had an undated special indorsement  from 
Golden Empire to " Bank of America , A National Banking Assoc." 
It had an undated blank indorsement by Bank of America. Randazzo's declaration stated: 2
11. The owner of the Note and Mortgage for a
particular a [sic] mortgage loan is commonly referred to in
the loan servicing industry as the Investor. The Investor for this mortgage loan is the Plaintiff  [Nationstar Mortgage
LLC]. 
(Emphasis added.) 
But Randazzo's declaration also stated: 
12. The owner of the Note and Mortgage for a
particular mortgage loan is commonly referred to in the loanservicing industry as the Investor. The Investor for this mortgage loan is Federal National Mortgage Association
("Fannie Mae"). 
13. Nationstar maintains all the day to day loan
documents, records and accounting of payments on the Loanbeing foreclosed in this action including all documents andbusiness records acquired by Fannie Mae  when it purchased
the subject mortgage loan. 
14. Under the terms of Nationstar's servicing
arrangement, Fannie Mae  does not participate in, keep and
maintain any of the day to day loan documents, inputting ofaccounting data, saving of business records and allcommunications with borrowers. 
2 "When specially indorsed, an instrument becomes payable to the
identified person and may be negotiated only by the indorsement of thatperson." Hawaii Revised Statutes ยง 490:3-205 (2008). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15. Fannie Mae , as the Investor, has a passive role
with the primary emphasis on tracking its return on
investment. In terms of routine business records on the Loan, Nationstar acts as the sole custodian of Plaintiff's[sic] records, except when they are delivered to Plaintiff'sattorney as agents for the Plaintiff [sic]. 
16. Nationstar  became Plaintiff's [sic] loan 
servicer  for the Loan being foreclosed in this action on
09/30/2012. 
. . . . 
24. The prior loan servicer  [sic] for this mortgage
loan was Bank of America , N.A. ("Prior Servicer"). Bank of 
America, N.A. acted as servicer for the original lender
Golen [sic] Empire Mortgage, Inc. dba Senior IndependenceHawaii. 
25. Upon becoming Fannie Mae's  loan servicer,
Nationstar took possession of the loan documents andbusiness records of the Prior Servicer and incorporated allsuch records into the business records of Nationstar. 
. . . . 
28. The Prior Servicer's records are regularly used
and relied upon by Nationstar in all dealings with all the
borrowers, in reporting all profit and loss on the mortgageloans to Fannie Mae , in the preparation, filing and payment
of income taxes dependent upon such information, and inevaluating Nationstar's own job performance. 
(Emphasis added.) Randazzo's declaration is ambiguous about the 
identity of the "Investor" for Lim's reverse mortgage. It also calls into question how Nationstar came into possession of, and incorporated into its business records, the records purportedly authenticated by Randazzo. 
The plaintiff in Verhagen offered these circumstances 
to indicate the trustworthiness of its incorporated records: 
The information regarding the Loan transferred to Caliber
from the Prior Servicer has been validated in many ways,including, but not limited to, going through a due diligencephase, review of hard copy documents, and review of thepayment history and accounting of other fees, costs, andexpenses charged to the Loan by Prior Servicer. 
Verhagen, 149 Hawai#i at 326, 489 P.3d at 430. The supreme court 
held: 
Though scant, this testimony establishes circumstancesindicating the trustworthiness of Caliber's incorporatedrecords. It is evidence that before incorporating JPMorgan 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chase's documents, Caliber reviewed hard copies of the
documents, engaged in a "due diligence" process, andreviewed the payment history and accounting associated withthe loan. JPMorgan Chase's documents were not, in otherwords, uncritically incorporated into Caliber's own. Theywere vetted by Caliber. This pre-incorporation vetting,however nebulously described by Patterson's testimony, is acircumstance that indicates the trustworthiness of the documents. 
 Id. 
The plaintiff in Yata offered these circumstances to 
indicate the trustworthiness of its incorporated records: 
It is the regular business practice of SLS to integrateprior servicers' records into SLS's business records, and torely upon the accuracy of those boarded records in providingits loan servicing functions. These prior servicer recordsare integrated and relied upon by SLS as part of SLS'sbusiness records. 
Yata, 152 Hawai#i at 334, 526 P.3d at 311. The supreme court 
held that 
the Mountes and McCloskey Declarations do not providesufficient "circumstances that indicate the trustworthiness of the documents." With regard to circumstances indicatingtrustworthiness, the Mountes and McCloskey Declarationsstate that "SLS maintains quality control and verificationprocedures as part of the boarding process to ensure theaccuracy of the boarded records." The declarations in Verhagen  provided specific methods of validation of
documents from the prior loan servicer, "including, but notlimited to, going through a due diligence phase, review ofhard copy documents, and review of the payment history andaccount of other fees, costs, and expenses charged to theLoan by Prior Servicer." The Mountes and McCloskeyDeclarations merely assert that SLS has "quality control andverification procedures" to ensure the accuracy ofincorporated records without stating what those procedures 
are. This court noted that the testimony indicating
circumstances of trustworthiness in Verhagen  was "scant" and 
"nebulously described" circumstances of trustworthiness.
Here, there is even less testimony describing circumstancesof trustworthiness. Thus, it appears that the thirdBehrendt  requirement was not satisfied, and the documents
attached to the Mountes and McCloskey Declarations were notadmissible. 
Id. at 335, 526 P.3d at 312 (cleaned up). 
Randazzo's declaration states: 
26. Before the Prior Servicer's records were 
incorporated into Nationstar's own business records, it 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conducted an independent check into the Prior Servicer's
records and found them in keeping with industry wide loanservicing standards and only integrated them intoNationstar's own business records after finding the PriorServicer's records were made as part of a regularlyconducted activity, met industry standards and determined tobe trustworthy. 
Like the declarations in Yata, Randazzo's declaration doesn't 
sufficiently specify what procedures Nationstar followed for its "independent check" to determine whether the incorporated records were trustworthy, or from where they came. 
For these reasons, we hold that Nationstar did not 
sustain its burden as the summary judgment movant in a foreclosure action. We need not address Amina's other arguments. We vacate the Judgment entered by the circuit court on January 29, 2020, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, December 12, 2023. 
Donna M. Amina, /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Self-represented Defendant- Presiding Judge
Appellant. 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Charles R. Prather, Associate Judge
Jason L. Cotton,Peter T. Stone, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
Nationstar Mortgage LLC. 
6 