NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000222
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ROBERT L. RODRIGUES JR.,
Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
 
BOARD OF WATER SUPPLY,
Employer-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL
 
RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2007-118 (2-01-08711))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Robert L. Rodrigues Jr. (Rodrigues)
 
appeals from a December 7, 2010, Decision and Order (order) by
 
the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB). LIRAB
 
resolved Rodrigues's workers' compensation claim by ruling in
 
favor of Employer-Appellee City and County of Honolulu Board of
 
Water Supply (BWS).
 
On appeal, Rodrigues contends:
 (1) LIRAB's determination of 4% permanent partial
 
disability is reversible error;
 
(2) LIRAB incorrectly concluded that Rodrigues was not
 
permanently totally disabled; and
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) LIRAB erred in concluding that BWS satisfied the
 
requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-52 (1993) and
 
was entitled to credit for temporary total disability benefits
 
"not payable when made."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Rogrigues's appeal is without merit.
 
(1) Rodrigues contends LIRAB erred by finding that
 
Rodrigues was not permanently totally disabled based on a report
 
by Peter Diamond, M.D. (Dr. Diamond). In its order, LIRAB held
 
that "[b]ased on the impairment rating of Dr. Diamond and the
 
work restrictions Dr. Diamond recommended, which did not preclude
 
[Rodrigues] from all work, [LIRAB] concludes that [Rodrigues] was
 
not [permanently totally disabled] on a medical basis."
 
Rodrigues argues that the "impairment rating of 
Dr. Diamond is without weight and/or even relevance[.]" 
Rodrigues argues further that LIRAB erred in relying on 
Dr. Diamond's characterization of the injury, as other evidence
 
contradicted Dr. Diamond's opinion. In doing so, Rodrigues
 
presents no error of law, but instead argues that LIRAB's
 
assessment of the evidence is erroneous. However, this court
 
gives "deference to the LIRAB's assessment of the credibility of
 
witnesses and the weight the LIRAB gives to the evidence." Moi
 
v. State, Dept. of Public Safety, 118 Hawai' i 239, 242, 188 P.3d 
753, 756 (App. 2008). Furthermore, 
[i]t is well established that courts decline to consider the
weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in
favor of the administrative findings, or to review the
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the findings
of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field.
 
Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai' i 263, 268, 47 P.3d 730, 735 (2002) 
(quoting Igawa v. Koa House Restaurant, 97 Hawai' i 402, 409-410, 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
38 P.3d 570, 577-578 (2001)). As such, this court gives proper
 
deference to LIRAB's finding of fact based on the opinion of 
Dr. Diamond. Therefore, LIRAB did not err in determining that
 
Rodrigues was not permanently totally disabled on a medical
 
basis.
 
(2) Rodrigues contends LIRAB erred in finding that
 
Rodrigues failed to establish that he was not permanently totally
 
disabled under the odd-lot doctrine. LIRAB held that 
[Rodrigues] was also not [permanently totally disabled] on
an odd-lot basis. A claimant seeking odd-lot [permanently
totally disabled] status has the burden of establishing a
prima facie case that he or she falls within the odd-lot
 
category based on evidence of degree of physical impairment
combined with other factors such as education, experience
and age.
 
In this case, due to a lack of evidence of severe
physical impairments, and because of factors, such as age,
education, and Claimant's voluntary retirement . . .,
[Rodrigues] did not successfully establish prima facie that
 
he fell within the odd-lot category.
 
(citations omitted)
 
Under the odd-lot doctrine,
 
where an employee receives a work-related permanent partial
disability which combined with other factors such as age,
education, experience, etc., renders him, in fact, unable to
obtain employment, he is entitled to be treated as being
permanently totally disabled. It seems to be accepted that
the employee has the burden of establishing prima facie that
he falls within the odd-lot category.
 
Tsuchiyama v. Kahului Trucking and Storage, Inc., 2 Haw. App. 
659, 660-661, 638 P.2d 1381, 1382 (1982). Rodrigues argues that 
LIRAB's findings are clear error because the findings were based 
solely on Dr. Diamond's assessment of Rodrigues. Rodrigues 
argues that the instant case is analogous to Yarnell v. City 
Roofing, Inc., 72 Haw. 272, 813 P.2d 1386 (1991). However, in 
Yarnell, the Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded LIRAB improperly 
placed the burden on the claimant to prove that he was unable to work as a result of the work injury, and did not answer the 
question of whether the claimant properly established a prima 
facie case. 72 Haw. at 276, 813 P.2d at 1389. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the instant case, LIRAB applied the proper standard. 
LIRAB clearly held that Rodrigues did not establish a prima facie
 
case that he fell within the odd-lot doctrine. Furthermore,
 
LIRAB's determination that Rodrigues did not establish a prima
 
facie case was not clearly erroneous. LIRAB found that Rodrigues
 
was 52 years old at the time of trial, with a high school
 
education and experience in the construction industry. These
 
factors, combined with the comparatively minimal degree of
 
physical disability, led LIRAB to conclude that Rodrigues failed
 
to meet his burden of proof. Therefore, LIRAB did not err in
 
finding that Rodrigues was not permanently totally disabled on an
 
odd-lot basis. 
(3) Rodrigues contends LIRAB erred in determining that
 
BWS was entitled to credit for temporary total disability
 
benefits paid to Rodrigues that were "not payable when made." 
Rodrigues argues that LIRAB erred in concluding that temporary
 
total disability benefits paid by BWS from October 1, 2005 to
 
April 30, 2006 were "not payable when made" because Rodrigues
 
voluntarily retired from employment. In its order, LIRAB
 
concluded that the total temporary benefit "paid for the period
 
October 1, 2005 through April 30, 2006 in the total amount of
 
$15,778.86 were 'not payable when made,' because [Rodrigues]
 
voluntarily retired from employment and chose not to attempt to
 
remain in the workforce as of October 1, 2005."
 
Under HRS § 386-52(a)(1993): 
Any payments made by the employer to the injured employee
during the employee's disability or to the employee's
dependents which by the terms of this chapter were not
payable when made, shall be deducted from the amount payable
as compensation subject to the approval of the director;
provided that:
 
(1) The employer notifies the injured employee and the
director in writing of any such credit request stating the
reasons for such credit and informing the injured employee
that the employee has the right to file a written request
for a hearing to submit any evidence to dispute such a
credit[.]
 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rodrigues argues that in order for temporary total
 
disability to be "not payable when made," temporary total
 
disability must be terminated in accordance with 
HRS § 386-31(b) (Supp. 2005), which states that "[t]he payment of
 
[temporary total disability] benefits shall only be terminated
 
upon order of the director or if the employee is able to resume
 
work." Rodrigues argues that HRS § 386-31(b) does not allow for
 
the termination of temporary total disability because Rodrigues
 
voluntarily retired from employment.
 
The purpose of temporary total disability benefits is
 
to compensate a claimant for current loss of wages. See Curaisma
 
v. Urban Painters, Ltd., 59 Haw. 409, 420, 583 P.2d 321, 327 
(1978). Furthermore, "[w]hile workers' compensation benefits are 
clearly intended to indemnify a worker for a job-related injury, 
they are not intended to provide an unemployed worker with lost 
income upon his retirement." Atchley v. Bank of Hawai' i, 80 
Hawai'i 239, 242, 909 P.2d 567, 570 (1996). In the instant case, 
there is no dispute that Rodrigues retired voluntarily. Because 
case law makes clear that temporary total disability is not 
intended to cover lost wages after retirement, LIRAB did not err 
when it concluded that benefits paid for the period of 
October 1, 2005 through April 30, 2006 in the total amount of 
$15,778.86 were "not payable when made." 
Rodrigues also contends LIRAB erred in finding that BWS
 
satisfied the notice requirement of HRS § 386-52(a). LIRAB found
 
that, by letter dated April 17, 2006 (letter), BWS gave Rodrigues
 
notice through his former attorney Jeffrey Taylor, Esq., that
 
temporary total disability benefits would end effective 
May 1, 2006. LIRAB also found that the letter satisfied the
 
notice requirement of HRS § 386-52(a)(1) "by informing
 
[Rodrigues] and the Director of [BWS's] credit request and
 
[Rodrigues's] right to file a request for a hearing, which was
 
held on January 25, 2007." Rodrigues argues that the letter does
 
not satisfy HRS § 386-52 because "(1) it does not state the
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasons for the credit requested, and (2) it does not inform
 
[Rodrigues] of his right to file a written request for a hearing
 
to submit any evidence to dispute such a credit." (emphasis
 
omitted.)
 
However, a plain reading of the letter reveals that
 
LIRAB was correct in finding that the letter satisfied the
 
requirements of HRS § 386-52(a)(1). The letter states:
 
[t]his is to inform you that we will be terminating
[Rodrigues's] temporary disability benefits effective May 1,
2006 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes Section 386-21. We
 are taking this action because we recently received notice
from the Employees' Retirement System that your client
applied for and has been awarded ordinary disability
retirement effective October 1, 2005. As a result, it is
our position that [Rodrigues] voluntarily removed himself
from the workforce and is no longer entitled to indemnity
benefits.
 
By copy of this letter, we are notifying the
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, Disability
Compensation Division of the foregoing action and requesting
that all temporary total disability payments made after
October 1, 2005 be credited to any permanent disability
and/or other future benefits awarded to [Rodrigues]. 
You may make a written request to the Director of
Labor and Industrial Relations should you or your client
disagree with the decision to terminate his temporary total
disability benefits and/or our request for a credit.
 
The language of the letter clearly satisfies the
 
requirements of HRS § 386-52(a)(1). As previously stated,
 
HRS § 386-52(a)(1) requires the employer to notify "the injured
 
employee and the director in writing of any such credit request
 
stating the reasons for such credit and informing the injured
 
employee that the employee has the right to file a written
 
request for a hearing to submit any evidence to dispute such a
 
credit[.]" The letter satisfies the requirement as it both
 
informs Rodrigues and the Director of the credit request and
 
informs Rodrigues of an opportunity to dispute the request. As
 
such, LIRAB did not err in determining that BWS is entitled to a
 
credit for benefits that were "not payable when made."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 7, 2010,
 
Decision and Order filed by the Labor and Industrial Relations
 Appeals Board is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 20, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Lila Barbara Kanae
 
for Claimant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Kamilla C.K. Chan
 Deputy Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
for Employer-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 