NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000600 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
RAMONCITO D. ABION, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2PC161000043) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ramoncito D. Abion (Abion) appeals 
from the "Judgment; Conviction and Sentence; Notice of Entry" 
(Judgment of Conviction), filed on June 13, 2018, and the 
"Stipulation and Order to Amend Judgment of Conviction Filed 
June 13, 2018" (Order to Amend Judgment of Conviction), filed on 
July 26, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(circuit court).1 
I. Background 
On January 13, 2016, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai# i (State) charged Abion with one count of Assault in the 
Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.        
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 707-711(1)(a) and/or (b) and/or (d),  alleging that on or about
January 11, 2016, Abion intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly 
caused substantial bodily injury to Temehane Visaya (Visaya) with
a dangerous instrument. 2 
 
On March 8, 2016, Abion filed a "Motion for H.R.S. § 
704-404  Examination" to determine his fitness to proceed to 
trial and whether he could be held penally responsible for his conduct. 
The circuit court granted the motion. All three 
examiners unanimously found Abion fit to proceed to trial. Two
of the examiners reported that, as to penal responsibility, 
Abion's cognitive and volitional capacities were not 
substantially impaired at the time of the alleged offense. [3]
 
2 HRS § 707-711 (2014) provides in relevant part: 
§707-711 Assault in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if: 
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another; 
(b) The person recklessly causes serious orsubstantial bodily injury to another; 
. . . 
(d) The person intentionally or knowingly causesbodily injury to another with a dangerousinstrument[.] 
3 HRS § 704-404 (2014) provides in relevant part: 
§704-404 Examination of defendant with respect to
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect.  (1)
Whenever the defendant has filed a notice of intention to rely on the defense of physical or mental disease, disorder,or defect excluding responsibility, or there is reason todoubt the defendant's fitness to proceed, or reason tobelieve that the physical or mental disease, disorder, ordefect of the defendant will or has become an issue in the case, the court may immediately suspend all further
proceedings in the prosecution. . . . 
(2) Upon suspension of further proceedings in the
prosecution, the court shall appoint three qualified examiners in
felony cases . . . to examine and report upon the physical andmental condition of the defendant. 
In felony cases the court
shall appoint at least one psychiatrist and at least one licensedpsychologist. The third member may be a psychiatrist, licensedpsychologist, or qualified physician. 
2     
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, the third examiner, Martin Blinder, M.D. (Dr. Blinder), 
reported that "[t]here are ample clinical grounds for a robust 
mental defense of the charges" based on his assessment that 
although Abion's past methamphetamine use may have caused a 
psychosis that led Abion to attack Visaya, "he was not strictly 
speaking under the influence of voluntarily ingested drugs at the 
time of the offense." Neither the State nor Abion contested the 
findings of the reports. On August 9, 2016, the circuit court 
found Abion fit to proceed. 
On September 22, 2017, the State filed its "Motion for 
Finding of Inadmissibility of HRS 704-400[4] Defense" (Motion for 
Inadmissibility Finding), requesting an evidentiary hearing on the admissibility of testimony from Dr. Blinder. The State 
expected Dr. Blinder to testify that Abion's conduct was the 
result of methamphetamine psychosis. The State argued that 
Dr. Blinder's testimony would be irrelevant and should be 
precluded under Hawai# i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 104
5 
4 HRS § 704-400 (2014) provides: 
§704-400 Physical or mental disease, disorder, or
defect excluding penal responsibility. (1) A person is not
responsible, under this Code, for conduct if at the time of
the conduct as a result of physical or mental disease,disorder, or defect the person lacks substantial capacityeither to appreciate the wrongfulness of the person'sconduct or to conform the person's conduct to therequirements of law. 
(2)
 As used in this chapter, the terms "physical or
mental disease, disorder, or defect" do not include anabnormality manifested only by repeated penal or otherwiseanti-social conduct. 
5 HRE Rule 104 (2016) provides in relevant part: 
(a) Questions of admissibility generally. Preliminary
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be awitness, the existence of a privilege, or the admissibilityof evidence shall be determined by the court, subject to theprovisions of subsection (b). In making its determinationthe court is not bound by the rules of evidence except thosewith respect to privileges. 
3          
           
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because, pursuant to HRS § 702-230(3),6 intoxication does not, in 
itself, constitute a physical or mental disease, disorder, or 
defect within the meaning of HRS § 704-400. 
An evidentiary hearing was held on October 6, 2017, at 
which time the circuit court qualified Dr. Blinder as an expert 
in the field of psychiatry and to render an opinion as to whether 
an individual is suffering from a physical or mental disease, 
disorder, or defect. At the hearing, Dr. Blinder testified that 
he had examined Abion and diagnosed him with methamphetamine 
psychosis, which was largely in remission at the time of 
examination. Dr. Blinder elaborated that methamphetamine 
is a recreational substance which does a lot more than what 
the people who are inclined to take this drug think it willdo. That is, in addition to giving you more energy and atleast temporarily a certain mental clarity, over time itcauses structural changes in the brain, yet subtle, butpowerful enough to render somebody periodically psychotic.And, in fact, since these changes in the brain are permanentlong after they have given up methamphetamines, theycontinue to have paranoid thoughts, they continue to besusceptible to auditory hallucinations and other abhorrentqualities that are characteristic of people with psychoses. 
Dr. Blinder stated that he did not believe that everyone suffers
from structural changes in the brain from long-term 
methamphetamine use, but agreed that  
people with an absolutely clean genetic makeup can develop
methamphetamine psychoses . . . . [b]ut there are alsopeople who carry genetic markers for mental illnesses thatmay not by themselves be enough to manifest the disease, butwhen they take methamphetamine over extended periods oftime, it may cause that mental illness to manifest[.] 
Dr. Blinder opined that in Abion's case, Abion carried some sort 
of genetic predisposition to psychosis that manifested with his 
prolonged use of methamphetamine, and that to a reasonable degree 
of medical probability, he would not have developed the psychosis 
absent his use of methamphetamine. Dr. Blinder testified that 
his conclusion was based on: Abion stating that he had an aunt 
6 HRS § 702-230(3) (Supp. 2016) provides: "Intoxication does not, in
itself, constitute a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect within the
meaning of section 704-400. " 
4           
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
who spent time in a mental hospital, how well Abion was doing 
prior to getting into methamphetamine, and the late blossoming of
the psychosis. The court then questioned Dr. Blinder about 
whether the aunt was determined to be a blood relative, as 
follows:  
THE COURT: Did you try to determine [whether the aunt
Abion spoke of was a blood relative]? 
THE WITNESS: I did not, and if it's not a blood
relative, then it's totally irrelevant. 
THE COURT: Okay. So how does that change your
opinion if it's not a blood relative? 
THE WITNESS: It doesn't change it, it just pulls out
from under my conclusions one of its bases, so it makes me
less confident that this man is carrying some sort of lowgrade genetic endowment that predisposes him for psychoses.It shifts all of the responsibility onto themethamphetamine, since I have indicated earlier, there aresome unlucky people with no genetic predisposition, they usethese drugs, and that's enough to send them into a mentalhospital. 
Dr. Blinder also opined that based on looking at the paperwork 
and talking to Abion, Abion was "not, quote, under the influence 
of or intoxicated with the methamphetamine, but rather was 
suffering from its permanent or long-term effects" at the time of
the alleged offense.  
On November 11, 2017, the circuit court filed its 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting State's
Motion for Finding of Inadmissibility of HRS 704-400 Defense" 
(Order Granting Motion for Inadmissibility Finding), in which it 
made the following conclusions of law (COLs):  
1. Preliminary questions concerning the admissibility
of evidence shall be determined by the court. H.R.E. 
104(a). 
2. Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute a
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect within themeaning of HRS Section 704-400. H.R.S. 702-230(3). 
3. Intoxication is not a defense to any offense,
unless specifically provided for in H.R.S. § 702-230.
[7] 
7 HRS § 702-230 (Supp. 2016) prohibits the use of self-intoxication as
a defense under HRS § 704-400, by providing that: 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. A drug-induced or exacerbated mental illness does
not constitute a defense. State v. Young, 93 Hawai #i 224,
232, 999 P.2d 230, 238 (2000). 
5. Dr. Blinder's testimony that Defendant was
suffering from a psychosis caused by long-standing drug
abuse does not constitute a defense. 
6. Further, Defendant cannot now benefit from long-
term drug abuse by asserting that the voluntary damage hedid to his body now constitutes a defense. 
§702-230 Intoxication.  (1) Self-induced intoxication
is prohibited as a defense to any offense, except asspecifically provided in this section. 
(2) Evidence of the nonself-induced or pathological
intoxication of the defendant shall be admissible to proveor negative the conduct alleged or the state of mindsufficient to establish an element of the offense. Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant is admissible to prove or negative conduct or to prove state of mindsufficient to establish an element of an offense. Evidence of self-induced intoxication of the defendant is not admissible to negative the state of mind sufficient toestablish an element of the offense. 
(3) Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute a physical
or mental disease, disorder, or defect within the meaning ofsection 704-400. 
(4) Intoxication that is: 
(a) Not self-induced; or (b) Pathological, 
is a defense if by reason of the intoxication the defendant at the
time of the defendant's conduct lacks substantial capacity eitherto appreciate its wrongfulness or to conform the defendant'sconduct to the requirements of law. 
(5) In this section: 
"Intoxication" means a disturbance of mental or physical
capacities resulting from the introduction of substances into the
body. 
"Pathological intoxication" means intoxication grossly
excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, to whichthe defendant does not know the defendant is susceptible and whichresults from a physical abnormality of the defendant. 
"Self-induced intoxication" means intoxication caused by
substances which the defendant knowingly introduces into thedefendant's body, the tendency of which to cause intoxication thedefendant knows or ought to know, unless the defendant introducesthem pursuant to medical advice or under such circumstances aswould afford a defense to a charge of a penal offense. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7. Therefore, Dr. Blinder's testimony is not relevant
pursuant to H.R.E. 104, and shall not be admissible at
trial. 
On February 28, 2018, Abion filed a "Notice of 
Intention to Rely on HRS Chapter 704 Defense and Call Dr. Martin
Blinder to Testify" (Notice of Intent). In response, the State 
filed "State's Motion in Limine No. 2" on March 1, 2018, 
requesting that the circuit court issue  
[a]n order precluding the defense from introducing any
testimonial or documentary evidence that is inconsistentwith and/or contrary to and/or irrelevant in light of theCourt's ruling in its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Lawand Order Granting State's Motion for Finding ofInadmissibility of HRS 704-400 Defense, filed onNovember 11, 2017. 
On March 2, 2018, the circuit court held a hearing on 
several pre-trial motions, including State's Motion in Limine No. 
2. Abion noted that the purpose of filing the Notice of Intent 
was to make the record clear that he believed that he was entitled to use an HRS § 704-400 defense and intended to do so. 
The circuit court held that, based on its ruling in the Order 
Granting Motion for Inadmissibility Finding, voluntary 
intoxication on the part of the defendant is not a defense and 
Dr. Blinder was precluded from testifying as to Abion being under 
self-induced methamphetamine conditions. The circuit court 
clarified that its ruling did not preclude Abion from presenting 
an HRS § 704-400 defense or from eliciting evidence of the 
condition in which Abion was found on the day of the incident. 
The circuit court explained that it was only precluding 
Dr. Blinder from testifying that Abion was "under a self-induced 
methamphetamine condition" and "call[ing] it a mental defense, 
because that, [the circuit court] find[s], it's not." The 
circuit court granted State's Motion in Limine No. 2 and denied 
Abion's Notice of Intent. 
7           
            
            
             
            
               
           
         
             
              
           
              
             
  
          
              
             
              NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The jury trial commenced on March 19, 2018.8 During 
trial, the court's preclusion of Dr. Blinder's testimony arose in 
discussions with the parties, outside the presence of the jury.9 
The court provided the jury with instructions on the affirmative defense of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect, 
excluding penal responsibility. 
Following the trial, the jury found Abion guilty as 
charged. On June 13, 2018, the circuit court entered its 
Judgment of Conviction, sentencing Abion to five years of 
incarceration and various fees and conditions, and on July 26, 
2018, entered its Order to Amend Judgment of Conviction to remove 
the order for restitution. Abion timely filed his Notice of 
Appeal on July 30, 2018. 
II. Points of Error 
On appeal, Abion argues that he was deprived of a fair 
trial when the circuit court precluded him from presenting to the 
jury, "testimonial evidence through Dr. Blinder that at the time 
of the assault[, Abion] had been suffering from a physical or 
mental disease, disorder, or defect," which would exclude penal 
responsibility. Abion asserts that the circuit court committed 
this error at two junctures: first, when it granted the State's 
Motion for Inadmissibility Finding; and second, when it granted 
8 There appears to be a typographical error in the Transcripts of
Proceedings as to the dates of the trial. The Transcripts of Proceedings
initially indicate the trial being held on October 19, 2018, and October 20,2018, but the parties indicate that the trial occurred on March 19, 2018, andMarch 20, 2018, and the remainder of the Transcripts of Proceedings also statesthat the trial occurred on March 19, 2018, and March 20, 2018. It is thus presumed that trial occurred on March 19, 2018, and March 20, 2018. 
9 The court's preclusion of Dr. Blinder's testimony arose when the
State objected to defense counsel's questioning of a witness as to whether he hadseen Abion acting strangely prior to the date of the offense. The State objected as to relevance and improper character evidence. Defense counsel argued thatwhile the court had "previously ruled that Dr. Blinder was precluded, . . . the[c]ourt stated the record wouldn't be sanitized as far as Mr. Abion has displayedmental health issues." 
Later in the trial, the circuit court referenced its ruling on
State's Motion in Limine No. 2 and reiterated for the record that it "did not preclude the [d]efense [under HRS § 704-400], just the witness, and . . .Dr. Blinder was not the only way the [d]efense could be inserted into this case." 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State's Motion in Limine No. 2 and denied Abion's Notice of 
Intent. 
III.  Discussion 
Abion challenges the circuit court's determination that 
Dr. Blinder's testimony was not relevant to a defense under HRS 
§§ 702-230 and 704-400, a decision we review de novo. See State 
v. Wakisaka
, 102 Hawai# i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) ("A 
trial court's determination of relevance pursuant to Hawai# i 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 401 (1993) can produce only one 
correct result, and is therefore reviewable under the right/wrong 
standard." (footnote omitted)); 
State v. Vliet
, 95 Hawai# i 94, 
106-107, 19 P.3d 42, 54-55 (2001) ("Because the court's inquiry under HRE Rule 702 is like that involved in deciding the 
relevancy of evidence under HRE Rules 401 and 402, we employ the 
right/wrong standard in reviewing challenges to a court's 
relevancy decision under HRE Rule 702"). Accordingly, Abion 
argues that the circuit court erred in granting the State's pre
-
trial Motion for Inadmissibility Finding and in denying Abion's Notice of Intent based on this conclusion. Abion specifically 
challenges the following COLs in the court's Order Granting 
Motion for Inadmissibility Findings: 
4. A drug-induced or exacerbated mental illness does
not constitute a defense. State v. Young, 93 Hawai #i 224,
232, 999 P.2d 230, 238 (2000). 
5. Dr. Blinder's testimony that Defendant was
suffering from a psychosis caused by long-standing drug
abuse does not constitute a defense. 
6. Further, Defendant cannot now benefit from long-
term drug abuse by asserting that the voluntary damage hedid to his body now constitutes a defense. 
7. Therefore, Dr. Blinder's testimony is not relevant
pursuant to H.R.E. 104, and shall not be admissible attrial. 
We review these COLs under the right/wrong standard. State v. 
Edwards
, 96 Hawai# i 224, 231, 30 P.3d 238, 245 (2001). 
Abion first asserts that the circuit court erred in 
relying on 
Young. In Young, the defendant was charged with 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
murder in the second degree for striking another man with a 
hammer, resulting in the man's death. Young
, 93 Hawai# i at 226
-
27, 999 P.2d at 232-33. A panel of examiners concluded that the defendant was fit to proceed to trial but opined that he should 
not be held penally responsible. Id. at 227, 999 P.2d at 233. 
During the bench trial, the panel members each testified that the defendant suffered from some sort of psychosis that caused him to 
lack the substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of 
his conduct or to conform his conduct to the law, but that the 
defendant was not under the influence of drugs or alcohol at the 
time of the offense. Id. at 228, 999 P.2d at 234. A forensic 
and clinical psychologist who was not on the examination panel testified that her tests indicated that the defendant was not 
schizophrenic and that his psychosis was caused by drugs and 
alcohol. Id. at 228-29, 999 P.2d at 234-35. However, the 
psychologist admitted that "it is unclear if [the defendant] suffers from an underlying schizophrenic process that was merely 
exacerbated by his substance abuse, or if years of using drugs 
and drinking have resulted in a disorder that mimics paranoid 
schizophrenia." Id. at 229, 999 P.2d at 235. Another witness, a 
forensic and clinical neuropsychologist, testified that methamphetamine can cause symptoms similar to those experienced 
by schizophrenics, which could last for weeks or months after the 
person stops abusing the drug. Id. 
The trial court adjudged the defendant guilty as 
charged, determining, in relevant part, that: the defendant had 
been voluntarily drinking alcohol and smoking marijuana in the 
weeks leading up to the incident, had been using other illegal 
drugs during that time, and that psychosis caused by drugs can 
last for months after drug use has stopped. Id. at 230, 999 P.2d 
at 236. The court also found that the defendant was not schizophrenic and that he suffered from a mental disease or 
defect that was caused by drugs and/or alcohol, and therefore, 
the defendant's mental disease or defect did not cause him to 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lack the substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of 
his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of the
law. Id.  
On appeal, the defendant in Young argued that a drug-
induced or exacerbated mental illness, in and of itself, can 
constitute a defense to a criminal charge. Id. at 231, 999 P.2d 
at 237. The supreme court determined that "[t]he issue of a 
preexisting mental illness that is aggravated by drug abuse is 
not presented in this case" because "[t]he trial court found that
[the defendant's] mental disease, disorder, or defect was caused 
by substance abuse." Id. at 231-32, 999 P.2d at 237-38. The 
supreme court then rejected the defendant's argument that a drug-
induced mental illness is a defense, "because to [adopt that 
argument] would be contrary to the legislative intent underlying 
HRS §§ 702-230 and 704-400." Id. at 232, 999 P.2d at 238. The 
court reasoned:  
In 1986, the legislature added subsection (1) to HRS
§ 702–230, specifically prohibiting self-inducedintoxication as a defense except in limited circumstances.1986 Haw. Sess. L. Act 325, § 2 at 687–88. The conference committee stated that it "believes that when a personchooses to drink, that person should remain ultimatelyresponsible for his or her actions." Conf. Comm. Rep. No.36, in 1986 House Journal, at 928. HRS § 702–230(3)provides that intoxication alone cannot negate penalresponsibility under HRS § 704–400. To adopt the rulesuggested by Young would be contrary to this statutoryscheme. If an intoxicated person cannot escape ultimateresponsibility for his actions, neither should a defendantwho chronically engages in substance abuse. Only in theinstance when the intoxication causes the person to lack theability to form the requisite state of mind is intoxicationa defense. The same is also true of someone with a drug-induced mental illness. 
Id. 
In this case, Dr. Blinder diagnosed Abion with 
methamphetamine psychosis. Dr. Blinder opined that Abion was not
"under the influence of or intoxicated with the methamphetamine" 
at the time of the offense but "was suffering from its permanent 
or long-term effects." Dr. Blinder essentially came to two 
alternative conclusions: (1) Abion carried some sort of genetic  
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
predisposition to psychosis that manifested with his prolonged 
use of methamphetamine; or (2) Abion's psychosis was fully caused 
by his prior substance abuse. 
On appeal, Abion argues that Dr. Blinder's testimony 
established that Abion suffered from drug-exacerbated psychosis -
- in other words, "[h]is psychosis appears to have existed prior 
to his chronic drug use, but did not manifest itself until after 
he started using methamphetamine." Thus, he argues, this genetic
predisposition constituted a "preexisting condition" that existed
independently and apart from his drug use and is a defense under 
HRS § 704-400. We find no merit to this contention.   
Dr. Blinder did not provide any evidentiary support for 
his conclusion that Abion carried a genetic predisposition to 
psychosis. Dr. Blinder primarily relied on Abion's statement 
that he had "an auntie who spent a lot of time in a mental 
hospital" and came to the conclusion that therefore "in [Abion's] 
genetic pool there's something floating in there that he'd be 
better off if he didn't carry it." When questioned by the 
circuit court, however, Dr. Blinder admitted that he did not 
determine if Abion's aunt was a blood relative. Dr. Blinder 
testified that even if the auntie was not a blood relative, his 
diagnosis of methamphetamine psychosis would not change and an 
absence of a genetic predisposition to psychosis would simply 
"shift[] all of the responsibility onto the methamphetamine[.]" 
Even assuming Abion carried a genetic predisposition for 
psychosis, Dr. Blinder stated that Abion's "prolonged meth use 
. . . brought it out[.]" 
Regardless of whether Abion did indeed have a genetic 
predisposition for psychosis, Dr. Blinder repeatedly testified 
that, absent the long-term abuse of methamphetamine, Abion's 
psychosis would not have manifested. Thus, Dr. Blinder's 
testimony does not establish that this was a case of drug-
exacerbated mental illness, despite Abion's argument on appeal to 
the contrary. Rather, Dr. Blinder's testimony established that 
12          
            
              
               
               
        
            
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Abion suffered from a drug-induced psychosis, i.e., his psychosis 
was caused by the long-term drug use. As provided in Young, a 
drug-induced mental illness does not constitute a defense. Id. 
Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in concluding that Dr. Blinder's testimony was not relevant to establish a defense 
under HRS §§ 702-230 and 704-400, and in precluding Dr. Blinder 
from testifying that Abion was suffering from a psychosis caused 
by Abion's long-term abuse of methamphetamine.
10 COLs 5-7 in the 
Order Granting Motion for Inadmissibility Finding are correct. The circuit court did not err in granting the Motion for 
Inadmissibility Finding and State's Motion in Limine No. 2 and in 
denying Abion's Notice of Intent. 
To the extent that the circuit court cited Young in COL 
4 of the Order Granting Motion for Inadmissibility Finding for 
the proposition that a drug-exacerbated mental illness does not 
constitute a defense, we conclude that this was error. The 
supreme court in Young expressly rejected the defendant's 
argument that a drug-induced mental illness is a defense, but 
noted that "[t]he issue of a preexisting mental illness that is 
aggravated by drug abuse [was] not presented in [that] case" and 
therefore did not address whether a drug-exacerbated mental 
illness constitutes a defense. Id. However, the error was 
harmless, see
 Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(a), as it 
did not affect Abion's substantial rights in light of our 
conclusion that Dr. Blinder's testimony only served to establish 
that Abion's psychosis was caused by his long-term abuse of 
methamphetamine and was not relevant to establish a possible 
defense founded upon any drug-exacerbated mental illness. 
10 Abion also argues that a drug-induced disease, disorder, or defect
may excuse a defendant's criminal conduct if it continues to exist when the
defendant is no longer under the influence of the drug. This argument is also precluded under Young . In this case, as was the case in Young , Abion was found
not to be under the influence of any intoxicants at the time of the offense.Nevertheless, permitting Abion to assert a voluntarily drug-induced mentalillness as a defense "would be contrary to the legislative intent underlying HRS§§ 702-230 and 704-400." Id. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Abion also asserts that whether self-intoxication 
precluded Abion's insanity defense was a question for the jury to
decide and therefore, the circuit court erred by precluding 
Dr. Blinder's testimony. Abion directs us to State v. Eager, 140
Hawai# i 167, 176-77, 398 P.3d 756, 765-66 (2017), in which the 
supreme court held that  
 
when a defendant both a) knowingly ingests an intoxicating
substance, the tendency of which to cause intoxication thedefendant knows or ought to know, and b) experiences mentaldisease, disorder, or defect, the trier of fact mustdetermine whether the mental disturbance would excuse the defendant's criminal conduct absent the influence of the intoxicant. 
Abion argues that the jury, as trier of fact, was required to 
reconcile evidence of a physical or mental disease, disorder, or 
defect, with evidence of self-induced intoxication to determine 
whether the disease, disorder, or defect, would excuse the 
defendant's criminal conduct absent the influence of the 
intoxicant. Abion further asserts that Eager's instruction 
indicated a recognition of the defense of "settled insanity" and 
implicitly overruled Young. 
Abion's reliance on Eager is misplaced. In Eager, the 
defendant, charged with assault in the second degree, asserted 
the defense of lack of penal responsibility due to a physical or 
mental disease, disorder, or defect, arguing that he was 
experiencing a psychotic episode at the time of the offense. Id. 
at 168, 398 P.3d at 757. The trial court found the defendant guilty as charged, rejecting the defense under HRS § 702-230 by 
concluding that "any disease, disorder, or defect the Defendant 
may have been suffering from at the time of the assault was 
self-induced and the product of the Defendant's refusal to take 
his prescribed medication and his use of marijuana." Id. On 
appeal, the supreme court held that "the circuit court's holding that [the defendant]'s failure to take his medication caused his 
psychotic behavior is inconsistent with the plain language of the 
statute, which requires the introduction of substances into the 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
body." Id. at 169, 398 P.3d at 758 (emphasis in original). 
Because the trial court based its finding of criminal 
responsibility on both the defendant's smoking marijuana and his 
failure to take prescribed medication, without distinguishing the 
effects of either, the supreme court held the fact finder had to 
determine "whether the mental disturbance would excuse the 
defendant's criminal conduct absent the influence of the 
intoxicant." Id. at 177, 398 P.3d at 766. 
Eager presented a case where there was no evidence or 
finding in the bench trial that substance abuse caused the 
defendant's mental disease, disorder, or defect. As discussed 
supra, Dr. Blinder's testimony provided that Abion's psychosis 
was caused by his methamphetamine use and did not establish that 
Abion suffered from any separate organic mental defect. 
Similarly, in Young, the trial court concluded that the 
defendant's mental illness was caused by the use of intoxicants. 
Thus, Eager is distinguishable from the instant matter as well as 
Young. Eager did not overrule Young in any way. Rather, Young 
remains good law and governs here. 
IV. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the June 13, 2018 
Judgment of Conviction and the July 26, 2018 Order to Amend Judgment of Conviction. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Gerald K. Enriques,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Associate Judge 
15 