NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000465
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ALLENE KAPLAN,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
STANLEY MARTIN LEHMAN, also known as Stanley Lehman,
Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(Civil NO. 11-1-0146)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff–Appellant Allene Kaplan (Kaplan), pro se,
appeals from the Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of
the Third Circuit (circuit court)1 on May 14, 2015, pursuant to
the "Order Dismissing Counterclaim Filed By Defendant/
Counterclaimant Stanley Lehman and Entering Default Against
Defendant/Counterclaimant on Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant
Allene Kaplan's First Amended Complaint" and the "Findings of
Fact and Conclusions of Law Regarding Entry of Default Judgment
in Favor of Plaintiff and Against Defendant."  The Final Judgment
entered judgment on several counts of Kaplan's Amended Complaint
in favor of Kaplan, dismissed the remaining counts of the Amended
1The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Complaint with prejudice, and dismissed Defendant-Appellee
Stanley Martin Lehman's Counterclaim without prejudice.
On appeal, Kaplan requests that "this Court reverse the
fraud count in favor of Kaplan and against Lehman; dismiss the
counterclaim with prejudice; award Kaplan all  attorneys' fees,
actual damages and costs, as well as treble and /or punitive
damages to the extent allowable by law . . . ."
Upon careful review of the record and Kaplan's opening
brief, and having given due consideration to the arguments and
issues raised by Kaplan, as well as the relevant statutory and
case law, we affirm.
We first note that Kaplan's opening brief substantially
fails to conform to the requirements of HRAP Rule 28(b), which
"is, alone, sufficient basis to affirm the judgment of the
circuit court."  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai# i 225, 228,
909 P.2d 553, 556 (1995).
HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) requires that the opening brief
contain
[a] concise statement of the case, setting forth the nature
of the case, the course and disposition of proceedings in
the court or agency appealed from, and the facts material to
consideration of the questions and points presented, with
record references supporting each statement of fact or
mention of court or agency proceedings. In presenting those
material facts, all supporting and contradictory evidence
shall be presented in summary fashion, with appropriate
record references. Record references shall include a
description of the document referenced, the JIMS or JEFS
docket number and electronic page citations, or if a JIMS or
JEFS docket number is not available, the document’s filing
date and electronic page citations within the document.
References to transcripts shall include the JIMS or JEFS
docket number, the date of the transcript, and the specific
electronic page or pages referenced. Lengthy quotations from
the record may be reproduced in the appendix. There shall be
appended to the brief a copy of the judgment, decree,
findings of fact and conclusions of law, order, opinion or
decision relevant to any point on appeal, unless otherwise
ordered by the court
.
(Emphases added.)  Kaplan's opening brief does not contain a
single citation to the record.  Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn
& Stifel, 117 Hawai #i 92, 114 n.23, 176 P.3d 91, 113 n.23 (2008)
("This court is not obligated to sift through the voluminous
record to verify an appellant's inadequately documented
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
contentions." (citation omitted)).  The opening brief also does
not include copies of the decisions from which the appeal is
taken.
HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) requires that the opening brief also
contain
[a] concise statement of the points of error set forth in
separately numbered paragraphs.  Each point shall state: (i)
the alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii)
where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii)
where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the
manner in which the alleged error was brought to the
attention of the court or agency.
Kaplan's opening brief does not contain any points of error
committed by the circuit court, and as stated above, fails to
cite to where in the record any error may have occurred. 
Consequently, Kaplan's opening brief also does not contain any
argument "on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with
citations to the authorities, statutes and parts of the record
relied on," as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
Despite Kaplan's noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28(b),
"this court has consistently adhered to the policy of affording
litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the
merits, where possible."  Bettencourt , 80 Hawai #i at 230, 909
P.2d at 558 (citation and internal quotations omitted).  However,
because Kaplan's opening brief contains no discernible argument,
we are unable to address the merits of any issues that Kaplan may
have intended to raise in her opening brief.  See Kakinami v.
Kakinami, 127 Hawai #i 126, 144 n.16, 276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16
(2012) (citing In re Guardianship of Carlsmith , 113 Hawai #i 236,
246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007) (noting that this court may
"disregard a particular contention if the appellant makes no
discernible argument in support of that position") (internal
quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
Kaplan makes a variety of conclusory statements and
claims in her opening brief.  It appears from her opening brief
that she ultimately contends that the circuit court erred in
dismissing her claim for fraud in her First Amended Complaint.
The circuit court dismissed Kaplan's fraud claim on the basis
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
that "[Kaplan] has failed to prove pecuniary injury or damages
legally caused by false statements made by [Lehman]."  Kaplan
does not address this conclusion by the circuit court, nor does
she point to anything in the record addressing this conclusion or
demonstrating that it is in error.
Beyond her opening brief, Kaplan requests that we also
review her "PETITION FOR WRIT OF PROHIBITION AND WRIT OF
MANDAMUS; EXHIBITS 1-51 filed in the Supreme Court of the State
of Hawai# i on March 4, 2014" (Petition for Writ) and her "MOTION
TO AMEND FINDINGS BY THE COURT REGARDING ENTRY OF DEFAULT
JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF PLAINTIFF AND AGAINST DEFENDANT AND
DECLARATION OF PLAINTIFF; EXHIBITS A-G filed in the Circuit of
the Third Circuit State of Hawai# i on March 18, 2015" (Motion to
Amend) as addendums to her opening brief.  First, we note that
the Petition for Writ does not appear to be part of the record in
the instant case, so we cannot consider it.  See Munoz v. Yuen,
66 Haw. 603, 606, 670 P.2d 825, 827 (1983) ("[T]his court can
only consider those materials in the record[.]" (citation
omitted)).  Second, the Motion to Amend, like the opening brief,
is devoid of record citations and specific allegations of error
committed by the circuit court.  At best, the Motion to Amend
vaguely argues that the circuit court's findings of fact are
"clearly erroneous," but makes no specific argument as to which
findings are erroneous and the reasons therefor.  Even if we were
able to discern which findings of fact Kaplan disagrees with, we
"give due deference to the right of [the circuit court as] the
trier of fact 'to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and
draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced.'"  In re
Doe, 107 Hawai #i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973 (2005) (quoting State
v. Lubong, 77 Hawai #i 429, 432, 886 P.2d 766, 769 (1994)
(citation omitted)).  Therefore, we reject Kaplan's contention
that the circuit court's findings of fact are clearly erroneous.
We are unable to discern any additional issues or
arguments that Kaplan may have intended to raise in her opening
brief or Motion to Amend.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on the foregoing, the Final Judgment entered by
the circuit court on May 14, 2015 is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 21, 2018.
On the brief:
Allene Kaplan,
Pro Se, Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5