 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000129
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RICHARD S. TAGUCHI, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
HAWAI'I STATE HOSPITAL; CURTIS FUJIMOTO in his
official capacity and individual capacity;
JOHN DOES 1-10; DOE ENTITLES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CV. NO. 08-1-2390 RAT)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Richard S. Taguchi (Taguchi)
 
appeals from the Judgment filed on October 29, 2010, in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Taguchi
 
filed a complaint against his employer, Defendant-Appellee State
 of Hawai' i, Department of Health, Hawai' i State Hospital (State) 
and his supervisor, Defendant-Appellee Curtis Fujimoto
 (Fujimoto), in his individual and official capacities
 (collectively, "Defendants"). Taguchi alleged claims against
 Defendants: (1) under the Hawai' i Whistleblowers Protection Act 
HWPA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 378-62 (Supp. 2011)
2
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
2
 The HWPA is codified at HRS §§ 378-61 through 378-69. HRS § 378-62
provides:
 
§378-62 Discharge of, threats to, or discrimination against
employee for reporting violations of law. An employer shall not
discharge, threaten, or otherwise discriminate against an employee
regarding the employee's compensation, terms, conditions, location, or
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Count I); and (2) for intentional infliction of emotional
 
distress (Count II). 
The Circuit Court approved the parties' stipulation to
 
dismiss with prejudice Count I against Fujimoto in his official
 capacity and Count II against the State, and the Circuit Court
 granted, in part, Defendants' motion for judgement on the
 pleadings and dismissed Count I against Fujimoto in his
 individual capacity and Count II against all Defendants. The
 State thereafter filed a motion for summary judgment on the 
remaining claim, the Count I HWPA claim against the State. The
 Circuit Court granted the State's motion for summary judgment. 
On appeal, the sole point of error raised by Taguchi is
 
that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment with
 respect to his claim in Count I that the State violated the HWPA. 
As set forth below, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 granting summary judgment in favor of the State on this claim. 
We vacate the Judgment to the extent that it entered judgment in
 favor of the State on Taguchi's HWPA claim in Count I. We affirm
 the reminder of the Judgment, which was not challenged by Taguchi
 on appeal, that entered judgment in favor of Fujimoto in both his
 individual and official capacities on all counts in the complaint
 and in favor of the State on Count II.
 
privileges of employment because:
 
(1)	 The employee, or a person acting on behalf of the
employee, reports or is about to report to the
employer, or reports or is about to report to a public
body, verbally or in writing, a violation or a
suspected violation of:
 
(A)	 A law, rule, ordinance, or regulation, adopted
pursuant to law of this State, a political
subdivision of this State, or the United States;
 or 
(B)	 A contract executed by the State, a political
subdivision of the State, or the United States,
 
unless the employee knows that the report is false; or
 
(2)	 An employee is requested by a public body to
participate in an investigation, hearing, or inquiry
held by that public body, or a court action. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
We review a grant of summary judgment de novo. Kamaka
 
v.
 Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176 
P.3d 91, 103 (2008). "Summary judgment is appropriate if the 
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. (block quote format and citation omitted). We must view the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. 
Taguchi and the State agree that to establish a prima
 
facie case of an HWPA violation, a plaintiff must show that: (1)
 the plaintiff engaged in activity protected by the HWPA; (2) the
 plaintiff was thereafter subjected to adverse employment action;
 and (3) a causal connection exists between the two. See Crosby
 
v. State Dep't of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai' i 332, 341-42, 876 P.2d 
1300, 1309-10 (1994). We conclude that when viewed in the light most favorable to Taguchi, he presented sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case. 
The Circuit Court's primary basis for granting summary
 
judgment in favor of the State was Taguchi's purported failure to
 show a causal connection between the alleged protected activity
 and adverse employment action. With respect to this causation
 element, the plaintiff's engagement in protected conduct must be
 a "substantial or motivating factor" for the adverse employment
 action. Id. at 342, 876 P.2d at 1310. Taguchi presented
 
evidence that after he engaged in protected activity, he was
 subjected to a pattern of retaliatory adverse employment actions
 by his supervisor. Although many of the alleged adverse actions
 occurred outside the applicable statute of limitations, they were
 relevant to establishing the requisite causal connection by
 showing a continuing pattern linking the alleged adverse actions
 taken outside the limitations period with those taken within the
 limitations period.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State presented legitimate non-retaliatory reasons
 
for the employment actions taken against Taguchi, which if
 
unrebutted would have served to break the causal connection. See
 
id. However, Taguchi presented evidence that the State's non-
retaliatory reasons were pretextual. In opposition to the
 State's motion for summary judgment, Taguchi submitted a
 declaration in which he asserted that on January 8, 2008, he
 approached Fujimoto and attempted to resolve their past
 differences by forgiving Fujimoto. Taguchi stated that Fujimoto
 responded by saying that Fujimoto was never going to forgive
 Taguchi for Taguchi's report of misconduct by Fujimoto, because
 Taguchi refused to admit that Taguchi made witnesses lie about
 what had happened. This interaction, when viewed in the light
 most favorable to Taguchi, created a genuine issue of material
 fact concerning whether the State's non-retaliatory reasons for
 its employment actions against Taguchi were pretextual. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary
 judgment against the State as to Count I of the complaint.
 
II.
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment to the extent
 
that it entered judgment in favor of the State on Count I of the
 complaint. We affirm the Judgment in all other respects. We
 remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 15, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Venetia K. Carpenter-Asui
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge
 James E. Halvorson 
Nelson Y. Nabeta Deputy Attorneys General Department of the Attorney GeneralState of Hawai
'i 
for Defendant-Appellee 
4
 