NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000886
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF AC
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 17-00222)
ORDER OF DISMISSAL FOR LACK OF APPELLATE JURISDICTION
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Appellant Mother (Mother ) appeals from the "Orders
Concerning Child Protective Act", filed on October 10, 2018, in
the Family Court of the First Circuit ( Family Court),  which
ordered placement of Mother's and Father's child, AC, under
family supervision with Father in California after AC attains
medical stability.  Mother also challenges the "Findings of Fact
and Conclusions of Law" entered on December 4, 2010 by the Family
court.  1
I.  Appellate Jurisdiction
Mother's appeal from the "Orders Concerning Child
Protective Act" was untimely.   It thus appears from the record2
1  The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
2  Mother's Notice of Appeal, filed on November 13, 2018, is
untimely because it was filed 34 days after entry of the "Orders
Concerning Child Protective Act" filed on October 10, 2018, in
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that Mother's counsel was ineffective in failing to timely file
an appeal in this case.  In termination of parental rights cases,
the Hawai#i Supreme Court has held that "the proper inquiry when
a claim of ineffectiveness of counsel is raised in a termination
of parental rights case is whether the proceedings were
fundamentally unfair as a result of counsel's incompetence."  In
re RGB, 123 Hawai# i 1, 25, 229 P.3d 1066, 1090 (2010) (emphasis
added) (citations omitted).  In particular, the Hawai#i Supreme
Court "adopt[ed] a fundamental fairness test, rather than
importing criminal law concepts directly[.]"  Id.
We must determine whether we have appellate
jurisdiction.  Given the standard adopted in In re RGB, we must
review whether the proceedings in this case were fundamentally
unfair due to the failure by Mother's counsel to timely file an
appeal.  Thus, in essence, we must review Mother's claims of
error by the Family Court.
II.  Review of Asserted Errors
Mother challenges Findings of Fact ( FOF) Nos. 46, 50,
55, 56, 57, 59, 64, and 72 and Conclusions of Law ( COL) Nos. 9,
10, 11, and 12.  Mother contends that her points of error "relate
to three overarching errors by the court that exceeded the bounds
of reason:" (1) that because of her mental illness, Mother could
not be trusted; (2)  that through Father's limited interaction
2(...continued)
violation of the 15 day time limit in Rule 3 of the Rules
Expediting Child Protective Appeals (RECPA) and the 30 day time
limit in Rule 4(a)(1) of the Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP).  The RECPA apply to this case and RECPA Rule 3 provides
that when an appeal is permitted by law, the notice of appeal
shall be filed within 15 days after entry of the judgment or
appealable order or decree.  If the appeal is not filed within
this period, "but is otherwise filed within the time permitted by
Rule 4 of the Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure, the appeal
shall not be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction[.]"  RECPA Rule
3.  HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) provides that the time for filing a civil
appeal is "30 days after entry of the judgment or appealable
order."  Under either standard, Mother's Notice of Appeal was not
timely filed.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
with his therapist, Richard Myatt ( Myatt), LMFT, of the Fontana
Counseling and Recovery Center, Father alleviated the safety
concerns raised by the allegations of domestic abuse; and (3)
that removing the child from a safe and appropriate placement
where he had frequent interaction with his Mother to whom he was
significantly bonded was in the best interest of the child. 
Mother does not provide specific arguments as to each
challenged FOF and COL.  Instead, Mother argues that (1)  her
claim that Father abused her was not a product of her mental
health issues, which were diagnosed as grandiose or delusional,
and her injuries were substantiated by another witness; (2)
"given Father's documented history of drug abuse, it stands to
reason that Father may have well engaged in drug-fueled violent
behavior against Mother"; (3) Father's safety issue of domestic
abuse was not addressed by four non-specific therapy sessions
when domestic violence/anger management classes usually span 12
to 16 weeks; (4)  it was not appropriate to move a medically
fragile child from a place where he could interact with Mother to
an out-of-state placement; (5) Mother would not have fair access
to AC to continue reunification efforts; and (6) the Family Court
should show a preference to in-state placement under the Child
Protective Act as long as the current placement is safe and
appropriate. 
(1) and (2)  The Family Court did not find Mother's
allegations of domestic abuse stemmed from her mental health
issues.  The Family Court did not make any specific finding
regarding Mother's allegation of domestic abuse, other than
mentioning that it had a grave concern about the domestic abuse
allegations but noted there was no prior finding of domestic
abuse related to issuance of a temporary restraining order
against Father and there was a lack of any police reports related
to the alleged incidents.  FOF No. 71 states Mother's witness was
a credible witness, "but his testimony was not persuasive nor
[sic] helpful to the Court in making its decision."  Mother does
not challenge FOF No. 71.  Mother cites no authority or evidence
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in the record to support a conclusion that Father committed drug-
fueled violent behavior based on his history of substance abuse.  
(3)  As part of his service plan, Father was ordered to
participate in, inter alia , domestic violence/anger management
education.  However, after Father participated in four general
therapy sessions, Myatt concluded in his professional opinion
that Father did not have a history or capability of domestic
violence based on Father's history, behavior, and body language,
as well as his attitude toward AC and his family and family
dynamics.  Father's psychological evaluation stated that although
Father denied all allegations of domestic violence, a "State-
Trait Anger Expression Inventory, Second Edition (STAXI-2)" was
administered to gain a better understanding of the intensity of
Father's anger, how often he experiences anger, and how he
expresses his feelings of anger.  "The STAXI results did not
identify any areas of concern with state or trait anger."  A
Department of Human Services ( DHS) social worker, Lena Kakehi
(Kakehi), testified that Father's service plan was based on
either parent's initial reporting or allegations and DHS relies
upon service providers to determine how long or if there is a
need for formal classes.  Kakehi testified that through Father's
assessment, Myatt indicated it was not necessary for Father to
complete formal domestic violence/anger management classes, and
thus DHS was satisfied Father had addressed any domestic
violence/anger management problem.  
(4), (5), and (6)  In approving AC's placement with
Father, the Family Court ordered that foster custody continue
until AC was "medically stable and is able to be placed in
Father's home[.]"  The Family Court concluded that "[i]t is in
the best interests of the Child to be placed in a medical
facility in California and to be reunited with Father after the
Child becomes medically stable."  Mother cites no authority to
support her claim that Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) Chapter
587A, the Child Protective Act, demonstrates a legal preference
for in-state placement over out-of-state placement when
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
considering a child's best interest.  "HRS ยง 571-46(a) provides
standards that apply to a court's custody decision in proceedings
involving a dispute as to the custody of a minor child[.]"  A.A.
v. B.B., 139 Hawai# i 102, 106, 384 P.3d 878, 882 (2016).  None of
the factors in HRS ยง 571-46(a) state there is a preference for
in-state placement.  The Family Court also ordered "Mother may
have visitation via skype like the father had here in Hawai #i."  
Further, the Family Court ordered that the courtesy worker
provided as part of family supervision was to work with Father to
provide Mother with visitation if she was in California.  
Therefore, we disagree with Mother's claim that she would not
have fair access to AC to continue reunification efforts.  
The Family Court did not abuse its discretion by
ordering AC to be placed in a medical facility in California and
to be reunified with Father when AC becomes medically stable. 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in making
its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unless
there is a manifest abuse of discretion."  Fisher v. Fisher, 111
Hawai#i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting In re Doe, 95
Hawai#i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001)).  "Preponderance of
the evidence" shall be the standard of proof required in any
proceeding, unless otherwise specified.  HRS ยง 587A-4 (2018).  
AC was diagnosed with a medical condition requiring 24-
hour medical care and with an average life expectancy of two to
three years.  See FOF No. 32 and 36.  At the time of the
placement hearing on September 27, 2018, AC was approximately 18
months old.  See FOF No. 27.  Kakehi testified that a Multi-
Disciplinary Team ( MDT) believed it was in AC's best interest to
have contact and a connection with a parent and, thus, the MDT
recommended AC be allowed to move to California where Father
lived.  Father is bonded to AC and AC gets very excited when he
sees Father and smiles and consistently stares at Father.  The
Family Court determined that Father was truthful about his
substance abuse issues, was cooperative with DHS and all service
providers, was receptive to information about AC's medical
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
condition and showed appropriate understanding of the severity of
AC's condition, was able to find service providers near his home
in California, interacted appropriately with AC in-person and
during video conference visits, and has insight into his problems
and exhibits willingness and ability to take the steps necessary
to provide a safe family home.  See FOF No. 73.  
Mother's psychological evaluation, dated November 30,
2017, stated her denial of her mental health symptoms and need
for treatment increased the risk of neglect if she is AC's
primary caretaker.  Mother testified she does not believe she has
any mental health issues but admits she sees a psychiatrist once
every two months.  Mother also claimed that during her visits AC
learned phonics and put together sounds to answer her questions,
he shouts "hugs" while watching a DVD, and he can read words and
sound them out, while admitting AC cannot breathe through his
mouth due to a tracheal tube in his neck.  Mother also stated AC
said "yeah" and "mom" when he was one year-old.  Mother believes
she could care for AC by herself because she used to own a
daycare.  A "Report to Court" by DHS, signed by Kakehi and DHS
Supervisor Pamela Nakanelua, dated July 9, 2018, states that
visits with Mother continued to be challenging because she failed
to follow directives to stay clear of AC's medical equipment and
had difficulty regulating her emotions when she becomes upset.  
The report also states Mother appeared to not understand the
severity of AC's condition and had unreasonable expectations of
his limitations and specific medical condition.  Mother attempted
to put things in AC's mouth because she believed he was teething
despite the fact he had a gastronomy tube and tracheal tube and
she was informed during prior visits it was not safe to put
things like toothpaste or orajel into his mouth.  Kakehi
testified that during supervised visits Mother would attempt to
touch or hold AC causing tubes to disconnect and alarms to sound
and Mother failed to recognize he was in distress.  
Based on the record in this case, the Family Court did
not err in determining that: Mother was not willing and able to
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan, because she was unable to recognize that her mental health
issues affected her ability to care for AC and that she could not
care for AC, even with supervised visits in a medical facility;
and Father was willing and able to provide AC with a safe family
home with the assistance of a service plan because he was
addressing his safety concerns, recognized the severity of AC's
condition, and demonstrated appropriate interaction with AC.
Under these circumstances, we conclude the proceedings
in this case were not fundamentally unfair as a result of the
failure by Mother's counsel to timely file an appeal.
 Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that, due to the
untimely filing of Mother's notice of appeal, this appeal is
dismissed for lack of appellate jurisdiction.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 13, 2019. 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
7