NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001369 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KIM RAYNARD MASSEY, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING PRISONER NO. 12-1-0032)
(CRIMINAL NO. 06-1-2105)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Kim Raynard Massey (Massey)
 
appeals pro se from the denial of his Hawai 'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 Petition,1
 which was ordered in the
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Hearing
 
for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing" entered on November
 3, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
2
 (circuit
 
court).
 
1 Massey's notice of appeal states that he appeals from the "final
Judgment and Decision of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit . . . attached
hereto as exhibit 'A,'" but attached to his notice of appeal is the "Order
Denying Petitioner's Motion for Appointment of Counsel and Order Denying
Motion for Leave to Amend and Clarify Petition." We construe Massey's appeal
as being taken from the circuit court's order denying Massey's HRPP Rule 40
Petition. See City & Cty. of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275, 554 P.2d
233, 235 (1976) ("[A] mistake in designating the judgment, or in designating
the part appealed from if only a part is designated, should not result in loss
of the appeal as long as the intent to appeal from a specific judgment can be
fairly inferred from the notice and the appellee is not misled by the
mistake.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
2 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Massey contends that he received (1)
 
ineffective assistance of counsel during the underlying criminal
 
trial and (2) ineffective assistance of appellate counsel in the
 direct appeal from his conviction.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Massey's
appeal is without merit.
 
I. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel at Trial
 
Massey asserted in his HRPP Rule 40 Petition that he
 
received ineffective assistance of his trial counsel.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held, "a claim of 
ineffective assistance of counsel is not considered 'waived' for the purposes of an HRPP Rule 40 Petition if there was 'no realistic opportunity' for the petitioner to raise the claim in the proceedings specified by the rule." Fagaragan v. State, 132 
Hawai
'i 224, 235, 320 P.3d 889, 900 (2014). 
On November 22, 2006, the circuit court entered an
 
order appointing the Office of the Public Defender as counsel for
 Massey in Cr. No. 06-1-2105. Deputy Public Defender Debra Loy
 represented Massey at trial. Attorney Barry L. Sooalo
 represented Massey on the direct appeal.
 
On the direct appeal, Massey asserted, among other
 
claims, that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance.
 State v. Massey, No. 30331 at *1 (App. June 9, 2011) (SDO). 
Specifically, Massey pointed to "(a) counsel's failure to present
 a witness to contest the State's expert fire witness regarding
 possible causes of the fire, (b) counsel's failure to object to
 hearsay evidence, and (c) counsel's failure to object to the
 cumulative nature and relevance of the State's expert fire
 witness." Id.
 
Under these circumstances, where Massey already alleged
 
ineffective assistance of his trial counsel on his direct appeal
 and was represented by an attorney different than the one who
 represented him at trial, we affirm the circuit court's decision 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the claim for ineffective assistance of trial counsel was
 
waived under HRPP Rule 40(a)(3)3
 because Massey had a "realistic
opportunity" to raise these arguments in his direct appeal.
II. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel on Direct Appeal 
Massey argues in his HRPP Rule 40 Petition and on
 
appeal that the attorney who represented him on his direct appeal
 was ineffective because the attorney prepared the opening brief
 in contravention of Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28, failed to file a timely appeal to the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court, "[f]ail[ed] to prefect [sic] [a] Prosecutorial Misconduct
 Argument," and "failed to prefect [sic] the Argument that Trial
 Judge abused his Discretion" in admitting expert testimony. 
In order to establish the ineffective assistance of
 
counsel on appeal, a petitioner must show that (1) his
appellate counsel omitted an appealable issue, and (2) in
light of the entire record, the status of the law, and the
space and time limitations inherent in the appellate
process, a reasonably competent, informed and diligent
criminal attorney would not have omitted that issue.
 
Domingo v. State, 76 Hawai 'i 237, 242, 873 P.2d 775, 780 (1994) 
(citing Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 466-67, 848 P.2d 966, 977­
78 (1993)).
 
An "appealable issue" is an error or omission by
counsel, judge, or jury resulting in the withdrawal or
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.
Every appealable issue is not required to be asserted. The
 page limitation on the appellate briefs and the dictates of
 
3 HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides:
 
Rule 40. POST-CONVICTION PROCEEDING.
 
(a) Proceedings and grounds.
 
. . . .
 (3) I
NAPPLICABILITY . Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled
upon or were waived. Except for a claim of illegal
sentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have been
raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated under
this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the
petitioner's failure to raise the issue. There is a
 rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or
to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
effective appellate advocacy compel appellate counsel to
advance a limited number of key issues.
 
If an appealable issue is omitted, then both the
issues actually presented on appeal as well as those omitted
are evaluated in light of the entire record, the status of
the law and, most importantly, counsel's knowledge of both.
Counsel's scope of review and knowledge of the law are
assessed, in light of all the circumstances, as that
information a reasonably competent, informed and diligent
attorney in criminal cases in our community should possess.
Counsel's 
informed  decision as to which issues to present on
appeal will not ordinarily be second-guessed. Counsel's
 performance need not be errorless. If, however, an
appealable issue is omitted as a result of the performance
of counsel whose competence fell below that required of
attorneys in criminal cases then appellant's counsel is
constitutionally ineffective.
 
Briones, 74 Haw. at 465-67, 848 P.2d at 977-78 (footnotes
 
omitted).
  Massey's first argument is that his appellate counsel
 
was ineffective because he prepared and submitted Massey's
 opening brief on the direct appeal in contravention of HRAP Rule
 28. In Massey's direct appeal, we deemed Massey's argument that his trial counsel was ineffective because she failed to object to the relevance or cumulative nature of the Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai
'i's (State) expert fire witness testimony waived, 
because the opening brief "[did] not explain how or where in the record the testimony is cumulative, or how counsel's alleged failure to object to that testimony amounted to the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Massey, SDO at *4. We also noted that Massey's argument that his trial counsel did not object to "numerous instances of hearsay evidence" was not supported by legal authorities in contravention of HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). Massey, SDO at *3 n.7. This lack of 
compliance with HRAP Rule 28, we noted, was "a pervasive problem throughout the opening brief." Id. at *1 n.4. 
Massey's HRPP Rule 40 Petition and his opening brief in
 
this appeal do not explain how his appellate counsel's
 preparation of the opening brief for the direct appeal led to the
 omission of an "appealable issue." Massey has not shown that the
 argument regarding Massey's trial counsel's failure to object to
 the relevance or cumulative nature of the State's fire expert
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witness's testimony would have, even if fully briefed, raised a 
potentially meritorious defense. Additionally, even though Massey's appellate counsel did not support the argument that Massey's trial counsel failed to object to hearsay evidence with legal authorities as required by HRAP Rule 28, this court addressed the merits of the argument and concluded that "counsel's failure to object to the identified hearsay included in [the investigator's] testimony did not amount to ineffective assistance of counsel." Massey, SDO at *4. Massey has failed to 
demonstrate that his appellate counsel's noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28 resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. See Domingo, 76 Hawai
'i at 242, 
873 P.2d at 780. 
Massey's second argument is that his appellate counsel 
failed to timely appeal to the Hawai 'i Supreme Court. The 
issuance of a writ of certiorari is a matter within the discretion of the supreme court. Where the record does not show the "withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense," an HRPP Rule 40 petitioner will not be awarded relief on the grounds that the ineffective assistance of his or her appellate counsel denied the petitioner of discretionary review by the supreme court. See Briones, 74 Haw. 
at 465-66, 848 P.2d at 977-78. Here, Massey has not demonstrated the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense, and therefore, we cannot grant Massey HRPP Rule 40 relief. 
Massey's third argument, that his appellate counsel 
failed to raise prosecutorial misconduct as an issue on appeal, is based on Massey's contention that the State's expert witness relied on improper methodology regarding fire scene investigation. Massey argues, "It is the duty of the prosecution to refrain from improper methods Calculated to Produce a Wrongful Conviction." Prosecutorial misconduct may be an appealable issue. See State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai
'i 83, 93, 26 P.3d 572, 582 
(2001) ("Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard[.]"). On 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
direct appeal, Massey raised a number of points of error,
 
including,
 
the [circuit court] erred when it (1) denied [Massey's]
motion to dismiss under Rule 48 of [HRPP] without making
appropriate findings on the reocrd [sic], (2) failed to
apply the proper factor's [sic] in denying the motion to
dismiss after a second mistrial was declared, and (3) failed
to declare a mistrial after two of the State's witnesses
 violated the exclusionary rule. In addition, Massey
contends that he was (4) denied effective assistance of
counsel at trial, as evidenced by (a) counsel's failure to
present a witness to contest the State's expert fire witness
regarding possible causes of the fire, (b) counsel's failure
to object to hearsay evidence, and (c) counsel's failure to
object to the cumulative nature and relevance of the State's
expert fire witness.
 
Massey, SDO at *1. Massey has not shown that his appellate 
counsel's failure to raise the prosecutorial misconduct issue constituted the omission of an appealable issue. In addition, given the number of arguments made on the direct appeal and that the arguments were related to the State's expert witness testimony on the fire scene investigation, Massey has failed to demonstrate that "in light of the entire record, the status of the law, and the space and time limitations inherent in the appellate process, a reasonably competent, informed and diligent criminal attorney would not have omitted that issue." See 
Domingo, 76 Hawai
'i at 242, 873 P.2d at 780; Briones, 74 Haw. at 
466, 848 P.2d at 977-78 ("Every appealable issue is not required to be asserted."). 
Massey's fourth argument, that his appellate counsel 
failed to raise the argument that the circuit court abused its discretion by allowing in testimony from the State's expert witness, similarly fails. Again, based on Massey's failure to show that this issue constituted an appealable issue, the number of arguments made on the direct appeal and the similarity of 
those arguments to Massey's fourth argument, Massey has failed to 
meet his burden. See Domingo, 76 Hawai
'i at 242, 873 P.2d at 
780; Briones, 74 Haw. at 466, 848 P.2d at 977-78. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Hearing for Post-Conviction 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Relief Without a Hearing" entered on November 3, 2014 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 12, 2016. 
On the briefs:
  
Kim Raynard Massey
Petitioner-Appellant pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 