NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000523
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
IN THE INTEREST OF N CHILDREN: XN, SN1, EN, SN2
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 09-12206)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Father-Appellant (Father) and Mother-Cross Appellant
 
(Mother) appeal from the Order Terminating Parental Rights,
 
entered on July 15, 2011 in the Family Court of the First Circuit
 
(family court).1
 
On appeal, Father challenges Findings of Fact (Finding)
 
Nos. 37, 43, 58, 59, 64, 73, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 90, 91, and 96
 
and Conclusions of Law (Conclusion) Nos. 9, 10, and 12. Although
 
Father challenges numerous Findings and Conclusions, he only
 
provides specific arguments as to Findings Nos. 43 and 73. In
 
addition, Father argues that (1) the family court erred by
 
finding that Father was unwilling and unable to provide a safe
 
family home, now or in the reasonably foreseeable future, (2) the
 
family court abused its discretion by terminating his parental
 
rights because there was no permanent placement identified for
 
SN1, (3) the family court abused its discretion by denying his
 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion for an Immediate Review, filed on July 1, 2011, without 
holding a hearing, and (4) Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawaif i, 
Department of Human Services (DHS) failed to provide him with 
2
reasonable efforts to reunify with his children  XN, SN1, EN, and
SN2 (collectively "Children") by denying him the opportunity to
 
participate in "hands-on" parenting.
 
In her cross appeal, Mother challenges Findings Nos. 
29, 31, 37, 41, 42, 43, 51, 58, 59, 64, 65, 67, 68, 70, 71, 78, 
79, 80, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, and 97 and Conclusions Nos. 9, 10, 
and 12. Although Mother challenges specific Findings and 
Conclusions in her points on appeal, she does not provide 
specific arguments as to each challenged Finding or Conclusion. 
Therefore, her challenge to these findings are deemed abandoned. 
Hawaifi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
Instead, Mother argues that "there are two basic
 
arguments that address each point of error." The first is that
 
DHS failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that Mother
 
was unwilling and unable to provide a safe family home, now or in
 
the reasonably foreseeable future. The second is that the family
 
court abused its discretion by denying her Motions for Immediate
 
Review because DHS failed to provide reasonable efforts to
 
reunify Mother by not providing visitation and updated
 
information regarding the Children.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Father and Mother's points of error as follows:
 
Father's Appeal.
 
(1) Father argues that the family court erred when it
 
found he was unwilling and unable to provide a safe family home. 
With the exception of Findings Nos. 43 and 73, Father does not
 
2
 In October 2003, Father and Mother adopted and were given legal
custody of Children. CN, born in August 1992, has since reached the age of
majority and is not a subject of this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
otherwise specify to which challenged Findings his various
 
arguments apply. Rather, Father notes that,
 
[t]o the extent permitted, each of the arguments, below,
which address more than one of the points of error, is
deemed to address each of the points of error to which it
would reasonably apply. For example, FOF#37 deals with the
June 23, 3011 Order and Decision which granted the
Department's Motion to Terminate Parental Rights.
Therefore, the paragraph dealing with FOF#37 should be
deemed to also address the specific point of error dealing
with the June 23, 2011 Order and Decision.
 
We do not agree that this method of reference is sufficiently 
specific to alert this court to the errors Father's arguments 
relate. As Father fails to specify, with the exception of 
Findings Nos. 43 and 73, to which of his designated Findings he 
is referring in his argument, we will not speculate as to the 
connection between his points and arguments. As a result, we 
deem his challenge thereto to be abandoned. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived.") See also Hawaii 
Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawaif i 438, 478, 164 P.3d 696, 
736 (2007) ("an appellate court is not obliged to address matters 
for which the appellant has failed to present discernible 
arguments").
 Father argues that Finding No. 43 ("The Children have
 
a long history of being physically abused by their biological and
 
adoptive parents.") is partially wrong because, as it pertains to
 
him, there is no evidence that Father physically abused any of
 
the Children. We agree. However, such error is harmless
 
because, as Father points out, the basis for the termination of
 
his parental rights was that he presented "a threat of abuse" for
 
being non-protective of the Children from Mother's physical
 
abuse. The unchallenged Findings supported this conclusion by
 
the family court. For example, the family court found:
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
53. The Children are fearful of returning home to
Mother and Father.
 
54. The Children do not want to have visits with
 
Mother and Father.
 
. . . .
 
75. Father is a passive caretaker who is infrequently
home and defers to Mother for the caretaking of the
Children.
 
76. Father has not demonstrated protective capability
nor has he stepped in to assure the Children's academic,
psychological or psychiatric needs are met.
 
We are bound by the unchallenged Findings. In re Guardianship of 
Doe, 119 Hawaif i 234, 235 n.4, 195 P.3d 701, 703 n.4 (App. 2008). 
3
Although Father cites to Finding No. 73  in his argument, he does
not appear to be arguing it is clearly erroneous, but rather
 
relies on this Finding to support his argument that the family
 
court was wrong in ruling he was not willing or able to provide a
 
safe family home.
 
With regard to his other arguments challenging the
 
family court's decision that he was not willing or able to
 
provide a safe family home, Father points to his prior absence
 
from the home explaining his past inability to be protective of
 
the Children, DHS's recognition that he was willing to provide a
 
safe family home, his indecision regarding whether he would be
 
willing to leave Mother so that DHS would be able to assess his
 
ability to provide a safe home for Children, and the lack of
 
visitation -- although XN at one time expressed willingness to
 
visit with Father and Mother -- as establishing the lack of
 
evidence supporting the family court's decision.
 
However, Father testified that he did not believe the
 
allegations against Mother regarding physical abuse and
 
specifically that Mother pinched and choked SN2. 
Such a denial
 
is inconsistent with his acknowledgment of his failure to protect
 
3
 Finding No. 73 reads, "Father has completed parenting classes.
However, the Department is unable to assess Father's parenting skills because
no visits with the Children have occurred."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Children from Mother's physical abuse and supports the
 
conclusion that Father could not presently provide a safe family
 
home.
 
Father was also aware that since 2001, there were at
 
least six reports of abuse to DHS resulting in services being
 
provided in two of those cases.4 The repeated intervention by
 
DHS coupled with Father's past failure to protect Children and
 present refusal to acknowledge any harm supports the family
 
court's determination that it is not likely that Father could
 
provide a safe home in the foreseeable future, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan in a reasonable amount of time.
 
(2) Although Father points to the lack of a suggested
 
permanent placement for SN1 in the permanent plan as a reason the
 
termination of his parental rights was error, it is not relevant
 
to the issue of whether Father could provide a safe family home. 
A permanent plan is not required to state the placement of a
 
child if a parent's parental rights are terminated. Hawaii
 
4 Father does not dispute the following Findings:
 
48. In 2005, the Department intervened due to
physical abuse by Mother and threat of physical abuse by
[Father's brother], who frequented the family home.
Services were offered and the Department closed its case in
2006.
 
49. In 2006 and 2007, Nanakuli Elementary and
Intermediate/High School made numerous reports to the
Department regarding physical abuse and neglect issues of
the Children by Mother and [Father's brother]. The Children
 reported the harm by Mother and [Father's brother] but later
recanted because of the fear of what would happen when they
got home.
 
50. In 2008, the Department again intervened due to
physical abuse by Mother. Services were offered and
 Department closed its case in early 2009.
 
51. In April 2009, [SN2] was pinched on the neck and
earlobe by Mother and choked by [Father's brother]. Mother
 also grabbed [SN2] by the neck and slammed her head into the
wall. The Children were also physically abused by [Father's
brother].
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 587-27 (2006).5 After an existing
 
service plan is terminated and foster custody is revoked, the
 
family court must award permanent custody to an appropriate
 
authorized agency and order the implementation of a permanent
 
plan whereby the child will be either adopted, placed under
 
guardianship, or remain in permanent custody until adopted,
 
placed under a guardianship, or reaches the age of majority. HRS
 
ยง 587-73(b) (2006).6 Therefore, Father's argument regarding a
 
lack of placement for SN1 prior to the termination of his
 parental rights is without merit.
 
(3) Father claims that the family court abused its
 
discretion by denying his July 1, 2011 Motion for an Immediate
 
Review Hearing. The motion requested that the case be re-opened,
 
stated that the evidentiary portion of the contested hearing had
 
concluded on April 28, 2011, and argued that, "[s]ince that date,
 
[Father's counsel] received additional information/evidence from
 
one of Father's service providers that may impact the Court's
 
ruling/decision in this matter." Father's counsel stated that
 
copies of the recently-received information were provided to the
 
other parties but not provided to the court "so the Court may
 
first rule on the instant motion."
 
During a hearing on the motion, Father's counsel stated
 
that
 
the reason I filed the motion for immediate review is
 
because I received something from [Father's] therapist who
was doing conjoint sessions with [SN1]. . . . and I was
hoping that the court would give us additional time to look
at that issue that I -- that I brought up that there is no
permanent placement for [SN1]. She's in conjoint sessions
with [Father]. And if the court would consider allowing
that to continue. Thank you.
 
As there is no copy of a document from Father's service
 
provider in the record on appeal, Father has failed to provide an
 
adequate record to enable this court to review his claim that the
 
5
 Pursuant to Act 135, effective September 1, 2010, HRS Chapter 587
was repealed and replaced by HRS Chapter 587A. 2010 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 135,
ยง 8 at 314.
 
6
 See footnote 5, supra.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
document should have been considered. In addition, Father's
 
counsel stated that he filed the motion based on the lack of
 
permanent placement for SN1 and to continue SN1's conjoint
 
sessions with Father. As explained above, the issue of permanent
 
placement was not relevant to determining whether Father could
 
provide a safe family home and, in any event, the family court
 
ordered that conjoint sessions continue. Therefore, there was no
 
reason for the family court to re-open the case and the family
 
court did not abuse its discretion by denying Father's July 1,
 
2011 Motion for an Immediate Review Hearing.
 
(4) Father argues DHS failed to afford him with
 
reasonable efforts to reunify with the Children and points to its
 
failure to use the conjoint therapeutic sessions he had with SN1
 
as opportunities for "hands-on" parenting. However, Father did
 
not object to the service plan and provides no basis for his
 
assertion that DHS "should have" altered or redesigned these
 
therapeutic sessions to add parenting services. In any event,
 
the hands-on parenting services were intended to occur in the
 
home and not in a clinical context. The opportunity to provide
 
in-home services did not arise because the Children were not, as
 
of the time of trial, ready to be reunited with Father, even on
 
such a limited basis.7 Father has failed to show the family
 
court erred in this regard as well.
 
Mother's Appeal.
 
(1) In support of her first argument that DHS failed
 
to carry their burden of proof that Mother was not willing or
 
able to provide a safe family home for Children, Mother asserts
 
that, although she completed all of the services offered by DHS,
 
DHS was unable to assess her parenting skills without Mother's
 
7
 XN and SN2's therapist testified at trial that, although XN did at
one time express interest in seeing her Father and Mother, that she had since
changed her mind. This therapist opined that if either child were returned,
it would be harmful to them. EN's social worker testified that EN told her he
 did not want to return home. The Children's DHS case manager testified that
SN1 was "indifferent" to visiting with Father and Mother.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
home visits with the Children. Mother fails to explain why this
 
supports her argument the evidence presented was insufficient.
 
Mother also argues that testimony to the effect that
 
Mother had failed to acknowledge she had harmed the Children was
 
undermined by testimony that she was not asked about this issue. 
However, there was also evidence, in the form of a December 6,
 
2009 letter from Mother's therapist, reporting that Mother
 
"continues to deny that she physically abused the children. She
 
added that she cannot admit or take responsibility for something
 
she did not do." This court will not reweigh evidence or second
 
guess the credibility determinations of the trial court. State
 
v. Martinez, 101 Hawaif i 332, 340, 68 P.3d 606, 614 (2003) ("But 
'[i]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon 
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight 
of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.'"). 
More importantly, the record supports the family
 
court's conclusion that there was clear and convincing evidence
 
that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide the
 
Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 
service plan and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that
 
Mother would become willing and able to provide a safe family
 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 
reasonable period of time. Mother does not dispute Findings Nos.
 
48-50, 53, and 57 which note the various DHS interventions
 
between 2005 and 2008, that the Children were fearful of
 
returning to the family home and "receive individual therapy due
 
to the psychological trauma caused by the physical abuse." 
Mother has not had in-home visits with Children and consequently
 
has not demonstrated that the services she has received have
 
changed her behavior. The family court's conclusion is supported
 
by the evidence in the record.
 
Mother's second argument, that DHS failed to provide
 
reasonable efforts to reunify Mother with the Children is not
 
supported by the record. The family court ordered visitation
 
with Mother if each child's therapist thought it was appropriate. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although Mother points to two 2009 letters indicating that CN and
 
XN stated that they wanted to visit with Mother and Father, the
 
Children's DHS case manager stated that CN changed his mind about
 
returning home several times and XN's therapist testified that
 
from May to November 2009, XN stated that she wanted to see her
 
Mother and Father again but she has since changed her mind. In
 
addition, there is nothing in the record indicating that the
 
Children's therapists recommended that the Children visit with
 
Mother.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, entered on July 15, 2011 in the Family Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaif i, February 24, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Tae Chin Kim,
for Mother-Cross Appellant. 
Thomas A.K. Haia,
for Father-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier andEric J. Alabanza,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 