 
      NOT  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS  AND PACI FIC REPORTER  
 
 
  
             
 
 Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000023 06-JUN-2025 07:45 AM Dkt. 103 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000023 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
SDCK I LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee, 
vs. 
AINA LE‘ A, INC., a Delaware corporation; LULANA GARDENS LLC, a 
Delaware limited liability Company; HO OLEI ‘ VILLAGE LLC, a 
Hawai
‘i limited liability company; B-1-A D-1-A, LLC, a Hawai‘ i 
limited liability company, Defendants/Third-Party 
Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim Defendants/Appellants, 
and 
ROMSPEN INVESTMENT CORPORATION, Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/ 
Counterclaimant/Cross-Claimant/Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellee, 
and 
BRIDGE AINA LE‘ A, LLC, a Hawai‘ i limited liability company, 
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Counterclaimant/ 
Cross-Claimant/Appellee, 
and 
LIBO ZHANG, Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-Claimant/ 
Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee, 
and 
PLANNING DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, County of Hawai‘ i; 
COUNTY OF HAWAI‘ I, a municipal corporation, State of Hawai‘ i, 
Third-Party Defendant/Appellee, 
and 
ROBERT WESSELS, Third-Party Defendant/Appellee,  
          
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50, JANE DOES 1-50; and DOE ENTITIES 1-50, 
Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 3CCV-20-0000375) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
This appeal arises out of a foreclosure summary 
judgment in favor of the lender, and challenges whether the 
circuit court erred by declining to exercise equitable 
discretion. We affirm. 
Defendants, Third-Party Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim 
Defendants/Appellants Aina Le‘ a, Inc., Lulana Gardens LLC, 
Ho‘olei Village L
LC and B-1-A D-1-A, LLC (collectively, 
Borrowers) appeal from the December 28, 2021 "Findings of Fact [(FOFs)], Conclusions of Law [(COLs)], and Order Granting Plaintiff Iron Horse Credit LLC's Second Motion for Summary Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" (Order Granting MSJ) and Judgment, both entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
On appeal, Borrowers contend that the Circuit Court 
erred in allowing Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee SDCK I LLC (Lender)
2 to foreclose and not granting it equitable relief 
from foreclosure.3 
1 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided. 
2 SDCK I LLC was substituted as Plaintiff- Appellee for Iron Horse 
Credit LLC, via a June 30, 2022 order, as the purchaser of the subject 
mortgage from Lender. 
3 We have consolidated Borrowers' four points of error challenging 
various FOFs and COLs regarding the finding of default, interpretation of 
"principles of equity" language in the Loan Agreement, and Lender' s 
2  
          
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Borrowers' contention as follows, and affirm. 
On October 13, 2020, Lender filed a Complaint to 
foreclose on a mortgage, which secured a $5,000,000 loan (Loan) to Borrowers in connection with a development project (Development Project) on former agricultural land in Waikōloa on 
Hawai‘i Island. The loan was secured by a mortgage (Mortgage) on 
four parcels of real property (collectively, Land) owned by 
Borrowers. 
While Borrowers admitted receiving the Loan and giving 
the Mortgage as security, Borrowers denied being in default, claiming that a critical component of the Development Project and their ability to satisfy their Loan obligations was the construction of 385 affordable housing units, which was a condition imposed when the State Land Use Commission reclassified the Land from agricultural to urban district. 
In 2011, the State Land Use Commission reclassified 
the Land back to agriculture because the affordable housing requirements had not been satisfied in a timely manner. 
The 
reclassification was challenged in court, and a 2014 Hawai‘i 
Supreme Court decision agreed that the State Land Use Commission erred in the reclassification back to agriculture, and the ruling allowed construction on the affordable housing units to resume. 
entitlement to foreclosure, a judgment, and a deficiency judgment. Borrowers 
rely on the same arguments to support all four points of error. We address 
these arguments infra. 
3  
          
 
 
  
  
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 16, 2017, however, the Director of the Hawai‘ i 
County Planning Department (Planning Director) issued a stop 
work order halting all construction on the affordable housing 
units until Borrower Aina Le‘ a, Inc., as the master developer, 
completed a supplemental environmental impact statement (EIS) 
for its proposal to change the zoning on the Land from Urban District to Project District zoning. The Planning Director's 
stop work order led to Aina Le‘ a, Inc. filing for bankruptcy. 
The Loan and Mortgage upon which Lender was seeking to foreclose, was part of the financing necessary for Aina Le‘ a, 
Inc.'s bankruptcy reorganization plan. 
Borrowers argue the Circuit Court erred by 
disregarding Section 3.3 of the Loan Agreement and refusing to 
exercise its equitable discretion.  According to Borrowers, Section 3.3 "invited the [C]ircuit [C]ourt to intervene and to protect and conserve the parties' respective equities[.]" They argue the Circuit Court erroneously declined to exercise its equitable discretion to prevent forfeiture, making Borrowers solely bear any resulting forfeiture and ignoring Section 3.3; and Borrowers assert that foreclosure is an equitable remedy, 
and "equity abhors a forfeiture." 
Generally, "the construction and legal effect to be 
given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an 
appellate court." Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co.
, 82 Hawaiʻi 226, 
239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996) (citations omitted). Summary 
judgment is also reviewed de novo. Nozawa v. Operating
Engineers Local Union No. 3
, 142 Hawaiʻi 331, 338, 418 P.3d 1187, 
1194 (2018). 
4  
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Section 3.3 of the Loan Agreement states in part: 
ARTICLE III  
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES  
As a material inducement to Lender to enter 
into this Agreement and the other Loan Documents, and as an 
express condition to the Loan and all Advances made 
hereunder, each Borrower hereby represents and warrants to 
Lender, as follows:  
 . . . . 
SECTION 3.3 Enforceability
. 
(a) This Agreement is, and all other Loan 
Documents executed by Borrower, on the execution and 
delivery thereof, and in each event on the Closing Date, 
will be, the legal, valid and binding obligation of Borrower enforceable in accordance with their terms, except 
to the extent such enforcement may be limited in the future by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency and other similar 
creditors' rights laws and principles of equity. 
(b) This Agreement is, and all other Loan 
Documents executed by each Borrower Party on behalf of 
Borrower, on the execution and delivery thereof, and in 
each event on the Closing Date, will be, the legal, valid 
and binding obligation of such Borrower Party enforceable 
in accordance with their terms, except to the extent such 
enforcement may be limited in the future by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency and other similar creditors' rights 
laws and principles of equity. 
(Emphases added.) 
Here, Lender makes no representations in Article III 
that it was agreeing that Borrower would be excused from making 
timely repayments under the Loan if it had an equitable excuse. The first paragraph indicates that the representations in Article III are by "each Borrower," who "represents and warrants to Lender" the immediately following recitals in Section 3.3. The Loan Agreement further states in Article IV, that Borrower is responsible for obtaining permits and government approvals 
5  
          
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessary for the Development Project.  Borrowers did not 
introduce any evidence to suggest that Lender was responsible 4
4 Article IV of the Loan Agreement states in pertinent part: 
Article IV 
DELIVERY CONDITIONS TO CLOSING OF LOAN 
SECTION 4.1  Conditions to Loan Closing. The 
effectiveness of this Agreement, the closing of the Loan 
and any Advance of the Loan proceeds shall be subject to 
the fulfillment, at or prior to the Closing Date, of each 
of the following conditions precedent; it being understood and agreed that Lender shall have received and approved 
each of the following items (and obtained evidence of the 
satisfaction of the items reasonably satisfactory to Lender 
in all respects) specified in this Section 4.1, . . . :  
 . . . . 
(i)Zoning
. Evidence confirming that the
existing development and planned use of the Project is in 
compliance with all applicable zoning Laws and other applicable Governmental Approvals (or, to the extent not in 
compliance due to the Tolling Order or otherwise identified by the Planning Department in correspondence delivered to 
Lender on or before the Closing Date, including without 
limitation that certain letter dated May 16, 2017), will be 
brought in compliance pursuant to the Land Use Action Plan) 
and that any zoning lot development agreement is in form 
reasonably satisfactory to Lender. . . . 
 . . . . 
(t) Permits and Governmental Approvals. 
Evidence that Borrower has obtained all material Permits 
and all Governmental Approvals necessary for the current 
operation of the Project in accordance with all applicable Laws
. Lender acknowledges that the continued development 
of the Project is dependent upon Borrower's compliance with the Land Use Action Plan, and Borrower hereby agrees to use 
good faith, commercially reasonable efforts to obtain and 
maintain all Permits required pursuant to applicable Laws to develop and entitle the Project for its contemplated use 
consistent with the Land Use Action Plan. 
 . . . . 
SECTION 4.2  Open Conditions. In the event that 
Lender closes the Loan or funds any Advance without 
requiring Borrower to have satisfied each and every 
condition set forth in Sections 4.1 of this Agreement or 
6  
          
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the State Land Use Commission erroneously reclassifying the 
Land back to Agriculture District, or for the Hawai‘ i County 
Planning Director's stop-work order for the Affordable Housing 
Project pending completion of a supplemental EIS. 
When considering equities in a foreclosure case, the 
equities affecting both mortgagees and mortgagors must be 
considered. HawaiiUSA Fed. Credit Union v. Monalim, 147 Hawai‘ i 
33, 48, 464 P.3d 821, 836 (2020). "The relief granted by a 
court in equity is discretionary and will not be overturned on 
review unless the circuit court abused its discretion by issuing 
a decision that clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant." Shanghai Inv. Co. v.
Alteka Co.
, 92 Hawaiʻ i 482, 492, 993 P.2d 516, 526 (2000) 
(cleaned up), overruled on other grounds by Blair v. Ing, 96 
Hawaiʻi 327, 336, 31 P.3d 184, 193 (2001). 
Borrowers agree that "[t]he facts pertaining to the 
Loan Agreement and to [Borrowers'] equities are not generally 
disputed[.]" Here, none of the equities cited by Borrowers support that it would be equitable to Lender to excuse Borrowers 
from their obligations to Lender, when the Loan Agreement 
allocates to Borrowers the responsibility of obtaining all required government permits and approvals. The Circuit Court 
otherwise as required by the terms, conditions and 
provisions of the Loan Documents (it being understood that 
Lender shall have no obligation to do so), then each and every condition not so satisfied as of the Closing Date (or 
the funding of any Advance) shall remain an obligation of 
the Borrower to deliver unless and until Borrower shall 
have satisfied such condition or Lender shall have 
expressly agreed in writing to permanently waive such condition. 
(Emphases added.) 
7  
          
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was made aware of the hurdles faced by Borrowers, but exercised 
discretion in determining that Lender's remedies for Borrowers' default, as set forth in the express terms of the parties' loan documents, were not limited by any "principles of equity" argued by Borrowers. The Circuit Court's determination in this regard did not constitute an abuse of discretion. See Shanghai Inv.
Co., 92 Hawai‘ i at 492, 993 P.2d at 526. 
We conclude the Circuit Court did not err in granting 
summary judgment. See Nozawa, 142 Hawaiʻ i at 338, 418 P.3d at 
1194. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
December 28, 2021 Order Granting MSJ and Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, June 6, 2025. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Katherine G. LeonardMichael J. Matsukawa, Acting Chief Judgefor Defendants/Third-Party  Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim /s/ Karen T. NakasoneDefendants/Appellants Associate JudgeAina Le‘ a, Inc., Lulana Gardens  LLC, Ho‘ olei Village LLC, and /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullenB-1-A D-1-A, LLC Associate Judge   Lisa Strandtman,  for Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant/Appellee 
SDCK I LLC. 
8 