 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000097 26-NOV-2025 07:47 AM Dkt. 160 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000097 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
NAPOLEON T. ANNAN-YARTEY, SR., Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 
SECURITAS SECURITY SERVICE, INC. USA; 
JUSTIN CASTRO, SECURITY GUARD; E. RODRIGUEZ, SECURITY GUARD; W. 
AGAPAY, SECURITY GUARD; ROJAS RODERICK, SUPERVISOR (All Sued 
Individually and Official Capacity), Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CC181001463) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Nakasone, Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Self-represented Plaintiff-Appellant Napoleon T. 
Annan-Yartey, Sr. (Annan-Yartey) appeals from the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit's  (circuit court) March 6, 2023 "Final 
Judgment," entered in favor of Defendants-Appellees Securitas 
Security Service Inc. USA (Securitas), and Securitas employees 1
1 The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree (Judge Crabtree) presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
 
 Justin Castro, E. Rodriguez,2 W. Agapay, and Rhoderick Rojas 
(Individual Appellees),3 and against Annan-Yartey, on all claims. 
This appeal arises out of legal action initiated by 
Annan-Yartey against Appellees. Annan-Yartey alleged that, in 
July 2017, he suffered injuries from an interaction with the 
Individual Appellees at the Daniel K. Inouye Honolulu 
International Airport, where Securitas was contracted to provide 
security services. Annan-Yartey asserted claims of false imprisonment, conspiracy, assault, battery, intentional 
infliction of emotional distress, negligent infliction of 
emotional distress, negligent hiring and screening, negligent 
training, negligent supervision, and violations of state and 
federal constitutional rights. 
Annan-Yartey's state and federal constitutional 
claims, negligent hiring, negligent training, and negligent 
supervision claims were disposed of prior to trial. The state 
and federal constitutional claims were dismissed pursuant to 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) for failure 
to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. Summary 
judgment was granted in favor of Appellees on the negligent 
2 E. Rodriguez is also referred to as " Elijah Rodriguez" in the 
analysis of point of error 7. 
3 Securitas and the Individual Appellees are collectively referred 
to as Appellees . 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 hiring, negligent training, and negligent supervision claims. 
During trial, but prior to jury deliberation, judgment as a 
matter of law (JMOL) was entered on the conspiracy claim 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 50. 
Annan-Yartey's remaining claims then proceeded to the 
jury, and the jury returned a verdict in favor of Appellees. 
The circuit court entered the Final Judgment. This appeal 
followed. 
Annan-Yartey raises nine arguments on appeal,4 
contending that the circuit court erred or abused its discretion in: (1) "commit[ing] prejudicial error . . . when [Judge 
Crabtree] refused to recuse himself for being tainted with bias, 
[lack of] impartiality, conflict of interest and racism toward 
[Annan-Yartey]"; (2) "when it granted final [JMOL] in favor of 
[Appellees]"; (3) in entering judgment in favor of Appellees 
because "the jury erred when it found that [Securitas] was not 
vicariously liable of [sic] [Individual Appellees]"; (4) "in denying [Annan-Yartey's] motion for discovery"; (5) "by 
excluding [Annan-Yartey's] treating physicians' medical reports 
and testifying as fact witness[es]"; (6) by giving the jury 
4 Annan-Yartey's opening brief does not set forth points of error 
on appeal, and is in other ways noncompliant with Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b). To promote access to justice, we do not 
automatically foreclose self- represented litigants from appellate review for 
their failure to comply with the court rules. Erum v. Llego
, 147 Hawaiʻi 368, 
380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827- 28 (2020). 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 "erroneous jury instructions"; (7) in "den[ying] [Annan-
Yartey's] motion to compel attendance of Elijah Rodriguez[] [at 
a] deposition and [the] jury trial"; (8) in "violat[ing] [Annan-
Yartey's] constitutional rights" by "permit[ting] [Appellees' 
attorney] to elicit highly prejudicial statement[s] and evidence 
to perpetuate fraud on the court"; and (9) in "violat[ing] 
[Annan-Yartey's] constitutional rights" by "permit[ting] 
[Appellees' attorney] to elicit highly prejudicial statement[s] by expanding the scope of Dr. Marvit[']s testimony about [Annan-
Yartey's] mental condition and the arrest of [Honolulu Police 
Department]." (Capitalization altered.)  
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Annan-Yartey's contentions as discussed below, and 
affirm the circuit court's Final Judgment. 
(1)
 Annan-Yartey contends that Judge Crabtree erred by 
"refus[ing] to recuse himself for being tainted with bias, [lack of] impartiality, conflict of interest and racism towards 
[Annan-Yartey]." "Decisions on recusal or disqualification 
present perhaps the ultimate test of judicial discretion and 
should thus lie undisturbed absent a showing of abuse of that 
discretion." State v. Ross
, 89 Hawaiʻi 371, 375, 974 P.2d 11, 15 
(1998). 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 Hawaiʻi courts reviewing questions of disqualification 
and recusal apply a two-part analysis. First, with respect to 
judicial disqualification, "courts determine whether the alleged bias is covered by [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 601-7, 
which only pertains to cases of affinity or consanguinity, 
financial interest, prior participation, and actual judicial 
bias or prejudice." Kondaur Cap. Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 
150 Hawaiʻ i 1, 10-11, 496 P.3d 479, 488-89 (App. 2021) (footnote 
omitted) (quoting Ross, 89 Hawai‘ i at 377, 974 P.2d at 17). 
Second, with respect to judicial recusal, "if HRS 
§ 601-7 does not apply, courts may then turn, if appropriate, to 
the notions of due process . . . in conducting the broader 
inquiry of whether circumstances . . . fairly give rise to an 
appearance of impropriety and . . . reasonably cast suspicion on 
[the judge's] impartiality." Id. at 11, 496 P.3d at 489 
(cleaned up). "The test for appearance of impropriety is whether the conduct would create in reasonable minds a 
perception that the judge's ability to carry out judicial responsibilities with integrity, impartiality and competence is 
impaired." Id. at 21, 496 P.3d at 499 (quoting Off. of
Disciplinary Couns. v. Au, 107 Hawaiʻ i 327, 338, 113 P.3d 203, 
214 (2005)). 
Judge Crabtree filed two judicial disclosures on the 
record. His first disclosure, dated January 11, 2019, informed 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
 the parties of his former professional affiliation with 
Appellees' law firm, which was then known as Bronster Crabtree & 
Hoshibata, and with attorney Margery S. Bronster, who was his 
law partner from 1999 to 2007. 
Judge Crabtree represented that 
he is "completely neutral and impartial" "[r]egarding the parties to this case." The first disclosure gave the parties 
until January 25, 2019 to request "further clarification or 
information regarding any of the [] disclosures," and until 4 p.m. on February 4, 2019 to move for Judge Crabtree's 
disqualification/recusal. Both Annan-Yartey and Appellees 
responded that they had no objections to Judge Crabtree 
presiding over the case. 
Judge Crabtree's second disclosure, filed August 10, 
2021, informed the parties that his former law clerk had 
recently accepted employment at the Bronster Fujichaku Robbins 
law firm during the pendency of the litigation, and that normal 
conflict avoidance procedures would be observed. Judge Crabtree represented that his second disclosure "[did] not change the 
[circuit] court's previous view that it can in fact be 
completely fair and impartial." 
In September 2021, Annan-Yartey moved for Judge 
Crabtree's recusal, to which Appellees objected. In October 
2021, Judge Crabtree heard and denied Annan-Yartey's motion. 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 We note the absence of record evidence supporting 
Annan-Yartey's contentions that Judge Crabtree exhibited bias 
towards him. "Bias cannot be premised on adverse rulings 
alone." Arquette v. State, 128 Hawaiʻ i 423, 448, 290 P.3d 493, 
518 (2012) (citation omitted). 
Annan-Yartey's speculative 
claims of bias or prejudice are insufficient to require 
disqualification, absent specific facts to support those claims. 
Id. 
"[A] judge is duty-bound not
 to withdraw where the 
circumstances do not fairly give rise to an appearance of 
impropriety and do not reasonably cast suspicion on his [or her] 
impartiality." Kondaur, 150 Hawaiʻ i at 22, 496 P.3d at 500 
(cleaned up). 
We conclude that Judge Crabtree did not abuse his 
discretion by not disqualifying or recusing himself from this 
case. 
(2) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court 
erred in entering JMOL. HRCP Rule 50(a)(1) authorizes a trial 
court to grant JMOL, "[i]f during a trial by jury a party has 
been fully heard on an issue and there is no legally sufficient 
evidentiary basis for a reasonable jury to find for that party 
on that issue[.]" 
The record reflects that the circuit court's 
JMOL was entered only as to Annan-Yartey's conspiracy claim. The circuit court explained that, based on the testimony 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 presented at trial, "there was just nothing the [circuit] court 
could find that supported a conspiracy claim." 
Annan-Yartey's opening brief fails to point to any 
record evidence that supports his allegations of conspiracy. 
Moreover, Annan-Yartey has not satisfied his duty to provide the 
relevant trial transcripts that are necessary for this court's 
review of this issue -- i.e., the testimony of Justin Castro, 
Rhoderick Rojas, and W. Agapay. See Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 
80 Hawaiʻ i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) ("The burden is 
upon appellant in an appeal to show error by reference to 
matters in the record, and [they have] the responsibility of 
providing an adequate transcript.") (citation omitted). We therefore have no basis upon which to review the circuit court's 
JMOL, which we leave undisturbed. 
(3)
 Annan-Yartey appears to contend that the jury 
erred in finding that Securitas was not vicariously liable for 
the Individual Appellees' actions. The record reflects that the 
jury did not make a finding as to Securitas' vicarious 
liability. 
Annan-Yartey therefore fails to make a discernible 
argument as to this point. "We will disregard a point of error 
if the appellant fails to present discernible argument on the 
alleged error." Bank of Haw. v. Shaw
, 83 Hawaiʻi 50, 52, 924 
P.2d 544, 546 (App. 1996) (citation omitted). 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (4) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court erred 
in denying his "motion for discovery." Annan-Yartey appears to 
contend that the circuit court erred in denying the testimony of 
his "treating physicians" who he alleges to have knowledge of 
his medical condition.  
In its June 6, 2022 "Order Granting in Part and 
Denying in Part [Annan-Yartey's] Motion to Present Testimony of 
Physicians Who Treated Him for the Injuries that He Sustained on July 4, 2019 After July 4, 2017, Filed April 8, 2022" (Physician 
Testimony Order), the circuit court ruled, 
The Motion is GRANTED with respect to: 
1. Dr. Henry Cacanindin of the Kuakini Medical 
Center, who treated [Annan- Yartey] on July 4, 2017 may 
testify at the trial of this matter. 
The Motion is DENIED with respect to: 
1. Dr. Maria Ver, Dr. [Szeto- Wong], and Dr. Richard Inae 
may not testify at the trial of this matter[.5] 
5 In its earlier May 6, 2022 "Ruling," the circuit court denied 
Annan-Yartey's request to introduce Dr. Ver, Dr. Szeto- Wong, and Dr. Inae's 
testimony, explaining, 
C. Here, the three doctors the instant motion is 
focused on did not treat [Annan- Yartey] at or soon after 
the alleged assault in 2017. They treated him one year 
later (2008, Dr. Ver, neck cysts), and three years later (2020, Dr. Inae, bowel obstruction and Dr. Szeto- Wong, 
heart ailment/Pacemaker). 
D. Based on the current record, it is not readily 
apparent that these later- treated medical conditions are 
causally related to the alleged assault in 2017, such as if 
it were follow- up treatment for a broken bone suffered at 
the time of the alleged incident. 
E. The instant motion does not provide any medical 
evidence regarding the three doctors mentioned above, other than the medical records for their treatment. None of 
these medical records states, infers, or even discusses 
 (continued . . .) 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annan-Yartey presents no argument, nor does he point 
to any evidence in the record, that would support a causal 
connection between Dr. Ver, Dr. Szeto-Wong, and Dr. Inae's 
treatment and Annan-Yartey's alleged assault. We therefore 
conclude that Annan-Yartey failed to demonstrate error, and we 
affirm the circuit court's exclusion of Dr. Ver, Dr. Szeto-Wong, 
and Dr. Inae's testimony from trial. See Haw. Ventures, LLC v.
Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawaiʻ i 438, 480, 164 P.3d 696, 738 (2007) 
(appellants failed to demonstrate error where they "[did] not 
point to anything in the record or provide any analysis that 
5(. . . continued) 
whether any symptom, diagnosis, or prognosis is related to 
the alleged assault in 2017.  
F. [Annan- Yartey's] motion asks that the three above-
named treating doctors be allowed to testify about their 
treatment of the later conditions discussed above. But 
such testimony is only relevant to [Annan- Yartey's] claims 
if the later conditions are [causally] related to the 2017 alleged assault. So the three doctors' testimony is only 
relevant if they give causation opinions. This was already barred by the court's prior summary judgment ruling, 
because no admissible medical opinion establishing causation was ever submitted. 
G. [Annan- Yartey] frames his request as one for 
"clarification" rather than reconsideration. The court respectfully disagrees. The prior [motion for summary judgment] established that medical causation testimony is 
required under Hawaii law, that it is [Annan- Yartey's] 
burden to establish causation, that discovery had closed, that the required evidence was not provided in opposition 
to the motion, and therefore such causation testimony was precluded. It is true that [Annan- Yartey] was pro se at 
the time, but that in and of itself is not grounds to unwind a prior dispositive order. 
(Emphasis in original.) 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 would guide th[e] court in determining the validity of their 
contention."). 
(5) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court erred 
by ruling "that [Annan-Yartey's] medical records were not 
admissible under any exception to the hearsay rule." Annan-
Yartey does not specify which medical records were excluded, 
where in the record they were excluded, or the basis for the 
circuit court's alleged exclusion of the records. The record reflects that the partial medical records of Annan-Yartey's 
emergency medical treatment at the airport and in transit were 
admitted into evidence. Annan-Yartey's Kuakini Health System 
emergency medical records were also admitted into evidence. We 
therefore decline to address this contention for lack of a 
discernible argument. 
(6) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court erred 
in its instructions to the jury. 
We review jury instructions to 
determine whether, considered as a whole, the instructions were 
"prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading." Medeiros v. Choy, 142 Hawaiʻ i 233, 239, 418 P.3d 
574, 580 (2018) (quoting Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 97 
Hawaiʻi 376, 
386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 (2001)). 
Annan-Yartey makes three arguments related to jury 
instructions. In light of sections (2) and (3), 
supra, we 
decline to address the circuit court's instruction on 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (continued . . .) conspiracy, and its "refus[al]" to give an instruction on 
vicarious liability. With regard to the remaining instruction, 
Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court "erred in 
instructing the jury regarding the Civil Assault claim by giving 
[Appellees'] requested instruction, which was a criminal assault 
instruction[, as] this instruction confused the jury." 
The record reflects that the circuit court instructed 
the jury as to both civil assault and criminal assault.  The 6
6   The circuit court's  instruction on "assault" and "assault against 
a law enforcement officer" was given  in connection with Appellees' "probable 
cause  to arrest"  defense, as follows:   
The existence of probable cause to arrest is an 
affirmative defense to an action for false imprisonment. 
Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances 
known to the officer, or of which he had reasonably 
trustworthy information, would warrant a man of reasonable caution to believe that the person arrested has committed 
or is committing an offense.  
A person commits the offense of assault if the person 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily 
injury to another person.  
A person commits the offen[se] of assault against a 
law enforcement officer in the first degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury to a law enforcement officer who is engaged in the performance of 
duty.  
A person commits the offen [se] of assault against a 
law enforcement officer in the second degree if the person 
recklessly causes bodily injury to a law enforcement 
officer who is engaged in the performance of duty.  
If [Annan
-Yartey] committed assault, assault against 
a law enforcement officer in the first degree, or assault 
against a law enforcement officer in the second degree  
against [Justin] Castro, then [Annan- Yartey] committed a 
criminal offense under the laws of the State of Hawaiʻ i.  
If [Annan
-Yartey] committed a criminal offense under the 
laws of the State of Hawaiʻi in any [Individual Appellees'] 
12   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 circuit court gave the following instruction on the common law 
tort of assault, 
A person commits the common law tort of assault if he 
acts with intent to cause another a nonconsensual harmful 
or offensive contact or apprehension thereof, and the other person apprehends imminent contact. The actor must intend to cause a harmful or offensive contact, or imminent 
apprehension thereof. 
Plaintiff must prove each element of assault by a 
preponderance of the evidence. Failure to prove any single 
element, is a failure to prove the civil assault claim. 
Annan-Yartey does not acknowledge the above 
instruction on civil assault, and contends only that the circuit 
court's "assault instruction" was "verbose, jumbled, and 
confusing." 
On this record, we conclude that the circuit court's 
jury instructions on civil and criminal assault were not "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading." Medeiros, 142 Hawaiʻ i at 239, 418 P.3d at 580 
(citation omitted). 
(7) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court erred 
in failing to compel Defendant-Appellee Elijah Rodriguez's 
(Rodriguez) attendance at trial and, separately, at a pre-trial 
deposition. We review the circuit court's ruling on a motion to 
compel discovery for abuse of discretion. Bank of N.Y. Mellon
 6(. . .continued) 
presence, then [Individual Appellees] had probable cause to place 
[Annan-Yartey] under arrest.   
13   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 v. Lemay , 137 Hawaiʻi 30, 33, 364 P.3d 928, 931 (2015) (citation 
omitted). 
Annan-Yartey first contends that the circuit court 
failed to compel Rodriguez's attendance at trial. 
The record 
reflects that Annan-Yartey did not move to compel Rodriguez's 
attendance at trial. On this record, we conclude that Annan-
Yartey's contention lacks merit. 
Annan-Yartey next contends that the circuit court 
failed to compel Rodriguez's attendance at a pre-trial 
deposition. The record reflects that Annan-Yartey subpoenaed 
Rodriguez to appear at a deposition on November 12, 2019. 
Appellees' counsel met and conferred with Annan-Yartey to discuss rescheduling the deposition to a date/time that would 
work for both sides. Appellees' counsel's declaration states 
that Annan-Yartey "told us [at the meet and confer] that he 
would insist on the depositions going forward on November 12 and 
13, 2019." "However, after the meet and confer, [Annan-Yartey] 
stated that he would reset the deposition dates and time in 
December to allow sufficient time to contact and prepare the deponents." The record reflects further communication between 
Appellees' counsel and Annan-Yartey regarding the deposition 
scheduling. 
In December 2019, Annan-Yartey moved the circuit court 
to compel Rodriguez to appear at a deposition. The circuit 
14   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 court noted, at the January 2020 hearing, that it was inclined 
to deny the motion without prejudice. The circuit court did 
not, however, enter a written order on the motion, and Annan-
Yartey subpoenaed Rodriguez to a video deposition scheduled for 
February 4, 2020. Prior to the scheduled deposition, the 
circuit court issued a minute order, noting further difficulties 
regarding the parties' scheduling of depositions. The circuit 
court "encourage[d] both sides to accomplish whatever can be accomplished on Feb. 3 and 4, and then [the circuit court would] 
set another status hearing if [needed] to smooth out any ongoing 
problems." 
It appears that the February 4, 2019, deposition did 
not proceed as scheduled, Rodriguez was not deposed, and Annan-
Yartey did not make further attempts to depose Rodriguez. In 
January 2021, two months after the discovery cut-off date, 
Annan-Yartey filed "[Annan-Yartey's] Motion to Re-Open Discovery 
for Limited Written Discovery," in which he sought to "conduct expedited limited written discovery of Elijah Rodrigo [sic] and 
[Annan-Yartey's] 'disclosed treating doctors.'" The circuit 
court denied Annan-Yartey's request to re-open discovery. 
On this record, we conclude that the circuit court did 
not abuse its discretion by not compelling Rodriguez's 
deposition testimony. 
15   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(8) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court 
violated his constitutional rights by "permitt[ing] [Appellees' 
counsel] to elicit highly prejudicial statement[s] and evidence 
to perpetuate Fraud on the Court." Annan-Yartey specifically 
maintains that Appellees' counsel "was permitted by the 
[circuit] court to elicit from the [HRS §] 261-17 . . . 
inflammatory evidence that, Securitas Security guards [] were 
airport police and not Security Guards." Annan-Yartey fails to present any discernible argument, and we therefore decline to 
address this contention. 
(9) Annan-Yartey contends that the circuit court 
violated his constitutional rights by "permitt[ing] [Appellees' 
counsel] to elicit highly prejudicial statement[s] by expanding 
the scope of Dr. Marvit[']s testimony about [Annan-Yartey's] 
mental condition and the arrest of [Honolulu Police 
Department]." It appears that Annan-Yartey is objecting here to 
Appellees' introduction of Annan-Yartey's arrest record and the characterization of Annan-Yartey as "delusional." 
The transcript of Dr. Marvit's testimony is not in the 
record. We therefore lack a sufficient record on which to 
review contentions of error related to the introduction of Dr. 
Marvit's testimony. 
The transcript of Appellees' counsel's closing 
statement is in the record and, relevant here, it reflects that 
16   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  Annan-Yartey did not make any objections. Annan-Yartey's 
argument on appeal is therefore waived. See Ass'n of Apartment
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawaiʻ i 97, 107, 
58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) ("Legal issues not raised in the trial 
court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal.") (citations 
omitted). 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Final 
Judgment.7 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, November 26, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
 Napoleon T. Annan-Yartey, Sr. 
Self-represented 
Plaintiff-Appellant.  
 Kenneth S. Robbins, 
for Defendants-Appellees. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Chief Judge  
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
7 Pursuant to HRAP Rule 34(c), Annan- Yartey's November 10, 2025 
Motion for Retention of Oral Argument is denied. 
17 