NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 HRS § 707-726(1)(a) provides:1/
(1) A person commits the offense of custodial interference
in the first degree if:
(a) The person:
(i) Intentionally or knowingly violates a court
order issued pursuant to chapter 586, or
intentionally or knowingly takes, entices,
conceals, or detains the minor from any other
person who has a right to custody pursuant to a
court order, judgment, or decree; and
(ii) Removes the minor from the State[.]NO. CAAP-15-0000935 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
DAWN MARIE ANZALONE, Defendant-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(FC-CR NO. 15-1-0287(4))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Dawn Marie Anzalone (Anzalone) with Custodial
Interference in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 707-726(1)(a) (2014).1  The charge stemmed from
Anzalone's failing to return her child to the child's father
after a visitation, as required by a court custody order, and
then leaving Hawai# i with the child.  Anzalone failed to return
the child as required on December 24, 2014.  She was laterNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2/ The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
2arrested in Florida and extradited to Hawai# i in June 2015.
Pursuant to a plea agreement, Anzalone pleaded no contest to the
charge and moved for a deferred acceptance of her no contest
plea.  The Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court)2
denied Anzalone's motion for deferred acceptance of her no
contest plea.  The Family Court sentenced Anzalone to a four-year
term of probation, subject to conditions that included payment of
restitution in the amount of $4,581.93 for the costs of her
extradition, mental health treatment, and 69 days of imprisonment
with 69 days of credit for time served.  The Family Court entered
its Judgment on October 28, 2015.
I.
On appeal, Anzalone contends that the Family Court
erred in: (1) denying her motion for deferred acceptance of her
no contest plea; (2) ordering that she pay the costs of her
extradition as restitution; and (3) imposing mental health
treatment as a condition of probation.  As explained below, we
conclude that: (1) the Family Court did not err in denying
Anzalone's motion for deferred acceptance of her no contest plea;
(2) the Family Court's imposition of the costs of extradition was
permissible pursuant to HRS § 621-9(b) (2016), but should not
have been imposed as restitution; and (3) the Family Court did
not err in imposing mental health treatment as a condition of
probation, but the terms of the condition need to be clarified to
avoid ambiguity.  Accordingly, while we affirm the basic
substance of the Family Court's rulings challenged on appeal, we
remand the case for modification and clarification of the
Judgment consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
II.
We resolve the arguments raised by Anzalone on appeal
as follows:
A.
Anzalone argues that the Family Court erred in denying
her motion for deferred acceptance of her no contest plea becauseNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3it focused on the offense she was charged with rather than her
personal characteristics.  Anzalone's argument is without merit.
"[T]he granting of a [deferred acceptance of no contest
plea] is an act of legislative grace, within the discretion of
the trial court[.]"  State v. Kaufman , 92 Hawai #i 322, 329, 991
P.2d 832, 839 (2000).  Pursuant to HRS § 853-1(a) (2014), a trial
court has the discretion to grant a motion for deferred
acceptance of no contest plea when the following conditions are
met: (1) a defendant voluntarily pleads no contest before trial;
"(2) [i]t appears to the court that the defendant is not likely
again to engage in a criminal course of conduct; and (3) [t]he
ends of justice and the welfare of society do not require that
the defendant shall presently suffer the penalty imposed by
law[.]"  
In denying Anzalone's motion to defer acceptance of her
no contest plea, the Family Court noted that Anzalone had
violated a custody order issued by a court in a separate
proceeding by leaving Hawai# i with the child without any
intention of returning, that she knew the issue of the child's
custody was pending before the court in the separate proceeding,
but that she left Hawai# i with the child to avoid the risk that
the court would rule against her.  The Family Court then stated:
The Court denies the deferred acceptance of the no
contest plea.  I do not think the ends of justice and the
welfare of society dictate that she not suffer this penalty. 
I think it's exactly the opposite of that.  This is not
conduct we want to encourage.
We conclude that the Family Court properly considered
the nature and circumstances of Anzalone's offense in denying her
motion for deferred acceptance of her no contest plea, and that
the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in denying her
motion.
B.
The Family Court ordered Anzalone to pay the $4,581.93
in costs incurred by the State in extraditing her from Florida as 
restitution, and it made her payment of restitution a condition
of probation.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3/ Anzalone did not object to the imposition of extradition costs on the
ground of indigency in the Family Court or on appeal.  We therefore do not
address this issue.
4Anzalone argues that the Family Court erred in imposing
the costs of extradition as restitution because the State was not
a victim of the underlying charge.  The State agrees that the
costs of extradition could not be imposed as restitution, but it
argues that the Family Court was authorized to impose extradition
costs under HRS § 621-9(b).  HRS § 621-9(b) provides:
Whenever the presence of a defendant in a criminal
case or in a proceeding under chapter 704 or a petitioner in
a post conviction proceeding who is outside the judicial
circuit is mandated by court order or bench warrant to
appear, the cost of airfare, ground transportation, any per
diem for both the defendant or petitioner and sufficient law
enforcement officers to effect the defendant's or
petitioner's return, shall be borne by the State.  All such
expenses shall be certified by the court or public
prosecutor or the attorney general.  Duly certified claims
for payment shall be paid upon vouchers approved by the
state director of finance and warrants drawn by the state
comptroller.  The court may order the nonindigent defendant
or petitioner who was returned to the State of Hawaii to
reimburse the State for the costs of such extradition or
return as specifically described above.
(Emphasis added.)  
We agree with the State that while the costs of
Anzalone's extradition could not be imposed as restitution, the
Family Court had the authority to impose extradition costs under  
HRS § 621-9(b).  Anzalone was a defendant in a criminal case
whose presence from outside the circuit was mandated by a bench
warrant.  The record shows that the Family Court was relying on
HRS § 621-9(b) in imposing the extradition costs.  We therefore
affirm the Family Court's imposition of the costs of extradition
as a condition of probation.  See HRS § 706-624(2)(q) (2004)
(identifying permissible conditions of probation to include 
requiring a defendant to "[s]atisfy other reasonable
conditions").3  However, because extradition costs could not be
imposed as restitution under HRS § 706-646 (2014), the Family
Court on remand shall modify the Judgment to reflect the
imposition of $4,581.93 in extradition costs pursuant to HRS 
§ 621-9(b), and not as restitution.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5C.
At Anzalone's sentencing, the Family Court orally
imposed mental health treatment as a condition of probation as
follows:
As directed by Probation, the defendant will obtain
and maintain mental health treatment until clinically
discharged or any other services, including medication
and/or tests, as required by your treating mental health
professional.  You are responsible for payment of that
treatment.
However, in the Family Court's written Judgment, this condition
of probation was drafted to read as follows:
Obtain and maintain mental health treatment or services,
including medication and/or tests if ordered, as directed by
your probation officer, until clinically discharged with the
concurrence of your probation officer.  You shall be
responsible for payment of such treatment.
Anzalone argues that the Family Court abused its
discretion in imposing mental health treatment as a condition of
probation because there was no factual basis in the record to
support the imposition of such a condition.  We disagree.  The
record indicates that prior to her incarceration, Anzalone had
one therapeutic session to address the emotional ramifications of
her custody dispute.  After her release from incarceration, she
had been undergoing treatment by a therapist, pursuant to a
referral by the Maui Community Correction Center's Conditional
Release Program.  This therapist opined that Anzalone tends
toward clinical depression, has a victim mentality, low self-
esteem, and poor decision making/reasoning skills, and the
therapist stated that continued therapy was being used to help
Anzalone gain long term reasoning and decision making skills to
enhance her future decision making.  We conclude that there was
sufficient factual basis in the record to justify the Family
Court's imposition of mental health treatment as a condition of
probation.  See State v. Kahawai , 103 Hawai# i 462, 466, 83 P.3d
725, 729 (2004) (requiring that "some factual basis for imposing
[discretionary] probationary conditions must inhere in theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6record"); State v. Morris , 72 Haw. 67, 70-71, 806 P.2d 407, 410
(1991).
Anzalone also argues that the condition imposed by the
Judgment was improper because it was phrased in a way that "gives
'medical' discretion to the probation officer."  We conclude that
the language of the condition as set forth in the written
Judgment is ambiguous in that it could be read as giving the
probation officer the authority to order medication and tests and
to determine whether clinical discharge is appropriate.  We
therefore remand the case so that the Judgment can be clarified,
consistent with the Family Court's description of the condition
at sentencing, to provide that while Anzalone shall, as directed
by her probation officer, obtain and maintain mental health
treatment or other mental health services, the determination of
clinical discharge and the appropriate medication or tests shall
be made by her treating mental health professional.
III.
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the portions of the
Judgment that characterize the imposition of Anzalone's
extradition costs as restitution and that refer to the special
condition for mental health treatment, and we remand the case for
modification and clarification of those portions of the Judgment
consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.  We affirm the
Judgment in all other respects.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 24, 2017.
On the briefs:
Matthew S. Kohm
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Renee Ishikawa Delizo 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge