NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000791
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
DONNA DAUM, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
CHRISTOPHER WEBSTER, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 5SS-14-1-0026)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Christopher Webster (Webster)
 
appeals from the Injunction Against Harassment and the Order on
 
Petition for Injunction Against Harassment (Order on Petition),
 
both filed on March 31, 2014, in the District Court of the Fifth
 
Circuit (District Court).1
 
Petitioner-Appellee Donna Daum (Daum) filed a Petition
 
for Ex Parte Temporary Restraining Order and for Injunction
 Against Harassment (Petition) pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 604-10.5 (Supp. 2015). The District Court granted the
 Petition, enjoining Webster from contacting, threatening or
 
1
 The Honorable Frank Rothschild presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
harassing Daum, and from entering or visiting Daum's residence
 
and place of employment for a period of three years. 
On appeal, Webster contends that the Injunction
 
Against Harassment was not supported by clear and convincing
 evidence.  Webster also argues that the District Court violated
 
his due process rights when (1) it interfered with Webster's
 
attempt to cross-examine Kasheda Daum (Kasheda); (2) it refused
 
to order Daum to disclose the name of her counselor during cross-
examination; (3) it improperly considered Daum's "altered
 testimony" submitted after all the testimony and exhibits; and
 (4) it improperly considered evidence without providing Webster
 the opportunity to examine the evidence
. 
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to

 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Webster's points of error as follows: 
(1) 	HRS § 604-10.5 provides in relevant part: 
Power to enjoin and temporarily restrain harassment.
(a) For the purposes of this section: 
"Course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct
composed of a series of acts over any period of time
evidencing a continuity of purpose.
 
"Harassment" means:
 
(1)	 Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury,
or assault; or
 
(2)	 An intentional or knowing course of conduct
directed at an individual that seriously alarms
or disturbs consistently or continually bothers
the individual and serves no legitimate purpose;
provided that such course of conduct would cause
a reasonable person to suffer emotional
distress.
 
. . . . 
If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence
that harassment as defined in paragraph (1) of that
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
definition exists, it may enjoin for no more than three
years further harassment of the petitioner, or that
harassment as defined in paragraph (2) of that definition
exists, it shall enjoin for no more than three years further
harassment of the petitioner; provided that this paragraph
shall not prohibit the court from issuing other injunctions
against the named parties even if the time to which the
injunction applies exceeds a total of three years.
 
Here, the District Court did not specifically find that
 
Webster engaged in paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) harassment. 
However, the Petition did not assert that Webster subjected Daum
 to "[p]hysical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat of
 imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or assault" under
 paragraph (1). See HRS § 604-10.5. Indeed, there was no
 
evidence adduced at the hearing to support a finding of paragraph
 (1) harassment. Thus, we presume that the District Court granted
 the Injunction Against Harassment because it determined that
 Webster engaged in an intentional or knowing course of conduct
 directed at Daum that seriously alarmed or disturbed consistently
 or continually bothered Daum, and served no legitimate purpose,
 and that would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional
 distress. HRS § 604-10.5. 
This court has held that "[a]n injunction issued 
pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5 may result in severe personal consequences for the individual enjoined. It infringes, first of all, upon the enjoined individual's freedom of movement, a fundamental right guaranteed by the Hawai
'i Constitution." Luat 
v. Cacho, 92 Hawai 'i 330, 346, 991 P.2d 840, 856 (App. 1999). As 
such, this court has recognized that "HRS § 604-10.5 requires that the clear and convincing standard of proof be applied in 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determining whether conduct rises to the level of paragraph (2)
 
harassment." Id. at 342, 991 P.2d at 852. 
In addition, a person engages in paragraph (2) 
harassment only if it "would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress." HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2). "The reasonable person standard is an objective one and a trial court's determination regarding whether a reasonable person would suffer emotional distress as a result of a course of conduct is reviewed on appeal de novo." Luat, 92 Hawai
'i at 343, 991 P.2d at 853. 
Under the objective standard, this court is required to determine "whether 'a reasonable person, normally constituted,' would have suffered emotional distress as a result of" Webster's course of conduct, including his remarks to Daum in the courthouse filing room. Id. (citing Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai
'i 336, 
362, 944 P.2d 1279, 1305 (1997)). 
In the instant case, the District Court granted the
 
Injunction Against Harassment based primarily on two incidents,
 an interaction between Daum and Webster in the filing room of the
 district court building and an interaction in the Longs parking
 lot, but also in the context of several prior incidents, which
 together reflected an escalating level of disturbance and alarm. 
With respect to these incidents, the District Court found that
 the testimony of Daum and Daum's witnesses was very credible and
 that Webster's testimony, in essence, was not consistent with
 that testimony. "It is for the trial judge as fact-finder to
 assess the credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions
 of fact; the judge may accept or reject any witness's testimony
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in whole or in part." State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 
P.2d 57, 65 (1996) (citation omitted). As the District Court 
found Kasheda, Mary Kealoha (Kealoha), and Daum to be credible 
witnesses, we necessarily accept their testimony regarding these 
incidents, notwithstanding Mike Joseph and Webster's conflicting testimony. 
Here, although Webster may have misunderstood the scope
 
of the Injunction Against Harassment against Daum's husband,
 David Timko (Timko), we conclude that Webster's yelling at Daum
 
in the courthouse and threatening to have her arrested,
 
particularly where she was located in a position in which she
 felt "trapped" and unable to leave without going past Webster,
 was seriously alarming or disturbing and "would cause a
 reasonable person to suffer emotional distress," as required by
 HRS § 604-10.5, in light of the earlier incidents between the
 parties. 
We also consider Webster's alleged action in the Longs
 
parking lot on the same day, shortly after their encounter at the
 courthouse. Webster appeared behind Daum as she was getting a
 stroller out of her car and said, "Your husband's going to end up
 in jail. You're going to get hurt[.]" In light of Webster's
 earlier threats to Daum, his calls to the police, and his
 apparent drives past her house, Webster's statement to Daum in
 the Longs parking lot was seriously alarming or disturbing and
 "would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress."
 
Although the District Court did not orally reference
 
the clear and convincing evidence standard that is applicable to
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the issuance of an Injunction Against Harassment, it is stated in
 
the written injunction and appears to have been satisfied in this
 case. 
Thus, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence
 
for the District Court to conclude that Webster's actions
 constituted an intentional course of conduct directed at Daum
 that seriously alarmed or disturbed her, that served no
 legitimate purpose, and that this course of conduct would cause a
 reasonable person to suffer emotional distress.
 
(2) Webster argues that the District Court violated
 
his due process rights when it interfered with Webster's attempt
 to cross-examine Kasheda and asserts that the District Court
 "took over the questioning and then declared its own conclusion
 about the location of the act, even though Kasheda herself was
 never quite able to describe the actual location." Daum submits
 that "there was no violation of [Webster's] due process right to
 complete the cross-examination of Kasheda as [Webster's counsel]
 continued her cross-examination when the Judge completed his
 questions necessary to ascertain a location of one of two
 incidents."
 
The fourteenth amendment to the United States 
Constitution and article I, section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution 
provide, in relevant part, that no person shall be deprived of "life, liberty, or property without due process of law[.]" The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has recognized that the "right to cross-
examine a witness, although subject to waiver, is a fundamental right that is basic to our judicial system." Kekua v. Kaiser 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Found.Hospital, 61 Haw. 208, 221, 601 P.2d 364, 372 (1979). 
Nevertheless, "the extent of cross-examination is a matter
 largely within the discretion of the trial court and will not be
 the subject of reversal unless clearly prejudicial to the
 complaining party." Id.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5, the "court shall receive
 
all evidence that is relevant at the hearing and may make
 independent inquiry." Moreover, it is within the "trial court's
 discretion to question a witness to elicit facts for the
 clarification of evidence so long as it is done in a fair and
 impartial manner." State v. Brooks, 44 Haw. 82, 87, 352 P.2d
 
611, 615 (1960) (citations omitted). 
Here, Kasheda testified that "Webster walked by and
 
under his breath he said . . . 'I'll bitch slap you.'" Kasheda
 related that this incident occurred when she was "sitting on the
 bench outside of the legal office." During Kasheda's cross-
examination, the District Court stated, "I think I already made
 clear, the location is not clear to the Court. I have no idea
 what you're talking about. So I cannot assess the accuracy of
 this information. I can't assess the relevance of this
 information." The District Court asked Kasheda, "Where is this
 law office?" In response, Kasheda said that the law office was
 near the main entrance of the district court building. Webster's
 counsel then resumed her cross-examination. 
The District Court made an independent inquiry about
 
the location of the law office. The purpose of the District
 Court's inquiry apparently was to clarify the location of where
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Webster allegedly said, "I'll bitch slap you." The District
 
Court's clarification of the evidence was conducted in a fair and
 impartial manner. Moreover, Webster contends that his alleged
 statement to Kasheda was not "pertinent to whether [Webster]
 committed an act of harassment against [Daum.]" Thus, Webster
 was not prejudiced by the District Court's independent inquiry. 
We conclude that this point of error is without merit.
 
(3) At the evidentiary hearing, the District Court 
determined that the name of Daum's counselor was not relevant. Relevant evidence is defined as "evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequences to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 401. "A trial court's determination that evidence is 
relevant turns on the application of HRE Rule 401 (1993) and is 
reviewed under the right/wrong standard." Steger, 114 Hawai
'i at 
172, 158 P.3d at 290 (citation and footnote omitted). 
During Daum's cross-examination, the following exchange
 
took place: 
[Webster's counsel]: Who's your counselor? 
[Daum]:  Do I need to answer that, your Honor? 

[The Court]: What's the relevance of knowing who the

counselor is? 
[Webster's counsel]:  I would like to know who it is. I

think she stated she's seeking counseling. It would be good
to know. 
. . . . 

First of all, it would be good to know if its an
actual counselor. Second of all, . . . she's alleging
my client has committed acts of harassment. One of
 the elements, as you know, causing a reasonable person
to suffer emotional distress or some sort of type of
psychological distress here. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
So her claim that she's seeking counseling is very
relevant to saving that element. I don't see any harm in
asking her who that counselor is. She's opened the door to
that by stating that. 
[The Court]:
 Well, I think wanting to ask her about
whether she was seeing anybody, I don't know what the
relevance is. This is a restraining order. There's a
 request for a restraining order. 
[Webster's counsel]:  I understand, your Honor. But the
last hearing she testified, and it's on the record, that she
is seeking counseling as a result of this, as a result of my
client's actions, which are directly relevant to the TRO
proceeding. 
[The Court]:  I don't find it to be relevant. Go

somewhere else. 
[Webster's counsel]:  If I may make a record. Again,
over the Court's granting of the objection, I am asking the
Court to order her to reveal the name of the counselor or
 therapist that she claims she's seeking counseling from. 
[The Court]: I understand. 

Do you have some therapist who is under subpoena who
might be in the hallway who, if she gives that name, that
person is going to be a witness this morning as part of this
trial? 
[Webster's counsel]:
 No, your Honor. 

[The Court]:  Well, move on.

 
It appears that Webster's attorney sought to elicit the
 
name of Daum's counselor to challenge Daum's credibility. 
However, the District Court did not err in concluding that the
 name of Daum's counselor, in and of itself, would not impact the
 court's assessment of Daum's credibility. Moreover, as
 previously noted, "an appellate court will not pass upon the
 trial judge's decision with respect to the credibility of
 witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the
 province of the trial judge." 
Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i at 139, 913 
P.2d at 59 (citations omitted). The name of Daum's counselor is
 not otherwise probative of whether Webster's conduct constituted
 harassment under HRS § 604-10.5. Thus, we conclude that this
 point of error is without merit.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4 & 5) Webster argues that the District Court
 
violated his due process rights when the court allowed Daum to
 
"change her story and alter the timeline of events." During
 closing argument, Webster's counsel argued that Daum filed her
 TRO prior to the incident in the Longs parking lot. While Daum
 was making her rebuttal, the District Court asked Daum, who was
 appearing pro se, to clarify when she filled out her Petition. 
In response, Daum said that she obtained the TRO packet before
 the incident in the Longs parking lot, and filed the TRO after
 the incident in the Longs parking lot. The District Court's
 inquiry simply sought to clarify the sequence of events. 
Webster also argues that the District Court violated
 
his due process rights because "he was not afforded the
 opportunity to inspect the time-stamp during the evidentiary
 hearing," because in the Order on Petition, the District Court
 noted that the "Petition was date and time stamped on the back of
 the first page showing when this document was 'LODGED' with the
 court, that date and time being February 24, 2014 at 3:41 p.m."
 
HRE Rule 201(a) "governs only judicial notice of 
adjudicative facts." Adjudicative facts "are the kind of facts that are ordinarily decided by the trier of fact; for example, who did what to whom, when, where, how and why." State v. Puaoi, 
78 Hawai
'i 185, 190, 891 P.2d 272, 277 (1995). A court may 
notice facts that are "not subject to reasonable dispute in that it is either (1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction of the trial court, or (2) capable of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonably be questioned." HRE Rule 201(b). Under HRE 201(c),
 
"[a] court may take judicial notice, whether requested or not." 
"Judicial notice may be taken at any stage of the proceeding." 
HRE Rule 201(f). 
"A trial court's sua sponte decision to take judicial 
notice of an adjudicative fact constitutes an exercise of its discretion." State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai
'i 319, 328-29, 984 P.2d 
78, 87-88 (1999). In Kotis, the defendant argued that the trial court erred when it took judicial notice of records and files of the case. Kotis, 91 Hawai
'i at 340-41, 984 P.2d at 99-100. The 
supreme court recognized that "taking judicial notice of the records and files of a case may or may not be proper, depending upon the type of record at issue and the purpose for which it is considered." Id. at 343, 984 P.2d at 102. 
Here, the District Court noted in the Order on 
Petition that the date and time stamp on the Petition corresponded with Daum's position and Kasheda's credible testimony. Under Rule 2(b) of the Rules of the District Courts of the State of Hawai
'i, "the clerk shall promptly stamp the time 
and date upon all papers filed." The date and time lodged on the Petition is an "adjudicative fact" properly noticed by a court because it is "capable of accurate and ready determination by resort to sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned." HRE Rule 201(b). Thus, it was within the District Court's discretion to take judicial notice of the date and time stamped on the Petition. We conclude that the District Court did 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not violate Webster's due process rights when it took the afore­
mentioned actions to confirm when Daum filed the Petition.
 
For these reasons, the District Court's March 31, 2014
 
Injunction Against Harassment and the Order on Petition are
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 29, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Rosa Flores,
for Respondent-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Donna Daum,Petitioner-Appellee Pro Se. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
12
 