 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000874
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF TW
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 08-11821)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
The Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court)1
 
terminated the parental rights of Mother-Appellant (Mother) over
 
her child, TW, pursuant to the "Order Awarding Permanent Custody
 and Establishing a Permanent Plan" filed on October 18, 2012. On
 appeal, Mother contends that: (1) the Family Court erred in
 determining that even with the assistance of a service plan,
 Mother was not presently able to provide TW with a safe family
 home and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would
 become able to provide TW with a safe family home within a
 

reasonable period of time;2 and (2) the Department of Human
Services (DHS) did not make reasonable efforts to reunify Mother
 with TW. 
We affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Matthew J. Viola presided over the proceedings at issue
in this appeal.
 
2
 Mother challenges numerous findings of fact made by the Family Court
in support of this determination.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 In May 2008, the DHS filed a petition for temporary
 
custody regarding TW, in which it alleged that Mother had been
 
leaving TW, who was then eight months old, for extended periods
 of time with a seventeen-year-old female who was not an
 appropriate caregiver. Mother's parental rights over TW's three
 older siblings had previously been terminated. Mother contested
 the petition for temporary foster custody regarding TW and
 participated in the trial on the petition. After the Family
 Court granted the DHS's petition, Mother appeared at numerous
 subsequent review hearings scheduled by the Family Court and was
 an active participant in the proceedings. However, when Mother
 failed to appear (her first such failure) at a "review/MPC"
 hearing on December 22, 2009, the Family Court defaulted Mother,
 granted the DHS's motion for permanent custody, and terminated
 Mother's parental rights. The Family Court also denied Mother's
 subsequent motion to set aside the default.
 
Mother appealed, and this court held that the Family 
Court abused its discretion in entering default against Mother and in terminating her parental rights based on her single non­appearance at the December 22, 2009, hearing. In re TW, 124 
Hawai'i 468, 474, 248 P.3d 234, 240 (App. 2011). We vacated the 
order terminating Mother's parental rights and remanded the case to give Mother the opportunity to contest the DHS's permanent custody motion on the merits. Id. at 475, 248 P.3d at 241. 
On remand, the DHS again sought permanent custody and
 
the termination of Mother's parental rights. The Family Court
 held a trial on the DHS' motion for the award of permanent
 custody on August 6, 2012, and October 2, 2012. On October 18,
 2012, the Family Court filed its "Order Awarding Permanent
 Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan," which terminated
 Mother's parental rights over TW. This appeal followed.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve Mother's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
1. The Family Court did not err in determining that 
even with the assistance of a service plan, Mother was not presently able to provide TW with a safe family home and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become able to provide TW with a safe family home within a reasonable period of time. The DHS presented evidence that Mother had unresolved substance abuse and mental health issues that rendered her unable to provide a safe family home for TW, and that she lacked the insight and motivation to successfully address these issues. This included evidence that Mother had a history of substance abuse; used methamphetamine in 2011 while pregnant with TW's half-sibling; used illegal substances to cope with stress, including after the first day of trial on August 6, 2012; repeatedly failed to successfully complete drug testing programs; has a history of suffering from serious mental health issues, including depression; and had made minimal progress in her mental health therapy, minimized her mental health issues, was not motivated, was not taking medication, and had a prognosis that was poor. In addition, Mother testified that she could not presently provide TW with a safe family home because she was living in a shelter and that she did not believe she had substance abuse, mental health, or parenting problems. We conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the Family Court's determination that Mother was not presently able, and it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become able within a reasonable period of time, to provide TW with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001); In 
re Doe, 103 Hawai' i 130, 135, 80 P.3d 20, 25 (App. 2003). 
2. We reject Mother's claim that the DHS did not make
 
reasonable efforts to reunify Mother with TW. As a result of
 this court's vacating the Family Court's prior order terminating
 Mother's parental rights and remanding the case, Mother had over 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
four years from the time TW was first placed into foster custody
 
to make progress and become able to provide TW with a safe family
 home. However, the record shows that despite the services
 offered by the DHS, Mother did not make sufficient progress and
 was not able to provide TW with a safe family home. Mother
 complains that the DHS did not refer her to parenting classes and
 anger management/domestic violence classes pursuant to the
 service plan. However, a DHS social worker explained that the
 DHS wanted Mother to first address her substance abuse and mental
 health issues before making such referrals, so that Mother would
 be able to better understand and benefit from the referrals. We
 conclude that it was reasonable for the DHS to require Mother to
 address her substance abuse and mental health issues before
 referring her for the additional services.
 
III.
 
We affirm the "Order Awarding Permanent Custody and
 
Establishing a Permanent Plan," which terminated Mother's
 parental rights over TW, that was filed by the Family Court on
 October 18, 2012. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 31, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Randal I. Shintani 
for Appellant-Mother Chief Judge 
Mary Anne MagnierJonathan M. FujiyamaDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 