 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000224 15-OCT-2024 08:00 AM Dkt. 41 SO 
CAAP-21-0000224 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
PUU HELEAKALA COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
by and through its Board of Directors, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GABI KIM COLLINS, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1RC181007771) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Gabi Kim Collins (Collins) appeals 
from the February 22, 2021 Judgment (Judgment) entered by the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Wai#anae Division (District 
Court),  against Collins and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Puu 
Heleakala Community Association, by and through its Board of 
Directors (Puu).  Collins also challenges the District Court's 
February 4, 2021 Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary 
Judgment (SJ Order). 1
Collins raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred by: 
(1) assuming 
1 The Honorable James C. McWhinnie presided.   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jurisdiction and adjudicating the case in violation of District 
Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 12.1, and Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-5(d) (2016); and (2) granting summary judgment to, and entering judgment in favor of, Puu 
because Collins presented substantial evidence that the claim was barred on multiple statutory grounds. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Collins's points of error as follows: 
(1) Collins argues that, pursuant to HRS § 604-5(d) 
and DCRCP Rule 12.1, the District Court lacked jurisdiction to resolve Puu's Complaint and motion for summary judgment. HRS § 
604-5 (2016) states, in pertinent part: 
§ 604-5 Civil Jurisdiction. 
. . . . 
(d) The district courts shall not have cognizance of
real actions, nor actions in which the title to real estate
comes in question . . . 
DCRCP Rule 12.1 states: 
Rule 12.1. DEFENSE OF TITLE IN DISTRICT COURTS. 
Pleadings. Whenever, in the district court, in
defense of an action in the nature of an action of trespassor for the summary possession of land, or any other action,the defendant shall seek to interpose a defense to thejurisdiction to the effect that the action is a real action,or one in which the title to real estate is involved, suchdefense shall be asserted by a written answer or writtenmotion, which shall not be received by the court unlessaccompanied by an affidavit of the defendant, setting forththe source, nature and extent of the title claimed bydefendant to the land in question, and such furtherparticulars as shall fully apprise the court of the natureof defendant's claim. 
Collins's arguments that title is in dispute are 
loosely based on separate foreclosure proceedings involving the 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subject property (Property). However, Puu's Complaint herein is 
in the nature of assumpsit, seeking money owed stemming from the 
time in which Collins owned the Property. Whether Bank of America, Collins, or another person or entity currently owns the Property is not relevant. Puu is plainly not attempting to collect from Collins Property-related fees owed after August 15, 2016, when the Property was transferred to Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC) via a Commissioner's Deed. We 
conclude that Collins's argument that the District Court lacked 
jurisdiction is without merit. 
(2) Collins makes several arguments in support of her 
second point of error challenging the SJ Order. 
The essence of Collins's first argument appears to be 
that she was not in privity with About Time Acquisition, LLC, a single member limited liability company owned by Collins (ATA). 
Some of Collins's arguments are difficult to discern, but it 
appears that Collins contends that she was wrongly found liable for association fees accrued during the period of ATA's ownership of the Property because that liability was founded in theories of privity or piercing of the corporate veil. However, that was not the case. To the extent that the Judgment was founded in part on unpaid assessments prior to ATA's transfer of the Property to Collins, the District Court's SJ Order stated: 
(iv) Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes § 421J-10.5,
[Collins] is jointly and severally liable with [ATA] (the
preceding owner of the Subject Property) for all unpaidassessments on the Subject Property which were due to theAssociation prior to ATA conveying the Subject Property to[Collins] in her individual capacity on November 26, 2014. 
HRS § 421J-10.5 (Supp. 2017) states, in pertinent part: 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 421J-10.5 Association fiscal matters; lien for
assessments. (a) All sums assessed by the association, but
unpaid for the share of the assessments chargeable to any
unit, shall constitute a lien on the unit. 
. . . . 
In the case of a voluntary conveyance, the grantee of
a unit shall be jointly and severally liable with thegrantor for all unpaid assessments against the latter forthe grantor's share of the common expenses up to the time ofthe grant or conveyance , without prejudice to the grantee's
right to recover from the grantor the amounts paid by the
grantee. . .
 . 
(Emphasis added). 
Collins, acting for ATA, voluntarily conveyed the 
Property to herself via quitclaim deed on November 26, 2014. 
Thus, pursuant to HRS § 421-J-10.5, Collins, as grantee, is 
jointly and severally liable with ATA, as grantor, for ATA's unpaid assessments, and her arguments concerning privity are without merit. 
Collins's next argument appears to be that Puu should 
be collaterally estopped from this collection action because the claim is barred by the final judgment in the foreclosure action; Collins contends that the claim was thus extinguished in the foreclosure action. However, contrary to Collins's assertion, the circuit court in the foreclosure action specifically found that Puu had a statutory lien against the Property pursuant to HRS § 421J-10.5, which was not extinguished by the foreclosure. Collins's argument is without merit. 
Collins further argues that Puu's claim is barred 
pursuant to HRS § 514B-146(b) (2018) because the purchaser of the Property, FHLMC, should have been responsible for expenses or assessments at an earlier date. It appears, however, that 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Collins's argument may be based on an incomplete or incorrect 
reading of the statute. 
§ 514B-146 Association fiscal matters; lien for
assessments. 
. . . . 
(b) Except as provided in subsection (j), when the
mortgagee of a mortgage of record or other purchaser of a
unit obtains title to the unit as a result of foreclosure of the mortgage, the acquirer of title and the acquirer'ssuccessors and assigns shall not be liable for the share ofthe common expenses or assessments by the associationchargeable to the unit that became due prior to theacquisition of title to the unit by the acquirer. 
The 
unpaid share of common expenses or assessments shall bedeemed to be common expenses collectible from all of theunit owners, including the acquirer and the acquirer'ssuccessors and assigns. The mortgagee of record or otherpurchaser of the unit shall be deemed to acquire title andshall be required to pay the unit's share of common expensesand assessments beginning: 
(1) Thirty-six days after the order confirming thesale to the purchaser has been filed with thecourt; 
(2) Sixty days after the hearing at which the courtgrants the motion to confirm the sale to thepurchaser; 
(3) Thirty days after the public sale in anonjudicial power of sale foreclosure conductedpursuant to chapter 667; or 
(4) Upon the recording of the instrument ofconveyance; 
whichever occurs first; provided that the mortgagee of
record or other purchaser of the unit shall not be deemed toacquire title under paragraph (1), (2), or (3) , if transfer
of title is delayed past the thirty-six days specified inparagraph (1), the sixty days specified in paragraph (2), orthe thirty days specified in paragraph (3), when a person
who appears at the hearing on the motion or a party to the
foreclosure action requests reconsideration of the motion or
order to confirm sale, objects to the form of the proposed
order to confirm sale, appeals the decision of the court togrant the motion to confirm sale, or the debtor or mortgagordeclares bankruptcy or is involuntarily placed intobankruptcy. In any such case, the mortgagee of record or
other purchaser of the unit shall be deemed to acquire titleupon recordation of the instrument of conveyance. 
(Emphasis added). 
In the subject foreclosure action, the order to confirm 
sale was entered on April 28, 2016. Collins filed a motion for 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reconsideration of, inter alia, the April 28, 2016 order to 
confirm sale. Therefore, the final sentence (bolded) above is controlling. Title was conveyed on August 15, 2016, by way of Commissioner's Deed filed in the Office of the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court of the State of Hawai# i.  Collins's 
argument based on HRS § 514B-146(b) is without merit. 
Collins cites HRS § 667-33 (2016) and contends that the 
foreclosure on the Property extinguished junior liens against the Property. Collins provides no discernible arguments regarding her request for relief from the District Court's money judgment against her. We conclude that this argument is without merit. 
Collins makes additional arguments regarding assumpsit 
and bad faith. However, these arguments are difficult to discern and are not made in compliance with Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 28(b)(4), (7). 
We conclude that these arguments 
are waived and/or no appellate relief is warranted based on these arguments. 
For these reasons, the District Court's February 22, 
2021 Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 15, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Gabi Kim Collins,Defendant-Appellant Pro Se. /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
R. Laree McGuire,(Porter McGuire Kiakona, LLP), /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullenfor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
6 