 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS  AND P ACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals 
CAAP-22-0000258 
19-JUN-2025 
07:51 AM 
Dkt. 68 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000258 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE PAUL A. FLINN REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST 
DATED MARCH 22, 2012 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 
2CTR-21-0000013) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
This appeal challenges the probate court's dismissal 
of a petition to remove a co-trustee, and subsequent award of 
attorney's fees. We affirm the dismissal, and reverse the award 
of attorney's fees. 
Petitioner-Appellant Margaret S.M. Flinn (
Margaret) 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's 
(Probate Court) April 8, 2022 "Order Granting Petition to 
Dismiss Emergency Ex Parte Petition of Co-Trustee & Beneficiary 
[Margaret] to Remove Co-Trustee Donald Flinn [(Donald)] & Order 
Accounting and Restitution for Waste and Neglect of Fiduciary   
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
    
 
    
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Duties and for Protective Order [Dkt. 1] and Vacate Order to 
Maintain Status Quo and to Set Evidentiary Hearing [Dkt. 37], 
Filed January 18, 2022" (Dismissal Order).
1 
On appeal, Margaret contends that the Probate Court 
erred by: (1) entering the Dismissal Order, dismissing her 
Petition to remove Donald as a co-trustee; and (2) awarding 
attorney's fees and costs (Fees Order) to co-trustees Donald, 
Juliana Flinn (Juliana), and Anthony Flinn (Anthony) 
(collectively, Co-Trustees).
2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve the contentions as follows. 
The subject trust (Trust) was executed by Margaret's 
father, Paul A. Flinn (Decedent). After Decedent's July 2, 2020 
death, his four living children, Donald, Juliana, Anthony, and 
Margaret became successor co-trustees. The Trust provides that 
the decisions and actions of a majority of the successor co-
trustees shall be binding on the Trust. In July 2020, the Co-
Trustees retained California counsel to administer the Trust. 
Relevant here, the Trust held title to a residential 
property in Kula, and it provided Margaret the right to continue 
to reside in a cottage located on the property. The Co-Trustees 
tried to include Margaret in the "decision-making process" to 
maintain and market the main house on the Kula property, among 
other things, but Margaret was unresponsive and uncooperative 
with these efforts. 
1 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided. 
2 We have consolidated Margaret's six points of error for clarity. 
2   
 
 
  
  
  
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
California Probate Court Proceeding 
On July 12, 2021, the Co-Trustees filed an "Ex Parte 
Application for Order Suspending the Powers of Co-Trustee 
Margaret Flinn" (Ex Parte Application for Temporary Suspension) 
and a "Petition to Suspend Powers of Co-Trustee; Petition to 
Remove Co-Trustee; Petition to Construe Trust Provisions; 
Petition for Instructions" (Petition to Suspend Margaret) in the 
Superior Court of the State of California in the County of San 
Luis Obispo (California Court). In the Ex Parte Application for 
Temporary Suspension, which was set for hearing on July 19, 
2021, the Co-Trustees sought "the temporary suspension of 
[Margaret]'s powers" based on her alleged "failure to cooperate 
and her breach of fiduciary duty to administer the trust 
estate," pending a hearing on the Petition to Suspend Margaret, 
which was set for November 30, 2021. A July 13, 2021 proof of 
service by the California counsel reflects service of both 
filings via mail and email on Margaret and her then-counsel. A 
July 14, 2021 attestation by the California counsel stated that 
Margaret and her then-counsel were also notified by telephone. 
On July 19, 2021, the California Court granted the Ex 
Parte Application for Temporary Suspension, suspending 
Margaret's powers as a co-trustee (Order Granting Temporary 
Suspension). The Order Granting Temporary Suspension stated: 
"All notices for this ex parte proceeding as required by law 
have been given[.]" 
As to the November 30, 2021 hearing on the Petition to 
Suspend Margaret, the record contains a November 23, 2021 
stipulation and order to continue the November 30, 2021 hearing 
to May 24, 2022, at Margaret's request. Margaret signed the 
November 23, 2021 stipulation and order, by which she agreed to 
file her objection to the Petition to Suspend Margaret "no later 
3   
 
 
 
 
 
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
than January 14, 2022[.]" Margaret, self-represented, timely 
filed her January 13, 2022 "Response/Objection" for the May 24, 
2022 hearing on the Petition to Suspend Margaret. 
Hawaiʻi
 Probate C
ourt Proceeding  
While the May 24, 2022 hearing on the Petition to 
Suspend Margaret was pending in California, Margaret filed a 
December 20, 2021 "Emergency Ex Parte Petition of Co-Trustee & 
Beneficiary Margaret S.M. Flinn to Remove Co-Trustee Donald 
Flinn & Order Accounting and Restitution for Waste and Neglect 
of Fiduciary Duties and for Protective Order" (
Petition to 
Remove Donald) with the Probate Court. Relevant here, Margaret 
declared that: 
17. On July 12, 2021, Donald FLINN applied to the probate 
court of San Luis Obispo County, California, for an order 
suspending [Margaret] as co-trustee, which was obtained ex 
parte, with no notice to [Margaret], and no opportunity to 
be heard in opposition. 
(Emphases added.) 
On January 18, 2022, the Co-Trustees filed an 
opposition to Margaret's Petition to Remove Donald, and a 
"Petition to Dismiss [Petition to Remove Donald] and Vacate 
Order to Maintain Status Quo and to Set Evidentiary Hearing" 
(Petition to Dismiss). Margaret filed an opposition, and court-
ordered supplemental briefs were also filed. 
On April 8, 2022, the Probate Court granted the Co-
Trustees' Petition to Dismiss, dismissing Margaret's Petition to 
Remove Donald with prejudice; ruling that "judicial comity" 
warranted the Probate Court to "refrain from exercising 
jurisdiction over the Trust"; concluding that Margaret "made 
material misrepresentations and/or omission[s]" in the Petition 
to Remove Donald regarding her allegedly not being on notice of 
the California proceeding and not having an opportunity to be 
4   
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
heard; and finding that the California proceeding had been 
active for months, in which Margaret had participated and 
already had her powers as co-trustee suspended. 
On April 13, 2022, the Co-Trustees moved for 
attorney's fees and costs (Fees Motion) pursuant to "common law" 
and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607-14.5.
3  On April 22, 
2022, Margaret filed her opposition to the Fees Motion and 
argued that the Co-Trustees failed to demonstrate that her 
filings were frivolous or made in bad faith; and on the same 
day, the Probate Court issued the Fees Order granting the Fees 
Motion in the full amount requested. 
(1) Margaret contends in her points of error that the 
Dismissal Order was erroneous because the Probate Court had 
subject matter jurisdiction; the Probate Court should have 
treated the issue as involving venue and not jurisdiction; and 
the California proceeding did not warrant dismissal in this 
case.
4  Margaret argues that the Probate Court "had jurisdiction 
3 HRS § 607-14.5 (2016) allows the court to impose attorneys' fees 
and costs as sanctions "upon a specific finding that all or a portion of the 
party's claim or defense was frivolous as provided in subsection (b)." 
Subsection (b) requires such sanctions awards to be supported by written 
findings, as follows: 
(b)  In determining the award of attorneys' fees and 
costs and the amounts to be awarded, the court must find in 
writing that all or a portion of the claims or defenses  
made by the party are frivolous and are not reasonably 
supported by the facts and the law  in the civil action. . . 
. If the court determines that only a portion of the claims 
or defenses made by the party are frivolous, the court 
shall determine a reasonable sum for attorneys' fees and 
costs in relation to the frivolous claims or defenses.  
(Emphasis added.) 
4 Margaret's arguments are difficult to follow. We address them to 
the extent reasonably possible. 
5   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
over the Trust" under then-existing HRS § 560:7-2035 because 
Article 9 of the Trust mandated the Trust be construed under 
Hawaiʻi law and the property at issue was in Hawaiʻi. Margaret 
claims the Probate Court's "extreme deference to the California 
Court was inappropriate" and the Probate Court should have 
applied the "factors listed by [Margaret] that supported 
retaining the venue in Hawaii[.]" 
The Probate Court treated the Petition to Dismiss as a 
motion to dismiss, which this court reviews de novo. Kealoha v.
Machado, 131 Hawai
‘i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 (2013).  This 
court reviews findings of fact under the clearly erroneous 
standard. Schmidt v. HSC, Inc., 145 Hawai‘i 351, 360, 452 P.3d 
348, 357 (2019). On appeal, we review a conclusion of law under 
the right/wrong standard of review. Id. 
The Probate Court's ruling in the Dismissal Order 
regarding jurisdiction concluded that California had 
jurisdiction over the Trust and had already been exercising 
jurisdiction in an ongoing dispute about administration of the 
Trust, as follows: 
3. Jurisdiction over the [Trust] lies with 
California and the Hawaii policy on judicial comity 
warrants that this Court refrain from exercising 
jurisdiction over the Trust and vacate its Status Quo Order 
and dismiss this Trust Proceeding; 
 . . . . 
5. The Court finds that the California proceeding
has been going on for many months, Margaret has been 
actively participating in the California proceeding, the 
California court is already litigating the very same issues 
5 Margaret did not raise an argument pursuant to HRS § 560:7-203 
(repealed 2021) (dealing with dismissal of trust proceedings relating to 
foreign trusts) below. This argument is waived. See Cnty. of Hawaii v. C & 
J Coupe Family Ltd. P'ship
, 119 Hawaiʻi 352, 373, 198 P.3d 615, 636 (2008) 
("As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that 
argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule applies in 
both criminal and civil cases." (citations omitted)). 
6   
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
raised in the Petition, and the California court has 
already issued its order suspending all powers of Margaret 
and finding full authority as co-trustees over the Trust to 
Donald Flinn, Juliana Flinn, and Anthony Flinn . . . . 
(Emphasis added.) Paragraph 5 above is a factual finding that 
Margaret has not challenged, and it is binding. 
Here, the Probate Court's findings that it lacked 
jurisdiction and jurisdiction "lies with California," where the 
California probate court proceeding "has been going on for many 
months," were supported by the record and not erroneous. 
(2) Margaret challenges the award of attorney fees, 
arguing that "it was error for the [Probate Court] to find that 
[Margaret] had engaged in material misrepresentations and 
omissions in her Petition," and "[i]t was error for the [Probate 
Court] to award attorneys' fees and costs for a frivolous or bad 
faith filing." 
Here, the "material misrepresentations and omission" 
finding is in the Dismissal Order,
6 but no similar finding 
appears in the Fees Order. Margaret does not dispute making the 
statements in the Petition to Remove Donald that the Probate 
Court found were "misrepresentations," but instead argues that 
the misrepresentations were "insignificant and not material to 
the issues raised in the Petition." Beyond this cursory 
argument, Margaret does not explain, by citing to the record and 
applicable legal authority, why or how the Probate Court's mixed 
determination of fact and law in this regard, was clearly 
6 The pertinent language in the Dismissal Order states: 
4. The Court finds that [Margaret] made material 
misrepresentations and/or omission in the Emergency 
Petition, including but not limited to false and misleading 
statements that Margaret did not receive notice of the 
California proceeding and that she was not provided an 
opportunity to be heard in opposition thereto[.] 
(Emphases added.) 
7   
 
 
  
   
  
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
erroneous. This challenge to the "misrepresentations" finding 
is waived. See Hawaiʻ i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(7). 
In any event, the record of the California proceedings 
reflects substantial evidence to support the Probate Court's 
"misrepresentations" finding. Margaret's Petition to Remove 
Donald, which claimed that the California Order Granting 
Temporary Suspension was "obtained ex parte, with no notice" to 
Margaret, was contradicted by the record reflecting that 
Margaret and her then-counsel had notice of the Ex Parte 
Application for Temporary Suspension by mail, email, and 
telephonically; and the California Order Granting Temporary 
Suspension's specific determination that proper notice had been 
given. 
Margaret argues that the award of attorneys' fees to 
the Co-Trustees was unsupported by factual findings as required 
by HRS § 607-14.5(b). Margaret is correct. The Fees Order only 
states: "The court having considered [Co-Trustees'] Non-hearing 
Motion for Attorneys [sic] Fees and Costs and good cause 
appearing, now therefore, the Motion is GRANTED." 
An award of attorney's fees is reviewed for an abuse 
of discretion. Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. v. Kozma, 140 Hawai‘i 
494, 497, 403 P.3d 271, 274 (2017). 
Under HRS § 607-14.5, to 
award attorney's fees for a frivolous claim, the court must make 
a "specific finding" in writing "that all or a portion of the 
claims . . . made by the party are frivolous and are not 
reasonably supported by the facts and law in the civil action." 
Tagupa v. VIPDesk, 135 Hawaiʻi 468, 479, 353 P.3d 1010, 1021 
(2015). 
Here, the Fees Order does not cite to authority 
explaining the award, and does not contain specific written 
8   
 
 
  
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
findings that the Petition to Remove Donald, or any claims made 
within it, were frivolous. See id. The Fees Order was outside 
the scope of the Probate Court's discretion. See Kozma, 140 
Hawaiʻi at 497, 403 P.3d at 274.  
In light of the foregoing, we affirm the Probate 
Court's April 8, 2022 Dismissal Order and reverse the April 22, 
2022 Fees Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, June 19, 2025. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPeter L. Steinberg, Acting Chief Judgefor Petitioner-Appellant.   /s/ Karen T. NakasoneSharon Paris, Associate Judgefor Respondents-Appellees.   /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
 Associate Judge 
9 