  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000226
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PATRICK WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 15-1-0047)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Patrick Williams (Williams) appeals
 
from a March 21, 2017 Judgment of Conviction and Probation
 
Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1 After a jury trial, the Circuit Court
 
convicted Williams of one count of Assault in the Third Degree
 (Assault 3), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­
712(1)(a).
2
 
Williams raises three points of error on appeal,
 
contending that: (1) the Circuit Court plainly erred in failing
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (2014) provides that "[a] person commits the
offense of assault in the third degree if the person . . . [i]ntentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily injury to another person[.]"
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to strike improper statements made by the prosecutor during
 
opening statement; (2) the Circuit Court erred in admitting
 certain X-rays into evidence without the necessary foundation;
 and (3) there was insufficient evidence to sustain Williams's
 conviction of Assault 3.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
 Williams's points of error as follows: 
(1) During opening statements, the prosecutor stated,
 
inter alia, that after the complaining witness (CW) underwent
 
surgery at Tripler, he was "subsequently transferred to another
 
family and reunited with his mother." Counsel later reiterated
 that "[CW] is ultimately reunited down the road with his mother." 
Williams argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred by failing
 to strike these comments, which were the result of prosecutorial
 misconduct, and the court's failure to do so prejudiced his
 substantial rights. Because Williams did not object to the
 State's comments, we review this point for plain error. See
 
Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b). 
"An opening statement merely provides an opportunity
for counsel to advise an outline for the jury, the facts and
questions in the matter before them." State v. Simpson , 64
Haw. 363, 369, 641 P.2d 320, 324 (1982) (citations omitted).
See also State v. Greyson , 70 Haw. 227, 232 n. 4, 768 P.2d
759, 762 n. 4 (1989). Hence, "[t]he purpose of an opening
statement is to explain the case to the jury and [to]
outline the proof. It is not an occasion for argument." 8A
 J. Moore, Moore's Federal Practice (Moore's ) ¶ 29.1.06, at
29.1–76 (2d ed. 1996).
 
Ordinarily, "the scope and extent of the opening
statement is left to the sound discretion of the trial
 
judge." Id. However, the trial court should "exclude
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
irrelevant facts and stop argument if it occurs." Id. The
 
State should only refer in the opening statement to evidence
that it has "a genuine good-faith belief" will be produced
at trial. Greyson, 70 Haw. at 232 n. 4, 768 P.2d at 762 n.
4. If improper remarks are made during the opening
statement, "[t]he test for determining the existence of
prosecutorial misconduct in [the] opening statement is
whether the improper remarks prejudicially affected the
defendant's substantive rights." Moore's, supra, ¶ 29.1.06,
at 29.1–77.
 
State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai' i 517, 528, 923 P.2d 934, 945 (App. 
1996) (citations omitted). 
Moreover, "[w]here the nature of the prosecutorial 
misconduct alleged is the failure of the prosecutor to prove or 
attempt to prove matters referred to in opening statements, . . . the burden [is] on the defendant to show bad faith on the part of the prosecutor, unless the fundamental rights of the defendant were substantially prejudiced." State v. Moore, 82 Hawai' i 202, 
213, 921 P.2d 122, 133 (1996). 
In examining the record to determine whether there is a
reasonable possibility that the error complained of might
have contributed to a defendant's conviction, thereby
warranting, at the very least, a new trial, we consider:
(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a
curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of
the evidence against the defendant.
 
State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i 465, 479, 24 P.3d 661, 675 (2001) 
(citation omitted). 
Valdivia provides guidance. During opening argument,
 
the prosecution stated that Valdivia went on a rampage of terror,
 
which, "[w]ithin a one-hour period, . . . almost killed at least
 100 people." Id. The trial court overruled defense counsel's
 
objection that the statement was argumentative, and the court
 gave no curative instruction. Id. On appeal, Valdivia argued
 
that there was no support in the evidence for the prosecution's
 assertions. Id. The supreme court held that the contested
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comments were improper and made in bad faith, with the intention
 
of inflaming the passions of the jury. Id. at 481, 24 P.3d at
 
677. However, the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable
 
doubt because the circuit court instructed the jury no fewer than
 three times that counsels' statements and arguments were not
 evidence and not to be considered during deliberations; there was
 no evidence that the jury failed to adhere to those instructions. 
Id.
 
In this case, the State's comments were improper
 
because the fact that CW was taken out of Williams's custody is
 unrelated to any of the elements of the offense. However, the
 Circuit Court instructed the jury – both before opening
 statements and during its general jury instructions, to refrain
 from considering counsel's comments as evidence. There is no
 basis to conclude that the jury failed to adhere to the
 instructions, and based on an examination of the entire record,
 we conclude that the prosecutor's improper statements were
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
(2) Even assuming that the Circuit Court erred in
 
admitting the X-rays of CW's femur bone into evidence due to
 improper foundation, any such error was harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt. Expert testimony of two physicians, Dr. Norman
 Odell Polk (Dr. Polk) and Dr. Jennifer Doerrige (Dr. Doerrige),
 
was presented, without objection, and described the nature
 
(diagnosis) and extent of CW's injuries, including testimony that
 a femoral fracture is notoriously painful and would cause a great
 deal of distress in most children. X-ray results are the type of
 
4      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
data that doctors reasonably rely on in rendering a diagnosis and
 
both doctors testified as to their observations that CW suffered
 a fractured femur. In addition, two nurses testified as to
 swelling and obvious deformity in CW's thigh; and one nurse and
 doctor testified that CW was crying and in distress. Thus, we
 conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that any error
 in admitting the X-rays into evidence might have contributed to
 Williams's conviction of Assault 3.
 
(3) Williams argues that the evidence was insufficient
 
to support his conviction because there was not any evidence that
 he caused bodily injury to CW. We disagree.
 
Doctors Doerrige and Polk, who treated CW, diagnosed
 
CW's injury as a transverse, angulated, significantly displaced
 fracture of the left femur. As noted above, Dr. Doerrige
 testified that the injury was notoriously painful, would cause
 most children to cry, and would prevent a child from sleeping
 through the night, standing, or walking. 
Yet, the evidence shows
 
that Williams waited approximately ten hours after CW sustained
 the injury to take him to the hospital. Williams was CW's sole
 caretaker. 
At the hospital, Williams sat off to the side, very
 
aloof, texting on his cell phone, despite the fact that CW was in
 a great deal of distress and pain. When CW returned from being
 X-rayed, crying, Williams gave him a "fist pump [sic]." 
Williams explained to hospital staff that CW was
 
jumping on a bed when he fell two to three feet onto a carpeted
 floor. Doctors Doerrige and Polk testified that CW's injuries
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were inconsistent with Williams's explanation because such an
 
accident would have created an insufficient amount of force to
 cause CW's injury. Further, Dr. Doerrige testified that most
 children do not learn to jump until they are older than CW. In
 Dr. Polk's opinion, CW's injury was consistent with non-
accidental trauma, such as abuse, caused by a blunt force to the
 back of his thigh. 
Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there 
is sufficient evidence that Williams at least recklessly caused CW to suffer bodily injury. See HRS § 707-712(1)(a); State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996) ("[A]s trier 
of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence."). 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 21, 2017
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 15, 2018. 
On the briefs: Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 