  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000546
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
KURTIS STEGER, Petitioner-Appellant
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 11-1-0013(1) (CR. NO. 02-1-0557(1)))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Kurtis Steger (Steger) appeals 
from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Dismissing Petition to Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Illegal Sentence Through a Writ of Habeas Corpus Pursuant to HRPP [(Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure)] Rule 40" (Order Dismissing 
Rule 40 Petition) that was filed on May 3, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ We affirm. 
I.
 
In Steger's underlying criminal case, a jury found him
 
guilty of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree,
 Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree,
 Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, and five counts
 of Prohibited Acts Relating to Drug Paraphernalia. Steger's
 prosecution was based on evidence recovered pursuant to the
 execution of a search warrant on his apartment. The police
 
1/ The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
recovered approximately four ounces of crystal methamphetamine, a
 
Glock pistol and magazines containing ammunition, a police
 scanner, almost $3,000 in cash, a gram scale, empty plastic
 packets, 100 Ecstasy tablets, eleven vials of ketamine,
 marijuana, glass smoking pipes, and other drug paraphernalia. 
Steger's roommate testified that she saw Steger and another
 roommate package crystal methamphetamine or "ice" into plastic
 packets on almost a daily basis; that Steger sold the ice out of
 his pickup truck; that the four-ounce quantity of ice seized by
 the police was "pretty much present all the time" in the
 apartment; and that Steger had received packages containing
 methamphetamine and sometimes Ecstacy in the mail. 
The Circuit Court sentenced Steger to concurrent terms 
of imprisonment of twenty years, with a five year mandatory minimum, on his conviction for Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the First Degree; ten years on his conviction for Attempted Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree; and five years on his remaining convictions, with a mandatory minimum of twenty months on his conviction for Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree. Steger filed a direct appeal from his convictions, and on November 14, 2006, this court affirmed the Circuit Court's Judgment. State v. Steger, 114 Hawai' i 162, 158 P.3d 280 (App. 
2006). 
In the meantime, on October 8, 2004, Steger appeared 
with his counsel before the Hawai' i Paroling Authority (HPA) for 
a hearing to set his minimum terms of imprisonment. On October 13, 2004, the HPA issued an order setting Steger's minimum terms at twelve years for his twenty-year sentence, ten years for his ten-year sentence, and five-years for his five-year sentences. In its "Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment," the HPA stated that the Level of Punishment was a Level III and identified "Nature of Offense" as a significant factor in determining the level of punishment. 
On October 14, 2011, Steger filed his "Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Illegal Sentence Through a Writ of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Habeas Corpus Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40" (Rule 40 Petition). 
Steger contended that the HPA violated his due process rights in
 setting his minimum terms of incarceration and that his counsel
 provided ineffective assistance in representing him before the
 HPA in the setting of his minimum terms. On May 3, 2012, the
 Circuit Court issued its Order Dismissing Rule 40 Petition. The
 Circuit Court concluded that the issues sought to be presented by
 Steger were "patently frivolous, and without a trace of support
 either in the record or from other evidence submitted by
 [Steger]." The Circuit Court therefore dismissed Steger's Rule
 40 Petition without a hearing.
 
II.
 
HRPP Rule 40(f) (2006) provides in relevant part: 
(f) Hearings. If a petition alleges facts that if
proven would entitle the petitioner to relief, the court
shall grant a hearing which may extend only to the issues
raised in the petition or answer. However, the court may
deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim is patently
frivolous and is without trace of support either in the
record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner.
 
HRPP Rule 40(f) has been interpreted as conditioning a
 
petitioner's right to a hearing on whether he or she has stated a
 
colorable claim for relief.
 
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule 40
petition for post-conviction relief where the petition
states a colorable claim. To establish a colorable claim,
the allegations of the petition must show that if taken as
true the facts alleged would change the [outcome of the
challenged proceeding], however, a petitioner's conclusions
need not be regarded as true. Where examination of the
 record of the trial court proceedings indicates that the
petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it is not
error to deny the petition without a hearing. The question
on appeal of a denial of a Rule 40 petition without a
hearing is whether the trial record indicates that
Petitioner's application for relief made such a showing of a
colorable claim as to require a hearing before the lower
court.
 
Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai' i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 1052 (1999) 
(block quote format altered and citation omitted). 
III.
 
The sole argument Steger raises on appeal is that his
 
claims "were creative not frivolous," and therefore, the Circuit
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court erred in denying his claims without a hearing. Steger
 
identifies his "creative arguments" as (1) "the HPA failed to
 sufficiently specify the grounds and criteria"; (2) "the HPA
 improperly arrived at a Level III level of punishment"; (3) "the
 HPA erred in using Level III as a starting point"; (4) "the HPA
 imposed a higher degree of penal liability [than] authorized by
 the verdict"; and (5) "[i]neffective assistance of counsel." We
 conclude that Steger has failed to demonstrate that the Circuit
 Court erred.
 
On appeal, Steger does not present any argument on the
 
merits of his claims that the HPA violated his rights or erred in
 setting his minimum terms of imprisonment and that his counsel
 provided ineffective assistance. The record indicates that the
 HPA held a hearing to set Steger's minimum terms of incarceration
 at which he was represented by counsel, and that the HPA issued
 its order setting his minimum terms, which stated that the HPA
 had placed Steger in the Level III level of punishment and that
 the nature of his offense was a significant factor in this
 determination. The record also indicates that there was evidence
 that Steger's offenses met the "Nature of Offense" criteria for
 Level III punishment under the HPA's Guidelines for Establishing
 Minimum Terms of Imprisonment. Among other things, there was
 evidence that Steger's offenses involved the importation or
 distribution of substantial quantities of drugs, and that Steger
 had knowingly devoted himself to criminal activity as a major
 source of livelihood and had obtained substantial income from
 criminal activity.
 
Steger has not presented any persuasive argument that
 
the HPA violated his rights or erred in setting his minimum terms
 of imprisonment or that his counsel provided ineffective
 assistance. Accordingly, he has not demonstrated that his Rule
 40 Petition presented a colorable claim for relief or that the
 Circuit Court erred in dismissing his Rule 40 Petition without a
 hearing.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Order Dismissing Rule 40
 
Petition. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 27, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Gerald Johnson 
for Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Lisa M. Itomura Diane K. Taira Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Respondent-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 