NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000360
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JENG-HER CHEN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HUI-CHUN LU, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 05-1-3305)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This appeal addresses custody for the minor son (Son)
 
of Plaintiff-Appellant Jeng-Her Chen (Father) and Defendant-
Appellee Hui-Chun Lu (Mother). Father appeals from three post-
decree orders filed in the Family Court of the First Circuit
 
(family court).1 Specifically, Father appeals from the "Decision
 
and Order" filed on March 5, 2012; the "Ex Parte Emergency
 Orders" (Emergency Orders) filed on March 13, 2012; and the order
 
filed on April 19, 2012 following a hearing held pursuant to the
 
Emergency Orders. In these orders, the family court denied
 
Father's request to relocate with Son to Taiwan, and when Father
 
nonetheless took Son to Taiwan, ordered Son's return and awarded
 
legal and physical custody to Mother. 
1
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal to this court, Father asserts various errors 
by the family court, but only provides supporting argument for 
some points. The points of error not supported by any argument 
are deemed waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."); Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i 422, 433, 16 P.3d 
827, 838 (App. 2000). We address the following contentions made by Father: 
(1) The family court erred in determining that it had
 
subject matter jurisdiction to issue custody orders. 
(2) The family court erred in determining that the sole
 
issue in a relocation request is "the child's best interests." 
Furthermore, in assessing the best interests of this child, the
 
family court "made glaring mistakes and omissions." 
(3) The family court's reservation of sanctions on
 
Father's "Motion to Compel Discovery and for Sanctions" (Motion
 
to Compel) had disastrous effects on the conduct of trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Father's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) Whether the family court properly exercised 
jurisdiction is a question of law that we review de novo. In re 
Doe, 96 Hawai' i 272, 283, 30 P.3d 878, 889 (2001). In this case, 
the family court properly exercised jurisdiction over Father's Motion to Relocate to Taiwan, filed on September 1, 2011; 
Mother's motion for sole legal and physical custody, filed on 
September 13, 2011; and the proceedings that followed. 
Therefore, the family court had jurisdiction to enter the three 
orders challenged by Father. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Father does not contest that the parties submitted
 
their divorce and custody dispute to the family court for
 
resolution, beginning with Father's Complaint for Divorce filed
 
on September 30, 2005, which sought custody of Son. Father
 
further recognizes in his opening brief that Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 583A-105 (2006 Repl.) provides that "[a] court
 
of this State shall treat a foreign country as if it were a state
 
of the United States for the purpose of applying parts I and II." 
Part II of HRS Chapter 583A deals with the jurisdiction of
 
Hawaii's family courts. Pursuant to provisions contained in Part
 
II,
 
[w]hen a Hawai' i court properly asserts jurisdiction and
makes an initial child custody determination, that court
retains "exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over thedetermination." HRS § 583A–202 (2006 Repl.). The court's exclusive jurisdiction continues until one of two eventsoccurs: 
(1) A court of this State determines that the child, the
child's parents, and any person acting as a parent do not
have a significant connection with this State and that
substantial evidence is no longer available in this State
concerning the child's care, protection, training, and
personal relationships; or
 
(2) A court of this State or a court of another state 
determines that the child, the child's parents, and any
person acting as a parent do not presently reside in this
State.
 
HRS § 583A-202(a)[.] 
Beam v. Beam, 126 Hawai' i 58, 60-61, 266 P.3d 466, 468-69 (App. 
2011) (footnotes and italics omitted). Thus, one of the 
requirements before the family court's exclusive jurisdiction is 
discontinued is that all the parties and the child identified in 
HRS § 583A-202 (2006 Repl.) must no longer have a significant 
connection with the State or no longer reside in the State. 
Here, the family court properly exercised jurisdiction 
and made the initial custody determination related to Son because 
Hawai'i was the home state of Son when Father initiated the 
custody proceedings in 2005. See HRS § 583A-201 (2006 Repl.); 
HRS § 583A-102 (2006 Repl.) (defining "home state" as the "state 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in which a child lived with a parent or a person acting as a
 
parent for a period of at least six consecutive months
 
immediately before the commencement of a child-custody
 
proceeding."). Thereafter, the family court continued to retain
 
exclusive and continuing jurisdiction related to Son's custody. 
2
See HRS § 583A-202;  Beam, 126 Hawai' i at 60-61, 266 P.3d at 
468-69. On September 1, 2011, when Father filed his Motion to 
Relocate seeking to move with Son to Taiwan, the parties and Son 
continued to reside in Hawai' i. Throughout the subsequent 
proceedings that are at issue in this appeal, Mother continued to reside in Hawai' i and maintain a significant connection with the 
State. Thus, the family court had exclusive and continuing jurisdiction over all of the proceedings in issue pursuant to 
HRS § 583A-202. 
Father's relocation with Son to Taiwan -- in direct
 
violation of the family court's March 5, 2012 Decision and Order
 
–- did not affect the family court's jurisdiction. On March 5,
 
2012, the family court issued its Decision and Order denying
 
Father's Motion to Relocate and further ordered, among other
 
things, that:
 
2 HRS § 583A-202 provides, in relevant part:
 
§583A-202 Exclusive, continuing jurisdiction. (a) Except
as otherwise provided in section 583A-204, a court of this State
which has made a child-custody determination consistent with
section 583A-201 or 583A-203 has exclusive, continuing
jurisdiction over the determination until:
 (1)	 A court of this State determines that the child, the
child's parents, and any person acting as a parent do
not have a significant connection with this State and
that substantial evidence is no longer available in
this State concerning the child's care, protection,
training, and personal relationships; or
 (2)	 A court of this State or a court of another state
 determines that the child, the child's parents, and
any person acting as a parent do not presently reside
in this State.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9.	 In the event that Father remains on Oahu, the parties
shall share legal custody of [Son]. Father shall
 maintain primary physical custody of [Son] under the
current time sharing arrangements.
 
10.	 In the event that Father moves to Taiwan, Mother shall
have sole physical custody of [Son]. Father shall
 have visits with [Son] as follows: all of summer (with
the exception of the last week before school starts,
and all even-numbered Winter Breaks. Upon 14 days
notice, if Father is on Oahu, Father shall have
weekend visits with [Son] on Oahu, from Friday after
school to Monday drop off at school. Father may
exercise visitation outside of the United States.
 
(Emphasis added). A few days later, Father took Son to Taiwan,
 
directly violating the family court's Decision and Order.
 
On March 13, 2012, the family court issued its
 
Emergency Orders, including that:
 
6.	 Plaintiff/Father Jeng-Her Chen is hereby ordered to
return [Son] to Honolulu, Hawaii and into
Defendant/Mother Hui-Chun Lu's custody immediately.
 
7.	 Defendant/Mother Hui-Chun Lu is hereby awarded sole
legal and physical custody of [Son], pending further
order of the Court.
 
8.	 Plaintiff/Father Jeng-Her Chen's visitation rights
with [Son] is hereby revoked until further order of
the Court.
 
9.	 Defendant/Mother Hui-Chun Lu and her designated agent
are authorized to take possession of [Son] and return
[Son] to the State of Hawaii.
 
10.	 The parties shall return for a hearing on this matter
on April 19, 2012, at 1:30 p.m. at the Family Court of
the First Circuit, State of Hawaii.
 
After a hearing on April 19, 2012, at which Father
 
failed to appear, the family court issued a further order on the
 
same date, including that:
 
(1) Mother is awarded sole legal and physical custody of the
child and is entitled to take immediate possession of the
child.
 
(2) Father's visitation shall be supervised at Parent[s] and
Children [T]ogether or other appropriate agency.
 
Father's violation of the family court's orders, by
 
removing Son from the State of Hawai' i and failing to immediately 
return Son to Mother's custody, has no effect on the family
 
court's jurisdiction. That is, the family court properly
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exercised its exclusive and continuing jurisdiction under
 
HRS § 583A-202 in issuing the March 5, 2012 Decision and Order,
 
the March 13, 2012 Emergency Orders, and the April 19, 2012
 
order.
 
Without citing any authority, Father argues that "[i]t
 
only makes sense that the country of which all parties are
 
citizens should decide their dispute." For the reasons discussed
 
above and the statutes setting forth the jurisdiction of Hawaii's
 
family courts, Father's argument is without merit.
 
(2) The family court properly ruled that the sole issue
 
in a relocation request is "the child's best interests" and the
 
court considered Son's best interests in making its custody
 
decision. We also conclude that Father failed to show that the
 
family court "made glaring mistakes and omissions" in its
 
assessment of Son's best interests. 
In Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 137 P.3d 355 
(2006), the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that "[u]nder HRS § 571­
46, the sole issue in a custody determination is the child's best interests, which is an issue of ultimate fact." Id. at 47, 137 
P.3d at 361; see HRS § 571-46(a)(1) (Supp. 2012) ("[c]ustody should be awarded . . . according to the best interests of the 
child[.]"); see also Maeda v. Maeda, 8 Haw. App. 139, 143, 794 
P.2d 268, 270 (1990). The Hawai' i Supreme Court further 
explained: 
Hawai'i courts have consistently adhered to the best
interests of the child standard as paramount when
considering the issue of custody. In so doing, the familycourt is granted broad discretion to weigh the variousfactors involved, with no single factor being givenpresumptive paramount weight, in determining whether thestandard has been met. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Fisher, 111 Hawai' i at 50, 137 P.3d at 364. HRS § 571-46(b) 
provides the factors a court shall consider in determining the 
child's best interests.3 
There was substantial evidence in the record to support 
the family court's conclusion that it was in Son's best interests 
to remain in Hawai' i. "[T]he family court is given much leeway 
in its examination of the reports concerning a child's care, custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if 
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on 
3 HRS § 571-46(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest of the
child under this section, the court shall consider, but not be
limited to, the following:
 
(1)	 Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a child by
a parent;
(2)	 Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a child
by a parent;
(3)	 The overall quality of the parent-child relationship;
(4)	 The history of caregiving or parenting by each parent
prior and subsequent to a marital or other type of
separation;
(5)	 Each parent's cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs,
interests, and schedule; provided that this factor
shall not be considered in any case where the court
has determined that family violence has been committed
by a parent;
(6)	 The physical health needs of the child;
(7)	 The emotional needs of the child;
(8)	 The safety needs of the child;
(9)	 The educational needs of the child;
(10)	 The child's need for relationships with siblings;
(11)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they allow
the child to maintain family connections through
family events and activities; provided that this
factor shall not be considered in any case where the
court has determined that family violence has been
committed by a parent;
(12)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they separate
the child's needs from the parent's needs;
(13)	 Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol abuse
by a parent;
(14)	 The mental health of each parent;
(15)	 The areas and levels of conflict present within the
family; and
(16)	 A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protection from abuse
process under chapter 586 to gain a tactical advantage in
any proceeding involving the custody determination of a
minor[.]
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal." In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
The family court held a day-long trial regarding 
Father's request to relocate to Taiwan. Ten witnesses, including 
Father and Mother, testified during the trial. Father's 
witnesses included his friend, Lisa Su Hong Chen (Chen); Rebecca 
Knuth (Dr. Knuth), the chairperson of Father's dissertation 
committee; and Martha Staff (Staff), the assistant director of 
the University of Hawai' i International Student Services program. 
Chen testified about Son's education, health, sports
 
activities, and observations of Father and Son together. She
 
also described her first-hand experiences and knowledge about
 
Taiwan, its healthcare facilities, and her views on its
 
educational system. Dr. Knuth testified about her observations
 
of Father and Son together, Father's doctoral program, and
 
Father's job prospects. Staff responded to questions regarding
 
immigration. 
Mother's witnesses included Robin Wurtzel (Wurtzel), an
 
immigration attorney; Marvin Acklin, MD, (Dr. Acklin), the court-
appointed custody evaluator; Dee Wong (Wong), Mother's friend who
 
taught at Son's school; Yi Hua Christine Lin (Lin), Mother's
 
friend; and Roanna Lee Chang (Chang), Mother's supervisor at
 
work.
 
As an immigration expert, Wurtzel testified about the
 
process undertaken to obtain a U Visa and a dependency card, as
 
well as any potential impact the status would have on travel. 
Dr. Acklin testified as to his extensive custody evaluation
 
report, which included his assessment of the best interests of
 
Son, incorporating many of the factors listed in HRS § 571-46(b). 
Dr. Acklin contacted several collateral sources and interviewed
 
the parties and Son as part of the process to develop his
 
assessment. 
8
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wong, Mother's friend and a teacher at Son's school,
 
testified about the parent-child relationship. She also
 
described her own interactions with Son. Lin, Mother's friend,
 
testified about the relationship between Mother and Son, as well
 
as her general impression about each of them. Chang, Mother's
 
supervisor, testified about Mother's character and Mother and
 
Son's relationship.
 
The parties also testified. Father discussed, among
 
other things, his relocation plans, his parenting style, the
 
health and educational needs of Son, and conflicts with Mother. 
Mother testified, among other things, about Son's activities, his
 
educational and health needs, her immigration status, and her
 
relationship with Father. 
The family court considered the "totality of
 
circumstances" and "the reliable and credible evidence presented
 
at trial" to determine that it was not in Son's best interests to
 
relocate with Father to Taiwan at that time. The family court's
 
pertinent rulings as to Son's best interest were that:
 
3.	 The Court finds that it is in [Son's] best interest to
have a relationship with both of his parents and that
[Son] is bonded to both of his parents.
 
4.	 The Court finds that neither parent was entirely
credible, and that they are incapable of co-parenting
at this time.
 
5.	 There was insufficient evidence that [Son] is not
doing well in Hawaii.
 
6.	 There was insufficient evidence that [Son] will do
"better" in Taiwan. For example, at the time of
trial, Father did not know where he would work or live
in Taiwan.
 
7.	 As such, given the totality of circumstances, and
based on the reliable and credible evidence presented
at trial, the Court finds that there is insufficient
evidence to show that it is in [Son's] best interest
to relocate with Father to Taiwan.
 
8.	 The Motion to relocate to Taiwan with [Son] is denied
without prejudice.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Based on our review of the record, there was substantial evidence
 
to support the family court's determination. 
Therefore, the family court correctly ruled that the
 
sole issue in considering Father's relocation request was the
 
best interest of the child. Moreover, the family court's custody
 
rulings are supported by substantial evidence in the record.
 
(3) Father fails to demonstrate how the family court's
 
reservation of sanctions on Father's Motion to Compel had any
 
effect on the conduct of trial. 
In Father's Motion to Compel, he asked Mother to
 
provide the names of her witnesses, numerous types of financial
 
documents, and answers to interrogatories. At trial on
 
December 12, 2011, the family court gave Father the opportunity
 
to support his motion by identifying what documents were missing. 
The court questioned Mother regarding some of the items mentioned
 
and then asked Father to identify specifically the missing
 
documents that were going to affect Father's ability to present
 
his case at trial. Father's counsel responded that he would let
 
his declaration stand for itself along with his argument. The
 
court then ruled:
 
I'm going to reserve the issue of sanctions and we'll deal
with it on a piecemeal basis via the objection of counsel,
the failure to disclose the other information. So if
 there's an objection by [Father's counsel] because he is not
able to cross-examine or impeach had he known this other
information fully sooner, then I'll take that under
consideration.
 
Father fails to provide any discernible argument to 
show how the family court's reservation of sanctions on his 
Motion to Compel had any effect on the conduct of the trial. "An 
appellate court does not have to address matters for which the 
appellant has failed to present discernible argument." Citicorp, 
94 Hawai' i at 433, 16 P.3d at 838; HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). We 
conclude that the family court did not err when it reserved its 
decision regarding sanctions until such time as Father objected 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and demonstrated that he was unable to cross-examine or impeach
 
witnesses at trial.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the March 5, 2012 "Decision
 
and Order," the March 13, 2012 "Ex Parte Emergency Orders," and
 the April 19, 2012 order issued by the Family Court of the First
 
Circuit are hereby affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 11, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Mark A. Worsham 
(Mark A. Worsham, AAL, ALC)for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Huilin Dongfor Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 