NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001479 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LIONEL LETOTO, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PRISONER PROCEEDING NO. 12-1-0051)

(FAMILY COURT CRIMINAL NO. 06-1-0017)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant pro se Lionel Letoto (Letoto)
 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Judgment or to
 Release Petitioner From Custody," filed May 21, 2013 in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Letoto contends that he did not enter into 
his plea agreement with Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i 
(State) knowingly and voluntarily and that his counsel at the 
plea proceeding was ineffective for "fail[ing] to present a clear 
and understandable complete profile of the plea and its possible outcome" and failing to "present any defense strategies, including non-intended injury by appellant[.]" 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Letoto's appeal is without merit. In light of the record of the 
trial court proceeding, it is clear Letoto presented no colorable claim in his Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 
petition (Rule 40 Petition). See Dan v. State, 76 Hawai 'i 423, 
427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
Pursuant to a plea agreement with the State, Letoto
 
2
pled guilty to an amended charge of reckless manslaughter,  in
lieu of his original charge of murder in the second degree. 
The
 
crux of Letoto's Rule 40 Petition hinged on his belief that he
 did not enter into his plea agreement voluntarily and knowingly. 
In a petition seeking relief under [HRPP] Rule 40 on
[the] ground that the guilty plea was entered into
involuntarily, the court is required to look at the entire
record in order to determine whether the petitioner's claims
or recantation are credible and worthy of belief. The
 record is vital to the ultimate determination of whether the
 plea was made voluntarily[.]
 
Eli v. State, 63 Haw. 474, 477, 630 P.2d 113, 116 (1981). 
Letoto contends that "the court itself failed to obtain 
any near clear understanding by the defendant/appellant who 
declared he did not understand the deal or its possible alternatives." Letoto also contends that "neither [his counsel] nor the court ever gave the [him] a detailed explanation of the term 'recklessly' and the [he] discovered the term by his own research[.]" However, during the plea proceeding, the circuit court "double cover[ed] some of [the] items to make sure" that Letoto understood the nature of the plea agreement and engaged in a colloquy of numerous questions. Letoto characterizes the circuit court's questioning as "senseless." However, the circuit court's questioning was the type of inquiry required under HRPP Rule 11. See State v. Solomon, 107 Hawai
'i 117, 126, 111 P.3d 
12, 21 (2005). "Although no specific dialogue is required, the court should make an affirmative showing by an on-the-record colloquy between the court and the defendant wherein the defendant is shown to have a full understanding of what the plea of guilty connotes and its consequences." Id. (citation and 
2
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702(1)(a) (1993)
"Manslaughter" provides that "A person commits the offense of manslaughter
if . . . [h]e recklessly causes the death of another person[.]"
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
internal quotation marks omitted). The circuit court engaged in
 
such a colloquy.
 
After the circuit court questioned Letoto as to whether
 
he understood the charge of reckless manslaughter, the circuit
 court asked Letoto whether his attorney explained the elements of
 reckless manslaughter, "the things that the State would have to
 prove in order for you [Letoto] to be found guilty of this
 amended charge." Letoto stated "Yes, he explained them." The
 circuit court then asked whether Letoto understood what the State
 would have to prove under the charge of reckless manslaughter to
 which Letoto responded that the elements of reckless manslaughter
 were "[n]ot in [his] head at this moment." Letoto's counsel,
 William Bento (Bento), asked the circuit court for "one
 
moment . . . [to] go over it with Mr. Letoto again." After Bento
 
and Letoto conferred about the elements of the charge, the
 circuit court asked Letoto, "So you understand what the elements
 are?" Letoto answered affirmatively, "Yes, Your Honor."
 
Letoto responded affirmatively that he was aware of the
 
maximum penalty of his plea and still wished to plead guilty;
 understood the possible immigration penalties; understood his
 right to plead not guilty; understood the right that he would be
 giving up by entering a guilty plea; understood that there would
 be no trial and that he would be found guilty; was not being
 threatened, forced, or pressured into pleading guilty and that he
 was pleading guilty of his own free will; and did not make any
 promises in exchange for his guilty plea other than the plea
 agreement. The circuit court complied with the requirements of
 HRPP Rule 11 and the record indicates that Letoto entered into
 the plea agreement voluntarily and knowingly.
 
Letoto also contends that Bento provided ineffective
 
assistance of counsel by "fail[ing] to present a clear and
 understandable complete profile of the plea and its possible
 outcome" and failing to "present any defense strategies,
 including non-intended injury by appellant[.] 
"In any claim of ineffective assistance of trial
 
counsel, the burden is upon the defendant to demonstrate that, in
 light of all the circumstances, counsel's performance was not
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
objectively reasonable - i.e., within the range of competence
 
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." •Briones v. State, 74
 Haw. 442, 462, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993) (citations and internal
 quotation marks omitted). The defendant must establish
 
1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that
such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritoriousdefense. 
State v. Aplaca
, 74 Haw. 54, 66-67, 837 P.2d 1298,
1305 (1992). To satisfy this second prong, the defendantneeds to show a possible impairment, rather than a probableimpairment, of a potentially meritorious defense. State v. Christian, 88 Hawai' i 407, 419, 967 P.2d 239, 251 (1998) A 
defendant need not prove actual prejudice. [Id.] 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) 
(footnote omitted). 
As noted, Letoto's contention that Bento failed to
 
explain the nature of the plea or the elements charged against
 
him is without merit. The record indicates that Bento conferred
 with Letoto to ensure that Letoto understood the elements of
 reckless manslaughter and Letoto indicated to the circuit court
 that he understood the elements of the charge. The record also
 indicates that Letoto responded affirmatively when the circuit
 court asked him whether he had discussed his plea fully with his
 attorney, Bento, and whether he was satisfied with his attorney's
 advice. The record does not support Letoto's contentions that he
 did not understand the nature of the charges against him or that
 he was dissatisfied with Bento's representation.
 
Letoto contends that Bento's assistance was ineffective
 
because Bento told him, "You could get life," when discussing the
 proposed plea agreement. That statement was a correct statement
 of the law. Letoto originally faced a charge of murder in the
 second degree, which carries a sentence of life imprisonment with
 possibility of parole.
3
 
Letoto also contends that Bento's assistance was
 
ineffective because Letoto failed to discuss possible defenses
 with him. This contention is also unsupported by the record. 
3
 HRS § 706-656(2) (1993) "Terms of imprisonment for first and
second degree murder and attempted first and second degree murder" provides
that "Persons convicted of second degree murder . . . shall be sentenced to
life imprisonment with possibility of parole." 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record indicates Letoto affirmed that "Bento had 'explained
 
any defenses that might be applicable in [his] case.'" During
 the plea proceeding, Letoto also gave an affirmative response
 when asked if he was aware of the rights that he was waiving by
 pleading guilty. Letoto has failed to establish any specific
 errors or omissions reflecting Bento's lack of skill, judgment,
 or diligence so to support his claim for ineffective assistance
 of counsel. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Petition to Vacate, Set
 Aside or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner From Custody,"
 filed May 21, 2013 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 9, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Lionel Letoto
 
Petitioner-Appellant pro se.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
5

 