 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003038
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JACOB W. LUND, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-12-00701)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jacob W. Lund (Lund) appeals from
 
the August 14, 2013 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment (Judgment), entered by the District Court of the
 
Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (District Court).1
 
After entering a conditional no contest plea, Lund was
 
convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 
Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2012). Lund reserved his right to appeal
 
the denial of his motion to suppress. 
On appeal, Lund claims the District Court erred by
 
denying his motion to suppress because there were no grounds to
 initiate a traffic stop, i.e., no particularized and objectively
 reasonable basis to suspect illegal activity by Lund.
 
1
 The Honorable Adrienne N. Heely presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Lund's point of error as follows:
 
Lund contends that video from the arresting officer's
 
vehicle shows that there is no evidence to support the District
 Court's finding that Lund was traveling at a high rate of speed
 or veered to the center of the road. Lund also contends that the
 District Court was wrong to rely upon Officer Arnds's subjective
 testimony because there is video of the incident.
 
The proffered reason for stopping Lund was that he
 
crossed a double solid yellow line, which is a violation of HRS
 ยง 291C-38(c)(8) (2007) ("The crossing of a double solid yellow
 line by vehicular traffic is prohibited except when the crossing
 is part of a left turn movement."). There is no dispute that
 Officer Arnds's video camera was positioned toward the right side
 of his vehicle. A review of the video shows that only the right
 half of the hood of Officer Arnds's vehicle can be seen when the
 camera was in that position. Thus, the video could not and did
 not show the position of Lund's vehicle as it traveled in the
 opposite direction and passed immediately in front of or next to
 Officer Arnds's vehicle. Officer Arnds stated that Lund's
 "vehicle came towards me. I saw it drift left, as it passed me,
 it actually drifted across the double solid yellow line with the
 driver's side wheels partially within my lane." The video does
 not contradict Officer Arnds's testimony that, as Lund passed
 him, his vehicle drifted across the double solid yellow line. In
 addition, after Officer Arnds turned around, but before he pulled
 Lund over, the video appears to show Lund's vehicle drift toward,
 but not over, the double solid yellow line, which is consistent
 with the officer's testimony regarding his earlier observation. 
The District Court credited Officer Arnds's testimony. 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. Bailey, 126 Hawai
'i 383, 406, 271 P.3d 1142, 1165 (2012) 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Lund
 
argues that the video demonstrates that the District Court
 clearly erred in finding that Lund's truck was traveling at a
 high rate of speed and veered to the center of the road. We
 disagree. As noted above, although the video does not show Lund
 crossing the double solid yellow line, it is not inconsistent
 with Officer Arnds's testimony of his observations.
 
A violation of HRS ยง 291C-38(c)(8) constitutes
 
reasonable suspicion sufficient to initiate an investigative
 stop. Therefore, the District Court did not err by denying the
 motion to suppress.
 
Accordingly, we affirm the District Court's August 14,
 
2013 Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
',i April 10, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 