NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  Pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 43(c), because
Nancy Crawford is no longer the Director of the Department of Finance
(Director) and Collins Tomei (Tomei) is now the Director, Tomei is
automatically substituted as a party.  NOS. CAAP-14-0001160 AND CAAP-14-0001190
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CAAP-14-0001160
CERTIFIED CONSTRUCTION, INC., Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
COLLINS TOMEI, as Director of the Department of
Finance, County of Hawai #i, Respondent-Appellee
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0303)
AND
CAAP-14-0001190
In the matter of CERTIFIED CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
Petitioner-Appellant/Appellee,
v.
COLLINS TOMEI, as Director of the Department of
Finance, County of Hawai #i,
Respondent-Appellee/Appellant
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0200)
APPEALS FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
In this consolidated appeal, Respondent-
Appellee/Appellant Collins Tomei,1 as Director of the DepartmentNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.2
2of Finance, County of Hawai #i (County) and Petitioner-
Appellant/Appellee Certified Construction, Inc. ( CCI) appeal from
two separate judgments filed in the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit ( circuit court) related to a procurement bid protest.2
On March 21, 2016, this court published an opinion
holding that CCI's bid protest was untimely and therefore the
Office of Administrative Hearings ( OAH), Department of Commerce
and Consumer Affairs (DCCA ) did not have jurisdiction to hear
this matter and the DCCA had properly dismissed the case. 
Certified Constr., Inc. v. Crawford , 137 Hawai #i 281, 369 P.3d
864 (App. 2016).
The Hawai #i Supreme Court subsequently accepted CCI's
application for writ of certiorari and, in an opinion issued on
September 20, 2016, vacated this court's opinion.  Certified
Constr. Inc. v. Crawford , 138 Hawai #i 315, 382 P.3d 127 (2016). 
The supreme court held that CCI's bid protest was timely, that
OAH had jurisdiction to consider the merits of CCI's protest, and
thus, the case was remanded to this court to address the
remaining issues presented on appeal.  Id. at 321, 382 P.3d at
133.
The County's remaining point of error on appeal is its
contention that the circuit court erred when it determined that
the County's "Proposal and Specifications for Reroofing for Fire
Maintenance Shop & Fire Dispatch/Warehouse Job No. B-4190" ( Bid
Solicitation) did not require a C-44 license.
In turn, CCI's remaining points of error are that the
circuit court erred when it upheld the "Hearings Officer's
Findings of Fact Conclusions of Law and Decision" issued on July
30, 2014 ( 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision), because the
Hearings Officer incorrectly: (1) concluded that OAH did not have
jurisdiction to consider whether the County must defer to the
opinion of the Contractors Licensing Board ( CLB) and to consider
the CLB opinion issued on April 8, 2014; (2) concluded that CCINOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3could not utilize the CLB opinion to determine the gooseneck hood
ventilator issue; (3) concluded that the County did not agree to
defer to a ruling by the CLB; and (4) concluded that any
assertion by CCI that the installation of ventilators was
incidental and supplemental to its roofing work was an admission
that such work was not covered by CCI's C-42 license.
For the reasons discussed below, the circuit court's
judgments are affirmed.
I.Brief Background
On December 24, 2013, the County, through its Director
of the Department of Public Works, published the Bid
Solicitation, which gave notice to bidders for "SEALED BIDS for
furnishing all tools, equipment, materials and labor necessary
for the construction of 'REROOFING FOR FIRE MAINTENANCE SHOP &
FIRE DISPATCH/WAREHOUSE,'" a project in Hilo, Hawai #i. 
On February 5, 2014, CCI submitted its bid proposal to
the County.  On February 14, 2014 the Director of the Department
of Public Works, Warren H.W. Lee (Director Lee ), sent a written
notification to CCI that its bid was disqualified
(Disqualification Letter).  On February 19, 2014, CCI submitted a
letter to the County protesting its disqualification and the
rejection of CCI's bid proposal for the project (Protest Letter). 
On March 11, 2014, CCI wrote a letter to the CLB
requesting a determination from the CLB that the "project work
may be performed under a C-42 and C-44A license and that a C-44
Sheet Metal License is not required."
On March 21, 2014, Director Lee wrote a letter
informing CCI that he was upholding the disqualification of CCI's
bid as being non-responsive and he was denying CCI's bid protest. 
On April 8, 2014, the CLB sent a letter to CCI,
responding to CCI's inquiry regarding the licenses required for
the project (CLB Response Letter ).  The letter, based on
information that CCI provided, listed the licenses that the CLB
believed were required to complete the project.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4After a hearing on April 17, 2014 addressing CCI's bid
protest, on May 8, 2014, OAH filed "Hearings Officer's Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision" (5/8/14 Hearings
Officer Decision ).  The Hearings Officer concluded, inter alia ,
that the Bid Solicitation "required a C-44 specialty contractor
license for the Project."  This decision also determined that
CCI's bid protest was untimely and should be dismissed (which is
the issue that was addressed and resolved by the recent supreme
court opinion).
On May 16, 2014, CCI filed a notice of appeal to the
circuit court from the 5/8/14 Hearings Officer Decision. 
On June 16, 2014, the circuit court filed an "Order
Granting Petitioner-Appellant Certified Construction, Inc.'s
Application for Judicial Review of the Hearings Officer's
Findings of Fact, Conclusion of Law and Decision and Exhibit 'A'"
(6/16/14 Order ).  The circuit court reversed the 5/8/14 Hearings
Officer Decision and remanded the matter to the Hearings Officer
for further proceedings.  On November 20, 2014, the circuit court
entered a Final Judgment related to this first appeal.
On July 30, 2014, on remand, the Hearings Officer
issued the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision.  The Hearings
Officer concluded, inter alia , that the OAH did not have
jurisdiction to consider CCI's claim that the County must defer
to the April 8, 2014 CLB Response Letter.  The Hearings Officer
nonetheless addressed CCI's arguments on the merits and
determined that CCI's protest to the Disqualification Letter
should be dismissed. 
On August 11, 2014, CCI filed its notice of appeal to
the circuit court from the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision.  On
September 19, 2014, the circuit court issued an order ( 9/19/14
Order) in which it affirmed the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer
Decision.  On October 28, 2014, the circuit court entered Final
Judgment affirming the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5The County timely appealed from the circuit court's
Final Judgment entered on November 20, 2014.  CCI timely appealed
from the circuit court's Final Judgment entered on October 28,
2014.
II.County's Appeal
A.C-44 license requirement
The County contends that the circuit court erred when
it reversed the Hearings Officer's determination that the Bid
Solicitation required the listing of a C-44 contractor license.
The County contends that the "Special Notice, taken in its
totality, clearly establishes the Specialty Classifications,
including the C-44 licensed contractor as requirements of the Bid
Solicitation."
The Bid Solicitation states that the "Bidder must
possess a valid State of Hawai #i, General Contractor's License
'B'" and that additional licencing requirements were noted in the
"Special Notice to Bidders."  Regarding licensing requirements,
the Special Notice to Bidders provides:
As stated in the Notice to Bidders, Bidders must possess a
valid State of Hawai# i, General Building Contractor's "B"
license.
Each of the following specialty contractor classifications
listed in the table below have been determined by the County
of Hawai# i as qualified to perform all of the work on this
project based on the project's scope and the County's
understanding of the State's licensing requirements and
specialty contractor classifications' scopes of work.  By
way of the minimum licensing requirement stated for this
project, no additional specialty contractor classifications
are required to perform the work; however, the Bidder may
list additional licensed subcontractors at its discretion.
Following this statement, is a table for "Specialty Contractor
Classification & Scope of Work," which lists "C-33 Painting and
decorating contractor," "C-44 Sheet metal contractor," and "C-48
Structural steel contractor."  Below the listing of the specialty
contractor specifications is a section titled "SPECIAL
INSTRUCTIONS TO BIDDERS REGARDING SPECIALTY CONTRACTOR
CLASSIFICATIONS AND REGARDING JOINT CONTRACTORS & SUBCONTRACTORS"
(Special Instructions ), which provides in pertinent part:NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
62)In the circumstance where a specialty contractor
classification license listed in the above table may
be deemed unnecessary by a Bidder due to its intent to
employ a plausible alternative means or method, the
Bidder shall in its Proposal clearly state such intent
and provide a detailed plan that meets with the
satisfaction of the Director.  The Director reserves
the sole discretion and right to determine whether the
Bidder's proposed justification for not listing the
required license is acceptable.  [(Special Instruction
Number Two).]
3)In the circumstance where the Bidder is licensed in
one or more specialty contractor classifications
required of the project (whether automatically as a
general engineering contractor "A", general building
contractor "B", or outright) and it intends to perform
all or some of the work of those classifications using
its own workforce, the Bidder shall, in its Proposal,
list itself accordingly and in consideration of the
balance of the instructions herein provided. 
4)In the circumstance where a specialty contractor
classification required in the above table may, in
part or in whole (as applicable to the
classification's scope of work), be within the
licensed scope of work of another listed specialty
contractor classification (e.g. overlapping scopes of
licenses), the Bidder shall clearly delineate in its
Proposal the extent of each subcontractor's
responsibility on the project such that the Director
can reasonably determine which classification is
responsible for the corresponding scopes.  Where a
listed specialty contractor classification is rendered
completely unnecessary due to overlapping scopes of
work, the Bidder, in its Proposal, shall clearly state
such as the reason for not listing that respective
entity in its Proposal. 
. . . .
Anyone who disagrees with the determination in the above
table shall submit their written objection to the Director
identifying the specialty contractor classification(s) in
question and the justification(s) for such position at least
10 consecutive calendar days prior to bid opening.  If no
such written objections are received by the Director prior
to such date, it will be presumed that all Bidders and
affected parties are in agreement with the listing set forth
above.  No other specialty license will be required unless
noted otherwise in an addendum.
(Emphasis added.)
The 5/8/14 Hearings Officer Decision concluded in
relevant part:
The Special Notice to Bidders did not specifically say
that a C-44 specialty contractor license was required for
the Project . . . . [T]he Special Notice to Bidders
identified the C-44 specialty contractor license as one of
the "minimum licensing requirement stated for the project,
and no additional specialty contractor classifications areNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7required to perform the work" and provided that it would be
presumed that "all Bidders and affected parties are in
agreement with the listing set forth above" if written
objections were not filed with the [County] ten consecutive
days prior to the bid opening.  Additionally, in allowing
for the bidder to identify an alternate means or method to
perform the work for a specialty classification license
listed in the table, [County] "reserved the sole discretion
and right to determine whether the Bidder's proposed
justification for not listing the required license is
acceptable."  Taken as a whole, the Hearings Officer finds
that the Proposal required a C-44 specialty contractor
license for the Project.
(Brackets in original omitted.)
At a hearing on June 13, 2014, the circuit court
stated:
Given what is clarified to now [sic] the Court to be the
posture of the parties with respect to this appeal the
Court's inclination is to vacate the order to dismiss and
remand.  And the basis of that would be that it appears to
the Court that the listing of the C-44, looking at all of
the terms that were referred to, appear to not establish the
C-44 subspecialty classification as a requirement but as a
minimum requirement, and to me when they stated it as a
minimum it invited the bidders to say, "Okay, you know,
we've met the minimum in other ways than the C-44."
Further, in the 6/16/14 Order, Finding of Fact (FOF ) 2 states
that the Bid Solicitation "did not require the use or listing of
a contractor, joint contractor, or subcontractor having a C-44
specialty contractor classification" and conclusion of law ( COL)
1 states that the Hearings Officer's finding that the Bid
Solicitation "required a C-44 specialty contractor license for
the Project, is clearly erroneous[.]"
We agree with the circuit court that the Bid
Solicitation did not require a C-44 license.  Under Special
Instruction Number Two, if a bidder deemed a listed specialty
contractor license unnecessary due to an intent to employ a
plausible alternative means or method, "the Bidder shall in its
Proposal clearly state such intent and provide a detailed plan
that meets with the satisfaction of the Director."  Thus, at a
minimum, Special Instruction Number Two provides an alternate
means of satisfying the licensing requirements for the project
and contemplates the possibility that a bidder would not base its NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8bid on the specialty contractor licenses set out in the Special
Notice to Bidders.
Therefore, we affirm the circuit court in that the
Hearings Officer's finding -- that the Bid Solicitation required
a C-44 specialty contractor license for the Project -- was
clearly erroneous.  See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 103D-
710(e)(5) (2012); S. Foods Grp., L.P. v. Dep't of Educ. , 89
Hawai#i 443, 452, 974 P.2d 1033, 1042 (1999) ("A COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the
clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent
upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case."
(citation omitted)).  Nonetheless, this issue is not dispositive
and the parties further litigated the matter on remand from the
circuit court.  
III.CCI's Appeal
A.OAH's Jurisdiction To Consider CLB Letter
On remand from the circuit court's 6/16/14 Order, OAH
requested that CCI and the County brief the following
jurisdictional question for the OAH Hearings Officer: "Does the
[OAH] have jurisdiction in this matter to consider [CCI's] claim
that the County must defer to an opinion of the [CLB] that was
not brought to the County's attention until after the County's
protest denial letter [dated] March 21, 2014?"
On appeal, CCI challenges the circuit court ruling
affirming the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision that the OAH did
not have jurisdiction "to consider CCI's arguments (1) that 'the
County had agreed to defer to a decision by the CLB' and (2) that
'the CLB's opinion was in favor of CCI's position on the C-42
licensing issue and should be followed.'" (Brackets omitted.) 
CCI contends that it "could not raise these 2 issues because it
did not have a favorable decision from the CLB until the CLB
orally decided the C-42 licensing question at its March 21, 2014
meeting and issued [its Response Letter] on April 8, 2014." 
Further, CCI asserts the CLB's Response Letter was not a "claim,"NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 HRS § 91-10 (2012) provides:3
§91-10 Rules of Evidence; official notice.  In
contested cases: 
(1)Except as provided in section 91-8.5, any oral or
documentary evidence may be received, but every agency shall
as a matter of policy provide for the exclusion of
irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence and
no sanction shall be imposed or rule or order be issued
except upon consideration of the whole record or such
portions thereof as may be cited by any party and as
supported by and in accordance with the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence.  The agencies shall give effect to
the rules of privilege recognized by law;
(2)Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies
or excerpts, if the original is not readily available;
provided that upon request parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original;
(3)Every party shall have the right to conduct such cross-
examination as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts, and shall have the right to submit
rebuttal evidence;
(4)Agencies may take notice of judicially recognizable facts. 
9as described by the OAH Hearings Officer, but instead "evidence
in support of CCI's bid protest argument that it had all the
proper licensure to perform the required project work."
Under the Public Procurement Code, HRS § 103D-709
(2012) addresses administrative proceedings for review and
provides that hearings officers 
shall have jurisdiction to review and determine de novo, any
request from any bidder, offeror, contractor, or person
aggrieved under section 103D-106, or governmental body
aggrieved by a determination of the chief procurement
officer, head of a purchasing agency, or a designee of
either officer under section 103D-310, 103D-701, or 103D-
702.  
HRS § 103D-709(a).  Further, "[t]he hearings officers shall have
power to issue subpoenas, administer oaths, hear testimony, find
facts, make conclusions of law, and issue a written decision . .
. ."  HRS § 103D-709(b).  "All parties to the proceeding shall be
afforded an opportunity to present oral or documentary evidence,
conduct cross-examination as may be required, and present
argument on all issues involved.  Fact finding under [HRS §] 91-
103 shall apply."  HRS § 103D-709(c).  Finally,   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In addition, they may take notice of generally recognized
technical or scientific facts within their specialized
knowledge; but parties shall be notified either before or
during the hearing, or by reference in preliminary reports
or otherwise, of the material so noticed, and they shall be
afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so noticed; and 
(5)Except as otherwise provided by law, the party initiating
the proceeding shall have the burden of proof, including the
burden of producing evidence as well as the burden of
persuasion.  The degree or quantum of proof shall be a
preponderance of the evidence.  
10[t]he hearings officer shall decide whether the
determinations of the chief procurement officer or the chief
procurement officer's designee were in accordance with the
Constitution, statutes, rules, and the terms and conditions
of the solicitation or contract and shall order such relief
as may be appropriate in accordance with this chapter.
HRS § 103D-709(h).
In the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision, the Hearings
Officer concluded:
the hearings officer can only make a decision about the
"determinations" of the chief procurement officer, and the
chief procurement officer can only make "determinations"
about complaints brought before that officer. [HRS § 103D-
709(a) and (h)] The statute literally leaves no room for the
hearings officer to make decisions about matters that were
not previously the subject of a determination by the chief
procurement officer. . . . 
In the present case, [CCI] did not assert as a basis
for its protest that the County had agreed to defer to a
decision by the [CLB], and that the [CLB's] opinion was in
favor of [CCI's] position on the C-42 licensing issue and
should be followed, until after the County had issued its
protest denial letter of [sic] March 21, 2014.  The County's
chief procurement officer or that officer's designee never
made a "determination" on either of these two claims. 
. . . .
[T]he Hearings Officer concludes that there is no jurisdiction in
this matter to consider [CCI's] claim that County must defer to
the opinion of the [CLB Response Letter] dated April 8, 2014.
Thus, the OAH Hearings Officer treated the CLB Response Letter as
an independent "determination" for which the OAH had no
jurisdiction to hear. 
By contrast, and as CCI asserts, we view the CLB
Response Letter as evidence regarding CCI's contention that the
sheet metal work could be performed under the C-42 and C-44ANOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4  The "gooseneck hood ventilator issue" refers to an issue addressed at
a hearing held on July 17, 2014 and determined in the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer
Decision.  In essence, the issue involves whether the CLB's letter addressing
the licensing requirements for installing "non-motorized prefabricated roof
vents" applies to gooseneck hood ventilators.
11licenses.  Under HRS § 103D-709(c), CCI was entitled to present
this documentary evidence to the OAH in support of its protest. 
The OAH Hearings Officer's conclusion that it did not have
jurisdiction "to consider [CCI's] claim that County must defer to
the opinion of the [CLB Response Letter] dated April 8, 2014" or
to consider the CLB letter was incorrect, and the circuit court
erred in affirming the OAH decision in this regard.
We note that, although the OAH Hearings Officer erred
in finding that it lacked jurisdiction to consider the content of
the CLB Response Letter, the OAH Hearings Officer, "out of an
excess of caution given the protracted proceedings in this
matter," went on to consider whether the County agreed to defer
to a CLB ruling.  The OAH Hearings Officer's error regarding its
jurisdiction over the CLB Response Letter issue is harmless
because, as discussed below, we affirm the OAH Hearings Officer's
decision that the County did not agree to defer to the decision
in the CLB Response Letter.
B.Gooseneck hood ventilator issue
The 7/30/14 Hearings Officer's Decision determined that
the CLB Response Letter could not be used to decide the gooseneck
hood ventilator issue4 because (1) the CLB Response letter was
informal in nature; (2) the County did not have an opportunity to
present to the CLB; (3) the gooseneck hood ventilator situation
was never presented to the CLB; and (4) the CLB's opinion
regarding turbo ventilators could not be extended to gooseneck
hood ventilators.  CCI challenges the circuit court's decision
affirming these rulings.
We conclude that the CLB Response Letter, while
relevant evidence, was not binding on the OAH.   Title 16 of
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) Chapter 201, Subchapter 5,NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12guides the CLB in its informal proceedings and interpretations. 
HAR §§ 16-201-85 et seq.  HAR § 16-201-85(a) provides: 
 
§16-201-85 Purpose, scope, and construction.  (a) The
purpose [of Subchapter 5] is to clarify that any board or
commission may issue informal interpretations in addition to
and supplemental to any power to grant declaratory relief
provided for elsewhere in this chapter.  The purpose of this
subchapter is to facilitate prompt decision making in
matters where no formal ruling is desired or needed by any
person and where the interpretation can be stated without
the necessity of an evidentiary hearing and without
consideration of legal arguments.
 
See also HRS § 444-4(9) (2013) ("In addition to any other powers
and duties authorized by law, the [CLB] shall . . . [i]ssue
informal nonbinding interpretations or declaratory rulings, and
conduct contested case proceedings pursuant to chapter 91[.]").
CCI cites to HAR § 16-201-88(b) to support its
position, which provides:
In determining whether a particular injury is appropriate
for the issuance of an informal interpretation, the
following factors shall be among those considered:
(1)Whether the facts set forth by the requester are
sufficiently detailed and clear to allow the
board or commission to understand the
requester's circumstance;
(2)Whether the question being asked is clear; and
(3)Whether there has been a consistent historical
pattern of deciding similar inquiries upon which
the board or commission can base its response.
CCI uses the above factors to suggest that the CLB Response
Letter is determinative of issues it considered, including the
"gooseneck hood ventilator issue."  These factors do not,
however, lead to the conclusion that an informal opinion of the
CLB is binding on the OAH.
Moreover, as noted in the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer's
Decision, the County had no opportunity to address any issues
with the CLB, and further, it does not appear from the record
that the gooseneck hood ventilator issue was specifically
presented to the CLB.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13CCI does not provide any authority that undermines the
OAH Hearings Officer's conclusion that the CLB Response Letter
was not binding on the OAH.  Based on CCI's challenge, we cannot
hold that the OAH Hearings Officer's conclusion was in violation
of constitutional or statutory provisions, was in excess of its
statutory authority or jurisdiction, or was affected by other
error of law.  See HRS § 103D-710(e).  Therefore, the circuit
court did not err in affirming the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer
Decision in this regard.
C.Whether the County agreed to defer to the CLB
The 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision found that the
County did not agree to defer to a ruling by the CLB.  The
circuit court affirmed, and CCI challenges this finding.  In
support of its argument, CCI cites to a February 18, 2014 email
from James Imanaka ( Imanaka) to Kevin Simpkins (Simpkins ), in
which Imanaka wrote: "We will need a [CLB] determination allowing
the C-42 to provide the classification scope of work listed under
the C-44, in order for us to negate the requirement for a C-44
Sheet metal contractor."
In addition to the email from Imanaka, Simpkins,
President of CCI, testified at the OAH hearing that in his
telephone conversation with Imanaka, his recollection was that
"[the County] had stated their position [in the Disqualification
Letter] and that [CCI] would have to get a ruling from the [CLB]
with respect to the issue at hand which was the C-44 which was
not listed."  Simpkins explained, "I don't know exactly [whether
it was] before or after I received the [Disqualification Letter],
but I did have a conversation with [Imanaka] regarding the [CLB]
and that they would defer to a ruling from the [CLB]."
Imanaka, on the other hand, was asked whether he
promised Simpkins that the awarding of the contract would be
delayed for a ruling or other information provided by CCI, to
which Imanaka responded "No."  Explaining his email to Simpkins,
Imanaka testified:NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 HRS § 103D-709(c) provides:5
§ 103D-709 Administrative proceedings for review.
. . . .
(c) Only parties to the protest made and decided
pursuant to sections 103D-701, 103D-709(a), 103D-
310(b), and 103D-702(g) may initiate a proceeding
under this section.  The party initiating the
proceeding shall have the burden of proof, including
the burden of producing evidence as well as the burden
of persuasion.  The degree or quantum of proof shall
be a preponderance of the evidence.  All parties to
the proceeding shall be afforded an opportunity to
present oral or documentary evidence, conduct cross-
examination as may be required, and present argument
on all issues involved.  Fact finding under section
91-10 shall apply.
14I asked if we will need a [CLB] determination allowing the
C-42 to provide the scope of work listed under the C-44 in
order for us to negate the requirement for a C-44 with –- to
give it the benefit of the doubt in case my interpretation
was wrong.
And what normally we'd do if that determination was
that a 42 can do the work, I did not tell this to [Simpkins]
though, this is for my knowledge and my information to go
back to the Director who -- because it's up to his
discretion yeah.
CCI bore the burden of proof as well as the burden of
persuasion under HRS § 103D-709(c).5  We cannot say that the OAH
Hearings Officer's finding that the County did not agree to defer
to the CLB was clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record.  See  HRS
§ 103D-710(e).
D.Whether CCI admitted that the installation of the
vents was not within the scope of the C-42 license
CCI challenges the conclusion in the 7/30/14 Hearings
Officer Decision that any assertion by CCI that the installation
of the gooseneck hood ventilators was incidental and supplemental
to the roofing work was an admission that the installation of
those vents was not within the scope of its C-42 license.
The OAH Hearings Officer's conclusion was based on
CCI's February 19, 2014 Protest Letter, which stated, in the
section titled "Sheet Metal Work Can Be Performed Under the C-42NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6 HAR § 16-77-34 defines "incidental and supplemental" as "work in other
trades directly related to and necessary for the completion of the project
undertaken by a licensee pursuant to the scope of the licensee's license."
15and C-44A Licenses," "the issue of whether roof flashing
installation may be performed by a roofing contract because it is
expressly included within or because it is incidental and
supplemental to the scope of work of [CCI's] C42 roofing
contractor license, has been considered in the past by other
State/County procurement agencies." (Footnote omitted).
In the 7/30/14 Hearings Officer Decision, the Hearings
Officer did not cite to any authority supporting its conclusion
that CCI's statement may be an admission that a C-42 license was
insufficient for the installation of ventilators.  The language
of CCI's Protest Letter suggests that CCI was reciting the issue
under protest to the County, and was not a definitive assertion
that the roofing work was "incidental and supplemental"6 to the
scope of work under the C-42 license.
Nonetheless, CCI does not identify a particular holding
the Hearings Officer made that was supported by this conclusion. 
The conclusion CCI challenges appears to be dicta.  Although the
OAH Hearings Officer's conclusion that CCI may have admitted its
license did not cover the roofing work appears to be erroneous,
it was harmless error.  See Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule
61 ("The court at every stage of the proceeding must disregard
any error or defect in the proceeding which does not affect the
substantial rights of the parties.").
IV.Conclusion
In light of the supreme court's opinion in this case,
the Judgment entered on November 20, 2014 in the Circuit Court of
the Third Circuit is affirmed in that OAH had jurisdiction to
address the bid protest.  For the reasons set forth above, the
finding in the 5/18/14 Hearings Officer Decision that a C-44
license was required is vacated, but that finding is not
dispositive.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16With regard to the circuit court's Judgment entered on
October 28, 2014, we affirm on the merits.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 16, 2016.
On the briefs:
Jeffre W. Juliano, 
Kristi L. Arakaki,
(O'Connor Playdon & Guben LLP)
for Petitioner-Appellant/Appellee.Presiding Judge
Jennifer D. K. Ng, 
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
County of Hawai #i, 
for Respondent-Appellee/Appellant.Associate Judge
Associate Judge