NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000104
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE TRUST AGREEMENT
 
DATED JUNE 6, 1974, AS AMENDED
(TRUST NO. 14-1-0019)
 
and
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE TRUST AGREEMENT
 
DATED JUNE 6, 1974, AS AMENDED
(TRUST NO. 14-1-0097)
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth, J., and
Circuit Court Judge Crabtree, in place of
Ginoza, C.J., Leonard and Chan, JJ., recused.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Association of Apartment Owners of
 
Discovery Bay (AOAO) appeals from the "Order Denying Petition of
 
Association of Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay for Order
 Instructing Trustee Bank of Hawaii to Sell the Fee Simple
 Reversionary Interest in the Trust Estate," (Order Denying the
 AOAO Petition) entered on September 22, 2014, and the "Final
 Judgment," entered on February 23, 2015, both by the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
12
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 
2
 A discussion of the facts in this case may be found in our
decision in the companion case, In re Trust Agreement dated June 6, 1974, as
amended, 142 Hawai 'i 484, 421 P.3d 692, CAAP-15-0000632,2018 WL 3199232 at *1
(App. Jun. 29, 2018) (mem).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, AOAO contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it (1) found that AOAO's proposed instruction to Trustee
 
Bank of Hawaii (BOH) to sell the reversionary interest did not
 conform with the stated purposes of the Trust Agreement, and
 (2) denied the "Petition of [AOAO] for Order Instructing Trustee
 [BOH] to Sell the Fee Simple Reversionary Interest in the Trust
 Estate" (Petition).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues they raised, we resolve
 AOAO's points of error as follows and affirm. 
The construction of a testamentary trust is a question 
of law which the appellate court reviews under the right/wrong standard. Trust Created Under the Will of Damon, 76 Hawai' i 120, 
123-24, 869 P.2d 1339, 1342-43 (1994). 
When construing a trust, [the appellate court]
is guided by principles relating to the interpretation
of trusts as well as those relating to the
interpretation of wills. A fundamental rule when
 construing trusts is that the intention of the settlor
as expressed in a trust instrument shall prevail
unless inconsistent with some positive rule of law.
Additionally, in construing a trust document to
determine the settlor's intent, the instrument must be
read as a whole, not in fragments. 
In re Lock Revocable Living Trust, 109 Hawai 'i 146, 151-52,
123 P.3d 1241, 1246-47 (2005) (internal quotation marks andcitations omitted). 
In re Estate of Damon, 109 Hawai' i 502, 511, 128 P.3d 815, 824, 
(2006). 
In the instant case, the Trust Agreement, dated
 
June 6, 1974,3 was entered into by Original Settlors, Helen Nahm
 
Choy, Herbert Young Cho Choy, Toyoko Ishiguro Lucas, Alice Hanako
 
Kodama Yokoyama, Louis Lyman Gowans, Helen Taylor Gowans,
 Umematsu Watada, Yasu Nakao Watada and Quon Moi Ching Wong; a
 developer, Mainline-MEPC Properties (Hawaii); and the Trustee,
 Hawaiian Trust Company, Limited, now BOH by merger. Pursuant to
 this agreement, the Original Settlors and the developer conveyed
 their fee simple title to certain lands in Waikîk î to the Trustee
 
3
 The Trust Agreement was amended three times. References to the
 
Trust Agreement in this opinion shall refer to the original version, unless
otherwise specified.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to (1) facilitate construction of the Discovery Bay Condominium
 
Project, and (2) administer the trust for the benefit of those
 with an interest in it.
4 The trust terminates on December 31,
 
2039, thereby creating the fee simple reversionary interest at
 issue.
 
In 2005, AOAO began acquiring beneficial interests in
 
the Trust and now holds the interests previously held by Helen
 Nahm Choy, Umematsu Watada, Yasu Nakao Watada, the developer, and
 part of the interests previously held by Louis Lyman Gowans,
 Helen Taylor Gowans, and Quon Moi Ching Wong, for a total of
 approximately 53% of the square footage of the Discovery Bay
 Condominium Project.
 
In its Petition, AOAO argued that it, as the majority
 
square-footage beneficiary, could instruct the Trustee to market
 and sell the fee simple reversionary interest over the objections
 of the remaining beneficiaries, pursuant to Paragraph 3(b) of the
 Trust Agreement (Third Amended Version).
5 AOAO's proposed
 
4 Specifically, the Trust Agreement (Third Amended Version) stated,
as its purposes:
 
(a) The submission of the project site and the
improvements to be constructed thereon to a single
horizontal property regime.
 
(b) The construction of one or more buildings by
[developer] across the existing common boundaries of the
project site.
 
(c) The efficient and uniform administration of the
Settlors' separate interests in the trust estate and in the
condominium conveyance documents relating to the apartments
of the horizontal property regime.
 
(d) The determination of valuation through an
appraiser or appraisers under the existing leases and the
condominium conveyance documents to be hereafter issued.
 
(e) The distribution of rents received by Settlors
under the existing leases and the condominium conveyance
documents to be hereafter issued.
 
(f) The administration of the project upon expiration
or earlier termination of the leasehold interest created
 under said condominium conveyance documents.
 
Paragraph 1(a) through (f).
 
5
 Paragraph 3(b) of the Trust Agreement provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) . . . Whenever there shall be a disagreement
among the Settlors as to the instructions to give the
 
(continued...) 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
guidelines for the Trustee included, inter alia, the Trustee
 
having "the power and authority" to select an appraiser "in its
 sole discretion," upon terms and conditions in the Trustee's
 "sole discretion," for which the Trustee "shall not be required
 to seek the approval or consent of the beneficiaries of this
 Trust[.]" AOAO proposed the same guidelines for the Trustee's
 discretionary selection of a qualified real estate broker,
 marketing of the reversionary interest, and accepting offers.
 
A plain reading of the Trust Agreement does not confer
 
upon the Trustee the discretion proposed by AOAO. Paragraph 2 of
 the Trust Agreement (Third Amended Version) provides:
 
2. Powers and Duties of Trustee. The powers of the
Trustee shall be limited to the powers hereinafter expressly
provided, and such other incidental powers as are reasonably
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the trust. . . . 
. . . .
 
The within grant of powers to the Trustee is intended
to confer upon the Trustee the power to perform on behalf of
the Settlors administrative and ministerial duties only.
. . . Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the
Trustee shall have no power to sell or exchange any portion
of the trust estate, to invest the income of the trust
estate, or to engage in any business enterprise on behalf of
the trust estate.
 
(Emphasis added.) Rather, AOAO's position swallows the explicit
 
provisions limiting the Trustee's powers, as enumerated by the
 Original Settlors. In re Estate of Damon, 109 Hawai' i at 511, 
128 P.3d at 824 ("[I]n construing a trust document to determine
 the settlor's intent, the instrument must be read as a whole, not
 in fragments.") (citations omitted).
6
 
(...continued) 
Trustee, the instructions of the Settlors having an interest
in the majority of the square footage in the jointlydeveloped parcel shall be conclusively binding upon allparties hereto; provided, that except as herein set forth,nothing herein shall authorize nor be deemed to authorizethe Trustee to act in any manner in which shall impair,modify and waive any beneficial right of the Settlors or anyone of them in the existing leases described in Exhibit A,except upon the unanimous consent of all representatives. 
Exhibit A contained a description of the parcels held by the Original Settlors
that were leased to the developer.
 
6
 We additionally note that it does not appear, nor do any of the
parties argue, that emergency circumstances exist which would permit deviation
(continued...) 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AOAO's proposals also appear to contradict Paragraph 12
 
(Third Amended Version), which provides that once the Discovery
 
Bay apartment owners' leases expire, the trust shall continue
 until all buildings are removed from the underlying land, at
 which time the land shall be subdivided and restored to the
 Original Settlors' beneficiaries by virtue of the fee simple
 reversionary interest.
 
This court also considered AOAO's argument that a
 
current inability to sell the reversionary interest renders void
 any trust provision prohibiting the sale. We disagree. The
 cases relied on by AOAO are distinguishable factually and on
 policy grounds. In fact, in Ass'n of Owners of Kukui Plaza v.
 City & County of Honolulu, 7 Haw. App. 60, 78, 742 P.2d 974, 985
 (1987) this court cautioned, "[w]e strongly emphasize that our
 holding is strictly limited to the facts in this case."
 
THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
 
Petition of Association of Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay for
 Order Instructing Trustee Bank of Hawaii to Sell the Fee Simple
 Reversionary Interest in the Trust Estate," entered on
 September 22, 2014, and the "Final Judgment," entered on
 February 23, 2015, both by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2018. 
Andrew V. Beaman,
(Andrew W. Char, Danton S.
Wong, and Adrienne S.
Yoshihara, with him on the
briefs; Chun Kerr),for Petitioner-Appellant
Association of Apartment
Owners of Discovery Bay.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
James K. Mee,
(Robert Bruce Graham, Jr. and
Clara Park, with him on the
briefs; Ashford & Wriston), Associate Judge
 
(...continued)
from the terms of the Trust Agreement. Cf. In re Trust Agreement dated June
6, 1974, as amended, 142 Hawai i 484, 421 P.3d 692, CAAP-15-0000632,2018 WL
3199232 at *1 (App. Jun. 29, 2018) (mem.) (holding that emergency
circumstances existed permitting the probate court to deviate from the terms
of the same Trust Agreement at issue in the instant case); see also Hawaiian
Trust Co. v. Breault, 42 Haw. 268, 271-73 (Haw. Terr. 1958).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for Respondents-Appellees
Susan Sheetz and Patricia
 Sheetz Bow.
 
Douglas C. Smith,
(Christopher J.I. Leong with
him on the briefs; Damon Key
Leong Kupchak Hastert),
for Respondent-Appellee
Kevin I. Yokoyama, as Trustee
of the Kevin I. Yokoyama Trust
and the Irvine K. Yokoyama,
Jr. Trust.
 
Blake W. Bushnell
 
(Corey Y.S. Park with him on
the briefs),
for Respondents-Appellees
Julie G. Henderson, Trustee of
the Julie G. Henderson
 Irrevocable Trust, Jean K.
Gowans Irrevocable Trust, and
Louis L. Gowans, Jr.,
Irrevocable Trust; and
Richard L. Gowans, Trustee of
the Richard L. Gowans
 Irrevocable Trust.
 
Vincent A. Piekarski and
 
Johnathan C. Bolton,
for Respondent-Appellee Bank
of Hawaii, as Trustee.
 
6
 