PROCEDURAL HISTORY NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000380 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
AKIRA KADOMATSU, JUNKO KADOMATSU, Individually, and as Next
Friend for AK, GK, and MK, minors, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
COUNTY OF 
KAUA# I and STATE OF HAWAI# I, Defendants-Appellees,
and 
HYATT CORPORATION, dba GRAND HYATT KAUAI RESORT AND SPA, KAWAILOA
D
EVELOPMENT LLP, and MAHAULEPU FARM LLC, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0324) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Akira Kadomatsu (
Kadomatsu) and 
Junko Kadomatsu, individually and as next friends for minors AK, 
GK, and MK (collectively,  
the Plaintiffs) appeal from the
Judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees State of Hawai# i and 
County of Kaua# i entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth 
Circuit  on April 29, 2016. For the reasons explained below, we
affirm the Judgment. 1 
Plaintiffs' complaint was filed on November 14, 2013. 
The complaint alleged that Kadomatsu was injured on November 15, 2011, by the negligence of the State and the County (among 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
others)2 because of "an unreasonably dangerous condition of the 
adjacent subsea terrain and [sic] creating an unreasonable risk 
of harm" at the beach where Kadomatsu was swimming. Kadomatsu's interrogatory answers stated that he "went to the beach in front of [the Grand] Hyatt [Kaua# i Resort and Spa]. We [sic] went into 
the ocean and began swimming. Just before the incident, I was swimming in the ocean. . . . I was pushed down to the bottom of the ocean by a wave and hit my forehead on a rock, coral or something hard." Kadomatsu became quadriplegic as a result. 
On March 11, 2015, the State filed a motion for summary 
judgment. The motion was supported by a declaration from Stephen L. Thompson (Thompson), the State Parks Program Manager 
of the State's Department of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR). 
Thompson stated that "[t]he State does not own or operate any 
public beach parks adjacent to the Grand Hyatt Resort and Spa[.]" By order entered on July 27, 2015, the circuit court granted the State's motion. The circuit court did not enter a certified judgment on this order pursuant to Rule 54(b) of the Hawai# i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP
).3 
On March 27, 2015, the County filed a motion for 
summary judgment. The motion was supported by four declarations authenticating various documents and photographs. It argued that the County owed no legal duty to Kadomatsu because he entered the ocean from the Grand Hyatt Resort's beach access, not from the 
2 Plaintiffs settled their claims against Defendants Hyatt
Corporation and Kawailoa Development LLP. 
3 HRCP Rule 54 provides, in relevant part: 
(b) Judgment upon multiple claims or involving
multiple parties . When more than one claim for relief is 
presented in an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim,
cross-claim, or third-party claim, or when multiple partiesare involved, the court may direct the entry of a finaljudgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the claimsor parties only upon an express determination that there isno just reason for delay and upon an express direction forthe entry of judgment. In the absence of such determination and direction, any order or other form of decision, howeverdesignated, which adjudicates fewer than all the claims orthe rights and liabilities of fewer than all the partiesshall not terminate the action as to any of the claims orparties, and the order or other form of decision is subjectto revision at any time before the entry of judgmentadjudicating all the claims and the rights and liabilitiesof all the parties. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
County-owned Shipwreck Beach Park. It also argued that even if 
Kadomatsu had entered the ocean from Shipwreck Beach Park, any legal duty the County owed to Kadomatsu was fulfilled by the County's compliance with Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-
1.56. By order entered on July 16, 2015, the circuit court 
denied the County's motion. 
On September 11, 2015, Plaintiffs filed an amended 
complaint.
4 The amended complaint re-alleged negligence claims 
against the State and the County, identified the ocean off the 
County's Shipwreck Beach Park as the location of Kadomatsu's accident, and specified that the "extremely dangerous natural condition" was sandstone. Attached to the amended complaint were photographs of warning signs posted by the County at the makai end of the Shipwreck Beach Park parking lot, facing the parking lot. One of the warning signs read: 
DANGEROUS 
SHOREBREAK 
Waves break in shallow water 
Serious injuries could occur, even in small surf
IF IN DOUBT, DON'T GO OUT 
The other sign warned of a strong current, and that "you could be swept away from shore and could drown." 
The amended complaint also alleged that the State and 
the County deprived Kadomatsu of his rights without due process and in violation of the equal protection clause of the constitutions of the state of Hawai# i and the United States. 
On October 8, 2015, the State moved to dismiss the 
amended complaint. The motion was granted by order entered on December 15, 2015. 
On October 7, 2015, the County moved to dismiss the 
amended complaint. The motion was granted by order entered on December 15, 2015. Plaintiffs moved for reconsideration. The circuit court denied reconsideration on February 17, 2016. 
4 An order granting Plaintiffs' motion to amend the complaint was
entered on September 9, 2015. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Judgment was entered on April 29, 2016. This
appeal followed. 5 
DISCUSSION 
I. The Circuit Court Did Not Err By Dismissing
the Amended Complaint Against the State 
"A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is 
reviewed de novo." Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 
Hawai# i 249, 256, 428 P.3d 761, 768 (2018) (citations omitted). 
A reviewing court applies the same standard applied by the trialcourt:  
[A] complaint should not be dismissed for failure to
state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that theplaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of[their] claim that would entitle [them] to relief.The appellate court must therefore view a plaintiff'scomplaint in a light most favorable to [them] in orderto determine whether the allegations contained thereincould warrant relief under any alternative theory.For this reason, in reviewing a circuit court's orderdismissing a complaint . . . the appellate court'sconsideration is strictly limited to the allegationsof the complaint, and the appellate court must deemthose allegations to be true. 
Id. at 257, 428 P.3d at 769 (citation omitted). "However, in 
weighing the allegations of the complaint as against a motion to dismiss, the court is not required to accept conclusory allega-tions on the legal effect of the events alleged." Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai# i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 (2013) (citations 
omitted). 
A. The negligence claim. 
The elements of a negligence claim are: 
(1) A duty or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring
the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct,
for the protection of others against unreasonable risks; 
(2) [a] failure on the defendant's part to conform to the
standard required: a breach of the duty; 
5 Because we affirm the Judgment, we need not address Plaintiffs'
additional contentions that the circuit court erred in granting the State's
March 11, 2015 motion for summary judgment on the original complaint, indenying Plaintiffs' discovery motions, and in denying Plaintiffs' motion forreconsideration of the order granting the County's motion to dismiss theamended complaint. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) [a] reasonably close causal connection between the
conduct and the resulting injury; and 
(4) [a]ctual loss or damage resulting to the interests of
another. 
Bhakta v. Cty. of Maui, 109 Hawai# i 198, 211, 124 P.3d 943, 956
(2005) (emphasis and alterations in original) (citations omit-
ted). 
The existence of a legal duty is entirely a question of 
law. Bidar v. Amfac, Inc., 66 Haw. 547, 552, 669 P.2d 154, 158(1983). HRS § 663-1.56 (Supp. 2010), provides:  
 
Conclusive presumptions relating to duty of public
enities to warn of dangers at public beach parks . (a) The
State or county operating a public beach park  shall have a 
duty to warn the public specifically of dangerous shorebreak
or strong current in the ocean adjacent to a public beachpark if these conditions are extremely dangerous, typicalfor the specific beach, and if they pose a risk of seriousinjury or death. 
(b) A sign or signs warning of dangerous shorebreak
or strong current shall be conclusively presumed to be
legally adequate  to warn of these dangerous conditions, if
the State or county posts a sign or signs warning of thedangerous shorebreak or strong current and the design andplacement of the warning sign or signs has been approved bythe chairperson of the board of land and natural resources.The chairperson shall consult the governor's task force onbeach and water safety prior to approving the design andplacement of the warning sign or signs. 
(c) A sign or signs warning of other extremely
dangerous natural conditions in the ocean adjacent to apublic beach park shall be conclusively presumed to belegally adequate to warn of the dangerous naturalconditions, if the State or county posts a sign or signswarning of the extremely dangerous natural condition and thedesign and placement of the sign or signs have been approvedby the chairperson of the board of land and naturalresources. The chairperson shall consult the task force onbeach and water safety prior to issuing an approval of thedesign and placement of a warning sign or signs pursuant tothis section. 
(d) The State or county operating a public beach
park may submit a comprehensive plan for warning ofdangerous natural conditions in the ocean adjacent to apublic beach park to the chairperson of the board of landand natural resources who shall review the plan for adequacyof the warning as well as the design and placement of thewarning signs, devices, or systems. The chairperson shallconsult with the task force on beach and water safety priorto issuing an approval of the plan. The task force on beach and water safety may seek public comment on the plan. In the event that the chairperson approves the plan for theparticular beach park after consulting with the task forceand the State or county posts the warnings provided for inthe approved plan, then the warning signs, devices, orsystems shall be conclusively presumed to be legally
adequate  to warn for all dangerous natural conditions in the
ocean adjacent to the public beach park. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(e) Neither the State nor a county shall have a duty
to warn on beach accesses, coastal accesses, or in areas 
that are not public beach parks  of dangerous natural
conditions in the ocean. 
(f) Neither the State nor any county shall have a
duty to warn of dangerous natural conditions  in the ocean 
other than as provided in this section . 
(g) In the event that a warning sign, device, or
system posted or established in accordance with this section
is vandalized, otherwise removed, or made illegible, theconclusive presumption provided by this section shallcontinue for a period of five days from the date that thevandalism, removal, or illegibility is discovered by theState or county. The State or county operating a publicbeach park shall maintain a record regarding each report ofvandalism, removal, or illegibility that results in thereplacement of a warning sign, device, or system at a Stateor county public beach park. The record shall include the date and time of the reporting and the replacement of thewarning sign, device, or system. The State and county shallprovide a copy of the record annually to the chairperson ofthe board of land and natural resources and the task force on beach and water safety. 
(h) The chairperson shall consider the needs of the
public to be warned of potentially dangerous conditions inthe ocean adjacent to a public beach park prior to issuingan approval for the design and placement of a warning signor a comprehensive plan. The chairperson may requirewarning devices or systems in addition to the signing beforeapproving the design and placement of a warning sign or acomprehensive plan. The approval of the design and
placement of a warning sign, device, system or comprehensiveplan provided in this section shall be a discretionarydecision under chapter 662 . 
(i) Chapter 91 shall not apply to any process,
including any action taken by the chairperson, establishedor made pursuant to this section. 
(j) Nothing in this section shall be construed to
have an impact upon governmental liability for theperformance of rescue services or duties andresponsibilities of lifeguards other than the duty to warnas set forth in this section. 
(Bold italics added.) 
Plaintiffs' amended complaint did not allege that the 
State operated Shipwreck Beach Park, where Kadomatsu was injured. 
The amended complaint alleged that Kadomatsu was injured in the ocean fronting the County-owned Shipwreck Beach Park. Thus, under HRS § 663-1.56, the State had no duty to warn Kadomatsu of dangerous natural conditions at that beach park. 
Bhatka, 109 
Hawai# i at 212-13, 124 P.3d at 957-58 (applying HRS § 663-1.56 
and holding that the State has a duty to warn of extremely dangerous conditions only at State beach parks). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, because the State has not waived its 
sovereign immunity for the discretionary act of approving the 
design and placement of the County's warning sign, Plaintiffs' claim that the State negligently approved the sign fails to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. HRS § 662-15 (Supp. 2010) provides, in relevant part: 
This chapter [the State Tort Liability Act] shall not apply
to: 
(1) Any claim based upon an act or omission of an employee
of the State . . . based upon the exercise or per-formance or the failure to exercise or perform adiscretionary function or duty  on the part of a state
officer or employee, whether or not the discretioninvolved has been abused[.] 
(Bold italics added.) Under the facts pleaded in the amended 
complaint, as a matter of law the State could not be liable in tort to the Plaintiffs. The circuit court did not err in dismissing the amended complaint's negligence claim against the State. 
B. The constitutional claims. 
Plaintiffs' amended complaint alleged that the State 
deprived Kadomatsu of his constitutional rights to due process and equal protection under the law. The sole remedy sought was recovery of damages. The State Tort Liability Act, HRS § 662-2 (1993), does not allow the State to be held liable for money damages for constitutional violations. Figueroa v. State, 61 
Haw. 369, 383, 604 P.2d 1198, 1206 (1979). The circuit court did not err in granting the State's motion to dismiss the Plaintiffs' claim against the State for alleged constitutional violations. 
II. The Circuit Court Did Not Err By Dismissing
the Amended Complaint Against the County 
The County's motion to dismiss the amended complaint 
was filed pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), for failure to state a 
claim upon which relief could be granted. Plaintiffs' memorandum in opposition included matters outside the amended complaint that were not excluded by the circuit court. Under such circumstances HRCP Rule 12(b) provides, in relevant part: 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If, on a motion asserting the defense numbered (6) to
dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim uponwhich relief can be granted, matters outside the pleadingare presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion 
shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed ofas provided in Rule 56 , and all parties shall be given
reasonable opportunity to present all material madepertinent to such a motion by Rule 56. 
(Bold italics added.) We review the circuit court's grant of 
summary judgment de novo using the same standard applied by the circuit court. Lansdell v. Cty. of Kauai, 110 Hawai# i 189, 194, 
130 P.3d 1054, 1059 (2006). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if 
the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id. A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. Id. In 
addition, "[a]n appellate court may affirm a judgment of the lower court on any ground in the record which supports affirmance." Am. Sav. Bank, F.S.B. v. Chan, 146 Hawai# i 94, 103, 
456 P.3d 167, 176 (2020) (citing Strouss v. Simmons
, 66 Haw. 32, 
40, 657 P.2d 1004, 1010 (1982)). 
A. The negligence claim. 
Plaintiffs contend that the shorebreak warning sign 
should have been double-sided, and placed at locations in addi-tion to the one makai of the County's parking lot at Shipwreck Beach Park, facing mauka. Plaintiffs did not allege whether the signage at Shipwreck Beach Park was approved by the State under HRS § 663-1.56. However, the County's March 27, 2015 motion for summary judgment contained a declaration from Curt Cottrell, then the assistant administrator for DLNR's State Parks Division, authenticating various documents including (1) a letter dated December 19, 1996, from the State Task Force on Beach and Water Safety to then-Board of Land and Natural Resources Chair Michael D. Wilson (Wilson) recommending approval of the design of 
the dangerous shorebreak warning sign submitted by the County, 
with then-Chair Wilson's signed approval, (2) a letter dated 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
September 29, 1997, from the State Task Force on Beach and Water 
Safety to then-Chair Wilson, recommending approval of the place-ment of the dangerous shorebreak warning sign at Shipwreck Beach Park and other locations, with then-Chair Wilson's approval, and (3) a memorandum from the County to DLNR confirming that the approved shorebreak warning sign, among others, was installed at Shipwreck Beach Park on January 11, 1998. Under HRS § 663-1.56(b), then-Chair Wilson's approval of the County's design and placement of the dangerous shorebreak warning sign at Shipwreck Beach Park, upon the recommendation of the State Task Force on Beach and Water Safety, is conclusive of the legal adequacy of the warning. 
Plaintiffs also argue that the County negligently 
failed to warn of the dangerous sandstone condition. However, Kadomatsu's interrogatory answers stated: "I was pushed down to the bottom of the ocean by a wave and hit my forehead on a rock, coral or something hard." It was the shorebreak that caused Kadomatsu's injury, whether he hit his forehead on a rock, coral, sandstone, the sandy bottom, or something else under the water. In addition, Plaintiffs' amended complaint alleged that sandstone was an "extremely dangerous natural condition[.]" (Underscoring added.) The County had no duty to warn Kadomatsu about dangerous natural conditions, except as provided in HRS § 663-1.56. The legislative history of HRS § 663-1.56 was quoted by the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court in Lansdell: 
[T]he legislature specifically eliminated the State's and
various counties' duty to warn on "beach accesses, coastalaccesses, or in areas that are not in public beach parks ofdangerous natural conditions" and with regard to "dangerousnatural conditions in the ocean" other than as provided by[1996 Haw. Sess. L. Act 190]. The legislative history ofAct 190 also evinces this intention. 
This bill would establish the duty of the State and
counties to warn of dangerous shorebreaks or strong
ocean current if the conditions are extremely
dangerous, typical for the beach, and if they pose arisk of serious injury or death. . . . The bill doesnot require warning to be given of other extremelydangerous conditions, but permits the State andcounties to obtain the same legal presumption forthose conditions if the State or county responsiblefor the beach posts approved warning signs . 
Id. at 201, 130 P.3d at 1066 (quoting Sen. Conf. Comm. Rep. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No. 98, in 1996 Senate Journal, at 787) (italics in original, 
underscoring added). 
As originally enacted, HRS § 663-1.56 was to be auto-
matically repealed on June 30, 2007. After Lansdell was decided, Act 152 of the 2007 Legislature repealed the sunset provision, making the statute permanent. S.B. No. 1603 (2007) stated: 
The legislature finds that the limitations on state and
county liability have proven to be beneficial to the stateand county governments, as well as the public. The liability protections have reduced the exposure of the stateand county governments to substantial damages and, as aresult, have allowed the state and county governments tokeep recreational areas and public beach parks withpotentially dangerous conditions open to the public. The legislature further finds that state and county compliancewith the statutorily required public warning of dangerousconditions at recreational areas and public beach parks hascontributed to an improvement in public safety in theseareas, which justifies making the current liabilityexemptions for state and county governments relating torecreational areas and public beach parks and actions ofcounty lifeguards permanent or extending their protections. 
S.B. 1603, S.D. 2, H.D. 2, C.D. 1, 24th Leg., Reg. Sess. (2007). 
The circuit court did not err in dismissing the amended 
complaint's negligence claim against the County. 
B. The constitutional claims. 
Plaintiffs' amended complaint alleged that the County 
deprived Kadomatsu of his rights "without due process in viola-tion of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii, Article 1, Secs. 1, 2 and 1.13, and/or the United States Constitution, Articles (amendments) VII and XIV, Section 1." They cite Brodie v. Haw. Auto. Retail Gasoline Dealers Ass'n, 2 Haw. App. 316, 631 P.2d 600 (1981), rev'd, 65 Haw. 598, 655 P.2d 863 (1982), for the proposition that "one of the things that distinguishes our society is the citizen's relative freedom of access to the courts." Id. at 321, 631 P.2d at 604. The only authority they 
cite to support their argument that HRS § 663-1.56 unconstitutionally deprives them of their right of access to the courts is Silva v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 115 Hawai# i 1, 165 
P.3d 247 (2007). 
In that case the supreme court held that former 
HRS § 46-72 (Supp. 1998) (which required that persons making claims against a county for personal injury or property damage 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
must provide the county with written notice of the claim within 
six months after the injury) violated the equal protection clause of the Hawai# i Constitution by creating a class of tort claimants 
— those injured by the conduct of a county — who were subject to disparate treatment when compared to tort claimants injured by the conduct of the State (whose claims were subject to a two-year statute of limitation under HRS § 662-4 (1993)). Silva does not 
stand for the proposition that a statute limiting a governmental entity's duty to warn unconstitutionally deprives one who did not receive the warning of access to the courts. 
Plaintiffs' amended complaint also alleged that the 
County deprived them of equal protection "in violation of the guaranty of equal protection set forth in the Constitution of the State of Hawaii, Article 1, Sec. 1.5 and/or the Constitution of the United States, Article (amendment) XIV, Sec. 2," but they do not cite to Silva, which was actually an equal protection case, in their argument. Under Silva, HRS § 663-1.56 survives constitutional scrutiny because it treats all tort claimants equally. The circuit court did not err in dismissing the amended complaint's claim against the County for constitutional violations. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the
circuit court on April 29, 2016, is affirmed.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 8, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
James Krueger,
Cynthia K. Wong,for Plaintiffs-Appellants./s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Caron M. Inagaki,
Marie Manuele Gavigan,for Defendant-AppelleeState of Hawai# i. Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
Adam P. Roversi,for Defendant-AppelleeCounty of Kaua# i. 
11 