NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000480
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ALBERTA J. RIVERA,
Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I and
 
DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS and
 
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION,
Appellees/Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-335)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard JJ.)
 
Appellant Alberta J. Rivera (Rivera) appeals from the
 
judgment entered May 31, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the Third
 
1
Circuit  (circuit court).  Judgment was entered in favor of 
Appellees State of Hawai' i, the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands 
(DHHL) and the Hawaiian Homes Commission (HHC) (collectively, 
Appellees) pursuant to the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, 
and Order Affirming Administrative Decision" entered May 2, 2011. 
Rivera's DHHL lease was terminated due to breach of the
 
terms. 
Rivera's husband was caught selling drugs for a third
 
time at their home. The lease was cancelled on the basis that
 Rivera knew or should have known of the illegal activity. The
 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lease required Rivera to "comply with all of the requirements of
 
all municipal, state and federal authorities and observe all
 
municipal ordinances and state and federal statutes pertaining to
 
said premises." The lease also prohibited Rivera from
 
"permit[ting] to be committed any . . . unlawful use of the
 
demised premises." HHC held a contested case hearing when Rivera
 
challenged the cancellation of the lease. HHC upheld the
 
termination of the lease and denied reconsideration. Rivera
 
appealed to the circuit court. Circuit court affirmed HHC's
 
decision.
 
On June 20, 2011, Rivera filed a notice of appeal from
 
the May 31, 2011 judgment.
 
Rivera's points on appeal are as follows:
 
Whether the Third Circuit Court committed reversible
 
error in upholding the decisions granting Appellees' orders
and findings of fact in the above entitled case as follows:
 
(1) The [circuit court's] and [HHC's] findings of
fact, conclusions of law and decisions and orders from July
29, 2009 ordering the forfeiture of [Rivera's] land and the
denial of [Rivera's] motion to reconsider are unsupported by
the facts in this case and constitute a direct violation of
 [Rivera's] 5th, 8th and 14th amendments constitutional
rights to due process, equal protection of the laws and
protection from excessive fines and double jeopardy
guaranteed under the United States Constitution and the
Hawaii State Constitution.
 
(2) The Appellees[] failed to apply the law where
Congress has enacted "innocent owner" defense in civil drug
forfeitures (21 U.S.C.A. ยง 881(a)(6) [1988]). Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes provides that the court shall limit the
scope of a forfeiture judgment issued pursuant to section
[712A-5(1)(b)]
 to the extent the court finds the effect of
the forfeiture is grossly disproportionate to the nature and
severity of the owner's conduct. The Appellees[] and the
[circuit court] failed to follow the law in determining
whether the forfeiture was grossly disproportionate to
[Rivera's] conduct.
 
(3) There was insufficient evidence submitted or
 
admitted into evidence by the Appellees[] that on April 13,
2007, the date of the alleged violation of the lease, that
[Rivera] was involved in or had any actual knowledge of any
criminal activity on the property and therefore the [circuit
court's] and [HHC's] decisions are arbitrary, capricious and
unreasonable and therefore in violation of state and federal
 constitutional rights to due process and equal protection.
 
(4) The orders and decisions entered against [Rivera]
are in direct violation of the United States Constitution
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the Hawaii State Constitution Double Jeopardy Clauses
that state that No person shall be put in jeopardy twice for
the same offence.
 
(5) The [circuit court's] decisions and orders are
barred by res judicata and collateral estoppel.
 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
Rivera's points on appeal are not in accordance with 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) in that 
they fail to state where in the record the alleged error 
occurred, where in the record the alleged error was objected to 
or the manner in which the allege error was brought to the 
attention of the court or agency. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(D) provides 
"[p]oints not presented in accordance with this section will be 
disregarded except that the appellate court, at its option, may 
notice plain error not presented." 
Additionally, Rivera's statement of the case fails to
 
comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) by not "setting forth the nature
 
of the case, the course and disposition of proceedings in the
 
court or agency appealed from, and the facts material to
 
consideration of the questions and points presented, with record
 
references supporting each statement of fact or mention of court
 
or agency proceedings." Rivera also failed to comply with HRAP
 
Rule 28(b)(7) in that the argument section of the opening brief
 
does not cite parts of the record relied on. Counsel is warned
 
future noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28(b) may result in sanctions
 
against him.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Rivera's
 
appeal is without merit. HHC did not err in concluding that the
 
terms of Rivera's lease had been violated, and the circuit court
 
properly affirmed HHC's decision to cancel the lease.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the May 31, 2011 judgment
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 16, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Johnaaron Murphy Jones
for Appellant-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
 
Diane K. Taira
 Scott Kalani Bush
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Appellees-Appellees.
 Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 