  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000892
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
HERMAN ALAN SANTIAGO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-11-00772)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Herman Alan Santiago (Santiago)
 
appeals from a Judgment entered on October 28, 2011, in the
 
District Court of the Third Circuit, North/South Kona Division1
 
(district court) convicting him of Operating a Vehicle Under the
 Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
2
Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a) (Supp. 2013)  and refusal to submit
to a breath, blood, or urine test (Refusal to Submit) in
 violation of HRS §§ 291E-11 (2007), -15 (Supp. 2013), and -68
 (Supp. 2011). 
1 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61(a) provides in pertinent part:
 
§291E-61. Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of operating
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Santiago contends that (1) the district 
court violated his constitutional right to testify when it failed 
to engage him in an on-the-record colloquy and obtain a waiver of his right to testify as required by Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995); (2) Santiago was deprived of 
the effective assistance of counsel; and (3) there was no substantial evidence to support a conviction on the charge for Refusal to Submit where Santiago was not provided counsel or read 
3
Miranda  warnings before deciding not to submit to testing. In
 
supplemental briefing, Santiago also argues that pursuant to
 
4
Missouri v. McNeely,  ___ U.S. ___, 133 S.Ct. 1552 (2013),  the
implied consent form used in this case was incorrect and
 misleading because Santiago had a right to refuse testing and
 could not be subject to criminal sanctions for asserting those
 
5
rights; and HRS § 291E-68  is unconstitutional.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
 Santiago's points of error as follows, vacate the Judgment, and
 remand for a new trial.
 
(1) Tachibana Colloquy  Just prior to starting the trial,
 
the district court engaged in a Tachibana colloquy with Santiago
 in which it advised him of his right to remain silent or to
 testify, that he could talk with his attorney, and that he could
 
3 Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
4 McNeely was decided after briefing in this appeal had been completed.
We granted Santiago's motion to file supplemental briefing to address McNeely.
Santiago and Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaii submitted supplemental briefson the effects of McNeely on this case, and the Attorney General filed anamicus brief defending the constitutionality of the Hawai' i statutes that 
penalize a refusal to submit to testing.
5
 HRS § 291E-68 provides:
 
[§291E-68] Refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or
urine test; penalty.  Refusal to submit to a breath, blood,
or urine test as required by part II is a petty misdemeanor.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wait until Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) completed 
its case before making the decision whether to testify. However,
 
it is undisputed that during trial, the district court failed to
 engage in an on-the-record colloquy with Santiago to further
 address his right to testify and to obtain a proper waiver
 directly from Santiago of his rights as required by 
Tachibana.  
The mere absence of such a colloquy constitutes a
violation of a criminal defendant's right to testify.
Hence the only issue remaining is whether [the
defendant's] conviction and sentence must be vacated. In
considering that issue, the question is whether the court's
failure to conduct a Tachibana colloquy was harmless beyond
a reasonable doubt.
 
In other words, "the question is 'whether there is a
reasonable possibility that error may have contributed to
conviction.' 'If there is ... a reasonable possibility ...,
then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt,
and the judgment of conviction on which it may have been
based must be set aside.'"
 
State v. Graybeard, 93 Hawai 'i 513, 521-22, 6 P.3d 385, 393-94 
(App. 2000) (citations omitted). There clearly was a Tachibana 
violation in this case and the burden is on the State to prove that the violation was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State 
v. Pomroy, 132 Hawai
'i 85, 94, 319 P.3d 1093, 1102 (2014). 
The State concedes there was a Tachibana violation but
 
makes no attempt to prove that the violation was harmless beyond
 a reasonable doubt. The State instead requests that we remand
 the case back to the district court for an evidentiary hearing at
 which the record could be developed so as to determine if the
 error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. However, the State
 cites no authority in support of this remedy. The State has not
 carried its burden.
 
When there is a reasonable possibility that a Tachibana 
violation is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, this court has vacated the final judgment and remanded for a new trial. See 
Graybeard, 93 Hawai
'i at 522, 524, 6 P.3d at 394, 396. There is 
a reasonable possibility that the Tachibana violation in this case contributed to Santiago's convictions for OVUII and Refusal to Submit. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Santiago did not testify at trial. Based on Santiago's
 
statements during sentencing, it appears that his version of
 
events includes the contention that one of the officers at the
 scene of the traffic stop ran over his toe with his car prior to
 administration of the field sobriety tests (FSTs), thus
 explaining Santiago's poor performance on the FSTs. Santiago's
 performance on the FSTs was part of the basis relied upon by
 Officer Derek Foster (Officer Foster) to arrest Santiago for
 OVUII. Santiago's version of events was not admitted into
 evidence, although Officer Foster was cross-examined about
 whether Santiago's foot had been run over. Officer Foster
 acknowledged that a second officer arrived at the scene after
 initiation of the FSTs, then left to get a "blue-and-white" car
 to transport Santiago to the station upon arrest. Officer Foster
 also acknowledged that none of this was reflected in his report,
 and to the best of his knowledge, the other officer did not file
 a report. Santiago's counsel then engaged in the following
 questioning of Officer Foster:
 
Q Okay. Isn't it true that my client's foot was run
over by the blue-and-white?

 
. . . .
 
[Officer Foster]: That I do not know.

 
Q (By [defense counsel])
 So it's possible that his
foot was run over by the blue-and-white?
 
A 
I guess anything is possible, yeah.
 
Q 
Okay. And you said that you weren't sure when the
other officer came and when the other officer left, so is it
possible that his foot got run over before he did the field
sobriety tests?
 
over. A I didn't see any vehicle that would have ran it 
Q So yes, it's possible; or no, it's not possible? 
A Well, the blue-and-white came after the field
sobriety tests.

 
Officer Foster was the only witness at trial and no
 
evidence was introduced regarding Santiago's alleged toe injury. 
Santiago's purported version of events possibly could have
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
explained his poor performance on the walk-and-turn test and his 
refusal to perform the one-leg-stand. "In general, it is inherently difficult, if not impossible, to divine what effect a violation of the defendant's constitutional right to testify had on the outcome of any particular case." State v. Hoang, 94 
Hawai
'i 271, 279, 12 P.3d 371, 379 (App. 2000). Thus, there is a 
reasonable possibility that the district court's failure to comply with the Tachibana requirements was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt regarding the OVUII charge. 
It is also possible that, if Santiago testified to his
 
purported version of events, it might have impacted whether he
 was convicted for Refusal to Submit. Under HRS § 291E-11, which
 is contained in Part II of HRS Chapter 291E, tests are to be
 administered "at the request of a law enforcement officer having
 probable cause to believe the person operating a vehicle . . . is
 under the influence of an intoxicant. . . ." (Emphasis added.) 
In turn, under HRS § 291E-68, "[r]efusal to submit to a breath,
 blood, or urine test as required by part II is a petty
 misdemeanor." Thus, if Santiago's testimony raised a question
 about whether there was probable cause that he was operating a
 vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant, it may have
 impacted whether he was properly requested to submit to testing. 
Thus, there is a reasonable possibility that the district court's
 failure to comply with the Tachibana requirements was not
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt regarding the Refusal to
 Submit charge. 
The Tachibana violations are sufficient grounds to 
vacate the Judgment. We thus need not reach Santiago's point of error regarding ineffective assistance of trial counsel. However, we address below Santiago's contention that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for Refusal to Submit.
6 Graybeard, 93 Hawai 'i at 522, 6 P.3d at 394 
6
 Santiago does not assert on appeal that there was insufficient
evidence to support his conviction for OVUII.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
("[C]hallenges to the sufficiency of the evidence must always be 
decided on appeal." (citation and quotation marks omitted)); Pomroy, 132 Hawai
'i at 94-95, 319 P.3d at 1102-03 (holding that 
appellant demonstrated a prejudicial Tachibana violation and there was substantial evidence supporting the initial conviction such that retrial did not violate double jeopardy). We also address Santiago's contentions raised in the supplemental briefing that challenge the validity of the implied consent form and HRS § 291E-68 in light of McNeely. McNeely was issued while 
this case was on appeal and after initial briefing had been completed.
(2) Sufficiency of the Evidence  Santiago contends that
 
there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for
 Refusal to Submit because he did not make a knowing and
 intelligent decision to refuse to submit to a breath or blood
 test.
 
Despite Santiago's effort to frame this issue as one of 
sufficiency of evidence, his arguments on appeal amount to an effort to suppress evidence of his refusal to submit to testing. Santiago raises these arguments for the first time on appeal. As pointed out by the State, Santiago never filed a motion or asserted to the district court that evidence of his refusal to test should be suppressed. In his appellate briefing, Santiago relies on State v. Wilson, 92 Hawai
'i 45, 987 P.2d 268 (1999); In 
re Doe, 96 Hawai 'i 217, 30 P.3d 231 (2001); State v. Garcia, 96 
Hawai'i 200, 29 P.3d 919 (2001); and State v. Taniguchi, 72 Haw. 
235, 815 P.2d 24 (1991). However, in each of these cases, the defendants had filed a pre-trial motion to suppress or dismiss which was granted by the trial court. Wilson, 92 Hawai
'i at 46, 
987 P.2d at 269; Doe, 96 Hawai 'i at 220, 30 P.3d at 234; Garcia, 
96 Hawai 'i at 201, 29 P.3d at 920; Taniguchi, 72 Haw. at 236, 815 
P.2d at 24. Motions to suppress evidence must be brought before trial or else are waived. Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12(b)(3), (f); see State v. Przeradski, 5 Haw. App. 29, 31­32, 677 P.2d 471, 474 (1984) (noting the waiver of a suppression 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument when defendant fails to move prior to trial). Because
 
Santiago did not attempt to suppress the refusal evidence before
 the district court, we need not address those arguments in this
 appeal.
 
Santiago's arguments on appeal do not dispute that the
 
evidence that was admitted at trial was sufficient to show that
 he refused Officer Foster's request to submit to a breath or
 blood test. Even if Santiago had raised such an issue, the
 evidence in the record is more than sufficient to show that he
 refused testing.
 
Given the above, Santiago's contention, although
 
couched as a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence for the
 Refusal to Submit charge, is in fact not a challenge to the
 sufficiency of the evidence. This point of error lacks merit.
(3) McNeely  In supplemental briefing, Santiago contends
 
that pursuant to McNeely the implied consent form used in this
 case was incorrect and misleading because it did not reflect
 Santiago's alleged right to withdraw his implied consent to
 testing and that HRS § 291E-68 is unconstitutional for punishing
 his refusal to submit to testing. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has "long held that: 
(1) legislative enactments are presumptively constitutional;
 (2) a party challenging a statutory scheme has the burden of
 showing unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt; and
 (3) the constitutional defect must be clear, manifest, and
 unmistakable." Pray v. Judicial Selection Comm'n, 75 Haw. 333,
 
340, 861 P.2d 723, 727 (1993) (citation, internal quotation
 marks, and original brackets omitted).
 
Santiago's arguments based on McNeely are unavailing. 
In McNeely, the defendant was subjected to a warrantless
 nonconsensual blood draw after he was arrested on suspicion of
 drunk driving and refused to submit to breath testing. 133 S.Ct.
 at 1556-57. At trial, McNeely sought to suppress the results of
 the blood test on grounds that the blood draw was done without a
 search warrant. Id. at 1557. The question addressed by the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
United States Supreme Court was "whether the natural dissipation
 
of alcohol in the bloodstream establishes a per se exigency that
 suffices on its own to justify an exception to the warrant
 requirement for nonconsensual blood testing in drunk-driving
 investigations." Id. at 1558. The Court held that "the natural
 
dissipation of alcohol in the bloodstream does not constitute an
 exigency in every case sufficient to justify conducting a blood
 test without a warrant[]" and that the issue had to be addressed
 on a case-by-case basis. Id. at 1563, 1568. At no point in
 
McNeely did the Court hold that implied consent laws were
 invalid.
 
This court has previously rejected a McNeely-based 
attack on Hawaii's implied consent law in State v. Yong Shik Won, 134 Hawai
'i 59, 332 P.3d 661 (App. 2014) cert. granted, No. SCWC­
12-0000858, 2014 WL 2881259 (June 24, 2014), and noted that 
McNeely does not address breath tests or the validity
of implied consent statutes, and neither McNeely's holding
nor its reasoning compels the conclusion that HRS § 291E-68
is unconstitutional. Indeed, Justice Sotomayor and three
other justices appear to endorse implied consent statutes,
and their use of "significant consequences" to discourage a
driver from refusing to submit to testing, as a preferred
alternative to "nonconsensual blood draws." See McNeely,
 
133 S.Ct. at 1566 (plurality opinion). 
134 Hawai 'i at 80, 332 P.3d at 682 (footnote omitted). In Won, 
we drew a distinction between the breath test performed in that 
case, and the nonconsensual blood draw that occurred in McNeely. Id. at 77, 332 P.3d at 679 ("Unlike McNeely, Won was not subjected to a compelled nonconsensual blood draw. A breath test is 'less intrusive' than a blood test."). We held that "[u]nder these circumstances, we reject Won's claim that McNeely renders HRS § 291E-68 unconstitutional." Id. at 80, 332 P.3d at 682. 
The instant case is even further removed from McNeely in that no testing of any kind was performed on Santiago. Therefore, we reject Santiago's claim that McNeely renders HRS § 291E-68 unconstitutional. 
In Won, this court further held that "[b]ecause Won has
 
failed to show that HRS § 291E-68 is unconstitutional, we reject
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his claim that the Implied Consent Form misinformed him of the 
sanctions for refusing to submit to testing because it included the sanctions imposed by HRS § 291E-68." 134 Hawai
'i at 80, 332 
P.3d at 682 (internal quotation mark omitted). Santiago similarly attempts to rely on McNeely to suggest that the implied consent form in this case was misleading, but there is nothing in McNeely that supports his contention. We thus reject Santiago's argument that the implied consent form in this case was misleading or incorrect based on McNeely. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment entered on
 
October 28, 2011, in the District Court of the Third Circuit,
 North/South Kona Division, is vacated and this case is remanded
 for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 15, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Alen M. Kaneshiro 
(for Defendant-Appellant) Presiding Judge 
Linda L. Walton County of Hawai
'i 
(for Plaintiff-Appellee) Associate Judge 
Robert T. NakatsujiDeputy Solicitor General(for Amicus Curiae 
Attorney General of theState of Hawai
'i) Associate Judge
9

 