NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000359
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STEPHEN KEITH ST. CLAIR, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION
 
(S.P.P. NO. 11-1-002K; CR NO. 02-1-0064K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Stephen Keith St. Clair (St.
 
Clair), appearing without a lawyer, appeals from the order
 
denying his petition for post-conviction relief (Order Denying
 
1
Petition)  filed in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
(Circuit Court).
2 St. Clair filed his petition for post-
conviction relief pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
Rule (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). 
On appeal, St. Clair contends that: (1) by placing him
 
in the Level III level of punishment, the Hawai 'i Paroling 
Authority (HPA) violated its guidelines for determining his
 
1The full title of the Order Denying Petition is "Order
Dismissing Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or
Release Petitioner from Custody, Filed on January 10, 2011 Under
H.R.P.P 40(G)(2) as Patently Frivolous, Previously Raised and
Ruled Upon."
 
2The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minimum term of incarceration, and therefore, the Circuit Court
 
erred in upholding the HPA's determination of his minimum term;
 (2) the Circuit Court erred in imposing restitution because St.
 Clair asserts that restitution can only be imposed by a jury; and
 (3) the Circuit Court violated his rights by determining on
 remand, in its Order Denying Petition, the manner of his
 restitution payments without a hearing and without providing him
 with assistance of counsel. 
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that
 
the HPA erroneously relied upon the "Degree of Injury/Loss to
 Person" as one of its two grounds for placing St. Clair in the
 Level III level of punishment and in determining his minimum
 term. Because we have no basis for determining whether the HPA
 would have imposed the same minimum term without its erroneous
 reliance on this ground, St. Clair's minimum term order must be
 vacated and the HPA must hold a new hearing to determine his
 minimum term. We further conclude that St. Clair's argument that
 restitution can only be determined by a jury is without merit,
 but that the Circuit Court erred in determining the manner of St.
 Clair's restitution payments in its Order Denying Petition
 without a hearing and without providing St. Clair with the
 assistance of a lawyer. Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit
 Court's Order Denying Petition and remand for further
 proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In his underlying criminal case, St. Clair was 
convicted after a jury trial of manslaughter, operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), and driving without no-fault insurance. See State v. St. Clair, 101 Hawai
'i 280, 
283-86, 67 P.3d 779, 782-85 (2003) (hereinafter, "St. Clair I"). St. Clair's convictions stemmed from his driving while intoxicated and striking and killing a pedestrian, Jane O'Brien, on February 23, 2002. Id. at 283, 67 P.3d at 782. At trial, St. 
Clair admitted that he had consumed at least twelve beers prior 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the accident. Id. at 284, 67 P.3d at 783. The prosecution
 
introduced evidence that St. Clair's blood alcohol content was
 
.211 gram per one hundred milliliters of blood immediately
 following the accident. Id. In addition, St. Clair stipulated
 
to conduct that had resulted in a prior conviction in Canada for
 OVUII, namely, that in 1998, he drove his vehicle with a blood
 alcohol content of 0.19 gram per one hundred milliliters of
 blood, failed to negotiate a curve, drove over a curb onto a
 lawn, and struck a parked vehicle forcing it into a second parked
 vehicle. Id. The trial court excluded evidence of a second
 
prior Canadian OVUII conviction. Id.
 
3
The Circuit Court  imposed sentence on St. Clair that
included twenty years of incarceration and restitution of $11,563.04 for his manslaughter conviction and a concurrent term of 30 days of incarceration for his OVUII conviction. The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on August 5, 2002. St. Clair filed a direct appeal of the Circuit Court's Judgment, which the Hawai
'i Supreme Court affirmed in its published opinion in St. 
Clair I issued in 2003. Id. at 290, 67 P.3d at 789. 
II. 
After the supreme court issued its decision in St. 
Clair I, St. Clair filed an HRPP Rule 40 Petition (First Petition) on October 1, 2003. See St. Clair v. State, No. 29978, 
2010 WL 2904829, at *1 (Hawai
'i App. July 22, 2010) (memorandum 
opinion) (hereinafter, "St. Clair II"). St. Clair only raised one ground for relief in the First Petition, that his court-appointed counsel provided ineffective assistance in advising him to stipulate to the Canadian charge. Id. 
On December 6, 2006, St. Clair filed another HRPP Rule
 
40 Petition (Second Petition) which attached a copy of the First
 Petition. Id. In St. Clair II, this court did not construe the
 
Second Petition as a new petition, but rather as a supplement to
 the First Petition. Id. In his Second Petition, St. Clair
 
3The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
3
 _______________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
clarified that the ineffective assistance of counsel claim raised
 
in the First Petition was that counsel was ineffective for
 allowing a prior bad act into evidence through a factually
 inaccurate stipulation. Id. The Second Petition also added
 
claims that trial counsel was ineffective for failing to:
 
(1) assert a [Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule
404(b) notice requirement when the prosecutor
brought up other matters beyond what had been
agreed to in the stipulation; (2) request a
limiting instruction regarding the stipulation so
it could not be proved that St. Clair acted in
conformity with the actions stated in the
stipulation[;] and (3) object to an order of
restitution because the circuit court did not
 enter Findings of Fact and Conclusions o[f] Law,
the order of restitution did not specify the time
and manner of payment, and an order of restitution
may not divest a prisoner's wages received from
prison labor. 
Id. In addition, St. Clair argued for the first time that the
 
Circuit Court erred when it admitted the prior bad act evidence
 
because he claimed that such evidence was not admissible to show
 recklessness. Id. The Circuit Court entered its order denying
 
the First and Second Petitions on September 4, 2009, and St.
 Clair appealed.
 
In St. Clair II, this court held that the Circuit Court
 
had erred in failing to prescribe the manner of payment for the
 restitution St. Clair was ordered to pay, and we otherwise
 affirmed the Circuit Court's denial of St. Clair's First and
 Second Petitions. Id. at *3-4. We remanded the case with 
instructions that 
the circuit court shall enter an amended judgment
that specifies the manner of restitution payments,
limited by [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 353­
2
22.6 (1993)  while St. Clair is incarcerated, and
also addresses the manner of restitution payments
if St. Clair is released from custody.
 
2 HRS § 353-22.6 provides:
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§ 353-22.6 Victim restitution. The
 
director of public safety shall enforce
victim restitution orders against moneys
earned by the prisoner while incarcerated.
The amount deducted and paid once annually to
the victim shall be ten per cent of the
prisoner's annual earnings. This section
 shall not apply to moneys earned on work
furlough pursuant to section 353-17. 
Id. at *4. St. Clair II was filed on July 22, 2010.
 
III.
 
In the meantime, on December 16, 2002, the HPA held a 
hearing to set St. Clair's minimum term of imprisonment on his 
manslaughter conviction. By order dated December 17, 2002, the HPA set St. Clair's minimum term of incarceration at fifteen years. However, the December 17, 2002, order failed to specify the level of punishment or significant criteria on which the HPA's decision was based. In 2007, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
decided Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai 'i 181, 172 P.3d 493 (2007), 
which held that a similar HPA minimum-term order, which failed to specify the level of punishment or the significant criteria on which the minimum-term decision was based, violated the HPA's 1989 Guidelines for Establishing Minimum Terms of Incarceration (Guidelines). Coulter, 116 Hawai
'i at 182-85, 172 P.3d at 494­
97. The supreme court remanded the case with instructions that
 
the HPA be required to hold a new minimum-term hearing. Id. at
 
187, 172 P.3d at 499. 
After Coulter was decided, St. Clair asked the HPA to
 
hold a new minimum-term hearing, and the HPA granted St. Clair's
 request. On October 18, 2010, the HPA held a new minimum-term
 hearing. By order issued on that same date, the HPA reduced St.
 Clair's minimum term from fifteen to thirteen years. The HPA's 
October 18, 2010, order specified that St. Clair's level of
 punishment was a Level III and that the "[s]ignificant factors
 identified in determining the level of punishment" were "(1)
 Nature of Offense; [and] (2) Degree of Injury/Loss to Person."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
On January 10, 2011, St. Clair, representing himself, 
filed the HRPP Rule 40 petition that is the subject of this 
appeal (2011 Petition).4 St. Clair contended that: (1) the 
minimum term imposed by the HPA was illegal and imposed in violation of the Guidelines; and (2) he was illegally sentenced to the payment of restitution. Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) filed oppositions to St. Clair's 2011 Petition 
through the Attorney General's Office on the minimum-term issue and the Hawai
'i County Prosecutor's Office on the restitution 
issue. The opposition filed by the Hawai 'i County Prosecutor's 
Office referred to this court's decision in St. Clair II, which directed the Circuit Court on remand to enter an amended judgment that specifies the manner of restitution payments, and noted that the Circuit Court had not yet entered an amended judgment. The Hawai
'i County Prosecutor's Office suggested that the Circuit 
Court amend its judgment to require St. Clair "to pay 10% of his earnings while incarcerated, as well as 10% of his earnings upon release." 
St. Clair filed a motion to appoint legal counsel and a
 
request to proceed without paying filing fees due to his poverty. 
On the same day that the Circuit Court issued its Order Denying
 Petition, the Circuit Court took judicial notice of St. Clair's
 indigent status and incarceration and granted his request to
 proceed in forma pauperis. The Circuit Court, however, denied
 St. Clair's request for appointment of counsel as moot, in light
 of its decision to deny St. Clair's 2011 Petition.
 
In its Order Denying Petition, the Circuit Court denied
 
St. Clair's 2011 Petition without a hearing, finding that St.
 Clair's claims were patently frivolous, failed to state a
 
4St. Clair apparently filed another HRPP Rule 40 petition in
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, which was dismissed on
December 23, 2010, presumably for being filed in the wrong
circuit. See HRPP Rule 40(b) (requiring petition to be filed
with the clerk of the court in which the conviction took place).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
colorable claim, or had been waived. The Circuit Court found
 
that the HPA did not violate its Guidelines or St. Clair's due
 process rights in setting his thirteen-year minimum term. The
 Circuit Court also rejected St. Clair's claim that Judge Ibarra
 lacked authority to order restitution as part of sentencing. In
 response to this court's decision in St. Clair II, the Circuit
 Court ordered that: (1) St. Clair shall make annual restitution 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
payments in the amount of 10% of his annual prison earnings,
 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 353-22.6; (2) any and
 all moneys earned by St. Clair on work furlough pursuant to HRS 
§ 353-17 shall be committed toward satisfaction of his
 restitution; and (3) in the event St. Clair is released, he shall
 make annual payments of 10% of his gross earnings until a hearing
 can be held to modify the terms of payment. This appeal
 followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 A.
 
In Coulter, the supreme court held that the HPA must
 
comply with its Guidelines in setting minimum terms of
 incarceration. Coulter, 116 Hawai
'i at 185, 172 P.3d at 497. 
The Guidelines state:
 
The purpose of minimum sentencing guidelines
is to provide a degree of uniformity and
consistency in the setting of minimum terms while
providing the community-at-large, public policy
makers and planners, the criminal justice system,
and victims and offenders with information as to
 the criteria used in establishing minimum terms of
imprisonment.
 
. . . .
 
The [HPA] may deviate from the guidelines,
either above or below, but all deviations shall be
accompanied by written justification and be made a
part of the Order Establishing Minimum Terms of
Imprisonment[.]
 
. . . .
 
The Order Establishing Minimum Terms of
Imprisonment
. . . will include the specific minimum terms(s)
[sic] established in years and/or months, the
level of punishment (Level I, II, or III) under
which the inmate falls, and the significant
criteria upon which the decision was based. 
Set forth in the Guidelines is the following chart
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which shows various imprisonment ranges based on the maximum term 
9
    LEVEL I           LEVEL II                       Level of Punishment
--Range in Years/Months-----NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
imposed by the court and the level of punishment: 
 ----------------- ------------­
Maximum Term in
 Years/Months
Imposed by the Court  LEVEL III
 
5 years(60 months) 1 - 2 yrs.(12 - 24 mos.) 2 - 3 yrs.(24 -36 mos.) 3 - 5 yrs.(30 - 60 mos.) 
10 years(120 months) 1 1/2 - 3 yrs.(18 - 36 mos.) 3 - 5 yrs.(36 - 60 mos.) 5 - 10 yrs.(60 - 120 mos.) 
20 years(240 months) 2 - 5 yrs.(24 - 60 mos.) 5 - 10 yrs.(60 - 120 mos.) 10 - 20 yrs.(120 - 240 mos.) 
Life with Parole 5 - 10 yrs.(60 - 120 mos.) 10 - 20 yrs.(120 - 240 mos.) 20 - 50 yrs.(240 - 600 mos.) 
The Guidelines establish three levels or ranges of 
punishment for each of four classes of felony offenses. Under 
Hawai'i's indeterminate sentencing scheme, a judge imposing a 
sentence of imprisonment generally must sentence the defendant to the maximum term prescribed: 5 years for a class C felony; 10 years for a class B felony; 20 years for a class A felony; and life with the possibility of parole for second-degree murder. See HRS §§ 706-656(2) (Supp. 2012), 706-659 (Supp. 2012), 706-660 (1993). Under the Guidelines, for a class A felony like St. Clair's manslaughter conviction, which carries a maximum term of twenty years, the minimum-term ranges applicable to the three levels of punishment are: (1) Level I -- 2 to 5 years; (2) Level II -- 5 to 10 years; and (3) Level III -- 10 to 20 years. 
B.
 
In setting St. Clair's minimum term of incarceration,
 
the HPA placed him in the Level III level of punishment. Under
 its Guidelines, the HPA focuses on three primary criteria to
 determine the appropriate level of punishment and minimum term:
 (1) Nature of the Offense; (2) Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or
 Property; and (3) Offender's Criminal History. In its October
 18, 2010, order setting St. Clair's minimum term, the HPA cited
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Nature of Offense" and "Degree of Injury/Loss to Person" as the
 
significant factors it relied upon in determining St. Clair's
 level of punishment. 
Under the Nature of Offense criteria, the standard for
 
a Level III level of punishment is met if "[t]he offense was
 against a person(s) and the offender displayed a callous and/or
 cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of others[.]" Under
 the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property criteria, the
 standard for a Level III level of punishment is met if "[t]he
 injury or loss suffered by the victim(s) was more than those
 experienced by similarly situated victims."
 
C.
 
St. Clair contends that the HPA violated its Guidelines
 
in placing him in the Level III level of punishment. St. Clair
 asserts that he did not meet the Level III standard under either
 the Nature of Offense or Degree of Injury/Loss to Person
 criteria, which the HPA relied upon to justify his Level III
 level of punishment. We disagree with St. Clair's claim as to
 the Nature of Offense, but agree with his claim regarding Degree
 of Injury/Loss to Person.
 
We first address the Level III standard under the
 
Nature of Offense criteria. In addition to the previously-
described evidence presented at St. Clair's trial, the record
 available to the HPA included evidence that on the day of the
 charged incident, St. Clair was drinking after work. He drank
 approximately 14 beers, and prior to that approximately two
 quarts of beer. St. Clair had been waiting for over three hours
 for someone he had paid $20 to come back with marijuana. St.
 Clair was angry and went looking for the person to whom he gave
 the $20. An individual who was with St. Clair told St. Clair not
 to drive because he was drunk. St. Clair got into his GMC van,
 drove backward out of the parking lot onto the road, then
 forward, accelerating and "burning rubber" both ways. While
 going forward, he lost control and struck and killed a
 pedestrian, Jane O'Brien, who was standing next to her sister. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The victim's sister also reported that she feared for her life as
 
St. Clair drove his vehicle in a reckless manner in her
 direction. St. Clair had several prior drunk-driving convictions
 in Canada, including the one referred to at his trial.
 
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence in the
 
record to support a determination that St. Clair displayed a
 callous disregard for the safety and welfare of others. The term
 "callous" is defined to include: "insensitive; indifferent;
 unsympathetic." Callous Definition, Dictionary.com, 
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/callous (last visited Dec.
 17, 2013). Evidence in the record shows that St. Clair drank
 large quantities of alcohol, resulting in his blood alcohol
 exceeding twice the legal limit, drove recklessly in the middle
 of the day, struck and killed the victim and almost struck the
 victim's sister, all after he had previously been convicted
 several times for drunk driving and had been specifically warned
 just prior to the incident that he should not drive because he
 was drunk. There was sufficient evidence to show that in
 committing the manslaughter offense, St. Clair displayed an
 insensitive, indifferent, or unsympathetic disregard for the
 safety and welfare of others. Therefore, the HPA did not err in
 relying on the Nature of Offense as a significant factor in
 placing St. Clair in the Level III level of punishment.
 
We further conclude, however, that the HPA erred in
 
relying upon the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person in placing St.
 Clair within the Level III level of punishment. To fall within 
Level III under this criteria, the injury or loss suffered by the
 victim must be "more than those experienced by similarly situated
 victims." The primary injury or loss suffered by victims of
 manslaughter is death. The record does not indicate that Ms.
 O'Brien experienced greater suffering than other manslaughter
 victims after being struck by St. Clair's vehicle, but rather
 indicates that she was killed almost instantly. 
We are not persuaded by the State's argument that the
 
relevant class of "similarly situated victims" is not
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
manslaughter victims but rather drunk driving victims, who
 
"generally are not killed" but only "suffer property damage or 
some physical injury[.]" The Guidelines are structured to factor
 in the seriousness of the underlying offense by imposing higher
 minimum-term ranges for each level of punishment the more serious
 the underlying offense. The State's proffered approach is
 inconsistent with the structure of the Guidelines because it
 would allow comparisons with less serious offenses to justify
 increased levels of punishment for more serious offenses. We
 conclude that "similarly situated victims," for purposes of
 applying the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person criteria to St.
 Clair's manslaughter conviction, are not victims of drunk driving
 in general where the underlying offense is less serious than
 manslaughter, but refer to manslaughter victims. 
In this case, the HPA erroneously relied upon one of
 
the two significant factors cited by the HPA in determining St.
 Clair's level of punishment and minimum term. We have no basis
 of determining whether the HPA would have placed St. Clair in the
 same level of punishment or have given him the same minimum term
 had it correctly applied its Guidelines. Accordingly, the HPA's
 October 18, 2010, order setting St. Clair's minimum term at
 thirteen years must be vacated and a new hearing held to
 determine St. Clair's minimum term.
 
II.
 
St. Clair argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
imposing restitution because he asserts that restitution can only
 be imposed by a jury. We disagree. In effect, St. Clair seeks
 to extend the United States Supreme Court's decision in Apprendi
 v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000) to the imposition of
 restitution. In Apprendi, the Court held that "[o]ther than the
 fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty
 for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be
 submitted to a jury and proved beyond a reasonable doubt." Id.
 
at 490. Here, the jury's finding that St. Clair was guilty of
 manslaughter exposed him to the requirement to pay restitution,
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and no additional fact-finding by a jury was required to impose
 
restitution. See HRS § 706-605 (Supp. 2001); People v. Smith,
 
181 P.3d 324, 326-27 (Col. 2008) (citing cases).
 
III.
 
St. Clair argues that the Circuit Court violated his
 
rights by determining the manner of his restitution payments in
 its Order Denying Petition without a hearing and without
 providing him with assistance of counsel. We agree.
 
The imposition of restitution, including the manner of 
payment, was part of St. Clair's criminal sentence. See HRS 
§ 706-605; State v. Gaylord, 78 Hawai
'i 127, 152-53, 890 P.2d 
1167, 1192-93 (1995). A defendant is entitled to an opportunity to be heard at his or her sentencing hearing, and an indigent defendant is entitled to appointed counsel to represent him or her at sentencing. HRS § 706-604 (1993) (requiring the court to afford the defendant an opportunity to be heard on the issue of the defendant's disposition); HRS § 802-5(a) (Supp. 2012) (providing for appointment of counsel to represent an indigent person charged with an offense punishable by imprisonment at all stages of the proceedings). There is no dispute, and the Circuit Court found, that St. Clair is indigent and unable to afford counsel. 
In St. Clair II, we remanded the case with directions
 
that the Circuit Court determine the manner of payment of
 restitution and enter an amended judgment reflecting its
 decision. The determination of the manner of payment of
 restitution was part of St. Clair's criminal sentence and part of
 his criminal case. St. Clair was entitled to a hearing and the
 assistance of appointed counsel with respect to the Circuit
 Court's determination of the manner of payment of restitution. 
See HRS § 706-604; HRS § 802-5(a). We conclude that the Circuit
 Court erred in ordering the manner of payment of restitution
 without a hearing and without providing St. Clair with appointed
 counsel, after St. Clair had moved for the appointment of 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel. We therefore vacate the manner of payment of
 
restitution ordered by the Circuit Court.
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Order Denying Petition, and we remand the case for
 further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion and
 with instructions that: (1) the Circuit Court order the HPA to
 vacate its October 18, 2010, minimum-term order and to hold a new
 minimum-term hearing; (2) the Circuit Court shall hold a hearing
 to determine the manner of St. Clair's restitution payments and
 shall appoint counsel to represent St. Clair at such hearing, if
 counsel is still requested by St. Clair and St. Clair still
 qualifies for appointment of counsel; and (3) upon determining
 the manner of payment of restitution, the Circuit Court shall
 file an amended judgment reflecting its decision. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 20, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Stephen Keith St. Clair
Petitioner-Appellant pro se Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Robert T. NakatsujiDeputy Solicitor GeneralDepartment of the Attorney Generalfor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
15
 