NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000491
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JOEL H. WHITE, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0137K)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
A jury found Defendant-Appellee Joel H. White guilty of
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree.  White filed a Motion for
New Trial, claiming that the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
("Circuit Court")1/ should have given the jury an instruction on
the affirmative mitigating defense of extreme mental or emotional
disturbance ("EMED") in light of the Circuit Court's independent
obligation to give the EMED instruction where there was some
evidence of EMED and of the deputy prosecutor's closing argument,
which, White claims, clearly invited the jury to consider his
mental and emotional condition as a motive for the alleged
conduct.  The Circuit Court granted the motion and Plaintiff-
Appellant State of Hawai #i appealed.
Although White argued, and the Circuit Court agreed,
that there were no facts supporting an EMED instruction prior to
closing arguments, we concur with the Circuit Court that it was
mistaken in its original ruling and that there was a "scintilla
1/The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of evidence" adduced at trial that White may have committed the
instant offense under EMED which was highlighted by the State's
subsequent closing argument and which warranted the instruction. 
Therefore, we affirm. 
I. BACKGROUND
A. Underlying Offense
On April 21, 2014 the State charged White with
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes ("HRS") sections 705-500(1)(b) (2014)2/ and 707-
701.5(1) (2014)3/, and Burglary in the First Degree, in violation
of HRS section 708-810(1)(a)-(c) (2014)4/. The focus of this
appeal is only on the Attempted Murder in the Second Degree
charge.     
B. Procedural History
1. The trial
On April 28, 2015, the jury trial for the underlying
2/The statute provides, in relevant part, "A person is guilty of an
attempt to commit a crime if the person . . .(b) Intentionally engages in
conduct which, under the circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to culminate in
the person's commission of the crime."  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 705-500(1)(b). 
3/The statute provides, in relevant part, "Except as provided in
section 707-701, a person commits the offense of murder in the second degree
if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another person." 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 707-701.5(1).     
4/The statute provides, in relevant part,
A person commits the offense of burglary in the first
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a
crime against a person or against property rights, and:
(a) The person is armed with a dangerous instrument
in the course of committing the offense;
(b) The person intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly inflicts or attempts to inflict bodily
injury on anyone in the course of committing the
offense; or
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling.
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 708-810(1)(a)-(c).    
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
offense commenced under Cr. No. 14-1-0137K. The State called as
its main witness the victim, Jeremy Nicholas.  Nicholas testified
that White and Ahlea Giles  were in a romantic relationship
during the time of the offense.  Nicholas also testified that he
had sexual relations once with Giles (i.e., an affair)
approximately one month prior to the offense while White and
Giles were in a relationship and that White was aware of
Nicholas' affair with Giles.
White testified that on the day of the incident he had
difficulty locating Giles when he came home from work.  When
White learned that Giles was sleeping at Nicholas' house, he made
numerous attempts to phone Giles to speak with her, but each time
Giles would hang up the phone.  This caused White to send a text
message to Nicholas saying, "WTF," explained by White as "'What
the fuck,' you know, 'WTF.' Like 'Why you keep hanging up on
me?'"  Thereafter, White appeared at Nicholas' house to retrieve
Giles.  While Giles slept on Nicholas' bed, White remained at
Nicholas' home for about two to three hours watching videos. 
The events leading up to the offense in which White cut
Nicholas' throat and stabbed Nicholas are unclear as White's and
Nicholas' testimonies are in conflict.  White testified that a
fight between he and Nicholas eventually ensued after they had
been watching videos which resulted in Nicholas' injuries.
Nicholas testified that White came up behind him while he was
facing his computer and without saying anything, White slit his
throat with a knife, and when he tried to run for help, White
chased and continued to stab him.
White testified that right before the fight ensued
Nicholas "asked me kind of, uh, in like a kinda weird way.  He's
like, 'Why does [Giles] keep showing up?  I told you not to let
her just keep showing up to my house.'"  White also testified
that Nicholas "kinda raised his voice, and he's like, 'I heard
[Giles] is a narc.'  And I'm like –- and then I got kinda like
mad."  Preceding these events, Nicholas testified that upon
arriving at Nicholas' house, White "seemed upset from what I
noticed. . . .  He was kinda quiet and wasn't really talking. 
That's not normal."  Nicholas additionally testified that "I
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
thought maybe [White] was upset with [Giles].  She had hung up on
him.  I thought maybe. . . [White] was upset with her."  
Following the presentation of evidence at trial, but
before closing argument, while both the State and defense counsel
were discussing jury instructions with the Circuit Court, the
State argued for giving jury instructions on the affirmative
mitigating defense of EMED and cited to evidence that White was
upset on the day of the incident as a result of Giles being at
Nicholas' house and of Giles hanging up the phone on White, but
agreed that its witness had testified that White looked calm and
was quiet.  Defense counsel argued against giving this
instruction and maintained that there was no evidence that would
support giving an EMED instruction.
THE COURT:  Okay.  There's another special instructions
that was discussed in chambers whether the Court should, uh,
provide an instruction Attempted Manslaughter Under Extreme
Emotional Distress.  And the prosecutor's position?
[PROSECUTOR]:  Well, we had concerns about whether or
not we should include it, um, because as the Court knows case
law of any evidence to support, um, then the Court should --
. . . . 
THE COURT:  And that question I have and you actually
state the correct statement of the law whether there's any
evidence on the record that would support the jury instruction
no matter how little or small .
[PROSECUTOR]:  Yeah, any scintilla.
THE COURT:  What -- what -- yeah, scintilla.  What is
the scintilla of the evidence in this case of, uh, emotional
distress --
. . . .
[PROSECUTOR]:  The State would, uh, state that, um, it
was the defendant's, um, girlfriend at the time was at the
complaining witness's home.  He found out about it while at
work.  He, uh, made phone -- this is according to the
complaining witness's testimony.  Made -- made phone calls to
the complaining witness.
Um, he was upset about it.  Um, he wrote back "WTF." 
Um, he left work, changed his clothes, went to the house
carrying the knife, and then the girlfriend was still at the
house, um, sleeping on the bed.
THE COURT:  But your complaining witness said he looked
calm and he just didn't -- he was quiet. 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Yes.
. . . .
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  Okay.  Anything else you wanna put?  I'm
gonna ask [defense counsel] his position on the evidence. 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Um, other than, uh, also, um, there was
the testimony defendant was upset while at work as well about
personal issues including his, uh, girlfriend, and, um, it was
after that that he went back to, um, uh, Jeremy's house while
the -- the girlfriend was at Jeremy's house.
THE COURT:  Okay.  [Defense counsel]?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  We would object to the instruction. 
We don't believe that there's, um, any evidence in the record
my client had a problem, uh, with, uh, Jeremy Nicholas, and
that's really the -- the -- the question and -- on a EMED is
whether the defendant, um, was undergoing any kind of
emotional stress and trauma at the time that he, uh, allegedly
committed this offense, and there's nothing in the record to
suggest that.
(Emphasis added.)
Defense counsel then elaborated on why there was no
evidence to support giving the EMED instruction and why White's
actions were the product of self-defense.  The Circuit Court
agreed with defense counsel: 
THE COURT:  -- the -- while the Court is aware of the,
uh, if there's a scintilla of evidence the Court must provide
it even if the defendant does not request it, the Court does
not see any scintilla of evidence to support the providing of
an emotional -- extreme emotional, uh, extreme --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Distress.
THE COURT:  -- distress manslaughter -- attempted
manslaughter instruction and that it would only serve to
confuse the jury, and therefore the Court is not giving that
instruction. . . .
The Circuit Court then instructed the jury without
including an EMED instruction and the parties proceeded to give
their closing arguments.  The State included the above-recounted
facts implicating Giles' affair with Nicholas and White's
emotional reaction to finding Giles at Nicholas' house in its
closing argument to refute White's self-defense theory,
suggesting that the motive for the attack was White's jealousy: 
[PROSECUTOR]:  And why did the defendant do this?
Simple. Jealousy. That's the reason why he did it. His
girlfriend was at -- this defendant's girlfriend was at
Jeremy's house, and when he found out about that he was upset.
And so when he was -- when he heard about this he
called, found out she was there. He goes over to the house
unannounced, uninvited and then slits Jeremy's throat.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
That is not a coincidence that that happened. It shows
you that the defendant had a motive to do this, and because he
had a motive there's no self-defense. So that's why the
defendant in this case is guilty as charged of Attempted
Murder in the Second Degree. Plain and simple.
The case was submitted to the jury, which found White guilty of
Attempted Murder in the Second Degree.
2. Events following trial
One week later, White filed his Motion for New Trial.
In the motion, White highlighted the State's closing argument
implicating his jealousy over Giles' affair with Nicholas, noting
that "[t]he State's position in closing was in contravention of
the State's previous position that there was no evidence of
extreme or emotional disturbance.  Such an argument clearly
invited the jury to consider [White's]  mental and emotional
condition as a motive for the alleged conduct."  At the hearing
on White's motion, the State argued that "jealousy does not
equate EMED," and that the logic of White's argument would
require an EMED instruction in every case where the State talks
about motive.  On June 23, 2015, the Circuit Court granted the
motion and entered the Order Granting Motion for New Trial
("Order for New Trial"), stating that, in retrospect:
The Court finds that there was a "scintilla" of evidence
adduced at trial indicating that defendant may have committed
the offense under extreme mental or emotional duress. 
Therefore in accordance with State v. Adivento , [sic] 132
Hawai#i 123 (2014) a jury instruction on the affirmative
mitigating defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance
("EMED") should have been given, notwithstanding the fact that
both Defendant and the State had chosen to waive giving of the
instruction as part of trial strategy.
On July 1, 2015, the State filed its timely Notice of Appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, the State contends that the Circuit Court
(1) erred in granting the Motion for New Trial because defense
counsel and the Circuit Court agreed at the close of evidence
that there was no evidence to support EMED; and (2) plainly erred
in granting a new trial without first vacating or setting aside
the verdict. 
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
Motion for a New Trial
"[T]he granting or denial of a motion for new trial is
within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be
disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion."  State v.
Yamada, 108 Hawai #i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005)
(citation omitted).  It is well-established that an abuse of
discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceed[ed]
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law
or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." 
Id. (citation omitted).
Furthermore, at a hearing on a motion for new trial, the
trial court acts as the trier of fact. State v. St. Clair , 101
Hawai#i 280, 287, 67 P.3d 779, 786 (2003) (citation omitted).
In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are
subject to the clearly erroneous standard of
review.  An FOF is clearly erroneous when,
despite evidence to support the finding, the
appellate court is left with the definite and
firm conviction that a mistake has been
committed.  And where there is substantial
evidence, which is credible evidence of
sufficient quantity and probative value to
justify a reasonable person in reaching
conclusions that support the FOFs, the FOFs
cannot be set aside.  Moreover, an appellate
court will not pass upon issues dependent upon
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
evidence; this is the province of the trial
judge.
Id. (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets
omitted).  A trial court's conclusions of law, however, are
reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard of review.
State v. Kido , 109 Hawai #i 458, 461, 128 P.3d 340, 343 (2006).
State v. Hicks , 113 Hawai #i 60, 69-70, 148 P.3d 493, 502-03
(2006).
Jury Instructions
The standard of review for a trial court's issuance or
refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading.  Erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful
and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears
from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial. 
In other words, error is not to be viewed in isolation and
considered purely in the abstract.
State v. Kassebeer , 118 Hawai #i 493, 504, 193 P.3d 409, 420
(2008) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets
omitted) (quoting State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai# i 235, 247, 178
P.3d 1, 13 (2008)).  In this context, "the real question becomes
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might have
contributed to conviction."  State v. Arceo , 84 Hawai# i 1, 12,
928 P.2d 843, 854 (1996) (quoting State v. Holbron , 80 Hawai #i
27, 32, 904 P.2d 912, 917 (1995)).
IV. DISCUSSION
A. The trial court's obligation to instruct the jury on
EMED turns on whether there is any evidence of a
subjective nature that a defendant acted under a loss
of self-control resulting from EMED.
  
The State's first point of error is that the Circuit
Court erred in granting the Motion for New Trial because "the
defense counsel and [Circuit Court] agreed at the close of
evidence that there was no evidence to support [a jury
instruction regarding] EMED," and therefore the Circuit Court did
not err in not giving this instruction during the trial.  In sum,
the State argues that an exception to the rule under S
tate v.
Adviento, 132 Hawai# i 123, 319 P.3d 1131 (2014) applies in this
case because the record does not reflect any evidence of EMED at
the time of the offense and because the Circuit Court agreed with
White's objection to the giving of instructions of EMED during
trial.  White counters that "[t]here was ample evidence offered
during the trial that would support an EMED instruction[,]" and
that "the [Circuit Court] appropriately acknowledged its error
and properly granted the Defendant's Motion for New Trial[.]" 
The State additionally argues, for the first time in its reply
brief, that the doctrine of judicial estoppel precludes White
from changing his position in filing the Motion for New Trial. 
1. There was a "scintilla" of evidence of EMED at the
time of the offense to require that an EMED
instruction be given.
 
Adviento dictates the general rule regarding EMED and
EMED jury instructions:
E
MED "reduces the offense to manslaughter or attempted
manslaughter," if "the defendant was, at the time the
defendant caused the death of the other person, under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which
there is a reasonable explanation." HRS § 707–702(2). The
trial court is obligated to provide an EMED instruction if the
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"record reflects any evidence of a subjective nature that the
defendant acted under a loss of self-control resulting from
[EMED]." [State v. ]Aganon , 97 Hawai #i [299,] 304, 36 P.3d
[1269,] 1274[ (2001)].  The court views "the evidence ... in
a light most favorable to the appellant in determining whether
or not the instruction should [have been] given." State v.
O'Daniel , 62 Haw. 518, 528, 616 P.2d 1383, 1390–91 (1980).
A defendant asserting the EMED defense is not required
to "show he or she has been exposed to 'an extremely unusual
and overwhelming stress.'" State v. Seguritan , 70 Haw. 173,
174, 766 P.2d 128, 129 (1988). "On the contrary, the statute
focuses . . . on the defendant's reaction to the stress , and
requires only that the defendant be under the influence of
extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is 'a
reasonable explanation.'" Id. (emphasis added). "The
disturbance was meant to be understood in relative terms as
referring to a loss of self-control due to intense feelings."
State v. Matias , 74 Haw. 197, 205, 840 P.2d 374, 378 (1992)
(quoting [State v.] Dumlao , 6 Haw.App. [173,] 180, 715 P.2d
[822,] 828[ (1986)]).
Adviento, 132 Hawai #i at 150, 319 P.3d at 1158.
Despite conceding in its opposition to White's Motion
for New Trial that "a defendant cannot waive an EMED
instruction," the State also contends that the "sole exception"
to that proposition is "if the defendant objects to the giving of
the instructions of manslaughter (EMED) on the basis that the
record does not reflect any evidence on this issue, and the trial
court agrees with the defendant," citing State v. Sawyer , 88
Hawai#i 325, 332–33, 966 P.2d 637, 644–45 (1998) (quoting State
v. Warner , 58 Haw. 492, 500, 573 P.2d 959, 964–65 (1977),
overruled on other grounds by Sawyer).  The mischaracterized
"sole exception," however, assumes that the record does not
reflect any evidence of EMED, and therefore represents an
alternative fact situation not present in this case and not an
exception to the Adviento  principle.
The sole question is the one addressed by the Circuit
Court, which is whether "the record reflects any evidence [(i.e.,
a "scintilla" of evidence)] of a subjective nature that the
defendant acted under a loss of self-control resulting from
EMED."  Adviento , 132 Hawai #i at 150, 319 P.3d at 1158 (quoting
Aganon, 97 Hawai# i at 304, 36 P.3d at 1274) (internal quotation
marks and original brackets omitted).  The focus of this inquiry
is "on the defendant's reaction to the stress , and requires only
that the defendant be under the influence of extreme mental or
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
emotional disturbance for which there is 'a reasonable
explanation.'"  Id. (quoting State v. Seguritan , 70 Haw. 173,
174, 766 P.2d 128, 129 (1988)) (internal quotation marks
omitted).
Here, Nicholas admitted that he had an affair with
Giles while White and Giles were in a relationship and that White
was aware of this.  White then testified that after discovering
that Giles was sleeping at Nicholas' house and after Giles would
not take his phone calls he sent a text message to Nicholas
saying "WTF," explaining in his testimony that the message was
intended to convey frustration and aggravation with Giles hanging
up the phone.  Nicholas corroborated this testimony and testified
that upon showing up at Nicholas' house to pick up Giles, White
"seemed upset from what I noticed . . . .  He was kinda quiet and
wasn't really talking.  That's not normal."  Further, right
before the attack, White testified that Nicholas asked in a
"kinda weird way . . . 'Why does [Giles] keep showing up?'" and
that White "got kinda like mad" when Nicholas made a comment
about Giles being a "narc."  Although jealousy may not
conclusively establish EMED, the supreme court has recognized
that "the jealousy of a jilted lover" culminating in a violent
reaction could support an EMED instruction.5/
White's and Nicholas' testimonies discussing White's
negative emotional reaction to Giles being at Nicholas' home,
sleeping in Nicholas' bed, and repeatedly hanging up on White
demonstrate that there existed at least a "scintilla" of evidence
of a subjective nature that White may have acted under a loss of
self-control resulting from EMED.  Consequently, we agree, the
Circuit Court was independently obligated, notwithstanding
defense counsel's initial objection, to provide the EMED
5/See, e.g. , State v. Espiritu , 117 Hawai #i 127, 146, 176 P.3d 885,
904 (2008); see also  State v. Kauhi , No. 26943, 2006 WL 1519404, at *14, 16
(Hawai#i May 31, 2006) (addressing whether an EMED instruction should have
been given when the defendant argued that she "had an emotional reaction to
[victim's] romantic affair with another woman, as a result of which there was
a loss of self-control and reason was overborne by intense feelings of
passion, anger and jealousy[,]" but holding that an EMED instruction was not
warranted because evidence supported the prosecution's assertion that the
defendant was unaware of a relationship between the victim and another woman).
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
instruction based on the evidence.  See Adviento, 132 Hawai# i at
140, 150, 319 P.3d at 1148, 1158; see also Sawyer, 88 Hawai# i at
334, 966 P.2d at 646 (ruling that the trial court did not err in
not giving an attempted EMED manslaughter instruction because
"the record was devoid of any evidence that Defendant acted while
under the influence of a reasonably induced loss of self-control
due to [EMED]" (some emphasis added)); State v. Moore, 82 Hawai #i
202, 210-211, 921 P.2d 122, 130-131 (1996)) (noting that there
was no testimony presented on the defendant's state of mind at
the time he shot the victim and therefore "there was no error in
failing to instruct the jury on attempted EMED manslaughter
because there was absolutely no evidentiary support for the
mitigating defense." (emphasis added)).
Further, although itself not representing the evidence,
the State's closing argument focused on jealousy as White's
motive for committing the offense, plainly asserting that
"defendant's girlfriend was at [Nicholas'] house, and when he
found out about that he was upset."  Thus, there is a reasonable
possibility that this focus invited the jury to consider White's
mental and emotional condition and that the absence of the EMED
instruction contributed to White's conviction.  See Arceo , 84
Hawai#i at 12, 928 P.2d at 854 (quoting Holbron, 80 Hawai #i at 32,
904 P.2d at 917).
2. The doctrine of judicial estoppel does not
preclude White from changing his position
regarding the giving of an EMED instruction.
 
The principle of judicial estoppel "prevents parties
from playing 'fast and loose' with the court or blowing 'hot and
cold' during the course of litigation."  State v. Fields , 115
Hawai#i 503, 534, 168 P.3d 955, 986 (2007) (quoting Roxas v.
Marcos, 89 Hawai #i 91, 124, 969 P.2d 1209, 1242 (1998)).  Unlike
the case in Fields, however, the defendant's "shifting
representations" here only arose after the State framed White's
actions as an emotional reaction on closing.  See Adviento , 132
Hawai#i at 146, 319 P.3d at 1154 ("In order to insure that the
trial court fulfills its ultimate obligation to properly instruct
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the jury on the law and the jury meets its duty to 'render true
verdicts based on the facts presented,' the trial court is
required to instruct the jury on the EMED defense notwithstanding
a defendant's 'waiver.'" (emphasis added) (quoting State v.
Haanio, 94 Hawai #i 405, 414, 16 P.3d 246, 255 (2001), overruled
on other grounds relating to eye witness identification and
harmless error by  State v. Flores, 131 Hawai# i 43, 314 P.3d 120
(2013))).  Therefore, even though the issue was not identified as
having been raised below in the opening brief,  Haw. R. App. P.
28(b)(4), or responsive to anything presented in the answering
brief, Haw. R. App. P. 28(d), the State's judicial estoppel
argument is without merit.    
B. The Circuit Court had jurisdiction to issue the Order
for New Trial.  
The State's second point of error, also raised for the
first time in its reply brief, is that the Circuit Court
committed plain error in issuing the Order for New Trial without
vacating or setting aside the verdict.  The State does not
provide any support for its argument, and nothing in Hawai #i
Rules of Penal Procedure ("HRPP") Rule 336/ requires a court to
vacate or set aside a verdict before granting an order for a new
trial.  Furthermore, a reply brief is "confined to matters
presented in the answering brief," and "[p]oints not argued may
be deemed waived."  Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7) and (d).  Therefore,
we reject the State's second point of error.   
6/HRPP Rule 33 provides: 
The court on motion of a defendant may grant a new trial
to the defendant if required in the interests of justice . If
trial was by the court without a jury, the court on motion of
a defendant for a new trial may vacate the judgment if
entered, take additional testimony and direct the entry of a
new judgment. A motion for a new trial shall be made within 10
days after verdict or finding of guilty or within such further
time as the court may fix during the 10-day period. The
finding of guilty may be entered in writing or orally on the
record.
Haw. R. Penal P. 33 (emphasis added).
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
V. DISPOSITION
Based on the foregoing, the Order Granting Motion for
New Trial filed on June 23, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the
Third Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2018.
On the briefs:
Dale Yamada Ross,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai #i,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
William A. Harrison
(Harrison & Matsuoka)
for Defendant-Appellee.
  Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
13