NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0004086
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JENNIFER MASANG, Claimant-Appellee,
v.
 
TARGET CORPORATION, Employer-Appellant,
and
 
SEDGWICK CMS, INC., Insurance Adjuster-Appellant,
and
 
INDEMNITY INSURANCE COMPANY OF NORTH AMERICA,
Insurance Carrier-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2012-299(H))

(1-11-00799)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Employer/Appellant
 
Target Corporation, Insurance Adjuster/Appellant Sedgwick CMS,
 
Inc., and Insurance Carrier/Appellant Indemnity Insurance Company
 of North America (collectively Target) appeal from a Decision and
 Order filed on September 19, 2013, by the Labor and Industrial
 Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) in favor of Claimant/Appellee
 Jennifer Masang (Masang). The LIRAB granted summary judgment in
 favor of Masang and against Target, thus affirming the July 27,
 2012 decision of the Director of the Department of Labor and
 Industrial Relations (Director). In granting summary judgment,
 the LIRAB found that Masang suffered a compensable neck injury as
 a result of a meeting on November 19, 2011, in which Masang was
 questioned about alleged misconduct at work.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Target contends the LIRAB erred when it:  
(1) sua sponte created a cross-motion for summary judgment on
 
behalf of Masang; and (2) improperly granted summary judgment in
 favor of Masang because the LIRAB's procedure violated due
 process and because there were genuine issues of material fact as
 to whether Masang suffered a compensable neck injury.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we conclude that, in
 
the circumstances of this case, it was error for the LIRAB to sua
 sponte create a motion for Masang, and further, the LIRAB erred
 in deciding the issue in this case without allowing Target to
 present the testimony of its witness who was present for the
 trial de novo.
1 Accordingly, we vacate the LIRAB's September 19,
 
2013 Decision and Order.
 
I. Brief Background
 
On November 19, 2011, while employed at Target, Masang
 
was called into an office to discuss allegations of theft and
 
workplace violence made against her. Masang claims that while
 being questioned by Cacique Melendez (Melendez), who is
 apparently a security supervisor for Target, she at some point
 moved back from him and suffered a sprain/strain of her cervical
 spine as a result. As reflected in medical records, Masang
 sought medical treatment three days later, asserting neck and
 back pain, and also inter alia denying any recent injury and
 stating that her symptoms started after she was accused of
 stealing at work. Subsequently, Masang filed a WC-5 Employee's
 Claim for Workers' Compensation Benefits form (WC-5 Form),
 describing the accident as "I feel I got accused of stealing &
 hurting someone no details" and describing her alleged
 injury/illness as "pain in upper back, neck, head & chest.
 [U]nder a lot of [t]rauma." 
1
 In this opinion, we use the terms "trial de novo" and "hearing de 
novo" interchangeably because that particular proceeding before the LIRAB is
referred to in both ways in the record. Indeed, under Hawai' i Administrative 
Rules § 12-47-2, which defines terms relevant to LIRAB practice and procedure,"'[t]rial' shall have the same meaning as the term agency hearing, which termis defined in section 91-1(6), HRS." In turn, Hawaii Revised Statutes§ 91-1(6) (2012) provides that "'[a]gency hearing' refers only to such hearingheld by an agency immediately prior to a judicial review of a contested caseas provided in section 91-14." 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a hearing, the Director determined that Masang
 
suffered a compensable neck injury arising out of and in the
 
course of employment, but rejected Masang's claim for a mental
 stress injury. Target's request for partial reconsideration was
 
considered an appeal to the LIRAB.
 
Pursuant to the LIRAB's Pretrial Order issued on
 
October 17, 2012, the sole issue to be determined by the LIRAB
 
was "whether [Masang] sustained a personal injury of a neck
 sprain/strain on November 19, 2011, arising out of and in the
 course of employment." Trial de novo was scheduled to commence
 on May 31, 2013. On May 28, 2013, three days before trial,
 Target filed a motion for summary judgment on the grounds that
 Masang did not injure her neck, and that even if she had, the
 injury did not occur out of and in the course of employment with
 Target. Among the exhibits attached in support of Target's
 summary judgment motion were some of Masang's medical records,
 which Target asserted supported its position that Masang had not
 sustained a neck injury as a result of her employment.
 
On May 31, 2013, two matters were thus scheduled before
 
the LIRAB -- first, a hearing on Target's motion for summary
 judgment, and second, a trial de novo. On that date, the LIRAB
 opened the hearing on Target's motion for summary judgment. 
Because Masang apparently had not been served with a copy of
 Target's motion for summary judgment, the LIRAB provided her with
 a copy, gave her some time to review it, and then allowed her to
 testify under oath in response to the motion. During her
 testimony, Masang testified inter alia about what happened while
 in the meeting with Melendez, including:
 
So I was sitting like this because, you know, I was working
and I just -- you know, I was like this, and he was sitting
here, and towards the end of the -- that question about the
stealing part, he went like, oh, you had -- with his paper
he went, oh, you had your chance. And you saw me go back.
You know, he saw me go back, and I went like, oh, like what
is this and I started rubbing my back. Nellie saw. God
 knows he saw, but he not saying nothing. 
(The LIRAB later made a finding in its Decision and Order that
 
Masang "experienced neck pain after she sharply pulled her head
 and neck away from Employer's inquisitor during a meeting or
 counseling session at work."). Masang testified that she felt a
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"mean poke" in the middle of her back and "the thing just went
 
run up towards my neck and my head and I started getting like
 back pain and headaches[.]" At various points in the hearing,
 the LIRAB asked Target's counsel if he wished to proceed with the
 motion for summary judgment, to which he responded in the
 affirmative. When asked if he wished to cross-examine Masang,
 Target's counsel stated that he had no questions for Masang
 regarding the motion, and later noted that "during the hearing de
 novo I may have questions." The LIRAB noted that Target's
 counsel had reserved his right to cross-examine, and then a
 recess was taken.
 
Upon resuming the hearing on Target's motion for
 
summary judgment, the LIRAB asked Target's counsel if he wished
 to proceed with the summary judgment motion, to which he replied
 in the affirmative. The LIRAB then stated inter alia that "[t]he
 board is struck by the testimony given by Ms. Masang, to the
 extent that we are unable to reach a conclusion that a physical
 injury did not occur." The LIRAB further noted that it deemed
 Masang's testimony as being equivalent to a declaration or
 affidavit in opposition to Target's motion for summary judgment
 and announced its intent to grant summary judgment for Masang.
 Target's counsel responded that the LIRAB should not sua sponte
 create a summary judgment motion for Masang, that in any event
 there were genuine issues of material fact that precluded summary
 judgment in her favor, and that the LIRAB should proceed to the
 trial de novo and allow Target to present the testimony of
 Melendez, who was present for the trial. Target's counsel
 represented that, if allowed to testify, Melendez would refute
 the fact of injury and the description of injury by Masang. 
Target's counsel also asserted that, in light of the unusual
 position taken by the LIRAB, he requested to withdraw Target's
 motion, which the LIRAB denied. The LIRAB then cancelled the
 trial de novo over Target's objections. 
On September 19, 2013, the LIRAB issued the Decision
 
and Order affirming the Director's decision. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.	 Standard of Review
 
Appellate review of a LIRAB decision is governed by
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14(g) (2012), which provides:
 
Upon review of the record[,] the court may
affirm the decision of the agency or remand the
case with instructions for further proceedings;
or it may reverse or modify the decision and
order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions,
or orders are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
 
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6)	 Arbitrary or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law (COLs) are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3). Tam v. Kaiser Permanente, 94 Hawai
'i 487, 494, 17 P.3d 219, 226 
(2001)(citation, quotation marks and brackets omitted).
III. Discussion 
A.
	 LIRAB's Sua Sponte Creation of a Summary Judgment
Motion For Masang
 
"[A] presumption of validity is accorded to decisions 
of administrative bodies acting within their sphere of expertise 
and one seeking to upset the order bears the heavy burden of making a convincing showing that it is invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in its consequences” Tam, 94 Hawai
'i at 
490, 17 P.3d at 222 (quoting In Re Gray Line Hawai 'i, Ltd., 93 
Hawai'i 45, 53, 995 P.2d 776, 784 (2000)). 
In its Decision and Order, the LIRAB explained why it

 
created a summary judgment motion on Masang's behalf as follows:
 
The Board concurs that the purpose of summary judgment
is to expedite matters where "there is no genuine issue as
to any material fact." This purpose should not be
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
obstructed merely because one party has not entirely
fulfilled the technical formalities conventionally expected.
 
In this case, Employer filed its Motion with the Board
and mailed it to Claimant on Hawaii island just three days
prior to the scheduled hearing. Claimant had not received
 Employer's Motion until she appeared on Oahu from the Big
Island; she was provided a photocopy of the Motion and the
memorandum in support by the Board's staff. She spent ten
minutes reviewing said document. As a pro se Claimant, she
did not have the legal knowledge to know that she could
prepare and file a Motion for Summary Judgment on her own.
The Board was within its discretion to construe her sworn
 testimony and opposition to Employer's Motion and the
records and files herein as her own Cross-Motion for Summary
Judgment and argument in support thereof.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The LIRAB relied on Flint v. Mackenzie, 53 Haw. 672, 
501 P.2d 357 (1972), in asserting that it had discretion to 
construe Masang's testimony in opposition to Target's motion for summary judgment as a cross-motion on her own behalf. In the LIRAB's Decision and Order, it asserts that based on Flint, "[e]ven in the absence of a formal motion for summary judgment filed by Claimant, the Supreme Court of Hawaii has looked with approval upon and allowed summary judgment for a non-moving party to be entered." In Flint, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court affirmed 
that, where there is no genuine issue of material fact, the circuit court could grant summary judgment for a non-moving party, reasoning that the purpose of summary judgment is to expedite matters and this "should not be thwarted because one party has not fulfilled the mechanical procedures normally required." Id. at 672-73, 501 P.2d at 357. 
Flint was construing Rule 56 of the Hawai
'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP). The HRCP apply to civil cases in the circuit courts, but do not as a general matter apply to worker's compensation proceedings before the LIRAB. See HRCP Rules 1 and 
81. Moreover, the relevant provisions of the Hawai
'i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) related to LIRAB proceedings do not incorporate HRCP Rule 56. That is, HAR § 12-47-32 dealing with motions before the LIRAB makes no reference to incorporating HRCP Rule 56 (whereas, for instance, HAR § 12-47-31 related to discovery in LIRAB proceedings does reference and incorporate the HRCP for discovery purposes). Therefore, Flint is 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
distinguishable because it was decided considering HRCP Rule 56.
 
Under HAR § 12-47-32, "[a]ll motions, except when made
 
during a trial, shall be in writing, state the grounds for the
 
motion, set forth the relief or order sought, and be accompanied
 by a memorandum in support of the motion." (Emphasis added). 
Notwithstanding HAR § 12-47-32, there certainly may be instances
 where it would be appropriate for the LIRAB to construe an oral
 argument of a party as a motion. See HRS § 91-9(d) (2012)
 
(providing that contested case procedures can be modified or
 waived by the parties and informal dispositions made by agreement
 of the parties or on default); HAR § 12-47-1 (providing that the
 rules governing the practice and procedure before the LIRAB
 "shall be construed to secure the just, speedy, and inexpensive
 determination of every proceeding"). However, in this case, the
 LIRAB construed Masang's testimony as a motion for summary
 judgment, apparently pursuant to HRCP Rule 56 which does not
 apply to LIRAB proceedings. As we discuss more specifically
 below, this had the effect of the LIRAB canceling the trial de
 novo over the objection of Target's counsel and precluding Target
 from presenting Melendez's testimony. Given these circumstances,
 and also for the reasons discussed below, we conclude that the
 LIRAB erred in construing Masang's testimony as a motion for
 summary judgment.
B. The LIRAB Erred in Granting Summary Judgment for Masang
 
As noted above, the HAR do not incorporate HRCP Rule 56
 
for application to LIRAB proceedings. Therefore, the LIRAB's
 
reliance on Flint is misplaced, as is much of Target's briefing
 that relies on case law relevant to HRCP Rule 56. This does not
 mean that the LIRAB cannot adjudicate cases in summary fashion
 when appropriate. See HRS § 91-9(d). However, in ascertaining
 
whether LIRAB utilized proper procedure in adjudicating this
 case, we do not apply HRCP Rule 56, but instead focus on relevant
 statutes pertaining to the LIRAB and the HAR provisions related
 to practice and procedure before the LIRAB. See HRS § 386-87
 
(1993); HRS Chapter 91; HAR Title 12, Subtitle 7, Chapter 47.
 
Under HRS § 386-87, which pertains to appeals to the
 
LIRAB from decisions by the Director, "[the LIRAB] shall hold a
 
7
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
full hearing de novo on the appeal." Moreover, given that LIRAB
 
is an agency within the definition of the Hawai 'i Administrative 
Procedure Act, the provisions of HRS Chapter 91 apply. See
 
Dependents of Cazimero v. Kohala Sugar Co., 54 Haw. 479, 481, 510
 P.2d 89, 91 (1973). HRS § 91-9 provides in relevant part: 
§ 91-9 Contested cases; notice; hearing; records . (a)
Subject to section 91-8.5,[ 2
] in any contested case, all
parties shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing after

reasonable notice.
 
. . . .
 
(c)
 Opportunities shall be afforded all parties to present
evidence and argument on all issues involved.
 (d) Any procedure in a contested case may be modified or
waived by stipulation of the parties and informal
disposition may be made of any contested case by
stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default.
 
Moreover, HRS § 91-10 (2012) provides, in pertinent part:
 
§ 91-10 Rules of evidence; official notice. In contested
 
cases: 
(1) Except as provided in section 91-8.5, any oral or
documentary evidence may be received, but every agency shall
as a matter of policy provide for the exclusion of
irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence and
no sanction shall be imposed or rule or order be issued
except upon consideration of the whole record or such
portions thereof as may be cited by any party and as
supported by and in accordance with the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence. The agencies shall give effect to
the rules of privilege recognized by law;
 
. . . .
 (3) Every party shall have the right to conduct such
cross-examination as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts, and shall have the right to submit
rebuttal evidence[.]
 
The HAR also provide relevant authority. Under HAR
 
§ 12-47-41, pertaining to rules of evidence, the LIRAB is not
 
bound "by statutory and common law rules relating to the
 admission or rejection of evidence" and "may exercise its own
 discretion in these matters, limited only by considerations of
 relevancy, materiality, and repetition[.]" (Emphasis added). 
Despite the LIRAB's broad discretion in making evidentiary

 
rulings, however, HAR § 12-47-42 provides that parties have the
 
2
 HRS § 91-8.5 (2012) deals with mediation in a contested case.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to call and examine witnesses and introduce evidence as
 
follows:
 
§ 12-47-42 Conduct of Hearing and evidence.   (a) Testimony
shall be taken on oath or affirmation.
 
(b)
 Each party shall have the right to call and examine
parties and witnesses, to introduce evidence, to question
opposing witnesses and parties on any matter relevant to the
issues even though that matter was not covered in direct
examination, to impeach any witness regardless which party
first called the witness to testify, and to offer rebuttal
evidence.
 
(c) Any member may question any party or witness.
 (d) The admission of evidence in a hearing shall be
controlled by the presiding member in a manner in which the
presiding member considers best suited to ascertain the
just, speedy, and inexpensive determination of the
proceedings.
 
Further, HAR § 12-47-43 provides that "[e]ach party has the right
 
to conduct such cross-examination of any party's witnesses as may
 be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts and has
 the right to submit rebuttal evidence." Under HAR § 12-47-44,
 "[t]o avoid unnecessary or unduly repetitious evidence, the
 presiding member may limit the number of witnesses or the time
 for testimony upon a particular issue." (Emphasis added).
 
Under the provisions set forth above, a full hearing de
 
novo should have been held (unless the parties stipulated
 otherwise or waived their rights, which they did not in this
 case); each party had the right to present evidence on the issues
 involved, cross-examine witnesses and submit rebuttal evidence;
 and the LIRAB was required to rule on the issue before it based
 upon consideration of the whole record. Given the procedure
 utilized by the LIRAB in this case, perhaps in part because it
 was seeking to apply Flint and HRCP Rule 56 procedures, it did
 not allow Target to present the testimony of Melendez at the
 previously scheduled, but subsequently cancelled, trial de novo.
 Importantly, however, the testimony of both Masang and Melendez
 was relevant and material to determine whether Masang sustained
 the claimed neck injury in the November 19, 2011 meeting. 
Moreover, Melendez's testimony was not repetitive, as Target had
 not submitted any other witness or documentary evidence as to the
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
actual events at the subject meeting.3
 
Under Hawaii's Workers' Compensation Law, an injury is
 
compensable if by accident it arises out of and in the course of
 
the employment. HRS § 386–3 (2014). Here, the crux of the issue
 before the LIRAB was whether Masang sustained a neck injury as
 she described during the meeting with Melendez. Further, Masang
 testified that Melendez saw her react when she sustained her
 injury. Target was entitled to have Melendez testify.
 
We therefore conclude that the LIRAB's September 19,
 
2013 Decision and Order was made upon unlawful procedure. See
 
HRS § 91-14(g)(3).
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Decision and
 
Order issued by the LIRAB on September 19, 2013, and remand for
 
further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 25, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Leighton K. Oshima,
Lauren H. Kalaukoa,Attorneys for Employer-Appellant,Insurance Adjuster-Appellant, andInsurance Carrier-Appellant. 
Jennifer Masang,
Claimant-Appellee, pro se. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
3
 We note that even assuming arguendo that HRCP Rule 56 procedures
applied, there were genuine issues of material fact given the conflicting
evidence already before the LIRAB, which would have necessitated proceeding to
the trial de novo, if HRCP Rule 56 applied.
 
10
 