NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-15-0000649 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
WAIKOLOA VILLAGE ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee, v.
J R & M RESTAURANTS HAWAII LLC,
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee,
and 
P
ETER J. LENHART,
Real Party in Interest-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC08-1-118) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.) 
Lienor-Appellant Peter J. Lenhart (Lenhart), pro se, 
purports to appeal from an "Order Denying Peter J. Lenhart Esq.'s 
Motion to Foreclose Attorney's Lien" filed on June 26, 2008 (6/26/08 Order
), and an "Order Granting JR&M Restaurants Hawaii 
LLC's Motion to Dismiss Attorney's Lien and to Release Settlement Funds" filed on August 3, 2015 (8/3/15 Order Dismissing Lien) 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu 
Division (District Court).   Lenhart also seeks to challenge 
1
1  The Honorable Gerald H. Kibe presided with regard to the 6/26/08 
Order.  The Honorable Hilary Benson Gangnes presided with regard to the 8/3/15
Order Dismissing Lien.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
certain other actions taken by the District Court with regard to 
his claim for an attorney's lien. 
On appeal, Lenhart contends, inter alia,2 that the 
District Court erred by:
 (1) entering a minute order on June 16, 2008 and by 
entering the 6/26/08 Order;
 (2) entering the 8/3/15 Order Dismissing Lien because 
(a) it is contrary to prior rulings by the District Court, (b) it erroneously concludes a statute of limitations had run on Lenhart's attorney's lien under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§§ 507-81 (2006)  and 657-1 (2016),  notwithstanding the filing 
of his Notice of Attorney's Lien, (c) it erroneously concludes 
the attorney's fees dispute between Defendant-Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellee J R & M Restaurants Hawaii LLC (JR&M) and 
Lenhart was subject to an arbitration clause in a retainer 
agreement, and (d) even if the fee dispute is subject to arbitration, the retainer agreement does not proscribe Lenhart from pursuing his attorney's lien remedies under HRS § 507-81; 4 3
2 Lenhart asserts numerous points of error, which include various sub-
issues, some of which overlap.  We summarize his points of error to the extent
we can discern that they relate to orders or rulings by the District Court. 
3  We apply the version of HRS § 507-81 that was in effect in 2008, when
Lenhart filed his notice of attorney's lien. The relevant portions of HRS
§ 507-81 are provided, infra. 
4  HRS § 657-1 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 657-1  Six years.   The following actions shall be
commenced within six years next after the cause of action
accrued, and not after:
(1) Actions for the recovery of any debt foundedupon any contract, obligation, or liability,excepting such as are brought upon the judgmentor decree of a court; excepting further thatactions for the recovery of any debt foundedupon any contract, obligation, or liability madepursuant to chapter 577A shall be governed bychapter 577A[.] 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) entering a minute order on July 6, 2015; and 
(4) striking Lenhart's memorandum in opposition to 
JR&M's motion to dismiss.5 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the 8/3/15 
Order Dismissing Lien and remand for further proceedings.
I.  Brief Background 
This case was initiated as a summary possession action 
filed by the Waikoloa Village Association (Waikoloa) against 
JR&M, in which JR&M filed a counterclaim and each party alleged 
breaches of a lease agreement against the other.  Lenhart represented JR&M at the onset of the case and for approximately one-and-a-half years during the litigation.  However, Lenhart subsequently withdrew as JR&M's counsel as of March 13, 2008, and a dispute arose regarding payment of Lenhart's attorney's fees.  
On March 11, 2008, Lenhart filed his "Notice of 
Attorneys' Lien" pursuant to HRS § 507-81. 
On April 1, 2008, Waikoloa and JR&M (represented by new 
counsel) entered into a Settlement Agreement resulting in Waikoloa paying $125,000 to JR&M, and the respective claims by the parties were dismissed.  The settlement funds were deposited with the court, and the District Court retained jurisdiction regarding the attorney's lien issue. 
On May 29, 2008, Lenhart filed a "Motion to Foreclose 
Attorney's Lien" requesting (1) an order foreclosing on his attorney's lien filed on March 11, 2008, and (2) "an order from the Court (pursuant to [HRS] §507-81) ordering the release and payment over to [Lenhart] of settlement funds in the amount of $125,000.00 deposited by [JR&M.]" Lenhart asserted via his declaration in support of this motion that total attorney's fees 
5 Lenhart does not indicate where in the record he objected to the
striking of his memorandum in opposition and he does not provide argument in
support of this point of error.  Therefore, we deem this point waived. Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28(b)(4) and (7).  As noted 
by Lenhart, however, he argued his opposition to JR&M's motion to dismiss at ahearing on July 6, 2016, before Judge Gagnes. Thus, we are still able toaddress many of his arguments in opposing the motion to dismiss. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
due and owing for legal services rendered to JR&M and its four 
members was $224,894.94. 
On June 10, 2008, JR&M filed its "Memorandum in 
Opposition to [Lenhart's] Motion to Foreclose Attorney's Lien with Request for Stay of Proceedings; Demand for Arbitration."  
On June 16, 2008, the District Court held a hearing on 
Lenhart's Motion.  At the hearing, the District Court stated there were factual and legal issues to be addressed "if there is going to be a proper basis for the claim of attorney's fees and that the clients who are covered by the fee agreement can be readily identified.  There are competing concerns/issues that cannot satisfactorily be addressed, in my view, within the confines of this [Lenhart's Motion]."  The District Court thus denied Lenhart's motion "without prejudice to [Lenhart's] pursuing such additional forms of relief as [Lenhart] deem[s] appropriate[.]" 
On June 26, 2008, the District Court entered its "Order 
Denying [Lenhart's] Motion to Foreclose Attorney's Lien (filed March 11, 2008)" (6/26/08 Order). 
Nearly seven years of inactivity followed the entry of 
the 6/26/08 Order.  Then, on June 15, 2015, JR&M filed its "Motion to Dismiss Attorney's Lien and to Release Settlement Funds" (Motion to Dismiss), pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) of the 
District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP). 
On July 2, 2015, Lenhart filed his opposition to JR&M's 
Motion to Dismiss, which the District Court struck as untimely 
filed. 
On July 6, 2015, the District Court held a hearing on 
JR&M's Motion to Dismiss (7/6/15 Hearing).  After considering the 
parties' arguments, the District Court ruled in favor of JR&M.  
On August 3, 2015, the District Court entered the 
8/3/15 Order Dismissing Lien, ruling that: 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1.  The contract claim dispute between Peter J.
Lenhart and J R & M Restaurants Hawaii LLC began over seven
years ago, and J R & M Restaurants Hawaii LLC filed itsdemand for arbitration on June 10, 2008.  Over seven yearshave passed since that time, and the six-year statute oflimitations on the contract claim has expired pursuant toHaw. Rev. Stat. § 657-1. 
The 8/3/15 Order Dismissing Lien further dismissed Lenhart's 
attorney's lien against the $125,000 settlement funds, deemed his attorney's lien claim satisfied in full under HRS § 507-81, and ordered the release of the $125,000 settlement funds. 
On September 1, 2015, Lenhart appealed. 
II.  Jurisdiction 
We have appellate jurisdiction to review the 8/3/15 
Order Dismissing Lien, but not the 6/26/08 Order or the minute orders referenced in Lenhart's points of error.
6 
III.  Standard of Review 
We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss 
under Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) de 
novo
.  Wright v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 111 Hawai# i 401, 406, 
142 P.3d 265, 270 (2006); see also DCRCP Rule 12(b) cmt. ("Adopts similar language of HRCP Rule 12(b) with changes to gender neutral language.").
IV.  Statute of Limitations 
We hold that the District Court erred in its 8/3/15 
Order Dismissing Lien by ruling that Lenhart's attorney's lien is barred by the statute of limitations set forth in HRS § 657-1. 
HRS § 657-1(1) provides, in relevant part, that 
"[a]ctions for the recovery of any debt founded upon any contract" shall be "commenced within six years next after the cause of action accrued[.]" 
6   Lenhart's appeal is timely as to the 8/3/15 Order Dismissing Lien,
but not as to the 6/26/08 Order.  HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) ("When a civil appeal is
permitted by law, the notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days afterentry of the judgment or appealable order.").  Moreover, the minute ordersreferenced in Lenhart's points of error are not appealable orders.  Adams v. Cades, Schutte, Fleming & Wright, 88 Hawai #i 319, 321 n.3, 966 P.2d 631, 633
n.3 (1998) ("[A] minute order is not an appealable order.").  Thus, we lackappellate jurisdiction to review the 6/26/08 Order or the minute orders. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In 2008, when Lenhart filed his attorney's lien, HRS  
§ 507-81 provided in relevant part:
[§507-81]  Attorney's lien upon actions and judgments. (a) 
An attorney has a lien upon: 
. . . 
(2) Judgments, decrees, orders, settlements, and
awards entered by the court in favor of theclient; and 
(3) Any proceeds paid in satisfaction of thejudgment, decree, order, settlement, or award. 
(b)  The lien shall be for: 
(1) The fees and compensation specifically agreedupon with the client; 
(2) The reasonable value of the services of the attorney, if there is no fee agreement; 
(3) Any costs advanced by the attorney; and 
(4) Any fees or commissions taxed or allowed by thecourt. 
. . . . 
(e)  The attorney's lien on a judgment, decree, order,
settlement, or award remains valid as long as the judgment,decree, order, settlement, or award remains valid.
(f)  To be enforceable under this section, a notice of
claim of the attorney's lien shall be filed:
(1) Before the complaint is dismissed bystipulation; 
(2) Before the complaint is dismissed by order ofthe court; or 
(3) Not later than one year after entry of finaljudgment is filed and disposition of any appealthereof. 
. . . .
     (h)  Except as provided by subsections (i) and (j), a
party to the action, suit, or proceeding or any other personshall not have the right to discharge or dismiss anyjudgment, decree, settlement, or award entered in theaction, suit, or proceeding until the lien and claim of theattorney for fees based thereon is satisfied in full. 
(Emphasis added).7 
In the instant case, Lenhart filed his Notice of 
Attorney's Lien on March 11, 2008, while the claims in the case 
were still pending.  Thereafter, the parties do not dispute that JR&M and Waikoloa entered into their Settlement Agreement and on April 1, 2008, stipulated to dismiss their respective claims and counterclaims.  On May 29, 2008, Lenhart filed his motion seeking 
7 Subsections (i) and (j) of HRS § 507-81 are not pertinent to this 
decision. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to foreclose on the lien, which the District Court denied. 
However, the District Court retained jurisdiction to address the lien. 
Given the circumstances in this case, Lenhart timely 
filed his notice of attorney's lien within the period set forth in HRS § 507-81(f), such that it was enforceable under that statute.  It is unclear under HRS § 507-81 whether a statute of limitations, such as under HRS § 657-1(1), would further limit or provide a time bar for pursuing an attorney's lien.  HRS §§ 507-81 and 657-1 do not directly address this question.  In Gold v. Duncan Ostrander & Dingess, P.C., 143 P.3d 1192, 1193 (Colo. App. 2006), the Colorado Court of Appeals dealt with an attorney's lien and held that "an attorney must enforce a charging lien within the limitations period applicable to enforcement of the underlying debt."  The court noted: 
Other jurisdictions have similarly held that the enforcement
of a lien for attorney fees is time barred when a claim onthe underlying debt has become time barred.  See, e.g.,Hunstein v. Fiksman, 279 Ga. 559, 615 S.E.2d 526 (2005). But cf. Sheehan v. Estate of Gamberg, 677 P.2d 254, 258(Alaska 1984) ("In the absence of any expressed statutorylimitation it would be improvident for this court to imposeany time bar limitation unless the facts clearly indicate
the applicability of laches or estoppel."). 
Id. at 1194. 
We need not resolve whether the limitations period 
under HRS § 657-1 necessarily applies to Lenhart's attorney's 
lien because in this case, even assuming HRS § 657-1(1) applies, Lenhart's claim is not time barred.  He filed both his notice of attorney's lien and his motion to foreclose on his attorney's lien in 2008, within six years of his cause of action for the unpaid attorney's fees accruing.  Thus, Lenhart commenced action within the six years set out in HRS § 657-1. 
Accordingly, the District Court erred in ruling that 
the statute of limitations barred Lenhart from pursuing his attorney's lien claim. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V.  Arbitration 
Lenhart argues that Judge Gangnes granted JR&M's Motion 
to Dismiss based in part on an erroneous determination that Judge 
Kibe had previously ruled that the lien dispute was subject to arbitration. 
At the 7/6/15 Hearing, Judge Gangnes stated: 
THE COURT: And [Judge Kibe] basically said, Your
contract has an arbitration provision in it, which -- and
[JR&M] made a demand for arbitration, so you all need toarbitrate before I can do anything. I mean, that's myreading of the record. 
. . . . 
THE COURT:  There was an arbitration demand presented
to Judge Kibe, and then he declined to rule on your motion
[to foreclose].  The only reasonable interpretation of whathappened then is, that in light of the arbitration clause inthe contract, arbitration is what had to happen before theCourt can do anything. 
. . . . 
THE COURT:  [It was] crystal clear that [JR&M]
demanded arbitration.  And it's clear to the Court, based on
the record of this case, that given that arbitration demandthe Court held the settlement funds, and they've stayedthere because arbitration was supposed to happen. Otherwise, the Court could have ruled on your lien at thetime that -- that you filed your motion [to foreclose.] 
Based on our review of the record, it does not appear 
that Judge Kibe issued a ruling with respect to an arbitration 
demand by JR&M.  In 2008, JR&M's Opposition to Lenhart's Motion to Foreclose included the following: "J R & M Restaurants Hawaii LLC hereby demands arbitration of its fee dispute with Peter J. Lenhart, Esq. pursuant to the arbitration clause in the agreement signed by the parties on or about June 20, 2007." 
HRS § 658A-6 (2016) provides that "[t]he court shall 
decide whether an agreement to arbitrate exists or a controversy is subject to an agreement to arbitrate."  Additionally, HRS § 658A-7 provides, in relevant part:
[§ 658A-7] Motion to compel or stay arbitration.   (a)
On motion of a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and
alleging another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant tothe agreement: 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) If the refusing party does not appear or does
not oppose the motion, the court shall order theparties to arbitrate; and 
(2) If the refusing party opposes the motion, thecourt shall proceed summarily to decide theissue and order the parties to arbitrate unlessit finds that there is no enforceable agreementto arbitrate. 
. . . . 
(e) If a proceeding involving a claim referable to
arbitration under an alleged agreement to arbitrate ispending in court, a motion under this section shall be madein that court.  Otherwise a motion under this section shall be made in any court as provided in section 658A-27.
(f) If a party makes a motion to the court to order
arbitration, the court on just terms shall stay any judicialproceeding that involves a claim alleged to be subject tothe arbitration until the court renders a final decision under this section. 
(Emphasis added). 
JR&M's "demand" for arbitration was not brought as a 
motion to compel arbitration under HRS § 658A-7.  Even if it 
could be construed as such a motion, Judge Kibe did not issue a ruling on whether the attorney's lien issue should be arbitrated and did not issue an order compelling arbitration.  At the June 16, 2008 hearing, Judge Kibe stated: 
THE COURT: [. . . .]  There are competing
concerns/issues that cannot satisfactorily be addressed, in
my view, within the confines of this form of motion.  So I'm going to deny the motion without prejudice to your pursuingsuch additional forms of relief as you deem appropriate,whether it be by way of a (indiscernible) action or adifferently filed -- or styled request to this Court. 
. . . . 
THE COURT:  You're going to have to look into the
matter further and figure out the appropriate way of
proceeding.  My take on it is this should be resolved ona mutual basis.  There are other avenues available,attorney-client fee mediation, through the Bar Association,for example. 
. . . . 
THE COURT:  All right. (Indiscernible), the motion is
denied, again, without prejudice. 
Based on the foregoing, to the extent that Judge 
Gangnes dismissed the attorney's lien based on a determination 
that Judge Kibe had required arbitration, this was in error. 
9  VI.  Laches NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In its answering brief, JR&M briefly asserts that 
Lenhart is precluded from seeking his attorney's fees due to 
laches.  JR&M did not raise laches in its motion to dismiss filed in the District Court, but argued generally at the 7/6/15 Hearing that it had been prejudiced by Lenhart's delay in pursuing his attorney's fees.  The District Court's 8/3/15 Order Dismissing Lien did not rely on laches, but at the 7/6/15 Hearing the court seemed to indicate that part of its reason for dismissing the attorney's lien was Lenhart's delay in acting, stating: 
THE COURT:  The Court is ready to rule.
The Court finds here that [JR&M's] motion to dismiss
attorney's lien and to release settlement funds, the Courtagrees with the argument and authority put forward by themoving party, grants the motion, finds that, Mr. Lenhart,you waited too long in this case to do anything.
And I could, basically, have it -- a clear demand for
arbitration, based on the fee contract drafted by you,presumably, was made on June 10th, 2008.  And even assumingthat after 30 days with no response we start the statute oflimitations, that would be June -- that would be July 10th,2008, and we're now at almost seven years, well past thesix-year contract statute of limitations.  And the Court's finding that had a separate claim been filed by you, youwould have, basically, been told after a year of inactivitythat your claim was being dismissed.  All these years,you're the one that is saying you want fees paid.  The Court's finding that you've sat on your rights.  You've waived whatever right you had to collect any fees in thiscase.  And the Court finds that in this case, viewing therecord as it is, that the funds that have been retained bythe court, the 125,000-dollar settlement funds, should bereleased to JR & M Restaurants forthwith. 
(Emphasis added).  
In reviewing the issue of laches, we consider the 
following: 
There are two components to laches, both of which must existbefore the doctrine will apply. First, there must have beena delay by the plaintiff in bringing his claim, and thatdelay must have been unreasonable under the circumstances.Delay is reasonable if the claim was brought without unduedelay after plaintiff knew of the wrong or knew of facts andcircumstances sufficient to impute such knowledge to him.Second, that delay must have resulted in prejudice todefendant. Common but by no means exclusive examples of suchprejudice are loss of evidence with which to contestplaintiff's claims, including the fading memories or deathsor material witnesses, changes in the value of the subjectmatter, changes in defendant's position, and interveningrights of third parties. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Royal Aloha v. Certified Mgmt., 
Inc., 139 Hawai# i 229, 234, 386 P.3d 866, 871 (2016) (holding 
that laches is a defense in all civil actions, not just equitable actions); see also Pelosi v. Wailea Ranch Estates, 91 
Hawai# i 
478, 491, 985 P.2d 1045, 1058 (1999) ("Lapse of time alone does not constitute laches.  Since laches is an equitable defense, its application is controlled by equitable considerations.") (citation omitted). 
JR&M's Answering Brief argues, in total, that "the 
delay resulted in prejudice to [JR&M] (as previously argued by counsel for [JR&M], delay has been fatal to this company[)]" and citing to pages 29-30 of the 7/6/15 Hearing transcript.  The following transpired during the cited portions of the hearing, in relevant part: 
THE COURT:  Well, why don't you respond to Mr.
Lenhart's argument that they can arbitrate now and that
there's been no prejudice to your client. 
[JR&M COUNSEL]:  On that, Your Honor, there has been a
great deal of prejudice to my client, and they have waited along time to resolve this issue.  In fact, JR & M needs tosettle its affairs because it's been administrativelydissolved.  This dispute and all of the issues around ithave been really fatal to this -- to this company, and verycostly, and the members need to resolve and -- and wrap upthe issues for the LLC.  And it's kind of late to come to the table and say, Now we'd be happy to arbitrate, after sixyears have already passed.  And it would be a great deal ofprejudice to my client if they were forced back to thebeginning and the six years, you know, started all overagain at this point. 
JR&M did not present any evidence of prejudice caused 
by Lenhart's delay in pursuing his attorney's lien, but instead 
argued prejudice at the 7/6/15 Hearing in a conclusory fashion. We note that, after the District Court denied Lenhart's motion to foreclose on his attorney lien in 2008, neither Lenhart nor JR&M took any action for approximately seven years, until JR&M filed its motion to dismiss in June 2015.  JR&M did not establish prejudice from the delay.  Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. Of Dirs. v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 
Hawai# i 
232, 284-85, 167 P.3d 225, 277-78 (2007) (holding that a party's 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claim that it had been "severely prejudiced" by the other party's 
"failure to press its claims in a timely fashion[,]" without evidence that said prejudice was caused by the claimed unreasonable delay, was conclusory and insufficient).
VII.  Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the "Order Granting 
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff J R & M Restaurants Hawai# i 
LLC's Motion to Dismiss Attorney's Lien and to Release Settlement Funds" entered on August 3, 2015, by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is vacated. 
This case is remanded to the District Court for further 
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: Chief Judge 
Peter J. Lenhart,
Real Party in Interest-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Robert D. Triantos, Edmund W.K. Haitsuka, Catherine L.M. Hall, for Defendant/CounterclaimPlaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
12 