NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000273
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
INDIRA D. LOPEZ RUIZ, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NOS. 1P111-03535 AND 1P111-03536)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Indira D. Lopez Ruiz appeals from
 
the "Notice of Entry of Judgment And/Or Order" entered March 23,
 
1
2012 in the District Court of the First Circuit  (district court)
convicting her of two counts of assault in the third degree. 
Ruiz contends the district court erred in denying her oral motion
 
to dismiss due to insufficiency in the arraignment, in denying
 
her motion to dismiss in the interest of justice, in determining
 
that she was guilty, and in not staying her sentence pending
 
appeal.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) in its 
answering brief points out the record of this case seems to 
reflect that there may have been a violation of Ruiz's right to 
testify pursuant to Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 900 P.2d 
1
 The Honorable Blake T. Okimoto presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1293 (1995). In Tachibana, the Hawai' i Supreme Court recognized 
that "[t]he decision to testify is ultimately committed to a 
defendant's own discretion." 79 Hawai' i at 232, 900 P.2d at 1299 
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). The supreme court recognized that "a defendant's personal constitutional 
right to testify truthfully in his [or her] own behalf may not be 
waived by counsel as a matter of trial strategy," and "may be 
relinquished only by the defendant." Id. (citations and internal 
quotation marks omitted). The supreme court held that, "in order to protect the right to testify under the Hawai' i Constitution, 
trial courts must advise criminal defendants of their right to testify and must obtain an on-the-record waiver of that right in 
every case in which the defendant does not testify." Id. at 236 
& n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 & n.7 (footnote omitted). 
In this case, the following exchange occurred prior to
 
trial:
 
THE COURT: All right. Ms. Ruiz, at this point it is
my duty to inform you and advise you as to your right
against self[-]incrimination. That means that you –- a
decision as to whether or not you're going to testify at
trial is solely your decision, not your counsel, and you
have a constitutional right not to testify and the court
will not take any negative inferences if you choose to
exercise your constitutional right. I will at the
 appropriate moment re-advise you of your constitutional
right against self-incrimination. Do you understand?
 
[RUIZ]: Yes, I do. And I appreciate you interpreting
that for me because it has not been respected in other
 cases.
 
However, the following exchange occurred after the
 
State rested:
 
THE COURT: . . . The State having rested, [defense
counsel], does the defense have any witnesses?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, after conferring with
[Ruiz], she has decided to maintain her right against – her
right to silence and will not be taking the stand.
 
THE COURT: Very well.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During sentencing, Ruiz said: "I can't testify and put
 
myself through victimization over and over again. If you want me
 
to testify, because you didn't hear my side of the story, can I
 
have a chance to do that? I mean, you already passed a verdict
 
that's inappropriate[.]"
 
Although the trial court informed Ruiz that she had a
 
right to testify before trial, and Ruiz acknowledged that she
 
understood that she had this right, the district court neither
 
asked nor received an answer from Ruiz whether
 
she herself would waive her right to testify. Following the
 
conclusion of the State's case-in-chief, the district court
 
merely accepted defense counsel's representation that Ruiz
 
decided to maintain her right to silence without asking Ruiz
 
herself whether she was waiving her right to testify.
 
It cannot be determined whether Ruiz herself 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived her 
constitutional right to testify, or whether her defense counsel 
waived his client's right to testify "as a matter of trial 
strategy." See Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 232, 900 P.2d at 1299. 
The district court's failure to obtain an on-the-record waiver of Ruiz's right to testify from Ruiz herself constituted a violation 
of that right, and such violation is not harmless. See id. at 
240, 900 P.2d at 1307 ("Once a violation of the constitutional right to testify is established, the conviction must be vacated 
unless the State can prove that the violation was harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt."); State v. Hoang, 94 Hawai' i 271, 278, 12 
P.3d 371, 378 (App. 2000) (holding that, although "the court did make [defendant] aware of his right to testify[,]" a defense 
counsel's "interposition" that effectively "preempted a waiver 
directly from [defendant]" cannot constitute a knowing, 
voluntary, and intelligent waiver of the defendant's 
constitutional right to testify, and that such error is not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt). The State concedes Ruiz's 
conviction must be vacated in this case and makes no attempt to 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prove the violation of Ruiz's right to testify was harmless
 
beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Ruiz asserts there was insufficient evidence to support
 
her conviction because testimony of the two Complaining Witnesses
 
(CW 1 and CW 2) conflicted with each other.
 
The standard of review for sufficiency of the evidence is
well established; namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed
in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full
recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full
play to the right of the fact finder to determine
credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable
inferences of fact.
 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai' i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(block quote format changed) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai' i 
409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)). 
CW 2 testified that she was struck twice by Ruiz, and
 
that both strikes caused her pain. CW 1 testified that Ruiz
 
struck her twice, which caused her pain and her nose to bleed. 
Honolulu Police Department Officer Sandstrom's (Sandstrom)
 
testimony corroborated the injuries that CW 1 sustained. 
Sandstrom also observed injuries to the "right temple area" of CW
 
2's forehead, which corroborates CW 2's testimony with regard to
 
where she was struck with at least the first punch. There is
 
certainly substantial evidence in the record to support the trial
 
court’s conviction.
 
With regard to Ruiz's asserted defenses of self-defense
 
and protection of property, the district court found that there
 
was no defense of property in light of both CW 1 and CW 2's
 
testimony about what happened during the incident, and there "is
 
no issue of self defense inasmuch as the [trial] court f[ound]
 
that [Ruiz] was the aggressor." Additionally, the district court
 
found both CW 1 and CW 2's testimony credible, and their
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
testimonies did not reflect that Ruiz assaulted them because Ruiz
 
was trying to prevent them from taking her scarf, or, as
 
Sandstrom testified, that anyone intended to deprive Ruiz of her
 
scarf. See also generally Hawaii Revised Statutes § 703-306
 
(1993) ("Use of force for the protection of property.").
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment And/Or Order" entered March 23, 2012 in the District
 Court of the First Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded
 
for a new trial. Ruiz's other points on appeal are moot. 
' DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, August 14, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Glenn D. Choy
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Brandon H. Ito
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 