__________________ 
KEAHOLE DEFENSE COALITION, INC.,
a Hawai'i nonprofit corporation,
Participant and Appellant,
v.
 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Appellee,
and
 
HAWAII ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANY, INC.,
Applicant and Appellee,
and
 
DIVISION OF CONSUMER ADVOCACY, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND
CONSUMER AFFAIRS OF THE STATE OF HAWAII,
Appellee
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000067
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
In the Matter of the Application of
HAWAII ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANY, INC.
For Approval of Rate Increases and
Revised Rate Schedules and Rules
 
APPEAL FROM THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I
 
(DOCKET NO. 05-0315)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Intervenor-Appellant Keahole Defense Coalition, Inc.
 
(KDC) appeals from the "Order Approving Hawaii Electric Light
 
Company, Inc.'s Revised Tariff Sheets and Rate Schedules, Filed
 
on November 12, 2010, as Amended" entered by Appellee State of
 
Hawai'i Public Utilities Commission (PUC) on January 7, 2011   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(January 7, 2011 Order). PUC found that the revised tariff
 
sheets and rate schedules filed by Appellee Hawaii Electric Light
 
Company, Inc. (HELCO) on November 12, 2010 and amended on
 
November 24, 2010 complied with the tariff and rate changes
 
authorized by PUC in its October 28, 2010 Decision and Order
 
(Decision and Order).1 In the Decision and Order, PUC denied
 
HELCO's initial request to increase its revenues by $29,931,100,
 or 9.24%, over 2006 test year rates and instead, approved an
 
increase in revenues of $24,564,500, or 7.58%, over 2006 test
 
year rates.
 
On appeal, KDC contends PUC erred in granting the
 
January 7, 2011 Order affirming PUC's Decision and Order. KDC
 
contends PUC erred when it:
 (1) approved the April 5, 2007 and May 15, 2007
 
stipulated settlements (Stipulated Settlements) because PUC
 
effectively delegated its statutory responsibilities to HELCO and
 
the Division of Consumer Advocacy of the Department of Commerce
 
and Consumer Affairs (Consumer Advocate);
 
(2) found that combustion turbine unit 5 (CT-5) was
 
"used and useful" pursuant to HRS § 269-16 (2007 Repl.) because
 
PUC failed to render specific findings as to what part of CT-5's
 
capacity was "used and useful";
 
(3) allowed certain costs to be added to the base rate,
 
including (a) land use entitlement costs, (b) noise attenuation
 
costs, (c) Allowance For Funds Used During Construction (AFUDC)
 
costs, and (d) other miscellaneous costs; and
 
(4) found that HELCO acted "expeditiously" rather than
 
evaluating if HELCO acted "prudently."
 
1
 The January 7, 2011 Order is the final appealable order in this 
case. However, KDC may challenge the October 28, 2010 Decision and Order
because "An appeal from a final judgment brings up for review allinterlocutory orders not appealable directly as of right which deal withissues in the case." Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 396, 114 P.3d 892,
902 (2005). (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude KDC's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
Rate-making decisions by PUC are governed by HRS 
§ 269–16, which requires all rates and charges to be "just and 
reasonable." "The 'unjust and unreasonable' language does not 
represent a separate standard of review, but rather represents 
the application of the abuse of discretion standard to the 
statutory scheme underlying PUC's rate-making powers." Paul's 
Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 419, 91 P.3d 494, 
501 (2004). Although PUC decisions "are not presumptively 
valid[,] . . . an agency's discretionary determinations are 
entitled to deference, and an appellant has a high burden to 
surmount that deference[.]" Id. 
KDC argues that PUC erred in its Decision and Order
 
because it "improperly delegated its regulatory authority to the
 
parties" when it adopted the Stipulated Settlements between HELCO
 
and the Consumer Advocate. PUC's Decision and Order stated that
 
the "Parties' agreements set forth in the [Stipulated
 
Settlements] are reasonable, and are therefore approved." KDC
 
argues "PUC confined its role to reviewing and approving" the
 
Stipulated Settlements, thus improperly delegating its regulatory
 
authority and abusing its discretion "because the outcome below
 
is 'unreasonable and unjust.'"
 
PUC's reliance on the Stipulated Settlements is subject
 
to a degree of deference. "[T]he reasonableness of utility rates
 
is not determined by a fixed formula but is a fact question
 
requiring the exercise of sound discretion by [PUC]." In re
 
Hawaiian Tel. Co., 67 Haw. 370, 382, 689 P.2d 741, 749 (1984)
 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets in original
 
omitted). In the instant case, KDC argues that accepting the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stipulated Settlements was an improper method of determining the
 
outcome of a rate proceeding. However, 
[i]t is not theory but the impact of the rate order which
counts. If the total effect of the rate order cannot be
 said to be unjust and unreasonable, judicial inquiry . . .
is at an end. The fact that the method employed to reach
that result may contain infirmities is not then important.
 
In re Hawaiian Tel. Co., 67 Haw. at 38, 689 P.2d at 749 (quoting
 
Fed. Power Comm'n v. Hope Natural Gas Co., 320 U.S. 591, 602, 64
 
S. Ct. 281, 288 (1944)). PUC's reliance on the Stipulated
 
Settlements in issuing its Decision and Order is not enough to
 
show that the rate itself is unjust and unreasonable. 
KDC next argues that PUC did not make a legally
 
sufficient finding as to the "exact portion" of CT-5's capacity
 
that is "used and useful" pursuant to HRS § 269-16(b).
 
A public utility is limited to "a fair return on the 
property of the utility actually used or useful for public utility purposes." HRS § 269-16(b). "The determination of a proper rate base thus entails a valuation of the property of the utility devoted to public utility purposes on which the public utility is allowed to earn an appropriate rate of return." In re 
Puhi Sewer & Water Co., Inc. 83 Hawai' i 132, 137, 925 P.2d 302, 
307 (1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In the instant case, PUC clearly determined whether CT­
5 was used and useful. Specifically, PUC found:
 
The construction, completion, and commercial operation
of CT-4 and CT-5 is the result of HELCO's initial capacity
plans which estimated the need for additional increments of
generating capacity during the early 1990s due to forecasted
load growth and the planned retirements of older generating
units. The record reveals that CT-4 and CT-5: (1) are
completed and have been in commercial operation since June
2004; (2) provide HELCO with approximately 44 MWs of firm
 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
power capacity; (3) have increased HELCO's ability to
schedule crucial maintenance outages on other units, while
continuing to maintain the margin of load required for
reliable electric utility service; (4) have decreased
transmission system losses; (5) improved transmission
reliability on HELCO's grid; and (6) have fast-start
capabilities. Moreover, CT-5 is utilized to maintain an
adequate generating reserve margin for HELCO's system.
Furthermore, as represented by HELCO, CT-5 provides other
attendant benefits due to its location at Keahole, which
include:
 
. . . . (1) helping to mitigate potential
transmission line overloads in the event of
 outages of certain transmission lines; (2)
helping to reduce the need to install an
additional cross island transmission line to
 carry power from East Hawaii, where most of the
generating resources are located, to West
Hawaii, where about one-half of the electrical
power on the island is consumed; (3) reducing
fuel costs by reducing the amount of
transmission system losses and by providing more
efficient generation at Keahole that is used to
mitigate potential transmission line overloads;
(4) facilitating and reconductoring of certain
transmission lines; and (5) helping to
accommodate renewable energy on the system.
 
Upon thorough review, the [PUC] finds that HELCO has
met its burden of proving that CT-4 and CT-5 are used and
useful for public utility purposes.
 
(citation omitted).
 
PUC presented sufficient facts and findings to support
 
a determination that CT-4 and CT-5 were "used and useful" under
 
HRS § 269-16(b). 
KDC next argues that PUC erred in allowing increased
 
costs associated with HELCO's choice of land use entitlement to
 
be added to HELCO's base rate. KDC contends HELCO knowingly
 
assumed the risks of project delay associated with its choice of
 
applying for a Conservation District Use Application (CDUA)
 
instead of seeking a land reclassification and then a rezoning.
 
KDC argues that PUC applied a subjective, rather than objective,
 
standard to determine whether HELCO acted prudently. KDC
 
specifically challenges the following findings made by PUC in its
 
Decision and Order:
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
5. HELCO's decision to apply for a CDUA instead of
seeking a reclassification and then rezoning of the Keahole
land ("Reclassification/Rezoning"), as part of its efforts
to expedite the installation of CT-4 and CT-5, was
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances. As outlined
 in HELCO's Rebuttal Testimony, while both processes involve
discretionary actions by a decision-making body, the
Reclassification/Rezoning process involves sequential
processing and decision-making by two entities,
reclassification under the Land Use Commission ("LUC") and
then rezoning by the Hawaii County Council, as opposed to
one proceeding for the CDUA, under the BLNR. Moreover,
while a CDUA process is limited to a period of 180 days from
the date that a completed application is accepted, at that
time, reclassification by the LUC was not limited by any
mandatory action period; nor was time limitations placed on
the Hawaii County Council. Finally, while both processes
are subject to judicial review, the
Reclassification/Rezoning process is subject to judicial
review after each discretionary action is taken (LUC and
then Hawaii County Council), as opposed to once following
BLNR's action under the CDUA. 
6. HELCO appears to have had no control over, or the
ability to avoid or to fully predict the actions and
decisions of project opponents, permitting agencies, and the
courts, which had the ultimate effect of delaying HELCO's
efforts in timely installing and completing the construction
of both units for commercial operation. For instance, in
1994, HELCO had no ability to predict the Department of Land
and Natural Resources' difficulty in scheduling a contested
case hearing regarding HELCO's CDUA application.
Specifically, HELCO could not have predicted that the first
hearings officer assigned to the case would have excused
himself or that that [sic] the second hearings officer would
fall seriously ill." In addition, upon deciding to go
forward before the BLNR in May 1994, without a contested
case hearing, HELCO could not have predicted that the BLNR
would not be able to cast sufficient votes to approve or
deny HELCO's CDUA application, resulting in HELCO obtaining
a "default entitlement" by operation of law to use the
property as set forth in the application.
 
As stated earlier, rate-making decisions by PUC are
 
governed by HRS § 269–16, which requires that "[a]ll rates,
 
fares, charges, classifications, schedules, rules, and practices
 
made, charged, or observed by any public utility or by two or
 
more public utilities jointly shall be just and reasonable[.]" 
HRS § 269–16(a). "The 'unjust and unreasonable' language does
 
not represent a separate standard of review, but rather
 
represents the application of the abuse of discretion standard to
 
the statutory scheme underlying PUC's rate-making powers." 
Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc., 104 Hawai' i at 419, 91 P.3d at 501. 
6
  
    
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the instant case, PUC's finding that costs
 
associated with HELCO's CDUA could be factored into the rate base
 
was not an abuse of discretion. PUC stated that "HELCO's
 
decision to apply for a CDUA instead of seeking a
 
reclassification and then rezoning . . . was reasonable and
 
prudent under the circumstances." Because PUC applied the proper
 
objective standard and found that HELCO acted reasonably in
 
seeking a CDUA, PUC did not err in allowing land use entitlement
 
costs to be factored into HELCO's base rate. 
KDC similarly argues that construction costs associated
 
with bringing the Keahole Generating Plant into compliance with
 noise level regulations for the conservation district should not
 
be included as costs for installing CT-4 and CT-5. KDC's
 
argument that noise attenuation costs were unnecessarily incurred
 
by HELCO's decision to apply for a CDUA, instead of a
 
reclassification and rezoning, is an extension of its above-
analyzed argument over CDUA costs. KDC also contends that the
 
decision to build CT-4 and CT-5 in a conservation district was
 
imprudent.
 
PUC determined that "HELCO appears to have followed
 
applicable existing standards regarding noise limitations at the
 Keahole Generating Plant," and "KDC's general assertion that the
 
cost for CT-4 and CT-5 are imprudently incurred appears to have
 
little merit[.]" PUC acted within its discretion when it found
 
that HELCO's choice to pursue a CDUA was prudent. PUC weighed
 
the benefits of applying for a CDUA with the costs (including
 
noise attenuation costs) and found that such costs were
 
reasonable. Because HRS § 269-16 allows a utility to charge
 
rates and fees which are "just and reasonable", and because PUC
 
found that the costs associated with a CDUA, including noise
 
attenuation costs, were reasonable, PUC did not err in allowing
 
noise attenuation costs to be added to HELCO's rate base. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  When utilities are not allowed to earn a
return to cover their construction
financing costs during the construction
period, they are allowed to capitalize the
financing costs for future recovery
through an allowance for funds used during
construction (AFUDC).  This capitalized
cost, which is added to the basis of
utility plant under construction, will
ultimately be include in the rate base as
a component of plant in service, thereby
earning a return and being recovered
through depreciation allowances.  
In re Hawaiian Electric Co., Inc., Hawaii Electric Light Co.,
# Inc., and Maui Electric Co., Ltd, (Hawai i P.U.C. May 3, 2005)
(Decision and Order No. 21798) (quoting R. Hahne, G. Aliff, and
Deloitte & Touche LLP, Accounting for Public Uilities, § 4.04(4),
at 4-16 (2004)).
8   KDC next challenges PUC's decision to include the
accrual of AFUDC in the rate base increase.2  KDC argues that PUC
erred in allowing costs stemming from "constant interruptions
that prevented the project from moving on a 'planned progressive
basis'" to be factored into AFUDC costs because such costs "were
all due to the lack of 'prudence' on the part of . . . HELCO's
managers[.]"  As in the previously-discussed arguments, KDC
asserts that these delays arose out of "HELCO's choice of land
entitlement[.]"
In its Decision and Order, PUC made the following
finding regarding AFUDC costs:
8.  HELCO correctly applied established accounting
principles and its own policies in its calculation of AFUDC. 
Although unusual, the accrual of AFUDC for CT-4 and CT-5
appears consistent with prior commission proceedings
involving capital improvement projects.  Moreover, on
December 1, 1998, HELCO voluntarily ceased the accrual of
AFUDC for both units. HELCO represents that this decision:
(A) was based on the length of the delays and uncertainty
over potential further delays due to the November 1998 U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Appeals
Board's remand of the PSD permitting proceeding to DOH; and
(B) has resulted in its shareholders bearing the entire
carrying costs of the construction work in progress from
2 PUC has previously held that: NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
December 1998 until the in-service dates of both units
 
(estimated $52.6 million in foregone AFUDC).
 
"Although the actual mechanics of computing AFUDC may be
 
challenged, there is little debate over the propriety of
 
including AFUDC as a component of construct costs[.]" In re
 
Hawaiian Electric Co., Inc., Hawaii Electric Light Co., Inc., and
 Maui Electric Co., Ltd,(Hawai i P.U.C. May 3, 2005) (Decision and
 
Order No. 21798) (quoting R. Hahne, G. Aliff, and Deloitte &
 
Touche LLP, Accounting for Public Uilities, § 4.04(4), at 4-16
 
(2004)).
 
PUC's finding that "HELCO correctly applied established
 
accounting principles" in its calculation of AFUDC is supported
 
by HELCO's testimony that "AFUDC should begin when expenditures
 
commence on a project, in accordance with the long-standing
 
practice in Hawaii[,]" and "delays beyond the control of
 
management are considered to be reasonable." Because the method
 
used in determining AFUDC costs was in accord with generally
 
accepted accounting practices, and because PUC found that the
 
delays in construction were not the fault of HELCO, PUC did not
 
err in allowing AFUDC costs to be factored into HELCO's base
 
rate.
 
KDC further contends that PUC erred when it "disposed
 
of . . . KDC's remaining points and dismissed the same as having
 
'little merit.'" KDC alleges that PUC did not address KDC's
 
arguments concerning an air permit and the availability of other
 
options to provide additional capacity. This argument appears to
 
challenge the following finding made by PUC in its Decision and
 
Order:
 
KDC's general assertion that the cost for CT-4 and CT-5 are
imprudently incurred appears to have little merit, and its
recommendation to disallow certain costs associated with the
 units including costs related to permitting/legal, noise
mitigation, and AFUDC is unsupported by the record. In
 response to KDC's cost concerns, HELCO asserts that all
costs would have been different had a different expansion
option been selected, and that this is not a basis for
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disallowing the costs associated with the selected expansion
option. The [PUC] agrees.
 
KDC's argument that PUC erred in not considering other
 
costs is erroneous. The above cited finding by PUC indicates
 
that PUC addressed all cost concerns raised by KDC. Furthermore,
 
KDC fails to cite to any authority that would require PUC to
 
discuss what other options were available to provide additional
 
capacity in this proceeding. As such, PUC did not err in finding
 
that the cost items complained of by KDC are meritless.
 
KDC argues that "PUC's finding that . . . HELCO acted
 
'expeditiously' is not relevant to any of the issues raised
 
below" and the proper question is whether HELCO acted prudently.
 
It is true that PUC found HELCO acted expeditiously, but PUC also
 
made the requisite determination that HELCO acted prudently. PUC
 
determined that "KDC's general assertion that the cost for CT-4
 
and CT-5 are imprudently incurred appears to have little merit,
 
and its recommendation to disallow certain costs associated with
 
the units including costs related to permitting/legal, noise
 
mitigation, and AFUDC is unsupported by the record."
 
Even if PUC was not required to make a finding of
 
whether HELCO acted expeditiously, PUC made specific findings as
 
to the prudence of HELCO's actions. Thus, PUC did not err in
 
finding that HELCO acted expeditiously. 
KDC presented five remaining points on appeal not
 
directly addressed above. Each of these points simply re-allege
 
or reiterate the points already discussed above. For example, in
 
Point Seven, KDC argues that PUC erred in finding that the
 
$12.898 million write-down in costs was reasonable. KDC argues
 
this finding was erroneous "in light of . . . PUC's errors
 
described in Points One, Two, Three, Four, Five and Six[.]"
 
Likewise, KDC argues in Points Eight through Ten and Point Twelve
 
that PUC erred "in light of" the points already discussed. 
Points on appeal Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten, and Twelve are premised
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on a conclusion that PUC erred in the other points addressed
 
above. Because we conclude PUC did not err in any of the points
 
on appeal already analyzed, we conclude KDC's remaining points on
 
appeal are also without merit.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Approving Hawaii 
Electric Light Company, Inc.'s Revised Tariff Sheets and Rate Schedules, Filed on November 12, 2010, as Amended" entered by 
State of Hawai' i Public Utilities Commission on January 7, 2011 
is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 21, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Michael J. Matsukawa 
for Participant and AppellantKeahole Defense Coalition, Inc. 
Presiding Judge 
Thomas W. Williams, Jr.Peter Y. Kikuta Lisa A. Bail Abigail M. HoldenAdam K. Robinson (Goodsill Anderson Quinn &Stifel) for Applicant and AppelleeHawaii Electric LightCompany, Inc. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
Jon S. Itomura 
Lane H. Tsuchiyamafor Appellee Division of ConsumerDepartment of Commerce andConsumer Affairs. 
11
 