NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000357 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I , Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
ERNEST J. TAVARES, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(Case Nos. 1PC131000445, 1PC131000874, 1PC131001281,
1PC141000052, and 1PC151000282) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ernest J. Tavares (Tavares
) pled no 
contest and was convicted, in five separate cases, of offenses 
including unauthorized possession of confidential personal information, fraudulent use of a credit card, credit card theft, second degree identity theft, third degree identity theft, second degree theft, third degree theft, second degree assault, third degree promoting a dangerous drug, and unlawful use of drug paraphernalia. The cases were consolidated for sentencing. Tavares appeals from each of the judgments of conviction and sentence, all entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1 
on March 6, 2018. He contends that the circuit court erred: 
a. by denying his motion for disqualification or 
recusal of the sentencing judge; 
b. by denying his oral motion for withdrawal of his 
no contest plea; 
c. by sentencing him to consecutive terms of 
imprisonment in violation of Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000); 
1 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
d. by abusing its discretion in sentencing him to 
consecutive terms of imprisonment; and 
e. by denying him effective representation of 
counsel. 
For the reasons explained below, we affirm each of the 
judgments without prejudice to Tavares's right to seek relief 
pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP
). 
I. 
During 2013 Tavares was charged in three separate cases 
with unauthorized possession of confidential personal informa-tion, credit card theft, second degree assault, second degree identity theft, fraudulent use of a credit card, and second degree theft (collectively, the 2013 Cases
). In 2014 Tavares was 
charged with fraudulent use of a credit card, unauthorized possession of confidential personal information, promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree, and unlawful use of drug paraphernalia (the 2014 Case). On August 29, 2014, Tavares 
changed his plea in each of the four cases to no contest. After 
questioning Tavares on the record and advising him of the potential mandatory minimum terms of incarceration he faced as a repeat offender, the circuit court
2 found that Tavares knowingly, 
voluntarily, and intelligently changed his pleas to no contest with an understanding of the nature of the charges. The court accepted the no contest pleas and adjudicated Tavares guilty as charged in each case. 
Sentencing was set for November 24, 2014. The 
sentencing hearing was continued to December 15, 2014, and again to January 15, 2015, so that Tavares could try to get admitted to a substance abuse treatment facility. On January 15, 2015, the sentencing hearing was continued because Tavares had filed a complaint with the Office of Disciplinary Counsel. 
Meanwhile, on February 24, 2015, Tavares was charged 
with new counts of unauthorized possession of confidential 
2 The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
personal information, third degree identity theft, and third 
degree theft (the 2015 Case). On August 6, 2015, Tavares 
appeared in circuit court3 for a change of plea in the 2015 Case 
and sentencing in the 2014 Case and the 2013 Cases. After 
questioning Tavares on the record and advising him of the potential terms of incarceration he faced, the court found that Tavares freely, voluntarily, and knowingly changed his plea to no-contest with an understanding of the nature of the charges. The court accepted the no contest plea and adjudicated Tavares guilty as charged. Tavares's counsel informed the court that Tavares had been accepted to Sand Island Treatment Center for substance abuse treatment, but he was on a six-month wait list. The court set a combined sentencing date in all of the pending cases for February 8, 2016. 
On September 3, 2015, Tavares moved for supervised 
release into the residential substance abuse rehabilitation program at Sand Island Treatment Center after being informed that a space was available for him. The circuit court granted the motion. Tavares was released from O# ahu Community Correctional 
Center and reported to Sand Island Treatment Center on September 15, 2015. However, on October 31, 2015, he left the Sand Island Treatment Center without authorization and never returned. 
Bench warrants were issued in each of the pending 
cases on November 9, 2015. Tavares was arrested on January 15, 2016. 
On December 21, 2017, Tavares's pending circuit court 
cases were transferred to Judge Todd W. Eddins. On February 12, 2018, Tavares filed a motion to disqualify or recuse Judge Eddins from each of the cases. The motions were heard on March 6, 2018, and were denied. 
During the same hearing, Judge Eddins 
determined that Tavares was subject to repeat offender sentencing in the 2014 Case because of a 2004 conviction for second degree sexual assault and attempted second degree sexual assault, but that Tavares was not subject to repeat offender sentencing in the 2013 Cases or in the 2015 Case because the State had not filed 
3 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
repeat offender motions in those cases. Tavares's public 
defender then orally moved to withdraw Tavares's no contest pleas. Judge Eddins denied the motion and proceeded with the sentencing phase. After hearing testimony from the deputy prosecuting attorney who handled the sex assault case against Tavares, Judge Eddins found that repeat offender sentencing was applicable. Tavares's public defender then moved to withdraw as counsel. The motion was denied. Tavares gave a presentence allocution. Judge Eddins then imposed the following sentences: 
Case 13-0445: Five years in each of Counts I and II, to
run concurrent in all counts and with any othersentence currently being served; 
Case 13-0874: Five years to run concurrent with any
other sentence currently being served; 
Case 13-1281: Ten years in Count I and five years in
each of Counts II, III, and IV, to run concurrent inall counts and with any other sentence currently beingserved; 
Case 14-0052: Five years in each of Counts I-VII with a
mandatory minimum of one year and eight months as arepeat offender, to run concurrent in all counts andconsecutive to the sentences in the 2013 Cases and the 2015 Case; and 
Case 15-0282: Five years in each of Counts I and II,
and one year in Count III, to run concurrent in allcounts and with any other sentence currently beingserved. 
This appeal followed. 
II. 
A. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Tavares's motion to disqualify or recuse. 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to disqualify or 
recuse is reviewed for abuse of discretion. State v. Ross, 89 
Hawai
#i 371, 375-76, 974 P.2d 11, 15-16 (1998). Tavares's motion 
was filed pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS
) § 601-7 
(2016), which provides: 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) No person shall sit as a judge in any case in which: 
(1) The judge's relative by affinity or consanguinity
within the third degree is counsel, or interestedeither as a plaintiff or defendant, or in the issue ofwhich the judge has, either directly or through suchrelative, a more than de minimis pecuniary interest;or 
(2) The judge has been of counsel or on an appeal from anydecision or judgment rendered by the judge; 
provided that no interests held by mutual or common funds, theinvestment or divestment of which are not subject to the directionof the judge, shall be considered pecuniary interests for purposesof this section; and after full disclosure on the record, partiesmay waive disqualification due to any pecuniary interest. 
(b) Whenever a party to any suit, action, or proceeding,
civil or criminal, makes and files an affidavit that the judgebefore whom the action or proceeding is to be tried or heard has apersonal bias or prejudice either against the party or in favor ofany opposite party to the suit, the judge shall be disqualifiedfrom proceeding therein. Every such affidavit shall state thefacts and the reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice existsand shall be filed before the trial or hearing of the action orproceeding, or good cause shall be shown for the failure to fileit within such time. No party shall be entitled in any case tofile more than one affidavit; and no affidavit shall be filedunless accompanied by a certificate of counsel of record that theaffidavit is made in good faith. Any judge may disqualify oneselfby filing with the clerk of the court of which the judge is ajudge a certificate that the judge deems oneself unable for anyreason to preside with absolute impartiality in the pending suitor action. 
Hawai# i courts apply a two-part analysis in disqualification or 
recusal cases. First, the court must determine whether the 
alleged bias is covered by HRS § 601-7. Ross, 89 Hawai# i at 377, 
974 P.2d at 17. The statute requires the movant to file an affidavit stating "the facts and the reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice exists[.]" In this case, Tavares failed to file the required affidavit. He concedes that "the specific instances requiring recusal set forth in HRS § 601-7 do not apply" in this case. 
Second, 
If the alleged bias falls outside of the provisions of HRS
§ 601–7, the court may then turn, if appropriate, to thenotions of due process described in Brown in conducting thebroader inquiry of whether circumstances fairly give rise toan appearance of impropriety and reasonably cast suspicionon the judge's impartiality. 
Ross, 89 Hawai# i at 377, 974 P.2d at 17 (cleaned up) (quoting 
State v. Brown, 70 Haw. 459, 467 n.3, 776 P.2d 1182, 1188 n.3 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1989)). In Brown, the defendant was charged with criminal 
contempt of court after she failed to appear for her trial. The judge who tried Brown's criminal contempt proceeding was the same judge who had charged Brown with contempt. The Hawai# i Supreme 
Court stated: 
When criminal contempt is charged, it signifies that the
accuser believes the defendant's conduct was contemptuous.A procedure whereby the trial, if any, upon the charge shallbe by the judge who lodged it, without a jury, denies theaccused due process; it offers a temptation to the judge toforget that proof beyond a reasonable doubt shall berequired for conviction. Due process, in the circumstances,called for a trial before someone other than the accuser. 
Brown, 70 Haw. at 467, 776 P.2d at 1187–88 (cleaned up) 
(citations and footnote omitted). In this case, Tavares's counsel argued: 
[T]he gist of the basis for the motion is back when -- in
the '90s when you were a public defender . . . yourepresented a defendant by the name of Christopher Aki.Mr. Aki was housed with my client. They had an adverserelationship. They had things going on during the time thathe was pending trial and after he was convicted. And myclient was told that his attorney knew about the situation,and he feels that based on his relationship with Mr. Akithat he risks you being impartial. And so we're requestingthe recusal. 
After hearing additional argument, Judge Eddins stated: 
I have had no contact with the defendant I previouslyrepresented 20-plus years ago. I do not know Mr. Tavares. I do not know who Mr. Aki may or may not have had disagree-ments with. . . . I don't even know what my former clientsare doing, much less who they may or may not havedisagreements with 20-plus years ago. 
The motion to disqualify was denied. There is nothing in the 
record to suggest that Judge Eddins' impartiality might reasonably be questioned.  Judge Eddins did not abuse his 
discretion in denying Tavares's motion to disqualify or recuse. 4
4 Rule 2.11 of the Hawai #i Revised Code of Judicial Conduct (eff.
2014) provides, in relevant part: 
[A] judge shall disqualify or recuse himself or herself in
any proceeding in which the judge's impartiality might reasonably
be questioned, including but not limited to the followingcircumstances: 
(1) The judge has a personal bias or prejudice for or
against a party or a party's lawyer, or personal knowledge offacts that are in dispute in the proceeding. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in 
denying Tavares's oral motion to withdraw his nocontest plea. 
The denial of a motion to withdraw a plea of no contest 
prior to the imposition of sentence is reviewed for abuse of 
discretion. State v. Krstoth, 138 Hawai# i 268, 273, 378 P.3d 
984, 989 (2016). When a motion to withdraw a plea of no contest is presented before the imposition of sentence, the motion should be granted if the defendant has presented a fair and just reason for the request and the State has not relied upon the guilty plea to its substantial prejudice. 
Id. at 274, 378 P.3d at 990. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has recognized "two fundamen-
tal bases of demonstrating 'fair and just reasons' for granting withdrawal of a plea: 
(1) the defendant did not knowingly, intel-
ligently or voluntarily waive [their] rights;[ ] or (2) changed 
circumstances or new information justify withdrawal of the plea." Krstoth, 138 
Hawai# i at 274, 378 P.3d at 990 (footnote added). 
On appeal Tavares argues the former — that he did not knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily change his pleas to no contest. He claims that he pled no contest because he wanted to enter a substance abuse treatment facility and his former defense attorney incorrectly told him that "he could not enter substance abuse treatment at Sand Island Treatment Center if he did not plead to the charges." 5
[A] defendant is entitled to withdraw [their] no contest
plea before imposition of sentence, premised upon [havingnot knowingly, intelligently or voluntarily waived theirright to trial], where: (1) the defendant has not enteredthe plea knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily; (2)there has been no undue delay in moving to withdraw theplea; and 
(3) the prosecution has not otherwise met its
burden of establishing that it relied on the plea to itssubstantial prejudice. Absent any of these factors, thetrial court may, without abusing its discretion, refuse topermit the defendant to withdraw the plea. 
Merino, 81 Hawai# i at 224, 915 P.2d at 698 (cleaned up). Tavares 
changed his plea in each of the 2013 Cases and in the 2014 Case 
5 "[I]f the accused, with full knowledge of the charge against
[them] and of [their] rights and the consequences of a plea of guilty or nocontest, enters such a plea understandingly and voluntarily, the court may,without abusing its discretion, refuse to permit the defendant to withdraw theplea." State v. Merino, 81 Hawai #i 198, 224, 915 P.2d 672, 698 (1996)
(original brackets omitted). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on August 29, 2014. One year later, on August 6, 2015, Tavares 
changed his plea in the 2015 Case. Tavares entered Sand Island Treatment Center on September 15, 2015, left without authorization on October 31, 2015, and never returned. When Tavares orally moved to withdraw his pleas during his March 6, 2018 sentencing hearing, the circuit court asked: 
THE COURT: Why wasn't there a written motion filed? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, it is my belief that
defendant thought that you would be recusing yourself and
that we wouldn't get to this point. 
THE COURT: Sentencing has been pending for four
years. Why wasn't . . . there a written motion to withdrawthe change of plea filed at some point in these near fouryears pending sentencing? 
. . . . 
THE COURT:
 Your request . . . to orally withdraw
Mr. Tavares's pleas is untimely and is denied. 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
Tavares's motion because of undue delay. Merino, 81 Hawai# i at 
224, 915 P.2d at 698. 
C. The sentence for consecutive terms of imprisonment
did not violate Apprendi. 
In Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), the 
Supreme Court held that "[o]ther than the fact of a prior 
conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. at 490. Tavares concedes that both the United States Supreme Court and the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court have held that Apprendi does not apply 
to a consecutive term sentencing determination. Oregon v. Ice, 555 U.S. 160 (2009); State v. Kahapea, 111 
Hawai# i 267, 141 P.3d 
440 (2006). Tavares's third point of error lacks merit. 
D. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
sentencing Tavares to consecutive terms ofimprisonment. 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion inimposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review forsentencing or resentencing matters is whether the courtcommitted plain and manifest abuse of discretion in itsdecision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuseof discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it mustappear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reasonor disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to thesubstantial detriment to the litigant. 
State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai# i 321, 328, 389 P.3d 916, 923 (2016) 
(citation omitted). 
A court has discretion to order multiple terms of 
imprisonment to run concurrently or consecutively. HRS § 706-
668.5(1) (Supp. 2017) . 
To determine whether to impose 
concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment, the court must consider the factors set forth in HRS § 706-606 (2014), which include: 6
(1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and the 
history and characteristics of the defendant; 
(2) The need for the sentence imposed: 
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to providejust punishment for the offense; 
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminalconduct; 
(c) To protect the public from further crimesof the defendant; and 
(d) To provide the defendant with needededucational or vocational training,medical care, or other correctionaltreatment in the most effective manner; 
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and 
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparitiesamong defendants with similar records who have beenfound guilty of similar conduct. 
"[T]he weight to be given the factors set forth in HRS § 706–606 
in imposing sentence is a matter generally left to the discretion of the sentencing court, taking into consideration the circum-stances of each case." Barrios, 139 Hawai# i at 328, 389 P.3d at 
923. A court imposing consecutive rather than concurrent sen-
6 HRS § 706-668.5(1) states: 
(1) If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a
defendant, whether at the same time or at different times,
or if a term of imprisonment is imposed on a defendant whois already subject to an unexpired term of imprisonment, theterms may run concurrently or consecutively. Multiple termsof imprisonment run concurrently unless the court orders orthe statute mandates that the terms run consecutively. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tences "must state on the record at the time of sentencing the 
reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence." Id. at 333, 389 
P.3d at 928 (underscore omitted). The requirement serves a dual purpose: 
First, reasons identify the facts or circumstances within
the range of statutory factors that a court considersimportant in determining that a consecutive sentence isappropriate. An express statement, which evinces not merelyconsideration of the factors, but recites the specificcircumstances that led the court to impose sentencesconsecutively in a particular case, provides a meaningfulrationale to the defendant, the victim, and the public. 
Second, reasons provide the conclusions drawn by the court
from consideration of all the facts that pertain to thestatutory factors. It is vital, for example, for thedefendant to be specifically informed that the court hasconcluded that [they are] dangerous to the safety of thepublic, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending, orthat rehabilitation appears unlikely due to [their] lack ofmotivation and a failure to demonstrate any interest intreatment, or that the multiplicity of offenses and victimsand the impact upon the victims' lives warrant imposition ofa consecutive term. Hence, reasons confirm for thedefendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court,that the decision to impose consecutive sentences wasdeliberate, rational, and fair. 
Id. at 335-36, 389 P.3d at 930-31 (quoting State v. Hussein, 122 
Hawai# i 495, 509-10, 229 P.3d 313, 327-28 (2010)). 
After hearing Tavares's presentence allocution, the 
circuit court gave an extensive explanation for its sentencing decision: 
Okay, so I have reviewed the records and files in this
case and reviewed the 706-606 factors. . . . 
. . . . 
When I look at the nature and circumstances of these 
offenses, particularly in light of the identity theft and
possession of confidential personal information cases, itdoes suggest to me, as I read the presentence report, a highdegree of planning, a high degree of sophistication. It involves deceptive conduct that occurred over a prolongedperiod of time. 
There were countless episodes and acts of
deceit. There was manipulation and harm to many victimsoften on a daily basis. There was significant hardship tothese victims. Their identities were taken. Their privacywas violated. Their lives were disrupted. The factual context of these crimes was substantially greater, in myview, than is typical for these types of offenses. There was significant economic loss to the victims, and there wasactually substantial time loss for those individuals aswell. 
When I look at the 706-606(1), history and
characteristics of the defendant factors, I see an extensivecriminal history. I see case 00-2193, a crime of violence,robbery in the second degree, in which a woman was walking 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
home and Mr. Tavares violently snatched her purse. I see 
case 01-1360, the attempted sexual assault in the seconddegree cases and the sexual assault cases that have resultedin triggering the repeat offender sentencing, and I see anindividual who served as a baby-sitter and then sexuallyassaulted several young children. Victims were as young asone and a half years old. 
Mr. Tavares received a ten-year term for that case.
He received a ten-year term for the robbery in the seconddegree case. His maximum term expired on November 30th,2011 after a long history of in-house infractions, and thenhe was released at the tail end of 2011. Within a short period of time, he was engaged in the criminality that hasbrought him to sentencing today. 
I look at the 706-668.5 statute in determining whether
the court shall run sentences consecutively or concurrently,and what that does is it refers me back to the 706-606 factors. I'm cognitive of Barrios and Hussein which areconsecutive sentencing cases, and the decision to imposeconsecutive sentencing must be deliberate, rational, andfair. I take that into consideration. 
The 706-606 factors,
as I've mentioned, suggest an extensive broad-basedcriminality by Mr. Tavares, not only including financialcrimes, identity theft crimes, but sex assaults, robbery,and now, one of the cases, an assault in the second degreecase. 
I believe and find that Mr. Tavares poses an
unacceptable risk of reoffending. Based on his crimes, he'sa danger to the safety of the public. 
He doesn't have 
respect for the law or for anyone based on the numerouspossession of confidential personal information cases aswell as his extensive criminality. 
When I looked at the traditional cornerstones of 
sentencing embodied in 706-606, subsection (2), when we lookat sentence imposed to reflect the seriousness of theoffense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide justpunishment for the law, the retributive goals of sentencingare served, in my view, by a consecutive term ofimprisonment. A period of incarceration of that type ofnature, of a consecutive type, pursuant to 706-668.5, wouldsatisfy the retributive goals and 706-606, subsection (2),in my view. Also, I find that to afford adequate deterrenceto criminal conduct -- and that's looking forward, it'sforward-looking aim -- of future crime reduction orprevention, a consecutive sentence satisfies that prong. A consecutive sentence also satisfies the prong of protectingthe public from further crimes of this defendant. In other words, that's the incapacitation prong to the traditionalaims of sentencing. 
When we look at subsection (d), to provide the
defendant with needed educational or vocational training,clearly he wasn't subject to a probation term. So when we have talked over these past four years about getting intoprograms, in my view, that was just simply kicking the candown the road because he was facing an indeterminate term ofincarceration based on being a repeat offender. He can receive adequate educational/vocational training within theconfines of our prison system. And, in fact, he wasreceiving treatment at one point at Kulani until there wereinfractions incurred. 
I look at the kinds of sentences available. I look to 
the need to avoid unwarranted disparities in sentencing 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendants of similar records. I think I'd be hard-pressed
to find an individual with a similar record of Mr. Tavares. 
I look at the presentence reports and especially
focusing on Ms. Vincent's case in 14-52 where a individualnamed Thomas Marino in Attachment C to the presentencereport basically says that by virtue of Mr. Tavares'sactions, his credit was affected. His life became, quote, atrain wreck. Mr. Tavares opened various accounts in hisname, applied for personal loans, even attempted torefinance a condo on Mr. Marino's good name. 
His credit was 
affected. 
Ryan Stevenson is also involved in 14-52.
Mr. Stevenson is involved in Count 6. Mr. Marino was referenced in Count 5 as far as the unauthorized possessionof confidential personal information in 14-52. Mr. Stevenson indicated that his dream vacation to Hawaii was ruined. He saved for years to come to Hawaii. His wallet,his phone, his Christmas gifts were stolen. It was a livingnightmare for Mr. Stevenson. He had to prepare over 300documents relating to canceling his accounts as a result ofMr. Tavares's actions. His credit was ruined. 
There is also another individual involved in case 
14-52, Mr. Ortiz. He was also from Georgia. 
His vacation 
was also ruined. That is just 14-52. 
15-282 was a case also involving Mr. Marino's credit
card. In fact, in particular, was a Barclays Bank ofDelaware card in which various transactions occurred with respect to Mr. Marino. Mr. Tavares was apprehended in 14-52while at Home Depot with one of the credit cards, and thensubsequently, there was a indication that the names of thesethree individuals, Mr. Marino, Mr. Stevenson, and Mr. Ortiz,were having their mail delivered to an Olokele Avenueaddress, and this is where numerous items were found. 
There is a utter lack of respect for the law that Mr.
Tavares has evinced over the course of his lifetime really.After he served his ten-year term of imprisonment, heengaged in these acts of criminality very soon after. The seriousness of what occurred at least to Mr. Marino and Mr. Stevenson is huge. Their lives were totally disruptedby the actions of Mr. Tavares. 
[The circuit court imposes sentences in the 2013 Cases
and in the 2015 Case.] 
All of the terms of imprisonment I just referenced,
specifically, 13-445, 13-874, 13-1281, and 15-282, will runconcurrent with each other, and the counts within each ofthose cases will run concurrent with each other. 
Case 14-52, this is the case in which, in Count 5, Mr.
Marino had his confidential personal information hijacked byMr. Tavares. Based on my aforementioned remarks withrespect to the 706-606 factors, the nature and circumstancesof the offense, the history and characteristics of thedefendant, the consecutive sentencing case law, 706-668.5, Ibelieve I stated my reasons as to the wisdom of imposingconsecutive sentence. 
In Count 5 of 14-52, that count, as
well as Counts 1, 2, 5, 7, and Counts 3 and 4 -- those areall five-year terms -- each of those will run consecutive --
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE DEFENDANT: Holy shit. 
THE COURT: -- to 15-282, 13-1281, 13-874, and 13-445. Count 5, the case involving Mr. Marino in which his
life was a train wreck, I find that if I had simply ran
Count 5 concurrent with each of those other cases, it wouldnot reflect the traditional aims of sentencing. It would not reflect the 706-606 factors as I have detailed, and itwould not reflect the history and characteristics ofMr. Tavares. It would not provide just punishment. In effect, it would be no sentence whatsoever. Mr. Marino deserves justice in this case, and he will get it throughthe consecutive sentencing in his count with respect to theother matters. 
With respect to Count 6 in case 14-52 -- and let me
just step back so that it's clear. 
In case 14-52, the court
has found that in Counts 1, 2, 5, 7, 3, and 4, those countsare running consecutive to the other cases, which leavesCount 6. And in Count 5 with Mr. Marino, that does have aone-year, eight-month mandatory minimum. Count 6 involves Mr. Stevenson, and Mr. Stevenson was in a similar situationas Mr. Marino. 
And I've talked about Mr. Stevenson's 
situation. I considered running Mr. Stevenson's case alsoconsecutive, in other words, doing two consecutive terms inthis case. I'm not going to do that. Mr. Stevenson also deserves justice, just like Mr. Marino, and justice will beserved by having Count 6 also run consecutive to 13-1281,13-874, 13-445 and 15-282. And I have singled out Counts 5and 6, but they all go hand in hand in case 14-52. Counts 5 and 6 struck me particularly based on the victims' -- theimpact of the victims in this case. 
So case 14-52, the five-year terms of imprisonment
will run concurrently with themselves, but they will runconsecutively to 15-282, 13-1281, 13-874, and 13-445. And again, it is based on the 706-606 factors that I detailed inmy initial remarks, including, of course, the history andcharacteristics of this defendant and the nature of the offenses in addition to the traditional cornerstones and aims of sentencing. 
(Underscoring added.) We hold that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion in imposing consecutive terms of impris-onment, and that in doing so the circuit court complied with the procedural requirements of Barrios and Hussein.
7 
7 We recognize that the circuit court did not mention specific facts
pertaining to counts 3 and 4 in the 2014 Case (third degree promoting a
dangerous drug and unlawful use of drug paraphernalia) but the omission, if itwas error, was harmless because Tavares's total term of imprisonment (tenyears) would have been the same even if the sentence for counts 3 and 4 in the2014 Case were to run concurrently with the sentences in the 2013 Cases andthe 2015 Case. See United States v. Henry, 325 F.3d 93, 102 (2d Cir. 2003)(concluding that imposition of sentence 31 months above statutory maximum washarmless error because defendant's total term of imprisonment would have beenthe same even absent the error); see also HRPP Rule 52(a) (eff. 1977) ("Anyerror, defect, irregularity or variance which does not affect substantialrights shall be disregarded."). 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
E. We decline to address Tavares's claim of 
ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Tavares contends that he was deprived of his 
constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel, but he 
did not seek relief from the circuit court under HRPP Rule 40. Although we may entertain ineffective assistance of counsel claims for the first time on appeal, State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592 (1993), HRPP Rule 40(f) (eff. 2006) requires that written notice of a petition seeking relief based on ineffective assistance of counsel be served "upon the counsel whose assistance is alleged to have been ineffective and said counsel shall have an opportunity to be heard." The record does not indicate that counsel whom Tavares claims was ineffective were served with any documents in this appeal. 
III. 
Based upon the foregoing, we affirm each of the 
judgments of conviction and sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on March 6, 2018, without prejudice to Tavares's right to seek relief pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawai# i 
Rules of Penal Procedure. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 29, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge Dwight K. Nadamoto,
Chad Kumagai,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
14 