NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000109
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
CALVIN K. KANOA, JR., Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC CR. NO. 15-1-0020)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai #i (State) appeals
from the February 11, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
and Order Granting Motion to Dismiss Count II for Violation of
[Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 5 and HRPP Rule 10
(Dismissal Order) entered by the Family Court of the First
Circuit (Family Court).1  The Family Court dismissed Count 2 of
the Complaint which accused Defendant-Appellee Calvin K. Kanoa,
Jr. (Kanoa) of the crime of Abuse of Family or Household Member
(AFHM) in violation Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1)
and (5) (2014)2 (Misdemeanor Count).
1The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided. 
2At the time of the events charged in the Complaint, HRS § 709-
906(1) and (5)  provided:
Abuse of family or household members; penalty.  (1) It shall
be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to
physically abuse a family or household member[.]
. . . .
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, the State contends that the Family Court
erred by dismissing the Misdemeanor Count because no judicial
determination of probable cause (JDPC) was made for this count.
After a careful review of the record on appeal and the
relevant legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the
issue raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we
resolve the State's point on appeal as follows, vacate the
Dismissal Order and remand for further proceedings.
The State does not contest any of the findings of fact
made by the Family Court in its Dismissal Order.  Therefore, we
are bound by those findings.  Cabral v. State , 128 Hawai #i
128, 284 P.3d 221, No. 28669 2012 WL 3791744 at *2 (App.
Aug. 31, 2012)(mem.) quoting Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd.  
of Water Supply , 97 Hawai #i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002).  
As found, Kanoa was arrested, without warrant, for AFHM as a
felony under HRS §709-906((1) and (9) (2014) and as a misdemeanor
under HRS § 709-906 (1) and (5), on April 28, 2015.3  On April
30, 2015, a JDPC was issued for the felony, based on the
affidavit of a Honolulu Police Department police officer.4  Kanoa
was charged by complaint on May 5, 2015 for the felony charge in
the Family Court and a preliminary hearing was held on June 3,
2015 during which evidence supporting only the felony charge was
2(...continued)
     (5)  Abuse of a family or household member and refusal
to comply with the lawful order of a police officer under
subsection (4) are misdemeanors[.]
3HRS § 709-906(1) and (9) provided at the time of these events, in
relevant part:
Abuse of family or household members; penalty.  (1) It shall
be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to
physically abuse a family or household member[.]
. . . .
(9) Where physical abuse occurs in the presence of any
family or household member who is less than fourteen years
of age, abuse of a family or household member is a class C
felony.
4We note that court documents indicate Kanoa was released from
police custody on April 30, 2015.  Kanoa asserts in his answering brief that
he was released on bail before the forty-eight hours had expired.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
presented.5  On June 4, 2015, the State filed a Complaint in the
Family Court of the First Circuit, charging AFHM as a felony in
Count 1 and the Misdemeanor Count in Count 2.6  The two counts
alleged two different complaining witnesses although they alleged
events occurring on the same date.  Kanoa was arraigned on this
two-count complaint on June 15, 2015, in the Family Court.7  The
State agrees that a JDPC was not obtained for the Misdemeanor
Count.
The Family Court's Dismissal Order was based on HRPP
Rules 5(a)(2)8 and 109.  HRPP Rule 5(a)(2) requires that a JDPC
be obtained no later than forty-eight hours after a warrantless
5Although not specifically found by the Family Court, it was
determined at the preliminary hearing, the Honorable Trish K. Morikawa
presiding, that probable cause existed for the felony charge and the charge
was committed to the Family Court.
6The State later filed an Amended Complaint, substituting initials
for the name of the minor-complaining witness in the Misdemeanor Count.
7The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
8HRPP Rule 5(a)(2) provides:
(2) PROBABLE CAUSE DETERMINATION UPON ARREST WITHOUT A
WARRANT. As soon as practicable, and , Rule 45
notwithstanding, not later than 48 hours after the
warrantless arrest of a person held in custody, a
district judge shall determine whether there was
probable cause for the arrest.  No judicial
determination of probable cause shall be made unless
there is before the judge, at the minimum, an
affidavit or declaration of the arresting officer or
other person making the arrest, setting forth the
specific facts to find probable cause to believe that
an offense has been committed and that the arrested
person has committed it.  If probable cause is found
as aforesaid, an appropriate order shall be filed with
the court as soon as practicable.  If probable cause
is not found, or a proceeding to determine probable
cause is not held within the time period provided by
this subsection, the arrested person shall be ordered
released and discharged from custody.
(Emphasis added.)
9HRPP Rule 10(a), Arraignment in circuit court, provides,
[a] defendant who has been held by district court to
answer in circuit court shall be arraigned in circuit court
within 14 days after the district court's oral order of
commitment following (i) arraignment and plea, where the
defendant elected jury trial or did not waive the right to
jury trial or (ii) initial appearance or preliminary
hearing, whichever occurs last.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
arrest.  However, the rule does not require that probable cause
be determined for every charge that is associated with that
arrest.  Here, probable cause for the arrest for AFHM as a felony
was timely made.  In addition, HRPP Rule 5(a)(2) provides the
remedy for a violation:  release and discharge from custody. 
Therefore, HRPP Rule 5(a)(2) does not support the dismissal of
the Misdemeanor Count.10
Kanoa argues that the Family Court's dismissal should
be affirmed on the alternative basis that it was supported by
HRPP Rule 5(b).11  However, this rule does not require that any
offense "other than a felony" must be charged by complaint in the
district court even when later joined with a felony.
10Kanoa agrees that a JDPC was not required for the Misdemeanor
Count.
11HRPP Rule 5(b) provides, in relevant part:
(b)  Offenses Other Than Felony.
(1) ARRAIGNMENT. In the district court, if the offense
charged against the defendant is other than a felony, the
complaint shall be filed and proceedings shall be had in
accordance with this section (b). A copy of the complaint,
including any affidavits in support thereof, and a copy of
the appropriate order, if any, shall be furnished to the
defendant. If a defendant is issued a citation in lieu of
physical arrest pursuant to Section 803-6(b) of the Hawai #i
Revised Statutes and summoned to be orally charged as
authorized by Rule 7(a) of these rules, a copy of the
citation shall be filed and proceedings shall be had in
accordance with this section (b). When the offense is
charged by complaint, arraignment shall be in open court or
by video conference when permitted by Rule 43. The
arraignment shall consist of the reading of the complaint to
the defendant and calling upon the defendant to plead
thereto. When the offense is charged by a citation and the
defendant is summoned to be orally charged, arraignment
shall be in open court or by video conference when permitted
by Rule 43. The arraignment shall consist of a recitation of
the essential facts constituting the offense charged to the
defendant and calling upon the defendant to plead thereto.
The defendant may waive the reading of the complaint or the
recitation of the essential facts constituting the offense
charged at arraignment, provided that, in any case where a
defendant is summoned to be orally charged by a citation as
authorized by Rule 7(a), the recitation of the essential
facts constituting the offense charged shall be made prior
to commencement of trial or entry of a guilty or no contest
plea. In addition to the requirements of Rule 10(e), the
court shall, in appropriate cases, inform the defendant of
the right to jury trial in the circuit court and that the
defendant may elect to be tried without a jury in the
district court.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As to the Family Court's HRPP Rule 10 basis, it is
undisputed that Kanoa was arraigned in the Family Court division
of the circuit court, which is governed by HRPP Rule 10(a). 
Although the Family Court cited to this rule in its Dismissal
Order, it did not specify in which respect the rule was
violated.12  The Family Court's minutes reflect that at the
arraignment and plea proceeding, with counsel present, Kanoa was
given an advisement regarding immigration consequences; given
discovery, received a copy of the charge, waived reading of the
charge, and entered a not guilty plea.  Therefore, HRPP Rule 10
does not support the Dismissal Order.
For the foregoing reasons, the February 11, 2016
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Motion
to Dismiss Count II for Violation of HRPP Rule 5 and HRPP Rule 10
Dismissal Order entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit
is vacated and this case is remanded for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 24, 2017.
On the briefs:
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee.,
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
12Kanoa also argues that HRPP Rule 10 was violated but, beyond the
blanket statement that "the State failed to comply with the requirements of
that rule[,]" does not argue exactly which requirements were not met.
5