NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000016
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
FC-S NO. 13-00110
 
IN THE INTEREST OF TA, KA, AS

 
and
 
FC-S NO. 14-00216
 
IN THE INTEREST OF CC
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 13-00110 and FC-S NO. 14-00216 )

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother (Mother) appeals from the Orders
 
Concerning Child Protective Act, filed on November 24, 2015, in
 
FC-S No. 13-00110, and the Orders Concerning Child Protective
 Act, filed on November 24, 2015, in FC-S No. 14-00216
 (collectively, Orders), all filed in the Family Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (Family Court).  The Orders imposed family
 
supervision over Mother's four children, including (at the
 
1
 The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant time) two infants, a toddler, and a young school-aged
 
child. 
Mother claims that the Family Court erred by finding
 
that the childrens' physical or psychological health or welfare
 had been harmed or was subject to threatened harm by the acts or
 omissions of the childrens' family sufficient to warrant family
 supervision. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's point of error as follows: 
On appeal, Mother objects to several Findings of Fact
 
and argues that the Family Court erroneously found that Mother
 could be an unidentified perpetrator of her child's broken leg.
 
When a petition for supervision is filed, the Family
 
Court must conduct a return hearing and decide whether the
 child's physical or psychological health or welfare has been
 harmed or is subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions
 of the child's family, whether the child should be placed in
 foster custody or under family supervision, and what services
 should be provided to the child's parents. Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 587A-28(a) and (c) (Supp. 2015). 
"'Preponderance of the evidence' shall be the standard of proof
 
required in any proceeding, unless otherwise specified." HRS
 ยง 587A-4 (Supp. 2015). "Preponderance of the evidence means the
 degree of proof, which as a whole, convinces the trier of fact
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the fact sought to be proved is more probable than not." 
Id.
 
By a preponderance of the evidence, Mother could not be
 
ruled out as the perpetrator of harm to her child, AS. It is 
undisputed that AS was eighteen-weeks old, non-verbal, and
 nonambulatory at the time that he suffered a spiral fracture of
 his left leg. Dr. Kevin Kon (Dr. Kon), a pediatric radiologist,
 
concluded from an x-ray taken on April 22, 2013 that his best
 
estimate was that the injury occurred between zero and eleven
 days prior, but it could have been up to fourteen days prior,
 based on medical studies because there was no sign of bone
 healing. Dr. Kon also stated that it would be very difficult for
 a child that could not walk to cause an injury like that to
 himself. 
Dr. Kayal Natarajan (Dr. Natarajan), a pediatrician and
 
child abuse expert, concluded that given the child's medical
 history, lack of explanation as to how the injury occurred, and
 lack of medical reason for the injury, that child abuse was the
 cause of a broken leg to AS. She opined that the child could not
 have injured himself due to the significant amount of force
 required to cause such an injury. Thus, by a preponderance of
 the evidence, AS's injury was inflicted upon him by someone else,
 anywhere from zero to fourteen days prior. 
Both Mother and Father denied causing AS's broken leg. 
AS stayed with Father from April 11, 2013, to April 21, 2013. 
Father stated that he did not notice anything unusual about AS on
 Sunday, April 21, 2013, and in fact, AS kicked his left leg
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
repeatedly while Father played with him. At approximately noon
 
on Sunday, Father transferred AS to Mother's custody. Mother
 stated that AS was cranky and fussy on the way home, but he was
 not screaming. She thought it was due to being sick or
 asthmatic. Mother noted that nothing out of the ordinary
 happened throughout the night or the next morning. 
However, the next day, Monday, April 22, 2013, at about
 
noon, AS's caregiver texted Mother stating that she thought
 something was wrong with AS's leg. Later that day, AS was
 dropped off at his maternal grandmother's home at about 5:30 p.m.
 and the grandmother noticed that AS had swelling in his left leg.
 When Mother arrived later at the grandmother's home, she touched
 AS's left leg and he began to cry hysterically. AS was taken to
 the hospital by Mother that evening at about 7:00 p.m. Mother
 contends that, based on the reported swelling of AS's leg, Dr.
 Natarajan stated that the leg was broken prior to AS being
 returned to Mother. However, Dr. Natarajan's testimony was
 equivocal; she testified that she could not give a determination
 of whether it was more likely than not that AS's injury occurred
 before or after AS was picked up from Father.
 
In addition, Mother testified that she did not think
 
that AS was injured when he was returned to her care on Sunday at
 noon because AS did not display any indication that his left leg
 was in pain from being broken. Dr. Kon concluded that AS's leg
 could have been broken between zero and up to fourteen days prior
 to being examined on Monday evening. Thus, Mother could not be
 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ruled out as the perpetrator of harm to AS because his injury
 
could have occurred when in Mother's care. 
"'Family supervision' means the legal status in which a
 
child's legal custodian is willing and able, with the assistance
 of a service plan, to provide the child with a safe family home." 
HRS ยง 587A-4. "'Family home' means the home of the child's legal
 custodian." Id. Alisa Imakyure, a Department of Human Services
 
(DHS) social worker, testified that Mother completed a
 
substantial amount of services and was able to demonstrate
 
progress, had a support system, and had a transition and respite
 plan. Thus, DHS requested family supervision instead of foster
 custody of the children. However, DHS also concluded that due to
 the infancy of Mother's youngest child in the home, that child
 was particularly vulnerable.  Thus, family supervision over all
 
four children residing with Mother was warranted. We conclude
 
that the Family Court did not clearly err in its Findings of Fact
 and did not abuse its discretion in ordering family supervision
 in this case.
 
Therefore, the Family Court's November 24, 2015 Orders
 
are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 26, 2016. 
On the briefs: Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Mother-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier,Jonathan M. Fujiyama,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5 