NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001305
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ELESTHER CALIPJO, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JACK PURDY, REGAL CAPITAL CORPORATION,
REGAL CAPITAL COMPANY, LLC, Defendants-Appellants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0003)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendants-Appellants Jack Purdy ( Purdy), Regal Capital
Corporation ( Regal Corp. ), and Regal Capital Company, LLC ( Regal
LLC) (collectively, Appellants ) appeal from the Final Judgment
(Final Judgment ) filed on July 18, 2014, in the Circuit Court of
the Fifth Circuit1 (Circuit Court).  
After a jury trial, pursuant to a special verdict, the
Circuit Court entered judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee
Elesther Calipjo (Calipjo ) as follows:  (1) with respect to Count
3 of the First Amended Complaint ( Complaint ), $1.00 against Purdy
and $1.00 against Regal Corp. for breach of the Alii Ranch
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Estates Reservation DROA ( Alii DROA ); (2) with respect to Count 4
of the Complaint, $1.00 against Purdy and $1.00 against Regal
Corp. for breach of the Moana Ranch Estates Reservation DROA
(Moana DROA ); (3) with respect to Count 11 of the Complaint,
$1.00 against Purdy and $1.00 against Regal Corp. for breach of
the covenant of good faith and fair dealing in the Alii DROA, and
$1.00 against Purdy and $1.00 against Regal Corp. for breach of
the covenant of good faith and fair dealing in the Moana DROA;
and (4) with respect to Count 10 of the Complaint, treble damages
totaling $166,865.00 against Purdy,2 $166,875.00 against Regal
Corp., and $7,500.00 against Regal LLC for unfair and deceptive
trade practices.3  The jury also found that Purdy is the alter
ego of both Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.  After trial, the Circuit
Court denied Regal LLC's request for attorneys' fees. 
On appeal, Appellants contend that the Circuit Court
erred in:  (1) denying Appellants' motion for judgment as a
matter of law after Calipjo rested his case; (2) denying
Appellants' renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law after
they rested their case; (3) denying Appellants' post-trial motion
for judgment as a matter of law; (4) concluding that Regal LLC
2It appears, based on the special verdict form, that this amount
should have been $166,875.00.  However, in light of our disposition concerning
this award, any clerical error in this amount is moot.
3Pursuant to an earlier summary judgment order, judgment was
entered in favor of Purdy, Regal Corp., and Regal LLC, and against Calipjo, on
Counts 1 (Civil Conspiracy), 2 (Alter Ego), 5 (Fraud and/or Negligent
Misrepresentation), 6 (Tortious Interference with Prospective Economic
Advantage), 7 (Tortious Interference with Contractual Relationship), 8
(Tortious Interference with Business Relationship), 9 (Intentional
Interference with Economic Relations), and 12 (Intentional Infliction of
Emotional Distress).  Calipjo did not seek appellate relief from the entry of
partial summary judgment.  Calipjo withdrew Counts 13 (Negligent Infliction of
Emotional Distress) and 14 (Attorneys' Fees and Costs).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was not the prevailing party against Calipjo when it denied Regal
LLC's motion for attorneys' fees and costs; and (5) denying Regal
LLC's motion for an award of attorneys' fees and costs.  
Appellants ask this court to vacate the jury verdict, enter
judgment in favor of Appellants and against Calipjo on all
remaining claims, and remand this matter to the trial court for
consideration of Regal LLC's request for attorney's fees.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Appellants' points of error as follows:
Appellants orally moved for judgment as a matter of law
on all claims against them, as well as on Calipjo's request for a
finding that Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal
LLC, on October 2, 2013, after the close of Calipjo's case-in-
chief.  The motion was denied.  Appellants renewed their oral
motion on October 3, 2013, after they rested their case.  The
motion was again denied.  After the entry of the Final Judgment,
on July 28, 2014, Purdy and Regal LLC filed a renewed motion for
judgment as a matter of law.  In the post-judgment motion, Purdy
and Regal LLC argued principally that they were not parties to
either DROA, they did not breach either DROA, and they had no
contact with Calipjo at any time relevant to his claims.  This
motion was denied at a hearing held on September 18, 2014.  
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held that a trial court's
ruling on a motion for judgment as a matter of law is reviewed de
novo.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A trial court's ruling on a motion for judgment as a
matter of law is reviewed de novo.  A motion for judgment as
a matter of law may be granted only when after disregarding
conflicting evidence, giving to the non-moving party's
evidence all the value to which it is legally entitled, and
indulging every legitimate inference which may be drawn from
the evidence in the non-moving party's favor, it can be said
that there is no evidence to support a jury verdict in his
or her favor.
Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai #i 253, 261, 259 P.3d
569, 577 (2011) (citations, quotations marks, and brackets
omitted).
(1) We first examine Appellants' challenge to the
jury's finding that Purdy was the alter ego of both Regal Corp.
and Regal LLC.4  The supreme court has explained the alter ego
doctrine as follows:
It is well settled that establishing a corporation to
limit personal liability is proper and is, alone, an
insufficient basis for the application of the doctrines of
alter ego or piercing the corporate veil. See 1 Fletcher
Cyclopedia
, supra, § 41.20, at 596; see generally Henry
Waterhouse Trust Co. v. Home Ins. Co. of Hawai i #, 27 Haw.
572, 581-82 (1923).
The common purpose of statutes providing limited
shareholder liability is to offer a valuable incentive
to business investment.  Although the greatest
judicial deference normally is accorded to the
separate corporate entity, this entity is still a
fiction.  Thus, when particular circumstances
merit-e.g., when the incentive value of limited
liability is outweighed by the competing value of
basic fairness to parties dealing with the
corporation-courts may look past a corporation's
formal existence to hold shareholders or other
controlling individuals liable for "corporate"
obligations.  Labadie Coal Co. v. Black, 672 F.2d 92,
96 (D.C. Cir. 1982) (citing Dodd, The Evolution of
Limited Liability in American Industry, 61 Harv. L.
Rev. 1351 (1948)).  When a corporation is the mere
instrumentality or business conduit of another
corporation or person, the corporate form may be
disregarded.
The alter ego doctrine has been adopted by the
courts in cases where the corporate entity has been
used as a subterfuge and to observe it would work an
injustice.  The rationale behind the theory is that,
if the shareholders or the corporations themselves
4We note that the jury was not asked to, and therefore did not,
determine whether Regal Corp. was the alter ego of Regal LLC (or vice versa).
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
disregard the proper formalities of a corporation,
then the law will do likewise as necessary to protect
individual and corporate creditors.  The rule is
designed to give incentives to those using the
corporate form to obey the state's laws fully by
maintaining the formalities and the legal separateness
of the corporation.  Thus, those who fail to maintain
the corporate formalities cannot expect the state to
grant them the limited liability that flows from the
corporate form.  While the instrumentality doctrine
has its origin in the context of parent-subsidiary
relationships, it has been suggested that a similar
analysis is applicable to an individual shareholder's
relationship with a corporation.
A claim based on the alter ego theory is not in
itself a claim for substantive relief, but rather to
disregard the corporation as a distinct defendant is
procedural.  A finding of fact of alter ego, standing
alone, creates no cause of action.  It merely
furnishes a means for a complainant to reach a second
corporation or individual upon a cause of action that
otherwise would have existed only against the first
corporation.  An attempt to pierce the corporate veil
is a means of imposing liability on an underlying
cause of action, such as a tort or breach of contract. 
The alter ego doctrine is thus remedial, not
defensive, in nature.  One who seeks to disregard the
corporate veil must show that the corporate form has
been abused to the injury of a third person.
Courts apply the alter ego doctrine with great
caution and reluctance.  In fact, many courts require
exceptional circumstances before disregarding the
corporate form.
1 Fletcher Cyclopedia, supra, § 41.10, at 568-581
(emphasis added).
Robert's Hawaii Sch. Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91
Hawai#i 224, 240-41, 982 P.2d 853, 869-70 (1999) (footnote
omitted; emphasis added), superseded by statute on other grounds
as noted in  Davis v. Four Seasons Hotel Ltd. , 122 Hawai #i 423,
427 n.9, 228 P.3d 303, 307 n.9 (2010).
The supreme court further noted in Robert's  that
"Hawai#i courts have been reluctant to disregard the corporate
entity."  Id. at 241 n.12, 982 P.2d at 870 n.12 (citations
omitted).  Earlier, in Chung v. Animal Clinic, Inc. , 63 Haw. 642,
645, 636 P.2d 721, 724 (1981), the supreme court adopted the line
of authorities holding:  "Even where all the stock is owned by a
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sole shareholder, there seems no adequate reason to depart from
the general rule that the corporation and its shareholders are to
be treated as distinct legal persons."  (Citations omitted).  The
court further elucidated:
Under Hawaii law, there is no specified or minimum number of
stockholders that is required for valid corporate existence.
The fact that a sole or principal stockholder dominates a
corporation violates no statutory requirement, is not
opposed to public policy, and constitutes no fraud on
creditors.  Since we decide that exclusive stock ownership
and control of corporations is not solely determinative on
the issue of whether we should disregard the corporate
entity, we must include other facts in our analysis.
Id.
In Robert's, the court identified over two dozen
factors that courts have weighed in determining whether the alter
ego doctrine applies and stated:
Generally speaking, a corporation will be deemed the
alter ego of another "where recognition of the corporate
fiction would bring about injustice and inequity or when
there is evidence that the corporate fiction has been used
to perpetrate a fraud or defeat a rightful claim." 
Before a corporation's acts and obligations can be
legally recognized as those of a particular person, and vice
versa, it must be made to appear that [1] the corporation is
not only influenced and governed by that person, but that
there is such a unity of interest . . . that the
individuality, or separateness, of such person and
corporation has ceased, and [2] that the facts are such that
an adherence to the fiction of the separate existence of the
corporation would, under the particular circumstances,
sanction a fraud or promote injustice.
Robert's, 91 Hawai# i at 241-42, 982 P.2d at 870-71 (citations
omitted).
We have carefully examined the testimony and evidence
presented to the jury, giving Calipjo's evidence all the value to
which it is legally entitled, and indulging every legitimate
inference which may be drawn from the evidence in Calipjo's
favor.  As Calipjo argues on appeal, Purdy was the sole
shareholder, director, and officer of Regal Corp.  While this
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence is a factor for consideration, it is not sufficient to
establish that Purdy is the alter ego of Regal Corp., even in
light of Purdy's heavy burden on a motion for judgment as a
matter of law.  There is no evidence that Regal Corp. failed to
comply with applicable law or that the corporate form was used to
abuse a third party.
Calipjo further argues that there was evidence that
Regal Corp. was undercapitalized.  "Undercapitalization" is
defined as "[t]he financial condition of a firm that does not
have enough capital to carry on its business."  B LACK'S LAW
DICTIONARY  251 (10th ed. 2014).  Here, the evidence that Calipjo
points to is Purdy's testimony concerning whether Regal LLC paid
money to Regal Corp., as payment for the Alii and Moana
properties.  Purdy testified that, although he did not recall
specifically how much Regal LLC paid Regal Corp. for the Alii and
Moana properties, he believed that the amounts were equivalent to
the amounts Regal Corp. had invested in the properties.  He
explained that the consideration between the entities was done
through a book entry, for tax purposes, and that the transfer was
related to changes in the law that would allow the properties to
be set up as agricultural condominiums for other than livestock
and farming purposes.  This testimony does not evidence or infer
any particular level of capitalization of Regal Corp., let alone
undercapitalization such that it would bring about injustice and
inequity not to find Purdy to be the alter ego of Regal Corp. 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Calipjo next argues that Purdy is the sole member and
manager of Regal LLC, which he asserts was formed in 2003,5 and
that certain testimony evidences that Regal LLC is
undercapitalized.  Again, Calipjo fails to point to any evidence
of disregard for legal formalities in the establishment of the
LLC and the cited testimony has nothing to do with the
capitalization of this entity.  
Next, Calipjo again points to the testimony regarding
Purdy causing the transfer of the Alii and Moana properties from
Regal Corp. to Regal LLC through a book entry, rather than
writing a check, asserting that Purdy did so after Calipjo
refused to execute escrow cancellation forms.  However, the
uncontroverted evidence, including Calipjo's own testimony, is
that Purdy did so in his role as the owner and controlling
shareholder of Regal Corp.  This case does not involve findings,
or even claims, of fraudulent transfer with respect to these
transfers.6  There is no evidence that these transfers rendered
Regal Corp. unable to satisfy its corporate debts and
obligations.
Finally, Calipjo points to his own testimony that, more
than six years after the cancellation of the DROAs, after this
lawsuit had been pending for over five years, Purdy said to
Calipjo, outside the Kauai courthouse:  "He doesn't intend to
5The testimony cited by Calipjo does not reference any dates.
6Although Calipjo asserts on appeal that Regal Corp. defrauded him,
he did not present a fraud or fraudulent inducement claim to the jury, there
was no jury instruction or finding regarding fraud, and summary judgment was
entered against Calipjo on his fraud claim.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sell me the property in the first place anyway."  Again, even
viewing this statement in the light most favorable to Calipjo,
with every legitimate inference, this statement does not support
a finding that "recognition of the corporate fiction would bring
about injustice and inequity or . . . that the corporate fiction
has been used to perpetrate a fraud or defeat a rightful claim." 
Robert's, 91 Hawai# i at 241-42, 982 P.2d at 870-71 (citations
omitted).  There is simply no evidence in the record that the
corporate form has been abused to cause injury to Calipjo.
Thus, we conclude that there was no evidence to support
the jury's verdict that Purdy was the alter ego of Regal Corp.
and Regal LLC.
(2) Next, we address Appellants' contentions on appeal
that the Circuit Court erred in denying the motions for judgment
as a matter of law as to the breach of contract and breach of the
covenant of good faith and fair dealing claims against Purdy.7  
Appellants argue that the DROA agreements were entered
into between Calipjo and Regal Corp., Purdy was not a party to
either DROA, and therefore, Purdy cannot be held liable for
breaching the express or implied terms of those agreements.  We
agree.  See , e.g., Young v. Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai #i 403,
428, 198 P.3d 666, 691 (2008) (absent a contract between the
parties, a claim for breach of an implied covenant of good faith
and fair dealing must fail).  Calipjo's contract claims against
Purdy are entirely dependent on the assertion that Purdy is the
7The jury did not find Regal LLC liable as to breach of contract or
breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing as to either DROA.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
alter ego of Regal Corp. and, therefore, Purdy is personally
liable for all corporate debts of Regal Corp.  As we have
concluded that the Circuit Court erred in failing to grant
Appellants' motion for judgment as a matter of law as to the
finding that Purdy is the alter ego of Regal Corp. and Regal LLC,
we further conclude that the Circuit Court erred in failing to
grant Appellants' motion for judgment as a matter of law in favor
of Purdy (only) as to Counts 3, 4, and 11, the breach of contract
and breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing claims.
Appellants further argue that Regal Corp. was entitled
to judgment as a matter of law on the contract claims because the
DROAs, as modified by the seller's agent and thereafter executed
by Calipjo, expressly permitted Regal Corp. to terminate both
DROA's at its discretion.  Calipjo does not deny that the express
terms of the DROAs, as entered into by Calipjo, allowed Regal
Corp. to cancel the agreements.  Calipjo argues instead that
Regal Corp. was not entitled to judgment as a matter of law
because, contrary to what Calipjo was told by Regal Corp.'s agent
prior to signing off on the modification which allowed the seller
– as well as the buyer – to cancel the DROA agreements, the
subject condominium statute did not require that both parties be
allowed to cancel the agreement.  Calipjo makes no other argument
and presented no other evidence to the jury of a breach of either
the Alii DROA or the Moana DROA.  Thus, even giving Calipjo's
evidence the value to which he was entitled, we conclude that
Calipjo's claims that Regal Corp. breached the terms of the DROA
agreements must fail and the Circuit Court erred when it failed
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to enter judgment as a matter of law in favor of Regal Corp. on
Counts 3 and 4.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has recognized that "in every
contract, there is an implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing.  The obligation to deal in good faith is now a
well-established principle of contract law.  Restatement (Second)
Contracts § 205 (1979) provides that '[e]very contract imposes
upon each party a duty of good faith and fair dealing in its
performance and its enforcement.'"  Best Place, Inc. v. Penn
America Ins. Co., 82 Hawai# i 120, 124, 920 P.2d 334, 338 (1996). 
The implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing mandates that
"neither party will do anything that will deprive the other of
the benefits of the agreement."  Id. at 1224, 920 P.2d at 338
(citations omitted).  "[G]ood faith performance emphasizes
faithfulness to an agreed common purpose and consistency with the
justified expectations of the other party."  Joy A. McElroy,
M.D., Inc. v. Maryl Grp., Inc., 107 Hawai #i 423, 436, 114 P.3d
929, 942 (App. 2005) (citation omitted).  
Here, the jury heard testimony that when Calipjo signed
off on the "or seller" modification and was told to backdate his
approval, he asked Regal Corp.'s agent, "Will this change my
position because you are the seller or buyer?"  According to
Calipjo's testimony, the agent responded, "No.  I just – this is
just a mere technicality with the CPR laws that they're doing." 
Only after Calipjo entered into agreements with third parties to
resell the Alii and Moana properties after his deals with Regal
Corp. closed, Calipjo received cancellation letters, signed by
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Jack Purdy for Regal Corp., stating that due to recent changes in
the law and substantial increases in the real estate market, he
was electing to cancel the DROA agreements.  Regal Corp.'s agent
also told Calipjo that because the real estate value had gone up,
he had to cancel the deal.  Calipjo further testified that Purdy
later told him that he never intended to sell him the properties. 
In light of this evidence, as well as all of the evidence
presented to the jury and the reasonable inferences therefrom, we
cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred when it denied
Appellants' motions for judgment as a matter of law in favor of
Regal Corp. on the breach of the covenant of good faith and fair
dealing claims in Count 11.
(3) Appellants argue on appeal that the Circuit Court
erred in denying the motions for judgment as a matter of law as
to Calipjo's unfair and deceptive trade practices claims.  Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 480-2(a) (2008) provides, in relevant
part, that "unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct
of any trade or commerce are unlawful."  "[A] practice is unfair
when it offends established public policy and when the practice
is immoral, unethical, oppressive, unscrupulous or substantially
injurious to consumers."  Balthazar v. Verizon Haw., Inc. , 109
Hawai#i 69, 77, 123 P.3d 194, 202 (2005) (citation and quotation
marks omitted).  "[A] deceptive act or practice is (1) a
representation, omission, or practice that (2) is likely to
mislead consumers acting reasonably under the circumstances where
(3) the representation, omission, or practice is material." 
Courbat v. Dahana Ranch, Inc. , 111 Hawai #i 254, 262, 141 P.3d
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
427, 435 (2006) (citation, quotation marks, and brackets
omitted).  "A representation, omission, or practice is considered
material if it involves information that is important to
consumers and, hence, likely to affect their choice of, or
conduct regarding, a product."  Id.  (citation and quotation marks
omitted).  This inquiry is objective - the test is "whether the
act or omission is likely to mislead consumers."  Id. (citation
and quotation marks).
Here, the evidence at trial included, inter alia, that
when Calipjo first signed the Alii DROA and Moana DROA, they
stated, "Buyer may terminate this reservation at anytime prior to
becoming a binding contract by written notice to seller." 
However, the next day Regal Corp.'s agent called Calipjo and told
him that they had to add the "or Seller" wording "because of the
CPR law."  Calipjo reportedly asked the agent whether the
modification would change his position in buying the property and
was told that it would not.  On that basis, Calipjo initialed the
change, and at the agent's direction, backdated it to the date
the agreement was first signed.  Calipjo testified, "I went back
to sign this thing, and he told me to backdate it.  Backdate this
to 12 because of the CPR law, the State of Hawaii."  Calipjo
continued, "And I asked him, 'Will this change my position
because you are the seller or buyer?'  And he said, 'No.  I just
– this is just a mere technicality with the CPR laws that they're
doing.'"   Later, Regal Corp. cancelled the DROAs and stated that
it was exercising its contractual right to cancel.  Shortly after
Calipjo indicated he would not sign off on the cancellation, the
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Alii and Moana properties were transferred to Regal LLC.  Several
years later, Purdy reportedly told Calipjo that he never intended
to sell the property to Calipjo in the first place.  It appears
that, weighing this evidence, as well as all of the other
evidence presented at trial, the jury found, inter alia , that
Regal's acts or practices in its dealings with Calipjo were
unfair or deceptive, as those terms were defined in the court's
instructions to the jury.
Giving Calipjo's evidence all of the value to which he
is legally entitled, and disregarding conflicting and
inconsistent evidence or inferences, we conclude that sufficient
evidence supports the jury's verdict with respect to Calipjo's
unfair or deceptive trade practices claims against Regal Corp. 
However, Calipjo identifies no evidence of a practice
engaged in by Regal LLC that offended established public policy
or that was immoral, unethical, oppressive, unscrupulous or
substantially injurious to Calipjo and we find none.  Likewise,
the record in this case is devoid of any evidence of a material
representation, omission, or practice by Regal LLC that was
likely to mislead consumers acting reasonably under the
circumstances.  The jury did not find that Regal LLC was the
alter ego of Regal Corp.  Therefore, there is no evidence
supporting the jury's verdict against Regal LLC with respect to
Calipjo's unfair or deceptive trade practices claim.
With respect to Purdy, Calipjo cites HRS § 480-17(a)
(2008), which provides:  "Whenever a corporation violates any of
the penal provisions  of this chapter, the violation shall be
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deemed to be also that of the individual directors, officers, or
agents of the corporation who have authorized, ordered, or done
any of the acts constituting in whole or in part the violation." 
(Emphasis added).  However, Regal Corp.'s unfair or deceptive
acts, as found by the jury, were unlawful under HRS § 480-2 and
subjected Regal Corp. to civil liability, but they did not invoke
the penal provisions of HRS chapter 480.  See, e.g. , HRS §§ 480-
15.1 & 480-16.  Thus, HRS § 480-17 does not apply to deem that
Regal Corp.'s violations are also the violations of Purdy on the
grounds that he authorized or ordered them.
Accordingly, we conclude the Circuit Court did not err
in refusing to enter judgment as a matter of law as to the unfair
or deceptive trade practices claims against Regal Corp., but the
court erred in refusing to enter judgment as a matter of law as
to the unfair or deceptive trade practices claims against Regal
LLC and Purdy.
(4) Finally, Appellants contend that the Circuit Court
should have ruled that Regal LLC was a prevailing party.  Calipjo
argues in response that there can only be one prevailing party
and the Circuit Court properly determined that Calipjo was the
prevailing party because the jury found in favor of Calipjo
against all defendants. This court has previously held that
"[i]n multiple parties cases, . . . a party may be a loser as to
one party and a winner as to another[.]"  Rosa v. Johnston , 3
Haw. App. 420, 431, 651 P.2d 1228, 1236 (1982) (citation
omitted).  Particularly in light of our ruling that the Circuit
Court erred in denying judgment as a matter of law on the claims
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
against Regal LLC, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
its determination that Regal LLC was not a prevailing party.  
HRS § 607-14 (2016) provides, in relevant part, that
"there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid by the
losing party and to be included in the sum for which execution
may issue, a fee that the court determines to be reasonable[.]" 
"The reasonableness of an expenditure of attorneys' fees is a
matter within the discretion of the circuit court."  Finley v.
Home Ins. Co., 90 Hawai# i 25, 39, 975 P.2d 1145, 1159 (1998). 
Accordingly, we remand the issue of Regal LLC's attorneys' fees
to the Circuit Court to determine, in its discretion, the
reasonableness of Regal LLC's requested attorneys' fees. 
For the reasons set forth above, the Circuit Court's
July 18, 2014 Final Judgment is affirmed in part, reversed in
part, and vacated in part as follows:  (1) with respect to Count
3 of the Complaint, we reverse the judgment in favor of Calipjo
and against Purdy and Regal Corp. for breach of the Alii DROA;
(2) with respect to Count 4 of the Complaint, we reverse the
judgment in favor of Calipjo and against Purdy and Regal Corp.
for breach of the Moana DROA; (3) with respect to Count 11 of the
Complaint, we reverse the judgment in favor of Calipjo and
against Purdy for breach of the covenant of good faith and fair
dealing in both the Alii DROA and Moana DROA, and we affirm the
judgment in favor of Calipjo and against Regal Corp. for breach
of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing in both the Alii
DROA and the Moana DROA; and (4) with respect to Count 10 of the
Complaint (unfair and deceptive trade practices), we reverse the
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
treble damages totaling $166,865.00 entered in favor of Calipjo
and against Purdy, we affirm the treble damages totaling
$166,875.00 entered in favor of Calipjo and against Regal Corp.,
and we reverse the treble damages totaling $7,500.00 entered in
favor of Calipjo and against Regal LLC.  We also reverse the
Final Judgment's determination that Purdy is the alter ego of
both Regal Corp. and Regal LLC.  The Circuit Court's denial of
Regal LLC's request for attorneys' fees is vacated and remanded
for further proceedings.  The Circuit Court's Final Judgment is
hereby affirmed in all other respects.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 22, 2017.
On the briefs:
Richard E. Wilson,
for Defendants-Appellants.Chief Judge
Donna E. Richards,
Mark R. Zenger,
(Richards & Zenger),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
17