NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000157 07-MAY-2026 08:04 AM Dkt. 63 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000157 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I
, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
INDIRA D. LOPEZ RUIZ, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-23-0003793) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Indira D. Lopez Ruiz (Lopez Ruiz) 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order 
(Judgment) entered on February 22, 2024, in the District Court of 
the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).  
Following a bench trial, Lopez Ruiz was convicted of Disorderly 
Conduct, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 711-
1101(1)(b) and (3).2/ The charge stemmed from an incident in 1/ 
1/ The Honorable Thomas A.K. Haia presided. 
2/ HRS § 711-1101 (2014) states, in relevant part: 
Disorderly conduct. (1) A person commits the offense
of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause physical
inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public,or recklessly creating a risk thereof, the person: 
. . . . 
(b) Makes unreasonable noise; 
. . . . 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
which Lopez Ruiz allegedly awakened her neighbor in an adjacent 
unit, Rianne Sanchez, and Sanchez's boyfriend at 1:00 a.m. by yelling, knocking on walls, and, then, by knocking on Sanchez's front door and shining a flashlight through her window. 
On appeal, Lopez Ruiz contends that the Judgment must 
be reversed or vacated because: (1) there is not substantial evidence that Lopez Ruiz caused or risked causing physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public; (2) the District Court erred by basing its verdict on the contents of a police body-worn camera video played in court on the State's laptop computer, after improperly overruling the defense's foundation objection; (3) even if the trial transcript of the challenged video is considered, there is not substantial evidence supporting Lopez Ruiz's disorderly conduct conviction; (4) the District Court's finding that Lopez Ruiz "merely 'had the intent to cause inconvenience'" proves that she was not guilty of disorderly conduct; (5) judicial bias deprived Lopez Ruiz of a fair trial; and (6) the District Court erred by denying Lopez Ruiz her right to presentence allocution. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Lopez Ruiz's contentions as follows, and reverse. 
Lopez Ruiz's first contention is dispositive. She 
argues that there is no substantial evidence that she acted with the "intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public, or reckless[ly] created a risk thereof" because "Sanchez and the people in her residence are not members of the public" for purposes of HRS § 711-1101(1). She further argues that there is no evidence that anyone else was "actually inconvenienced or that there was a substantial and unjustifiable risk that anyone other than the people in Sanchez's residence might have been inconvenienced." 
Lopez Ruiz relies on the Hawai# i Supreme Court's 
is the defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or 
serious inconvenience, or if the defendant persists indisorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request todesist. Otherwise disorderly conduct is a violation. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision in State v. Kaeo, 151 Hawai# i 329, 333, 512 P.3d 154, 
158 (2021), which reversed a conviction for disorderly conduct. 
There, the defendant protestor had "laid in front of trucks scheduled to transport telescope components for the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST)[,]" which inconvenienced "[a]bout twenty transport convoy workers – all affiliated with, if not employed by, the DKIST[.]" Id. at 330, 512 P.3d at 155. The 
court ruled that the word "public" as used in HRS § 711-1101(1) means the "community or the people as a whole." Id. at 332, 512 
P.3d at 157. The court reasoned: 
[The convoy workers] were not part of the "community or the
people as a whole." They were the subset of people taskedwith facilitating the DKIST's construction. They were thevery group [the defendant] targeted with his conduct. This conceptual nexus between [the defendant's] conduct and theconvoy workers' presence at the Baseyard because of theirDKIST ties precludes us from treating the convoy workers as"members of the public." 
Id. at 334, 512 P.3d at 159 (emphases added). The court held 
that because the convoy workers were not members of the public and the State presented no evidence that the defendant inconvenienced anyone other than the convoy workers, the trial court lacked sufficient evidence to convict the defendant of disorderly conduct. Id. at 335, 512 P.3d at 160. 
The court's reasoning in Kaeo applies with equal force 
here. During the bench trial, Sanchez testified that on the night of the incident, she and her boyfriend were awakened by "yelling" and "knocking on the walls" "around 1 a.m." Sanchez heard Lopez Ruiz saying, "cut it out, cut it out, my – my electricity's not working[,]" and accusing Sanchez and her boyfriend of "playing with her electricity[.]" Sanchez then "heard [Lopez Ruiz] exit her unit, come to our front door, knock on our front door, shine . . . her flashlight through the window[,]" which is when Sanchez called the police. Sanchez's testimony, which the District Court found credible, showed that Lopez Ruiz had directed her conduct (i.e., her "unreasonable noise") at Sanchez and her boyfriend, whom Lopez Ruiz believed were "playing with her electricity[.]" In these circumstances, Sanchez and her boyfriend were not part of the "community or the people as a whole" and thus not "members of the public" for 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
purposes of HRS § 711-1101(1). Kaeo, 151 Hawai# i at 334, 512 
P.3d at 159; see id. at 334 n.11, 512 P.3d at 159 n.11 (noting 
that in State v. Leung, 79 Hawai# i 538, 904 P.2d 552 (App. 1995), 
the court "did not consider the theater manager – a target of Leung's ire - a 'member of the public' within the context of the disorderly conduct statute") (emphasis added). Because there was no evidence presented of actual inconvenience (or a substantial and unjustifiable risk of it) to anyone other than Sanchez and her boyfriend, Lopez Ruiz's disorderly conduct conviction under HRS § 711-1101(1)(b) and (3) is not supported by substantial evidence. 
In light of our disposition, we need not reach Lopez 
Ruiz's remaining contentions. 
For the reasons discussed above, the Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order entered on February 22, 2024, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is reversed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, May 7, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Henry P. Ting, 
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
4 