NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000840
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRANDETTE K. RAMOS-LABENIA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(Waianae Division)
(CASE NO. 1DCW-12-000335)
  
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brandette K. Ramos-Labenia (Ramos-
Labenia) appeals from the Judgment filed on April 29, 2014, by
 
the District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).1 After
 
a bench trial, the District Court found Ramos-Labenia guilty as
 charged of third-degree assault based on evidence that she
 repeatedly punched a loss prevention agent who attempted to stop
 her because he suspected her of shoplifting.
 
On appeal, Ramos-Labenia, who testified at trial, 
contends that: (1) the District Court's colloquy pursuant to Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995) was 
defective; and (2) her trial counsel provided ineffective assistance. We affirm. 
1The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve Ramos-Labenia's arguments on appeal as
 
follows.
 
I.
 
A.
 
Ramos-Labenia contends that the District Court
 
committed plain error in failing to ensure that she validly
 waived her right to remain silent at trial. 
In support of her
 
argument, Ramos-Labenia cites a portion of the District Court's
 Tachibana colloquy, in which it stated that "If you decided to
 not testify, then I'll consider your decision as part of the
 evidence." Ramos-Labenia argues that because the Circuit Court
 misadvised her that it would consider her decision not to testify
 as part of the evidence, her decision to testify and waive her
 privilege against self-incrimination was invalid.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) argues that 
when viewed in context, it is clear that the District Court merely misspoke in the portion of the Tachibana advisement cited by Ramos-Labenia and that when the record is viewed as a whole, the District Court properly advised Ramos-Labenia that a decision not to testify would not be used against her. We agree with the State. 
Before the start of the trial, the District Court
 
engaged in the following colloquy with Ramos-Labenia:
 
Ms. Ramos-Labenia, we're starting your trial. At this
 
trial you have the right to testify if you want to. If you
want to testify, nobody can stop you from doing so. It is
 your right. If you choose to testify, you will do so up
here on the stand. You will take an oath to tell the truth.
 You would answer all the questions put to you. That
 includes the questions from the prosecutor. So unless I
 sustain the objection, you will have to answer the questions
of the prosecutor. 
If you choose to not testify, you don't 
have to testify. You have the right to remain silent. You
 can do so as well.
 
If you choose to remain silent, the Court doesn't
think that you're hiding anything. 
The Court doesn't
 
consider your silence at all. You understand that?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
THE COURT: You don't have to make a decision at this
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
point in time. Later on in the trial, we'll probably have
this conversation again, and at that point in time you will
have to let me know if you decide to testify or remain
silent.
 
Do you have any questions?
 
THE DEFENDANT: No.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Thank you, Ms. Ramos-Labenia. You
 
can have a seat.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
After the State rested its case in chief, the District
 
Court denied Ramos-Labenia's motion for judgment of acquittal. 
When trial resumed, defense counsel informed the District Court
 that Ramos-Labenia would be called as the first witness, and the
 District Court engaged Ramos-Labenia in a second colloquy:
 
THE COURT: . . . . Counsel, I believe the last time
we were here in court, the State had already rested its
case. Defendant did move for judgment of acquittal. It was
 denied. So it's defendant's opportunity to present
evidence, if she chooses to do so.
 
[Defense counsel]: Yes, Your Honor. Just may I have
one moment? All right. Yes. We'd be calling Ms.
Ramos-Labenia to testify.
 
THE COURT: Before she goes up -- Ms. Ramos-Labenia. 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 THE COURT: When we started this trial way back when,
I informed you that you have the right to testify if you
want to. And if you decided to testify, nobody can stop you
from doing so. That's your decision to make.
 
If you do testify, you see how this goes; right?
You'll take an oath to tell the truth. Your attorney gets
to ask you questions first. After he's done, the prosecutor
gets to ask you questions. Unless I sustain an objection,
you have to answer the prosecutor's questions as well.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Okay.
 
THE COURT: 
You also have the right to remain silent.
So if you don't want to testify, you don't have to. You can
 
just remain silent. If you decided to not testify, then
I'll consider your decision as part of the evidence. So I
 don't think like, oh, she's holding something back or she's
hiding something. I don't consider it at all.
 
Do you have any questions about your right to testify
or your right to remain silent? Do you have any questions
about your rights?
 
THE DEFENDANT: No.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Have you talked with [defense counsel]
about your decision?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, I did.
 
THE COURT: And did you have -- do you feel like
you've had enough time to talk with him?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah.
 
THE COURT: And what is your decision?
 
THE DEFENDANT: I want -- I want to testify.
 THE COURT: Okay. Then come up to the stand. 
(Emphasis added). 
B. 
The  District  Court  incorrectly  stated  that  "If you
 
decided to not testify, then I'll consider your decision as part
 
of  the evidence."2 However, based on our review of the record as
 
a whole, it was obvious that the District Court simply misspoke
 
when it made that statement and did not mean what it had said. 
Considering the entirety of both colloquies as quoted above, we
 conclude that Ramos-Labenia was not misled by the District
 Court's misstatement and understood that if she decided not to
 testify, that decision would not be considered against her.
 
As the record shows, prior to trial, Ramos-Labenia was
 
correctly advised that the District Court would not use her
 exercise of the right to remain silent against her. After
 advising Ramos-Labenia that she had the right to remain silent
 and did not have to testify, the District Court advised her: "If
 you choose to remain silent, the Court doesn't think that you're
 hiding anything. The Court doesn't consider your silence at all. 
You understand that?" Ramos-Labenia acknowledged her
 understanding of the District Court's explanation. 
2The State did not attempt to correct the record pursuant to
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 10(e) (2012), and we
assume the transcript accurately reflects what the District Court
said. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, the District Court's misstatement in the
 
second colloquy was immediately followed by the statement: "So I
 
don't think like, oh, she's holding something back [if Ramos-
Labenia decided to not testify] or she's hiding something. I
 don't consider it at all." Thus, the District Court immediately
 corrected its misstatement by informing Ramos-Labenia that the 
exercise of her right to remain silent and not testify would have
 no effect on the District Court's consideration of her case. 
When asked if she had any questions about her right to testify or
 right to remain silent, Ramos-Labenia replied that she had no
 questions about her rights. She also acknowledged that she had
 discussed her decision on whether to testify with her counsel and
 felt that she had enough time to talk to counsel. Under these
 circumstances, we conclude that the District Court's
 misstatement, when viewed in context, did not render the District
 Court's advisement of rights misleading and did not invalidate
 Ramos-Labenia's waiver of her right to remain silent.
 
C. 
Our conclusion is supported by the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court's decision in State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai 'i 292, 12 P.3d 1233 
(2000). In Lewis, the trial judge failed to give Lewis the start-of-trial advisement set out in footnote 9 of the Tachibana 
3
decision  or engage in the "ultimate colloquy" described in
footnote 7 of 
Tachibana.4 Lewis, 94 Hawai 'i at 293-94, 12 P.3d 
at 1234-35. The supreme court held that "Tachibana does not require the 'colloquy' described in footnote 7 in the situation where a defendant has decided to testify[,]" and it therefore rejected Lewis's argument that the trial court erred in failing to engage in that colloquy. Id. at 294, 12 P.3d at 1235. 
The supreme court explained that the purpose of
 
imposing the colloquy requirement in Tachibana was to protect a
 defendant's personal right to testify; the purpose of the
 
3
Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 237 n.9, 900 P.2d at 1304 n .9. 
4
Tachibana, 79 Hawai' i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d 1303 n .7. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
colloquy requirement was not to protect a defendant's right to
 
remain silent by not testifying at trial. Accordingly, the
 Tachibana colloquy is only required when the defendant does not
 testify. Id. at 295, 12 P.3d at 1236. The supreme court stated:
 
[T]he Tachibana  colloquy was the product of two objectives:
(1) the protection of a defendant's personal right to
testify; and (2) the minimization of post-conviction
disputes over the actual waiver of the right to testify.
Where, as here, the Petitioner has exercised his right to
testify, neither one of the Tachibana concerns arises. By
testifying, Petitioner realized his constitutional and
statutory right to testify in his own defense. When he did
 so, the question of whether he waived the right was removed
from any future post-conviction proceeding.
 
In light of the foregoing considerations, the colloquy
requirement to "advise a defendant that he or she has a
right not to testify" does not impose an affirmative duty on
the trial courts in all cases to engage the defendant in the
colloquy. In 
Tachibana , the colloquy was adopted "in order
to protect the right to testify," and the trial courts were
instructed to "advise criminal defendants of their right to
 testify," and to "obtain a waiver of that right in every
 case in which the defendant does not testify." Hence, the
colloquy is required only in cases "in which the defendant
does not testify."
 
Id. (brackets, ellipsis points, and citations omitted).
 
The supreme court also explained why it saw no reason
 
to impose a  Tachibana colloquy requirement where the defendant
 
decides to testify:
 
We see no reason to adopt a collateral Tachibana
colloquy for instances where a defendant chooses to testify.
It has been suggested that while the procedural safeguard of
a waiver proceeding is required where a defendant does not
testify, a similar proceeding is unnecessary if a defendant
chooses to testify because of the likelihood that (1) the
defendant has received "one or more such advisements from
 law enforcement officials during the course of a criminal
investigation," (2)
 
defense counsel would not "allow a
defendant to take the stand without a full explanation of
the right to remain silent and the possible consequences of
waiving that right
," and (3) any defendant who testifies
would expect to be cross-examined. 
We concur that when a defendant takes the stand to
 
present his or her own defense, the probability is great
that the defendant and his or her counsel will have
 discussed the advantages and risks of testifying, the nature
of the defense(s) to be presented during the defendant's
testimony, and the subjects upon which the defendant will
likely be challenged on cross-examination. 
Such a
 
discussion must necessarily bring home to a defendant that,
by taking the stand, he or she will have waived his or her
right not to testify. In light of this greater probability,
there is "less need for intervention by the trial court and
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an on-the-record advisement concerning these matters before
the defendant testifies." 
In view of the foregoing, we hold that Tachibana does
not require that the court engage in the colloquy if the
defendant chooses to testify in his or her own behalf.
 
Id. at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237 (emphases added; brackets, citations,
 
and footnotes omitted).
 
Here, Ramos-Labenia specifically acknowledged that 
she had discussed her decision on whether to testify with her
 counsel and had sufficient time to engage in such discussion. 
The record also indicates that Ramos-Labenia had decided to
 testify before the District Court's misstatement. These
 circumstances reinforce our view that the District Court's
 misstatement did not mislead Ramos-Labenia or affect her decision
 to testify.
 
II.
 
Ramos-Labenia contends that her trial counsel provided 
ineffective assistance by failing to object to the District Court's misstatement and by failing to call her "male friend" who was witness to the charged incident. To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant bears the burden of establishing: "1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1247 (1998) (block quote format and citation omitted). Ramos-Labenia has failed to meet her burden. 
Based on our conclusion that Ramos-Labenia was not
 
misled by the District Court's misstatement, we reject Ramos­Labenia's contention that her trial counsel's failure to object
 to the misstatement constituted ineffective assistance. With
 respect to Ramos-Labenia's claim that her trial counsel's failure
 to call her male friend as a witness constituted ineffective
 assistance, Ramos-Labenia has not supported this claim "by
 affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proffered witness[]." Id. Accordingly, she has not satisfied
 
her burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel with
 
respect to this failure-to-call-witness claim. Id. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the District 
Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 26, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Tae Won Kim 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
8
 