NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000626
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALEXANDER H. LI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(Case No. 1DTA-12-00941)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J. concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Alexander H. Li (Li) appeals from
 
the Judgment, entered on June 18, 2012 in the District Court of
 
the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).1
 
Li was found guilty of Operating a Vehicle under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(3) (Supp. 2012).
 
On appeal, Li contends the District Court erred by (1)
 
denying his motion to dismiss because the amended complaint was
 pled in the disjunctive and (2) admitting a supervisor's sworn
 statements regarding the accuracy of an Intoxilyzer because they
 were testimonial in nature and he was not provided the
 opportunity to question the supervisor which violated his right
 to confront a witness.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Li's points of error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided.
 Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 ctive. On appeal, Li challenges three disjunctive terms:
 
On or about the 5th day of February, 2012, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, ALEXANDER H. LI . .
. did operate or  [the 1st "or"] assume actual physical
control of a vehicle upon a public way, street, road, or
 [the 2d "or"] highway with .08 or  [the 3d "or"] more grams
of alcohol per two hundred liters of breath, thereby
committing the offense of Operating a Vehicle Under the
Influence of an Intoxicant, in violation of Section 291E-61
. . . (a)(3) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. ALEXANDER H. LI
is subject to sentencing as a first offender in accordance
with Section 291E-61(b)(1) of the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Li claims that the District Court erred by denying
 
his Motion to Dismiss because the charge was stated in the
 
disjun
However, during his arraignment, Li orally stated his
 
objection as follows:
 
I'm just going to move to dismiss the complaint inasmuch as
the complaint says basically "intentional, knowing, or
recklessly operate or assume on a public road, street, or
highway while under the influence of alcohol sufficient to
impair his mental faculties or ability to care for his -­guard against himself and casualty." And this complaint is
completely pled in the disjunctive. Under Jendrush and the
 McCarthy case it is a pleading that should be dismissed, and
I would move to dismiss it at this time.
 
Li did not object to the "third or" he identifies on 
appeal. Therefore, that point of error is waived. Hawai 'i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4). 
As to the "first or," the term "operate" in HRS § 291E­
61(a) is defined in HRS § 291E-1 (2007) as "to drive or assume 
actual physical control of a vehicle upon a public way, street, road, or highway or to navigate or otherwise use or assume physical control of a vessel underway on or in the waters of the State." HRS § 291E-1, State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i 383, 391, 
219 P.3d 1170, 1178 (2009). The term "assume actual physical control" is part of the definition of "operate" in HRS § 291E-1. Thus, the term operate is synonymous with the phrase "assume actual physical control." Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i at 392, 219 P.3d 
at 24 ("[W]e interpret the definition of 'operate' in HRS § 291E­1 as referring generally to the conduct of 'operating' a vehicle under the influence as described in the title of HRS § 291E­61(a), whether the conduct consists of driving the vehicle or otherwise assuming actual physical control of it.") Thus, the term "operate" and the phrase "assume actual physical control" are not alternative methods of committing the offense that must be charged in the conjunctive. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to the "second or," the phrase "Public way, street,
 
road, or highway" is a specific term that is defined in HRS
 
§ 291E-1.
 
"Public way, street, road, or highway" includes:
 
(1)	 The entire width, including berm or shoulder, of every
road, alley, street, way, right of way, lane, trail,
highway, or bridge;
 
(2)	 A parking lot, when any part thereof is open for use
by the public or to which the public is invited for
entertainment or business purposes;
 
(3)	 Any bicycle lane, bicycle path, bicycle route,
bikeway, controlled-access highway, laned roadway,
roadway, or street, as defined in section 291C-1; or
 
(4)	 Any public highway, as defined in section 264-1.
 
The phrase "Public way, street, road, or highway" is a
 
single term. The term itself is not a combination of four
 
possible public places upon which an offense may be committed. 
Thus, it is not improperly charged in the disjunctive. 
Even if it were to be read as four separate terms, i.e.
 
public way, public street, public road, and public highway, the
 terms are synonymous with each other. When terms are synonymous,
 they may be pled in the disjunctive. See Terr. v. Kim Ung Pil,
 
26 Haw. 725, 729 (1923) ("[W]here terms laid in the alternative
 are synonymous, the indictment is good.") (citation and internal
 quotation marks omitted). Subsection 1 of this definition
 defines the term "Public way, street, road, or highway" as "the
 entire width, including berm or shoulder, of every road, alley,
 street, way, right of way, lane, trail, highway, or bridge[.]"
 (emphasis added).
 
The District Court did not err by denying Li's Motion
 
to Dismiss.
 
(2) Li claims that his Sixth Amendment right to 
confront witnesses against him was violated when the District Court admitted State's Exhibits 2 and 5 over his objection. State's Exhibits 2 and 5 were "the two internal accuracy tests with the supervisor's sworn statements." executed thirty days before and after Li's Intoxilyzer test was administered.
2 Li 
acknowledges that in State v. Marshall, 114 Hawai 'i 396, 400-02, 
2
 Although both exhibits appear to have been admitted into evidence
at trial, only Exhibit 5 appears in the record.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
163 P.3d 199, 203-05 (App. 2007) and in the majority of other
 
jurisdictions considering the matter, a supervisor's sworn
 statement that an Intoxilyzer had been properly calibrated and
 tested for accuracy was not testimonial in nature and therefore
 not subject to the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment. 
Citing Bullcoming v. New Mexico, 131 S. Ct. 2705 (2011), Li urges
 this court to overrule Marshall. 
In Bullcoming, the court considered the admissibility
 
of a certificate attesting to Bullcoming's blood-alcohol
 concentration without the testimony of persons having personal
 knowledge of Bullcoming's test. The high court held that a
 witness that did not certify a report that was testimonial in
 nature could not testify in place of the person that did certify
 the report in order to satisfy the Confrontation Clause of the
 Sixth Amendment. 131 S. Ct. at 2713. The issue in Bullcoming
 was not whether the report was testimonial in nature, rather
 which witness must testify at trial about a report that is
 testimonial in nature. Thus, Bullcoming is inapplicable to this
 case. We find no authority since Marshall that undermines its
 holding, therefore, we decline to overrule it. Marshall controls
 
and, consequently, District Court did not err by admitting
 State's Exhibits 2 and 5.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment, entered on
 
June 18, 2012, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
R. Patrick McPherson,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
4
 