FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
(FC-A NO. 15-1-0025)
IN THE MATTER OF ADOPTION OF A
 
MALE CHILD, H.A.,
 
and
 
(FC-A NO. 15-1-0016)
IN THE MATTER OF ADOPTION OF A 
MALE CHILD, R.A.,
 
and
 
(FC-A NO. 15-1-0013)
IN THE MATTER OF THE ADOPTION OF A 
MALE CHILD, R.A.,
By K.W. and D.W., husband and wife,
 
and
 
(FC-A NO. 15-1-0021)
IN THE MATTER OF THE ADOPTION OF A
 
MALE CHILD, H.A.,
By K.W. and D.W., husband and wife,
 
and
 
(FC-A NO. 15-1-0022)
IN THE MATTER OF THE ADOPTION OF A 
MALE CHILD, R.A.,
By P.O., a single person,
 
and
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(FC-A NO. 15-1-0023)
IN THE MATTER OF THE ADOPTION OF A
 
MALE CHILD, H.A.,
By P.O., a single person
 
NOS. CAAP-15-0000929, CAAP-15-0000923, CAAP-15-0000924,
CAAP-15-0000925, CAAP-15-0000927, CAAP-15-0000928
(CONSOLIDATED)
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
APRIL 28, 2017
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
This case involves competing petitions for the adoption
 
of two young brothers, R.A. and H.A., who were under permanent

 
custody of the Department of Human Services (DHS). Petitioners/
 
Appellees the Foster Parents, DHS (on behalf of Respondent/
 
Appellee/Cross-Appellant Great Aunt), and Petitioner/Appellant
 
Grandmother, each filed adoption petitions for R.A. and H.A. The
 
Family Court of the Third Circuit (1
Family Court)  held a trial on
all petitions and, on November 10, 2015, entered Adoption Decrees
 granting the Foster Parents' petitions to adopt R.A. and H.A. On
 December 8, 2015, the Family Court entered an order denying DHS's
 and Grandmother's adoption petitions.
 
Appellant/Cross-Appellee Guardian ad Litem for R.A. and
 
H.A. (
GAL) appeals, Grandmother appeals pro se, and Great Aunt
 
cross-appeals, from the Family Court's: (1) November 10, 2015
 
1
 The Honorable Lloyd X. Van De Car presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Adoption Decree granting the Foster Parents' petition for
 
adoption of R.A.; (2) November 10, 2015 Findings and Decision of
 the Court Granting the Foster Parents' Petition for Adoption of
 R.A.; (3) November 10, 2015 Adoption Decree granting the Foster
 Parents' petition for adoption of H.A.; (4) November 10, 2015
 Findings and Decision of the Court Granting the Foster Parents'
 Petition for Adoption of H.A.; and (5) December 8, 2015 Order
 Denying Petitions for Adoption. On March 11, 2016, this court
 consolidated all six appeals under CAAP-15-0000929.
 I. BACKGROUND
 A. Pre-Trial
 R.A. was born in December of 2011. He was removed from
 
his biological parents and placed in foster custody in February
 of 2013. DHS was involved because of allegations of lack of
 supervision, threat of neglect, and because R.A. was exposed to
 and tested positive for marijuana. The GAL was appointed for
 R.A. on February 19, 2013. 
R.A. was placed with C.O., a maternal aunt, from March
 
28, 2013 to January 31, 2014. R.A. was then placed with the
 Foster Parents by DHS Child Welfare Services on January 31, 2014,
 as resource caregivers. On October 9, 2014, DHS wrote a
 Permanent Plan for R.A. The Foster Parents, Grandmother, and
 Great Aunt, who lives in Washington state, were all considered as
 potential permanent placements at that time. 
H.A. was born in March of 2015. On March 31, 2015, DHS
 
assumed custody of H.A. On April 8, 2015, the same GAL was
 appointed to protect the interests of H.A. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 15, 2015, the Foster Parents filed a Petition
 
for Adoption for R.A. 
On June 29, 2015, DHS wrote a Revised Permanent Plan
 
for H.A., in which DHS deemed that Grandmother was
 
"inappropriate" as a permanent placement. DHS reported that
 Grandmother "has verbalized an interest in completing a
 guardianship of [R.A.] because she would like to see Father's
 child returned to him." "Another concern" was her "ability to
 remain impartial and protective" of the children. Grandmother
 told DHS that "she is allowing Mother and Father to live
 rent-free in her home." DHS was concerned that Grandmother was
 "too vested in her own son's welfare to be completely and fully
 protective of her grandchild." DHS also noted concerns of
 Grandmother's "history of drug abuse," although both Grandmother
 and her partner submitted to and passed random urinalysis
 testing.
 
In the same report, DHS stated that as it pertains to
 
the Foster Parents, a "continued concern of possible permanent
 placement with [the Foster Parents] is whether they would not
 maintain family connections, other than the maternal aunt,
 [C.O.], whom they are friends with. It is the belief of the DHS
 that [the Foster Parents] will not support family connections." 
DHS stated, inter alia, that "the most appropriate permanent
 placement in the best interest of [H.A.] is one that includes his
 older brother, [R.A.]. The Maternal Great Aunts . . . are
 relatives who have historically been very supportive of
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maintaining safe connections with both the maternal and paternal
 
families." 
The Foster Parents filed, on July 2, 2015, an ex parte
 
motion for injunction against R.A.'s change in placement. On
 July 10, 2015, DHS, the GAL, and the Foster Parents appeared
 before the Family Court. DHS reported to the Family Court that
 H.A. was placed in Washington, and DHS wanted to place R.A. in
 Washington with Great Aunt as well. The Family Court stated that
 "this child has been there before and not suffered any harm on
 account of it. So doing it again doesn't seem to be harmful." 
It appears that the biological parents' parental rights
 
were terminated with respect to R.A. on July 9, 2015, and H.A. on
 July 16, 2015, in separate proceedings, and permanent custody of
 both children was awarded to DHS.
 
On August 4, 2015, DHS filed petitions for adoption on
 
behalf of Great Aunt for R.A. and H.A. DHS stated that adoption
 by Great Aunt "will be in the best interests of the child." DHS
 filed consents to both adoptions, declaring that Great Aunt "is a
 suitable and legally qualified adoptive parent."
 
On August 4, 2015, the Foster Parents filed a petition
 
for adoption of H.A. On August 4, 2015, Grandmother filed her
 petition for adoption of R.A., which included, inter alia, that
 she had one criminal conviction. On August 10, 2015, Grandmother
 also filed a petition for adoption of H.A. 
On August 4, 2015, the Foster Parents, DHS, and the GAL
 
returned to the Family Court, for what appears to be a status
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conference or continued hearing on the Foster Parents' request
 
for an injunction. The court stated:
 
I've been talking with the attorneys for some time
now, and while this is an important issue, I expressed to
them my belief that regardless of how things work out in the
adoption, that it's important for me, and I think it's in
the best interests of the boys with their life going
forward, that they be placed together, and I also believe
that, and I'll say it here, I'm going to have to say it
again soon in the presence of the paternal grandmother, I
don't believe that she is a viable candidate for adoption,
but, however, you, as well as the folks on the mainland,
are, and I would like to have the opportunity for me to
receive information about how both boys are doing if placed
with you and how both boys are doing or will continue to do
for the next few days placed together in Washington.
So what the court is going to do is the following
. . . . I'm going to order that the guardian ad litem leave
here on the 13th and retrieve both boys, and they're to
return here by no later than the 15th. 
B. Trial on Adoption
 
On August 27 and 28, September 29, and October 1, 2015,
 
the Family Court heard evidence regarding all six adoption
 petitions. DHS, Great Aunt, Grandmother, the Foster Parents, and
 the GAL appeared.
 
Foster Parents' expert witness, Karen De Soto (De
 
Soto), was qualified as an expert in child development attachment
 
and trauma. De Soto conducted two observation sessions of the
 
children with the Foster Parents. The first visit was a home
 visit that lasted an hour. The second visit occurred at the zoo. 
De Soto spent a total of three and a half hours with the
 children. She opined that the Foster Parents "were functioning
 as kind of a secure base" for R.A. When asked to assess the
 level of comfort that R.A. has in the home, De Soto stated that
 R.A. "looked to me like he was very much at home." De Soto
 testified that R.A. appeared to be securely attached to the
 Foster Parents. De Soto testified that she "thought his
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
attachment to [Foster Mother] looked very secure." De Soto 
testified that a move away from Hawai 'i Island for R.A. would be 
difficult, but that did not mean that he could not adjust. 
Sandra Pickard (Pickard) testified, as a witness called
 
by Foster Parents, and was qualified as an expert in child
 development attachment and trauma. She met R.A. at home on one
 occasion and "read all of the court reports" and "GAL reports." 
Pickard testified that the brains of children under four are in a
 state of rapid development and growth. Pickard testified that
 the primary attachment relationship is essential to the
 development of the brain. According to Pickard, a child that has
 had more than one disruption in their primary attachment will
 have an accumulation of emotional distress, which could be
 severe. 
Pickard also opined that R.A. has an increased need for
 
stability and that it is not in R.A.'s best interest to be
 removed from the Foster Parents' home and placed elsewhere. 
Pickard admitted, however, "I can't directly speak a lot about
 [R.A.] from my own personal knowledge so I'm going on what I know
 from the information in the reports and, um, in my one visit[.]" 
Pickard testified that the reports reflect that R.A. is "a happy
 well-adjusted child." Pickard further believed that R.A. "right
 now has established a very, um, positive attachment with the
 [Foster Parents]." 
Several of the Foster Parents' friends testified in
 
support of the Foster Parents. Each testified that R.A. adjusted
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well to the Foster Parents and spoke highly of the Foster
 
Parents' parenting skills. 
Kristin Omoto (Omoto) testified. Omoto is the licensed
 
social worker at DHS's Child Welfare Services (CWS) that
 
supervised R.A. during his placement with the Foster Parents. 
Omoto gave the Foster Parents Grandmother's telephone number and
 asked them to call and arrange visits. When the Foster Parents
 later told Omoto they wanted to adopt R.A., there was a concern
 that if they were to adopt the children that they would not
 foster relationships with the children's blood relatives. 
Foster Mother testified. Foster Mother and Foster
 
Father married in 2001. They could not conceive, so they decided
 to adopt. They became foster parents and R.A. moved to their
 home in January 2014. Foster Mother testified that she limited
 R.A.'s visits with C.O. and her children so R.A. could adjust to
 the Foster Parents' home. Foster Mother also testified that DHS
 told her that Grandmother was not to have unsupervised contact
 with R.A. and that any visits would be at the Foster Parents'
 discretion. Because DHS was not comfortable with unsupervised
 visits, Foster Mother felt the same way. The concern was that
 Grandmother was a "weak link" to her son, R.A.'s biological
 father. Grandmother was never invited to her home or any family
 function because Foster Mother had concerns. Foster Mother
 testified that C.O. also had expressed concerns about how
 Grandmother would be able to maintain a safe environment for R.A. 
Foster Mother testified that she facilitated the visits 
with Great Aunt, when she came to Hawai
'i. Foster Mother 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that she saw regressions in potty training, disruption
 
of sleep, and that R.A. was more moody after returning from
 Seattle. Foster Mother also testified that she facilitated Skype
 calls between R.A. and Great Aunt. 
Foster Mother testified that if she were granted
 
adoption of H.A. she would envision H.A. having similar visits
 with Grandmother that R.A. does. Foster Mother testified that
 she would want to continue R.A.'s visits with Grandmother if she
 was granted adoption and that she would expect that Grandmother
 would have "longer visits" in the future. Foster Mother stated
 that if she was able to adopt the children, Skyping between R.A.
 and Great Aunt "certainly would continue as it has" and as the
 boys got older, "they would be able to stay for longer periods in
 Seattle." 
DHS called Dr. Steven Choy (Dr. Choy), a clinical
 
psychologist, to testify as an expert in the fields of child
 maltreatment, trauma, child trauma, developmental disabilities
 and attachment. Dr. Choy testified that "attachment is the
 mechanism which in terms of human beings, and especially in
 children, develop a dependency in a sense to the person that they
 have to attach to." Dr. Choy testified that secure attachment is
 important to brain growth. Dr. Choy testified that having
 multiple placements puts children at a higher risk for problems,
 but not necessarily more problems. Dr. Choy testified that a
 child can have multiple secure attachments. 
Dr. Choy testified that from birth to about nine to ten
 
months, a child can easily attach and reattach. From nine months
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to about eighteen months it is "a little bit harder to move." 
From two years old to three years old is "really one of the hard
 times." Dr. Choy testified that "the studies show that if you
 move from one primary attachment that was good to another primary
 attachment that was good, you don't see a whole lot of problems." 
Dr. Choy testified that a child who is almost four can transition
 "pretty quickly" to a new environment and that "children that are
 adopted by kin do have a better chance for family attachment and
 continuing attachments." 
Dr. Choy never met with the children, and the only
 
information he received about the case was information he
 received from DHS. Dr. Choy was given a copy of Pickard's
 written testimony dated August 4, 2015. Dr. Choy testified that
 it usually takes four to five hours to do a sufficiently
 comprehensive evaluation to give the assessment that Pickard did. 
Dr. Choy also testified, "I don't know if [Pickard] is trained to
 do those psychological tests that can help us make those
 decisions."
 
Foster Father testified. Foster Father testified that
 
if they were able to adopt, he would envision visitations with
 Grandmother "[m]ore or less the same as it is now, possibly a
 little restructuring to where maybe we do a little longer
 visitation, I don't know, once a month, as opposed to doing two,
 but we would definitely continue that. We want to continue that
 relationship." As far as Great Aunt, Foster Father testified
 that "we definitely would continue the Skype calls" and "we would
 like to have them go back and, of course, stay in Seattle for a
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
short time." Foster Father stated that "we would continue a 
relationship with" R.A.'s family in Hawai 'i. 
Foster Father also testified that he has a medical
 
marijuana permit that he obtained shortly after moving to
 Arizona, five years ago. He testified that he uses marijuana to
 address chronic knee pain, which is due to playing lacrosse in
 high school and being a chef for over twenty years; Foster Father
 stated that he wore away the cartilage in his knees. Foster
 Father testified that he currently obtains his marijuana through
 a caregiver. He previously purchased it "through what normal
 means there were at the time." When asked to clarify what that
 meant, Foster Father's counsel invoked his Fifth Amendment right
 against self-incrimination. Foster Father testified that he
 occasionally smokes marijuana - "[n]ightly or every other night,
 not always the same." He testified that he does not smoke
 marijuana around R.A., but smokes it outside after R.A. goes to
 bed. He testified that he stores his marijuana on the "very top
 shelf" of his closet, where R.A. does not have access. Foster
 Father testified that he did not inform DHS of his marijuana
 permit because he "was never asked."
 
After two days of trial, on August 28, 2015, the Family
 
Court stated, "We're going to address the issue of where these
 kids are going to be between now and September 29th." DHS, Great
 Aunt, and the GAL requested that both children go with Great
 Aunt. DHS explained that this was the potential permanent
 placement that they had been working toward. Grandmother
 requested that H.A. go to Great Aunt, and R.A. stay with the
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Foster Parents. The Foster Parents requested that both children
 
stay with them. 
The Family Court stated that it would apply the 
standard of "the best interest of the children" and, as the boys recently returned from the mainland, "another move at this point in time would be disruptive." The Family Court stated that with H.A.'s age, "attachments are easier" and so "remaining here and then traveling again would not present the kind of trouble that it would were he older." "For [R.A.], of course, the testimony is clear that transitions are more difficult at his stage of development. He does seem to be very resilient." The Family Court noted that the children's "closest blood relatives" are located on the island of Hawai
'i and ruled that both boys "will 
remain here in Hawaii in the home of [the Foster Parents] during the recess of these proceedings between now and when these proceedings conclude." The Family Court also ordered that the children remain in the permanent custody of DHS, but be placed pendente lite with the Foster Parents. The Family Court noted, "I haven't heard all of the evidence, but based on the evidence I have heard, I don't have any concerns about the genuineness of the [Foster Parents] in maintaining family connections[.]" 
At the resumption of trial on September 29, 2015,
 
Grandmother testified. She testified that she took care of R.A.
 much of his first year, because of his mother's drug and alcohol
 issues. Grandmother testified that the Foster Parents have no
 interest in maintaining family values and connections with the
 extended family. Grandmother admitted that she was convicted of
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
growing 876 marijuana plants, and spent three years in prison. 
However, she had completed a drug treatment program and
 considered herself to be recovered. 
Two of Great Aunt's friends testified in support of 
Great Aunt and testified that she was great with the boys and that she offered a safe and loving home. Great Aunt testified that she had been to Hawai
'i eight times to see R.A. and to work 
with DHS on permanent placement. R.A. visited Seattle three times, for a total of six weeks, and showed no stress during those visits. H.A. stayed with them for five weeks. 
Great Aunt testified that she had Skyped with R.A.
 
since the Foster Parents had him "probably anywhere from one to
 three times a week." Great Aunt testified regarding a Christmas
 morning where Foster Mother was not cooperative with Great Aunt's
 request to Skype with R.A. 
The GAL testified. The GAL observed R.A. in the home
 
of all adoption petitioners. The GAL testified that he seemed
 comfortable in all environments. After discussing with
 Grandmother that Grandmother was not getting visits with R.A.
 after R.A. was placed with the Foster Parents, the GAL put it in
 her report that "those visits needed to happen." The GAL
 testified that Foster Mother's report that R.A. had problems with
 potty training came six weeks after R.A. returned from
 Washington. The GAL recommended that both children be adopted by
 Great Aunt. 
CWS Supervisor Maria Jiminez (Jiminez) testified that:
 
The policy regarding placement really involves trying
the best that we can to find suitable family members. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
That's first and foremost. The other part of that is that
the most important thing to the Department is beyond trying
to find good family members, we're also trying to do what we
think is in the very best interest of the children. So
 actually what's most important, of course, is what's best
for the children, and this is the law that we've been
talking about that's changed.
In this particular case, I think both of those things
are very definitely met by placing this baby or these two
children with their maternal aunties.
 
. . . .
 Sometimes we have to choose what's best, and we would
always have to go with what's in the best interests of the
children.
 
Jiminez also testified that R.A. is very well adjusted
 
and seemed to be doing really well with both of his placements,
 
both here and in Washington.
 
After the close of evidence, the Family Court stated
 
that it needed to "rule on placement of the boys in the interim." 
The court asked for written closing arguments to be submitted and
 for suggestions with regard to placement for the two week period
 before the court's final decision. Grandmother offered to take
 the children for the two weeks. Both the GAL and counsel for
 Great Aunt agreed that Grandmother should have children for the
 two weeks. However, counsel for the Foster Parents objected
 because "[t]here's been reservations in the past about long-term
 visits." The Family Court stated to Grandmother:
 
I think it's unlikely that I'll grant your adoption
petition, not because I don't think – not because I think
you're a bad person or anything like that, but that of the
contestants, and that's probably the best word I can use,
that you offer them the least in terms of a future, and I
say that mainly because I – family courts are, I think, by
nature, really conservative places, and while you may be a
different person than you were at the time of your criminal
activity, at the time of your prosecution, at the time of
your incarceration, those are things that I cannot ignore,
and neither of the other contestants presents that kind of
hurdle. It's a hurdle. Frankly, it's there for all of your
life, and you know it. So that's my – that's my concern with
placement with you. 
14

  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Family Court ruled that it would leave the children
 
where they were, with Foster Parents.
 
C.	 The Family Court's Rulings
 
On October 15, 2015, the Family Court filed a
 
Memorandum Decision, awarding the boys to the Foster Parents. 
The Family Court wrote, inter alia:
 
Justice McKenna wrote in A.S. that DHS' preference was
entitled to agency deference, and a party opposing the
preference had the burden of establishing that the
preference was not in the best interests of the children.
The burden of proof, however, is a preponderance of the
evidence. So proving that one proposed adoption is in the
children's best interests by definition establishes that any
other proposed adoption is not. What the A.S. decision
 makes most clear is that the Family Court must exercise its
own judgment concerning what is in the best interests of
children involved in custody disputes. 
On November 10, 2015, the Family Court filed Findings
and Decision of the Court Granting Petition for Adoption, and an
 
Adoption Decree, in FC-A No. 15-1-0013 and FC-A No. 15-1-0021,
 granting the Foster Parents' petitions as to R.A. and H.A. On
 November 10, 2015, the Family Court filed its Findings of Fact
 (FOFs), Conclusions of Law (COLs), which included:
 
 
6. 	Under HRS § 578-8(c)(1)(H) [sic], DHS' consent is not
required if it has been unreasonably withheld.
 
7. 	In a contested adoption, DHS's consent to one
petitioner and not another is the legal equivalent of
a DHS preference for permanent placement. 
8. 	Under In the Interest of A.S., 132 Haw. 368 (2014),
there is no relative placement preference of foster
children; however, that is precisely what DHS has
done. DHS has expressed that preference in the guise
of its concern that [the Foster Parents] are unlikely
to maintain family connections between the boys and
the extended families of their biological parents.
The Court's review of the record in the FC-S cases and
 the testimony of [the Foster Parents] convince the
Court that DHS ought not to be concerned. 
9. 	
Under In the Interest of A.S. , 132 Haw. 368 (2014),
the Court must make its own determination which of the
 competing adoptions is in [R.A.] and [H.A.]'s best
interests.
 
15

    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10. 	Under In the Interest of A.S., 132 Haw. 368 (2014), a
party opposing DHS's preference has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, the
preference is not in the children's best interests. 
11.	 In any case where there is a dispute as to the custody
of a minor child, the Court must consider the best
interest factors set forth in HRS § 571-46(b).
 
12.	 [quoting all of the HRS § 571-46(b) factors]
 
13.	 In this case, parental rights have been terminated, so
the factors and references to "parent" in the statute

apply here to the three proposed adoptive
placements[.]
 
14. 	There are no allegations or concerns of sexual or

physical abuse, or neglect or emotional abuse by any
of the petitioners, so factors one and two do not
apply.
 
15. 	Factor three, the "overall quality of the parent-child
relationship" weighs heavily in favor of placing R.A.
with [the Foster Parents]. The testimony of the
expert witnesses presented by both DHS and the [Foster
Parents], as well as the articles on child development
addressing attachment that were admitted in to
evidence, establish that at this stage of development
children of R.A.'s age are forming attachments
critical to healthy growth, and that severing those
attachments will create stress. 
. . . .
 
17. 	[R.A.]'s primary attachments are to [the Foster
Parents]. While there is no way to predict how
detrimental severing his primary attachments will be
for [R.A.], all of the professionals, including the
DHS supervisor, agree that there will be a negative
impact.
 
18. 	As to the other placements, [R.A.] has important
relationships with both [Grandmother] and [Great
Aunt]; however, they are not primary attachment
relationships, and granting adoption to either of them
would require severing [R.A.]'s critical attachment to
[the Foster Parents]. 
. . . .
 
20. 	Likewise, [Great Aunt] and her partner have a lot to
offer [R.A.] and [H.A.], and had [R.A.] been placed
with them earlier in his life, formed the attachments
with them he has instead formed with [the Foster
Parents], this factor may have weighed in their favor,
rather than heavily against them.
 
21. 	The analysis of the "overall quality of the parent-
child relationship" factor for [H.A.] is different.
At his stage of development, critical attachments to
individuals have not been formed, so moving from one
home to another will not have the same negative impact
on him that a similar move will have on [R.A.].
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
22. 	Factor four, the "history of caregiving or parenting
by each parent" again weighs heavily in [the Foster
Parent]'s favor. [R.A.] has been with them longer
than anyone else, nearly half of his life. During
that time he has had the time necessary to interact
and form secure attachments. He has spent a few weeks
with [Great Aunt], and visits with [Grandmother]
regularly, but [the Foster Parents] have been the ones
to raise him through his toddlerhood.
 
23. 	For [H.A.], he spent three months in a general-
licensed foster home, and approximately six weeks with
each [Great Aunt] and the [Foster Parents]. He has
 had visitation with [Grandmother]. However, as
discussed above, at his stage of development critical
attachments to individuals have not been formed, so
this factor is not as important to his analysis as it
is to [R.A.]'s.
 
24. 	Factor five, a party's "cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs,
interests, and schedule" weighs equally in favor of
all parties. . . .
 
25. 	All potential placements are able to meet the
physical, emotional, safety, and educational needs of
the children. However, the safety factor weighs
against [Grandmother] because her criminal history and
commitment to her son raise safety concerns.
Similarly, this factor weighs against [Great Aunt]
because of the potential for divided loyalties between
the boys and their mother[].
 
26. 	Factor ten, the "child's need for relationships with
siblings" is pivotal in this case. It is in [R.A.]
and [H.A.]'s best interests to be placed together.
 
27. 	Factor eleven, each placement's "actions demonstrating
that they allow the child to maintain family
connections through family events and activities"
weighs only slightly in [Great Aunt] and
[Grandmother's] favors. They are blood relation to
the boys, and blood relations are generally more
likely than non-relatives to maintain family
connections. However, as testified to by the
Department's expert, if a placement has been
supporting family connections before an adoption, they
are likely to continue to do so. [The Foster Parents]
have been very supportive of [R.A.] and [H.A.]'s
connections with his blood relations. They have
meaningful ongoing contact with [C.O. and her
children]. They have facilitated close to one hundred
Skype sessions between [Great Aunt], [Great Aunt's
significant other], and [R.A.]. They have photographs
of the biological family up in the home. They have
also coordinated ongoing, extensive visitation with
[Grandmother]. As stated above, the Court's review of
the record in the FC-S cases and the testimony of [the
Foster Parents] convince the Court that the concerns
regarding ongoing family connections are unfounded.
 
28. 	As for factor twelve, both [the Foster Parents] and
[Great Aunt] have demonstrated an ability to separate
the children's needs from their own. This factor
 
17
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
weighs against [Grandmother], who has not maintained
good boundaries with her son. She was supporting
guardianship over adoption as a permanency goal and
continues to make payments on her son's land.
 
29. 	Factor thirteen, any "evidence of past or current drug
or alcohol abuse by a parent," weighs again against
[Grandmother], who carries a federal drug conviction
on her record.
 
30. 	None of the remaining factors weigh for or against any
of the parties.
 
31. 	For [R.A.], the overwhelming factor is his need to
maintain his connections with [the Foster Parents].
The only result that preserves the critical
attachments [R.A.] has made is granting [the Foster
Parents'] adoption petitions. For [H.A.], the
overwhelming factor is his need to be placed with his
brother [R.A.].
 
32. 	[The Foster Parents] have proven by preponderance of
the evidence that adoption of [H.A.] and [R.A.] by
[the Foster Parents] would be in [H.A.] and [R.A.]'s
best interests. 
33. 	Thus, the Department has unreasonably withheld its
consent to adoption by [the Foster Parents].
 
On December 8, 2015, the Family Court filed a joint
 
Order Denying Petitions for Adoption in FC-A Nos. 15-1-0016 and
 
15-1-0025 (Grandmother) and FC-A Nos. 15-1-0022 and 15-1-0023
 (Great Aunt). 
Grandmother and the GAL appeal the Family Court's
 
rulings, and Great Aunt cross-appeals.
 II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Great Aunt raises four points of error on appeal:
 (1)
 The Family Court misinterpreted In re AS, applied
 
the wrong standard of review after permanent placement, shifted

 
the burden from the Foster Parents, who challenged the placement,
 to Great Aunt, and showed no deference to DHS;
 
(2) 
The Family Court awarded custody based on a single
 
factor given presumptive paramount weight, creating a priority in
 adoption cases for the continuity of the primary caretakers;
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The Family Court misinterpreted In re AS by finding
 
adoption by kin is not a factor in adoption cases, and falsely
 
accusing DHS of pursuing a relative preference "under the guise"
 of stating its real concerns about maintaining family
 connections; and
 
(4) The Family Court disregarded Foster Father's
 
storage, daily use, and likely illegal purchase of medical
 marijuana. 
The GAL raises three points of error on appeal:
 (1) The Family Court erred in temporarily placing the
 
children with Foster Parents on August 4, 2015, and August 28,
 2015;
 
(2) The Family Court erred in granting the adoptions to
 
the Foster Parents; and
 
(3) The Family Court was clearly erroneous in its FOFs
 
and COLs that the Foster Parents' adoptions were in the best
 interest of R.A. and H.A. 
Grandmother raises the following points of error on
 
appeal:
 
(1) The Family Court erred when it prejudged her case
 
prior to trial;
 
(2) The Family Court erred when it ruled against her
 
cases prior to the closing of the trial;
 
(3) The Family Court erred by not independently
 
drafting its own Findings of Fact;
 
(4) In re AS does not apply to the instant case;
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(5) The Family Court erred when it overlooked
 
conflicting statements from the Foster Parents regarding Foster
 
Father's medical marijuana use;
 
(6) DHS and the Foster Parents erred in withholding
 
visitations from Grandmother;
 
(7) The Family Court erred in not admitting Doctor
 
Vigoritto's letter into evidence;
 
(8) The Foster Parents violated the "Hopes and Dreams"
 
agreement at the Ohana conference;
 
(9) The Family Court erred in considering Grandmother's
 
prior conviction; 
(10) The Family Court wrongly concluded that adoption
 
by the Foster Parents is in the children's best interests; and
 
(11) The Family Court discriminated against Grandmother
 
because of her age. 
III. 
APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decision will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the "clearly erroneous" standard. A FOF is clearly
erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to
support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in
support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless
left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has
 been made. "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence
 which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable
a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are
reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard.
COLs, consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court
and are freely reviewable for their correctness.
 
. . . .

 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[T]he family court's determination of what is or is
not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for
clear error.
 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal.
 
It is well-settled that an appellate court will not
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses
and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the
trier of fact.
 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189–90, 20 P.3d 616, 622–23 (2001) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and ellipses
 
omitted).
 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law
reviewable de novo." State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 390,
219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009)(internal quotation marks

omitted). Our construction of statutes is guided by the
following rules:
 
First the fundamental starting point for
statutory-interpretation is the language of the
statute itself. Second, where the statutory
language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty
is to give effect to its plain and obvious
meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost
obligation to ascertain and give effect to the
intention of the legislature, which is to be
obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself. Fourth, when there is
doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an
expression used in a statute, an ambiguity
exists. 
First Ins. Co. of Hawaii v. A&B Props., 126 Hawai 'i 406, 414, 271 
P.3d 1165, 1173 (2012) (citation omitted).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Adoption Framework
 Adoption proceedings are governed by Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) chapter 578. HRS § 578-8(a) (2006) provides a
 
four-part test for entering an adoption decree:
 
§ 578-8 Hearing; investigation; decree. (a) No
 
decree of adoption shall be entered unless a hearing has
been held at which the petitioner or petitioners, and any
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
legal parent married to a petitioner, and any subject of the
adoption whose consent is required, have personally appeared
before the court, unless expressly excused by the court.
After considering the petition and such evidence as the
petitioners and any other properly interested person may
wish to present, the court may enter a decree of adoption if
it is satisfied (1) that the individual is adoptable under
sections 578-1 and 578-2, (2) that the individual is
physically, mentally, and otherwise suitable for adoption by
the petitioners, (3) that the petitioners are fit and proper
persons and financially able to give the individual a proper
home and education, if the individual is a child, and (4)
that the adoption will be for the best interests of the
individual, which decree shall take effect upon such date as
may be fixed therein by the court, such date to be not
earlier than the date of the filing of the petition and not
later than six months after the date of the entry of the
decree.
 
HRS § 578-1 (Supp. 2016) primarily pertains to who may
 
petition to adopt an individual. HRS § 578-2 (2006 & Supp. 2016)
 
states, in relevant part:
 
§ 578-2 Consent to adoption. (a) Persons required to
consent to adoption. Unless consent is not required or is
dispensed with under subsection (c) hereof, a petition to
adopt a child may be granted only if written consent to the
proposed adoption has been executed by:
. . . .

 
(6)	 Any person or agency having legal custody of the
child or legally empowered to consent;
. . . .
 
(c) Persons as to whom consent not required or whose
consent may be dispensed with by order of the court.
(1) 	
Persons as to whom consent not required:

. . . . 
 
(H)
	 Any legal guardian or legal custodian of
the child sought to be adopted, other than
a parent, who has failed to respond in
writing to a request for consent for a
period of sixty days or who, after
examination of the person's written
reasons for withholding consent, is found
by the court to be withholding the
person's consent unreasonably;
 
HRS chapter 578 does not define what constitutes the
 
best interest of the child in the context of adoption
 
proceedings. However, this case stems from Child Protective Act
 (HRS chapter 587A) proceedings in which the natural parents'
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parental rights were terminated and DHS was awarded permanent
 
custody. In such cases (as HRS chapter 587A also does not define

 
the best interest of the child), Hawai 'i courts have often looked 
to applicable best-interest-of-the-child factors provided in HRS
 chapter 571 for the purpose of determining custody and visitation
 in divorce proceedings. See, e.g., In re AS, 130 Hawai
'i 486, 
507, 312 P.3d 1193, 1214 (App. 2013), affirmed and clarified by
 In re AS, 132 Hawai
'i 368, 376-77, 322 P.3d 263, 271-72 (2014). 
HRS § 571-46(b) (Supp. 2016) states:
 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best
interest of the child under this section, the court shall
consider, but not be limited to, the following:
(1)	 Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a
child by a parent;
(2)	 Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a
child by a parent;
(3)	 The overall quality of the parent-child
relationship;
(4)	 The history of caregiving or parenting by each
parent prior and subsequent to a marital or
other type of separation;
(5)	 Each parent's cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing
needs, interests, and schedule; provided that
this factor shall not be considered in any case
where the court has determined that family
violence has been committed by a parent;
(6)	 The physical health needs of the child;
(7)	 The emotional needs of the child;
(8)	 The safety needs of the child;
(9)	 The educational needs of the child;
(10)	 The child's need for relationships with
siblings;
(11)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they
allow the child to maintain family connections
through family events and activities; provided
that this factor shall not be considered in any
case where the court has determined that family
violence has been committed by a parent;
(12)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they
separate the child's needs from the parent's
needs;
(13)	 Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol
abuse by a parent;
(14)	 The mental health of each parent;
(15)	 The areas and levels of conflict present within
the family; and
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(16)	 A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protection
from abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a
tactical advantage in any proceeding involving
the custody determination of a minor[.]
 
In addition to these statutory precepts, in In re AS, 
the supreme court provided clarification and guidance applicable 
to many of the issues raised in this appeal. The supreme court recognized DHS's expertise, discretion, and statutory charge to make child placement determinations in the first instance, but made clear that the Family Court is required to make its own independent determinations as to the best interest of children in adjudicating permanent placements. In re AS, 132 Hawai
'i at 377­
78, 322 P.3d at 272-73. In light of DHS's duties and expertise, however, the supreme court held that "where a party challenges DHS's permanent placement determination, that party bears the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the DHS's permanent placement determination is not in the best interests of the child." Id. at 377, 322 P.3d at 272. The 
supreme court also discussed at some length, and confirmed, that under federal and state law, there is no relative placement mandate or preference with respect to permanent placement matters. Id. at 378-87, 322 P.3d at 273-82. Nevertheless, as 
emphasized by the concurring justices, kinship is "an anchoring proposition in the sea of circumstances considered in the decision to adopt" and the relevant statutes "do not preclude weighing kinship as a substantial factor in considering with whom 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a child should be placed under a permanent plan." Id. at 390,
 
322 P.3d at 85 (referencing HRS § 587A-32).
 
B. The Adoption Rulings
 
In the November 10, 2015 Findings of Fact, Conclusions
 
of Law, the Family Court included 191 numbered paragraphs
 
2
designated as "Findings of Fact,"  the vast majority of which do
not properly state findings, because they primarily contain recitals of the various witnesses' testimony with no actual statement of the court's determination as to credibility, weight, or resolution of conflicting evidence. See, e.g., In re Doe, 96 
Hawai
'i 255, 259, 30 P.3d 269, 273 (App. 2001) ("the family 
court's statement of the evidence, by itself, is not its finding of fact"); State v. Krstoth, 138 Hawai
'i 268, 271 n.2, 378 P.3d 
984, 987 n.2 (2016) ("[t]he circuit court actually made few relevant findings, as most of the 'findings' were recitations of testimony"). Nevertheless, the section designated as "Conclusions of Law" contains several paragraphs that are more properly characterized as factual determinations or mixed factual and legal determinations. See, e.g., 9C Charles Alan Wright and 
Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice & Procedure Civil § 2579 (3d ed. 2008) ("[a]n appellate court will regard a finding or conclusion for what it is, regardless of the label the trial court may have put on it"). These facilitate our review of the 
2
 There are four numbered paragraphs in a section regarding
jurisdiction, thirteen in a section regarding case history, and 174 in a
section regarding the trial, with each section beginning with the numeral 1.
 
25
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court's decision to grant the Foster Parents' petitions to
 
adopt and to deny DHS's petitions supporting adoptions by Great
 Aunt, as well as Grandmother's petitions to adopt R.A. and H.A.
 
Accordingly, we turn to the HRS § 578-8 requirements
 
for entering the adoption decrees in this case. 
1.	 Adoptability under HRS §§ 578-1 and 578-2
 
First, we consider whether R.A. and H.A. are adoptable
 
under HRS §§ 578-1 and 578-2. There is no dispute concerning the
 eligibility of each of the adoption petitioners under HRS § 578­1.
3 With respect to HRS § 578-2, the Family Court's COLs include
 
the following, which are challenged on appeal:
 
6	 Under HRS § 578-8(c)(1)(H) [sic], DHS' consent is not 
required if it has been unreasonably withheld.
 
7.
	 In a contested adoption, DHS' consent to one
petitioner and not another is the legal equivalent of
a DHS preference for permanent placement. 
. . . .
 
3	 HRS § 578-1 (Supp. 2016) provides:
 
§578-1 Who may adopt; jurisdiction; venue.  Any
proper adult person, not married, or any person married to
the legal father or mother of a minor child, or a husband
and wife jointly, may petition the family court of the
circuit in which the person or persons reside or are in
military service or the family court of the circuit in which
the individual to be adopted resides or was born or in which
a child placing organization approved by the department of
human services under the provisions of section 346-17 having
legal custody (as defined in section 571-2) of the child is
located, for leave to adopt an individual toward whom the
person or persons do not sustain the legal relationship of
parent and child and for a change of the name of the
individual. When adoption is the goal of a permanent plan
recommended by the department of human services and ordered
pursuant to section 587A-31, the department may petition for
adoption on behalf of the proposed adoptive parents. The
 petition shall be in such form and shall include such
information and exhibits as may be prescribed by the family
court. 
26
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
33. 	Thus, the Department has unreasonably withheld its 
consent to adoption by [the Foster Parents].
 
It is undisputed that DHS did not consent to Foster
 
Parents' adoption of R.A. and H.A. Except for what appears to be
 
a typographical error (it should reference HRS § 578-2(c)(1)(H)),
 COL 6 is generally a correct statement of the law. COL 7 is not
 determinative of whether DHS unreasonably withheld its consent to
 the adoptions by Foster Parents, and we decline to unnecessarily
 complicate the matter by commenting here on "legal equivalency." 
COL 33 follows the Family Court's multi-pronged analysis of the
 considerations for determining the best interests of the child. 
Clearly, the court's determination that consent was unreasonably
 withheld was conflated with its determination that adoption by
 the Foster Parents was in the best interest of both R.A. and H.A.
 
Under HRS § 578-8, satisfaction of the consent statute,
 
HRS § 578-2, and the determination that the adoption is in the
 best interests of the child are separate requirements. Some
 jurisdictions with such requirements have mandated that the
 unreasonableness of an agency's withholding of consent be judged
 independently of the best interests of the child analysis, so as
 not to render the consent requirement superfluous. See, e.g., In
 
re Adoption of Missy M., 133 P.3d 645, 650 (Alaska 2006). The
 Alaska courts go so far as to hold that a "facially reasonable
 withholding of consent can be overcome only if the prospective
 adoptive parent can show, by clear and convincing evidence, that
 it would be clearly detrimental to the child to deny the
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adoption." Id. at 654. That analysis, however, is based on a 
rather stringent deference to agency expertise, which appears to 
be inconsistent with our State's requirement that family courts make independent determinations in adjudicating permanent placements. Compare In re Adoption of Missy M., 133 P.3d at 651­
52, with In re AS, 132 Hawai
'i at 377-78, 322 P.3d at 272-73. 
Nevertheless, a requirement that the unreasonableness 
of DHS's withholding of consent be established independently of the best interest of the child analysis, to avoid rendering that part of the statute superfluous, is well-founded. See, e.g., 
Santiago v. Tanaka , 137 Hawai 'i 137, 156, 366 P.3d 612, 631 
(2016) ("courts are bound to give effect to all parts of a statute, and no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, void, or insignificant" (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). We hold that, prospectively, the family courts must make a separate inquiry into whether the applicable HRS § 578-2 consent provision has been satisfied, or whether the first of the four HRS § 578-8(a) requirements has otherwise been met. With respect to the unreasonableness of DHS's withholding of consent to adoption, consistent with the standard applicable to other aspects of permanent placement, we hold that the party challenging DHS's action bears the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the withholding of consent is unreasonable. See In re AS, 132 Hawai
'i at 377, 
322 P.3d at 272. The reasonableness of DHS's decision should be 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examined in light of the process undertaken and the reasons
 
articulated by DHS in support of its decision to withhold
 consent. Inevitably, many if not all of DHS's considerations
 regarding consent will be germane to the requirement that the
 adoption be in the best interest of the child.
4 However, no
 
decree of adoption may be entered unless all of the HRS § 578­8(a) requirements have been satisfied.
 
In this case, although not expressly stated, it appears
 
that the findings in COLs 8, 15, 17, 18, 22, 25, 27, 28, and 31
 underlie the Family Court's conclusion that DHS unreasonably
 withheld consent to the adoption of R.A. by the Foster Parents. 
It appears that the only findings that support the Family Court's
 conclusion that DHS unreasonably withheld consent to the adoption
 of H.A. by the Foster Parents are the findings (in COL 26 and 31)
 that it is in both boys' best interest to be placed together. 
Neither the GAL nor Grandmother specifically challenges the
 
4 We note that HRS § 578-2(c)(1)(H) states, in pertinent part, that
consent is not required from DHS if DHS "has failed to respond in writing to a
 
request for consent for a period of sixty days or [if], after examination of
[DHS's] written reasons for withholding consent, [DHS] is found by the court
to be withholding [DHS's] consent unreasonably[.]" (Emphasis added.) The
 record in this case does not appear to include a request from Foster Parents
to DHS for consent to their adoption of R.A. and H.A. Thus, DHS did not
appear to "respond in writing" or provide "written reasons" for withholding
consent, except to the extent one might construe its petitions for adoption by
Great Aunt as its written reasons for not consenting to the Foster Parents'
petition, which one might broadly view as a request for DHS's consent. It
 does not appear that any party or the Family Court raised these issues in the
proceedings below, as grounds for granting or denying Foster Parents'
petition. However, in future proceedings, a petitioner (other than DHS) would
be well advised to submit a (written or otherwise verifiable) request for
consent to DHS. In addition, it appears that DHS has a statutory duty to
provide a written response to such a request, in less than sixty days, or DHS
essentially abdicates its duty to either consent or withhold consent to the
adoption. Finally, we note that pursuant to HRS § 578-8(b), under some
circumstances, a family court may waive the requirement for notice to and an
investigation by DHS.
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
findings and conclusions stated in these COLs, although it
 
appears they challenge their relative weight, as well as the
 court's resulting decision. DHS declined to take a position or
 file briefs in this appeal.
 
Great Aunt challenges all of these COLs, except COL 22
 
(that R.A. has mostly been in the care of Foster Parents and
 formed attachments) and COL 28 (that Foster Parents are able to
 separate the children's needs from their own).
5 We agree with
 
Great Aunt's contention, regarding COL 8, that there is no
 evidence in the record to support that DHS's concern regarding
 the Foster Parents' maintenance of family connections was a
 "guise" for a relative placement preference and we consider that
 portion of COL to be clearly erroneous. However, COL 8 also
 states that the Family Court is convinced by the record in the
 FC-S cases, as well as the Foster Parents' testimony, "that DHS
 ought not be concerned." Although there was conflicting evidence
 on this issue, we cannot conclude that the Family Court clearly
 erred in this regard. 
Upon review of the record and the evidence presented at
 
trial, we conclude there is substantial evidence to support the
 findings in COLs 8 (except as noted), 15, 17, 18, 22, 25, 26, 27,
 28, and 31. In sum, the Family Court determined that DHS's
 
5
 The GAL, Great Aunt and Grandmother all point to Foster Father's
daily use of medical marijuana as cause to vacate the Family Court's Decision.
However, the withholding of DHS's consent was not based on Foster Father's
marijuana use, as it appears that consent was effectively withheld prior to
the parties learning of this fact.
 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consent was unreasonably withheld because the court was convinced
 
that the Foster Parents would maintain family connections, R.A.'s
 attachment to the Foster Parents was critical to his well-being,
 severing the connection between Foster Parents and R.A. would
 negatively impact him, the Foster Parents have raised R.A.
 through toddlerhood, the Foster Parents (as well as the other
 petitioners) are able to meet the physical, emotional, safety,
 and educational needs of both children, the Foster Parents are
 able to separate the childrens' needs from their own, and the
 adoption of both boys by the Foster Parents will keep them
 together. A determination of reasonableness, or
 unreasonableness, is generally a question of fact. Amfac, Inc.
 
v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 107, 839 P.2d 10, 24
 (1992). Here, the Family Court found and concluded that it was
 unreasonable for DHS to have withheld consent for the Foster
 Parents' adoption of R.A. and H.A. This ruling was based on
 DHS's investigation and testimony, as well as the testimony and
 evidence presented by the Foster Parents. We cannot conclude
 that the Family Court clearly erred in this determination.
 
Therefore, the first of the HRS § 578-8(a)
 
requirements, that R.A. and H.A. are adoptable by the Foster
 Parents, was satisfied.
 
2. Suitability of the boys for the adoption
 
The second requirement stated in HRS § 578-8(a) is
 
"that the individual is physically, mentally, and otherwise
 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suitable for adoption by the petitioners." Although some of the
 
assertions raised by GAL, Great Aunt, and Grandmother on appeal
 arguably pertain to this requirement, none of the appellants
 specifically contend that infirmities with respect to this prong
 of the four-part test warrant vacating the Family Court's
 decision and orders. Thus, any challenge based on suitability
 per se is waived and, to the extent applicable, we will address
 these issues in conjunction with the best interests of the
 children analysis.
 
3. Fit and proper petitioners
 
The third requirement stated in HRS § 578-8(a) is "that
 
the petitioners are fit and proper persons and financially able
 to give the individual a proper home and education, if the
 individual is a child." Pertinent to this requirement, in COL
 25, the Family Court found that all petitioners were "able to
 meet the physical, emotional, safety, and educational needs of
 the children." On appeal, no one directly argues that the Foster
 Parents are not fit and proper persons with the financial ability
 to give R.A. and H.A. a proper home and education. 
However, Great Aunt and Grandmother argue that the
 
Family Court did not adequately weigh Foster Father's daily use
 of medical marijuana outside of the family home for chronic knee
 pain. More pointedly, Great Aunt argues that the court "could
 certainly consider . . . whether a lifetime use of medical
 marijuana outside the family home 'endangers the health and well­
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being' of two little boys removed from their parents' home
 
because of drug abuse." Great Aunt cites HRS § 571-46(b)(13),
 which requires consideration of "[a]ny evidence of past or
 current drug or alcohol abuse by a parent." 
There was testimony, and the Family Court found, that 
Foster Father had a medical marijuana permit. There is no evidence of "drug abuse" or that Father used marijuana recreationally, as opposed to medicinally. The Family Court was free to disregard any negative inferences from Father's "taking the Fifth Amendment" when asked how he obtained marijuana prior to having a caregiver. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has 
acknowledged the lack of clarity that has existed in our medical marijuana statutes and we decline to overturn the Family Court's adoption decision, and its weighing of the evidence, based on Foster Father's decision not to wade into a murky area of potential penal liability. See, e.g., State v. Woodhall, 129 
Hawai
'i 397, 409, 301 P.3d 607, 619 (2013). The only evidence 
concerning Foster Father's use of marijuana reflected considered efforts to safely store and use it, away from the boys' access. On the record in this case, we cannot conclude that, because of Foster Father's use of medical marijuana, the Family Court erred in finding and concluding that Foster Parents were fit and proper persons, within the meaning of HRS § 578-8(a). 
In addition to the above, the GAL expressed deep
 
concerns about whether the Foster Parents would truly work to
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maintain strong family connections with their extended biological
 
relatives who love them and want to support them. The GAL cites
 many instances and parts of Foster Mother's testimony to support
 the GAL's concerns. However, these issues were well developed at
 trial, and there were cogent reasons for, for example, Foster
 Parents' initial refusal to allow visitation with Grandmother, as
 DHS had expressed concerns about Grandmother's ability to place
 the children's needs above those of their parents. The Family
 Court clearly weighed the evidence and discounted these concerns. 
On the record in this case, we cannot conclude that, because of
 the concerns that Foster Parents may not adequately support the
 boys relationships with their family, the Family Court erred in
 tacitly finding and concluding that Foster Parents were fit and
 proper persons, within the meaning of HRS § 578-8(a).
 
4. Best interests of the child
 
The final requirement in HRS § 578-8(a) is "that the
 
adoption will be for the best interests of the individual." This
 issue was and remains foremost in the minds of all of the parties
 and is of utmost concern to both the Family Court and the
 appellate court.
 
The GAL contends that the Family Court erred in
 
awarding the adoptions to the Foster Parents against the
 recommendations of DHS and the GAL. The GAL submits that the
 Family Court relied too heavily on a single factor, i.e., that
 R.A. had spent nearly half of his young life in the Foster
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Parents' care. The GAL argues that the Family Court ignored or
 
overlooked many of the factors she used in formulating her
 placement recommendation including, but not limited to, her
 concern that the Foster Parents' quest to adopt H.A. was simply a
 means to ensure that they could keep R.A., and that they did not
 show adequate interest in or concern for the younger boy. 
Additional "negatives" include Foster Father's marijuana use and
 the strong reasons and rationale for adoption by Great Aunt.
 
Great Aunt expresses these same concerns, and points to
 
problematic areas of testimony and evidence, such as the alleged
 inadequacy of the time Foster Parents' expert witnesses spent
 with R.A. before formulating opinions concerning the level of
 stress and trauma that would be experienced if R.A. would be
 removed from the Foster Parents' home. Great Aunt argues that
 the Family Court misinterpreted In re AS by finding that adoption
 by kin is not a factor in adoption cases, but acknowledges the
 Family Court did in fact note that blood relatives are more
 likely to maintain family connections and specifically considered
 family connections as a factor.
 
Grandmother's arguments demonstrate her great love for
 
these children and her desire to be close to them and see them
 raised with the benefits of strong family ties and knowing their
 family's religion, values, and traditions. Grandmother argues
 that the Foster Parents worked to undermine the possibility of
 either Grandmother or Great Aunt ultimately being awarded
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adoption because their intent was always to try to win adoption
 
of R.A., and then H.A.
 
It appears, however, that all of the arguments raised
 
on appeal concerning the best interests of R.A. and H.A. were
 carefully considered by the Family Court. Contrary to Great
 Aunt's contention, the Family Court did not make its decision
 based on a single factor or disregard Great Aunt's kinship with
 the boys in its determination that it would be in their best
 interest to be adopted by the Foster Parents. The Family Court
 considered and weighed each of the best interests factors in HRS
 § 571-46(b), as detailed in COLs 13 through 32, which are set
 forth above.
 
Although conflicting testimony and evidence was
 
presented as to some of these factors, there is substantial
 evidence in the record to support the Family Court's findings,
 and there is no clear error in the Family Court's determination
 of what is in the best interests of R.A. and H.A. Accordingly,
 we will not disturb the Family Court's decision that the Foster
 Parents' adoption of R.A. and H.A. is in their best interests.
 
C. Other Issues Raised on Appeal
 1. The Family Court's application of In re AS
 
Great Aunt argues that the Family Court misinterpreted
 
In re AS, applied the wrong "standard of review" after permanent
 placement, shifted the burden from the petitioners who challenged
 DHS's placement, i.e., the Foster Parents, to Great Aunt, and
 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showed no deference to DHS. We acknowledge that the lack of
 
differentiation between the best interests of the child analysis
 and the other statutory requirements set forth in HRS chapter 578
 is problematic. Hence, we have held that, prospectively, the
 family courts must make a separate inquiry into whether the
 applicable HRS § 578-2 consent provision has been satisfied, or
 whether the first of the four HRS § 578-8(a) requirements has
 otherwise been met, and we have confirmed the burden of proof
 applicable to the determination concerning whether DHS has
 unreasonably withheld consent. Although the issue is not
 squarely before us, we have also urged potential adoptive parents
 and DHS to be more attentive to the process intended to occur
 pursuant to HRS § 578-2(c)(1)(H) (the provision concerning DHS
 consent). Again, although not raised here, prudence dictates
 that separate inquiries be made into each of the other HRS § 578­8(a) requirements, as well.
 
However, there is sufficient clarity and support in the
 
record of this case to dissuade this court from disturbing the
 Family Court's decision to grant the Foster Parents' petitions to
 adopt R.A. and H.A., in part because we reject most aspects of
 Great Aunt's argument that the Family Court's procedures and
 analysis are too flawed to stand. Notwithstanding erroneous
 arguments below by the Foster Parents, in COLs 9 and 10, the
 Family Court correctly ruled that, under In re AS, it "must make
 its own determination of which of the competing adoptions is in
 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[the children's] best interests" and that "a party opposing DHS's 
preference has the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the preference is not in the children's best interests." See In re AS, 132 Hawai
'i at 377-78, 322 P.3d at 
272-73. We cannot conclude that the Family Court acted inconsistently with these standards. 
2.	 The temporary placement in August 2015
 
The GAL argues that the Family Court erred when,
 
pending completion of the adoption trial, it ordered both boys
 back from Great Aunt's home in Washington and, effectively
 ordered that they remain in the Foster Parents' home until a
 final adoption decision was made. It appears, however, that the
 Family Court properly exercised its authority, ordering that the
 children remain in the permanent custody of DHS, but that they be
 placed pendente lite with the Foster Parents through the trial.
 
3.	 Whether the Family Court prejudged Grandmother's
petitions for adoption
 
Grandmother contends that the Family Court erred by
 
prejudging her case prior to trial and declining her petitions
 
for adoption prior to the end of trial. Here, after all of the
 petitions were filed, but before the evidence was taken at trial,
 at a hearing on a preliminary matter, which Grandmother did not
 attend, the Family Court commented that, "I don't believe that
 she is a viable candidate for adoption, but, however, you [the
 Foster Parents], as well as the folks on the mainland, are[.]" 
While it could have been more clearly expressed, it is clear,
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
based on the record as a whole, that the Family Court was not
 
prejudging the case, rather it was stating its initial
 inclination based on, inter alia, DHS's statement of position in
 the Permanent Plan for H.A., which stated that Grandmother was
 "inappropriate" as a permanent placement, and cited concerns
 about her ability to remain impartial and protective of the
 children, and her history of drug abuse, which include a felony
 conviction.
 
4. Grandmother's other arguments on appeal
 
Grandmother also argues that the Family Court erred in
 
not drafting its own FOFs, with respect to DHS and the Foster
 Parents withholding of visitations from Grandmother, in not
 admitting Doctor Vigoritto's letter into evidence, in considering
 Grandmother's prior conviction, and in discriminating against her
 because of her age. Upon careful review, we conclude that these
 arguments are without merit.
 
Hawaii Family Court Rule 110, which applies to adoption
 
proceedings, provides, in relevant part: "Notwithstanding Rule
 52 of these rules, following the hearing, written findings of
 fact and conclusions of law that shall be prepared by the court
 or by the attorney for the petitioner or petitioners shall be
 entered in each case." Therefore, the Family Court was not
 required to independently draft its own FOFs and COLs.
 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Any possible error by DHS in imposing or suggesting
 
restrictions on Grandmother's visitation with R.A. does not show
 
that the Family Court abused its discretion or otherwise erred.
 
At trial, Grandmother attempted to admit into evidence
 
her exhibit A-14, a letter from psychologist Dr. Vigorito. 
Counsel for the Foster Parents objected for lack of foundation
 and hearsay. The Family Court sustained the objection and
 explained the hearsay rule and necessity of a hearsay exception
 to admit the letter. Grandmother stated that CWS requested
 Grandmother and her partner to undergo a psychological evaluation
 to "claim that we are a safe environment to raise our
 grandchildren." Grandmother's proffer was insufficient to
 establish a hearsay exception. Arguments that were not presented
 to the Family Court are considered waived. See, e.g., Hong v.
 
Kong, 5 Haw. App. 174, 177, 683 P.2d 833, 837 (1984). 
Grandmother notes that she has been sober for fourteen 
years, which is commendable. Under HRS § 571-46(b)(13), however, the Family Court was required to consider any evidence of past drug abuse by Grandmother. The Family Court found that this factor weighed against her because of her federal drug conviction. As substantial evidence supports this finding, the Family Court did not clearly err. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 
190, 20 P.3d at 623. 
Finally, in applying the best interests standards, the
 
Family Court did not refer to Grandmother's age and, although the
 
40
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court previously noted her age and her anticipated age at
 
the time H.A. reached eighteen years old, there is no indication
 in the record that the court inappropriately weighed
 Grandmother's age in declining to award adoption to her. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's

 
November 10, 2015 Adoption Decrees granting the Foster Parents'
 petitions to adopt R.A. and H.A., as well as the Family Court's
 December 8, 2015 order denying DHS's and Grandmother's adoption
 petitions.
 On the briefs:
 
Peter Van Name Esser,
for Respondent/Appellee/
Cross-Appellant P.O.
 
L.A.,

Petitioner/Appellant pro se.
 
Stephanie St. John,
Appellant Guardian Ad Litem.
 
Francis T. O'Brien,
for Petitioners/Appellees
D.W. and K.W.
 
41
 