NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000141
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE PROTECTION OF THE PROPERTY OF
 
MICHAEL A. PEDRO, Protected Person, v. SUSAN PEDRO;
MATTHEW PEDRO, Respondents-Appellants, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(GUARDIANSHIP NO. 2357)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this appeal arising out of a guardianship
 
proceeding, Appellants Susan and Matthew Pedro (Susan and
 
Matthew, or collectively the Pedros) appeal from the February 7,
 2013 "Order Denying [the Pedros'] Motion for Reconsideration of
 Order Granting Petition for Approval of Ninth Triennial Accounts
 and Judgment Pursuant to Order Granting Petition for Approval of
 Ninth Triennial Accounts" (Order Denying Motion for
 Reconsideration) and the February 7, 2013 Judgment entered
 pursuant to the Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration, by the
 Probate Court of the First Circuit (Probate Court).
1
 
On appeal, the Pedros allege the Probate Court erred by
 
(1) denying their request for evidentiary hearing on their
 October 22, 2012 Motion for Reconsideration (Motion for
 Reconsideration); (2) disregarding Article 3-5.6 of the
 Michael A. Pedro Trust (Trust), which they claim mandates that
 the Pedros could live, without charge, in the residence
 (Residence) purchased for Michael A. Pedro (Michael);
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) concluding that the Pedros were not immediate family members
 
for the purposes of application of Article 3-5.6 of the Trust and
 that even if Susan qualified, the Residence is not being used for
 Michael's benefit; and (4) failing to provide specific authority
 for the Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration and Judgment.
 
After a careful review of the record on appeal, the
 
points raised and arguments made by the parties, and applicable
 legal authority, we resolve the Pedros' points on appeal as
 follows and affirm.
 
I.
 
The Trust was created to manage the assets of Michael,
 
who suffered permanent disability as a child due to medical
 malpractice. Michael was living with and being cared for by
 Betty Pedro, his adoptive mother and biological grandmother
 
2
(Betty). Betty and her husband adopted Michael  when he was two
years old and in 1984, Betty was appointed guardian over

 
Michael's property, including the proceeds of the settlement of
 his malpractice claim. Betty was also authorized by the probate
 court to establish a trust containing all of Michael's
 guardianship property with First Hawaiian Bank (FHB) and Betty as
 co-trustees (Trustees).
 
The Trust was created for Michael as its "sole

 
beneficiary." Pertinent to the issues raised in this appeal,
 Article 3-5.6 of the Trust empowered the Trustees "[t]o purchase
 a residence and furnishings with trust assets not to exceed
 $175,000.00, to be used for the benefit of [Michael] and his
 immediate family, and to pay for all maintenance, taxes,
 insurance, assessments and expenses related thereto, without
 responsibility for diminution in value or lack of income
 
2
 The adoption decree provided, in pertinent part, 
(2) From and after the effective date, for all
purposes, the adopted child and adopting parents shall
sustain towards each other the legal relationship of parents
and child and shall have all the rights and be subject to
all the duties of that relationship, the same as if said
child were the natural child of said adopting parents; and
all such duties and rights as between said child and any
other person having a legal parental relationship to said
child shall be deemed to have ceased.
 
Betty's husband died before the proceedings at issue here.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
production[.]" The Trust also required triennial reports to the
 
court. The Trust was approved by the Probate Court on July 13,
 1984.
 
The Trust immediately purchased the Residence. 
Although Michael lived with Susan in the Residence for a period
 of time, by the time the Trustees filed their "Petition for
 Approval of Ninth Triennial Accounts Covering the Period From
 July 1, 2008 Through June 30, 2011, and for Instructions"
 (Petition), he had not lived in the Residence for more than a
 decade. Susan, however, continued to reside in the Residence.
 
In their Petition, Trustees stated,
 
8. Michael has asked that [Trustees] allow [Susan] to
continue to live in the Residence without paying rent.
Although [Trustees] want to accommodate Michael's wishes,
they have concerns about (a) whether such rent-free
occupation is truly in Michael's best interest, and (b)
their ability to manage the Residence while Susan Pedro and
other family members (Michael's brother, Matthew, for
example) occupy the Residence. The Residence comprises
almost 40% of the total Trust portfolio. Therefore, the
Trustees need the flexibility to sell the Residence to
provide for Michael['s] needs, if necessary. There have also
been instances where Susan Pedro and Matthew Pedro have
 shown hostility to [FHB] employees who have attempted to
inspect the Residence and to vendors sent by the [Trustees]
to make repairs to the Residence. [Trustees] are concerned
that Susan Pedro and other family members will continue to
interfere with the [Trustees'] duty to protect and preserve
the Residence for Michael's benefit.
 
In the event that the Probate Court ruled the Trust allowed Susan
 
to continue to live in the Residence rent-free, the Trustees
 asked that certain conditions, including requiring Susan to pay
 for the costs of use and upkeep of the Residence, be authorized. 
They also asked that, if Susan did not comply with such
 conditions, they be authorized to terminate Susan's occupancy
 and, if she failed to vacate, that she would be liable for fair­market-value rent.
 
On August 21, 2012, the Pedros filed their "Partial
 
Objection to Co-Trustees' [Petition]" (Partial Objection)
 primarily taking issue with the Trustees' request for authority
 to (1) require that Susan obtain approval for guests staying at
 the Residence for more than fourteen days and (2) terminate
 Susan's rent-free occupancy in the event she failed to comply
 with the Trustees' requested conditions. The Pedros maintained
 that they should be allowed to live rent-free in the Residence as
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
they are "immediate family by any definition." In support of
 
their allegations, a declaration by Matthew was attached, in
 which he alleged that FHB had been "unscrupulous" and averred,
 amongst other things, that FHB had a conflict of interest as over
 fifty percent of Michael's assets were being held in a mutual
 fund owned by FHB.
 
On September 24, 2012, the Probate Court granted the
 
Trustees' Petition and entered judgment thereon. In its order
 granting the Petition, the Probate Court answered the Trustees'
 request for instructions regarding the Residence as follows:
 
a. The Court finds that the purpose of the Trust is to
provide for [Michael's] support, maintenance, health, and
education;
 
b. The Court also finds that Article 3-5.6 is only one
of the Trustee[s'] many enumerated powers, and is not a
requirement of the Trust.
 
c. The Court finds that Susan Pedro does not qualify
as an "immediate family member" for purposes of Article
3-5.6 of the Trust. Even if Susan Pedro qualified as an
"immediate family member," the [Residence] is currently not
being used as [Michael's] residence and is not being used
for his benefit. Therefore, [Michael's] immediate family
members are not entitled to live at the Property rent-free.
 
No party appealed from this judgment. Instead, on
 
3
October 22, 2012, the Pedros filed their HPR Rule 36(b)  Motion
for Reconsideration. The Pedros sought reconsideration and asked
 
that the Trust be amended to remove the requirement of a
 corporate trustee and to replace Betty with Susan and Matthew as
 co-trustees. They argued that
 
[t]his request is appropriate because of the unique,
historical circumstances that resulted in the provision for
and appointment of a corporate trustee have long since
passed. It is also appropriate because of the numerous
 
3
 Our review of the record reveals that two motions for
 
reconsideration were filed by the Pedros on the same date, October 22, 2012.
The first, a fourteen-page document, also bears a "Received" stamp on the
lower right corner and a date of October 18, 2012. The second is a three-page
document without a "Received" stamp. We treat the second as amending the
first and refer to them collectively as the Motion for Reconsideration.
 
Although the Pedros cite to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 60, HPR Rule 36(b) authorizes a probate court to set aside ajudgment for certain enumerated reasons. Rather than rigidly adhering to theform of a movant's motion, appellate courts look to the substance of themotion to determine its nature. Madden v. Madden, 43 Haw. 148, 149-50 (1959)
("Under the rules, the substance of the pleading controls, not thenomenclature given to the pleading."). In any event, the Commentary to HPRRule 36 notes that it "complies substantially with HRCP [Rule] 60" and thuscase law construing HRCP Rule 60 is useful to our analysis. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
violations of the Trust terms by [FHB] and its egregious
breach of it's [sic] fiduciary duty in self-dealing, as
later more fully described herein.
 
No request for an evidentiary hearing, affidavits, nor proffers
 
of evidence were included in or with the Motion for
 Reconsideration.
 
The Trustees filed an objection to the Motion for
 
Reconsideration, arguing that the motion should be denied because
 it contained no argument or evidence that could not have been
 previously presented. On February 7, 2013, the Probate Court
 entered its Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration, ruling in
 pertinent part that, "[t]he Court is unable to conclude that
 there has been a mistake, newly discovered evidence which by due
 diligence could not have been discovered in time before the order
 and judgment were issued, or any other reason justifying relief
 from the order and judgment." From this February 7, 2013 order,
 the Pedros timely appealed.
 
II.
 
The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow the
parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could
not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated
motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old
matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and
should have been brought during the earlier proceeding. 
Cho v. State, 115 Hawai 'i 373, 384, 168 P.3d 17, 28 (2007) 
quoting Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai 'i 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 
547 (2000) (reviewing motion for reconsideration based on HRCP 
Rule 60). Our review of the Pedros' Motion for Reconsideration leads us to the conclusion that all of the arguments they made could, and should, have been made in litigating the Petition. 
The Pedros argued that FHB ought to be removed as a 
trustee by removing the corporate trustee requirement of the Trust, that the Pedros are "immediate family" members as defined by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court, and that the Trust language 
providing for the purchase of the Residence, Article 3-5.6, is mandatory and not precatory language. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Pedros argued that FHB should be removed as a
 
trustee because it violated its fiduciary duties by "seeking to
 
sell" the Residence because FHB would place the proceeds in its
 own subsidiary. The Pedros presented no evidence in support of
 the allegation that FHB had a present intention or had taken
 steps to sell the Residence or explain why any evidence of the
 same could not have been discovered prior to the hearing on the
 Petition. Moreover, to the extent the Pedros' allegation was
 more about FHB adding assets to its subsidiary, this point was
 already unsuccessfully raised in Matthew's declaration in support
 of their Partial Objection; it was not a "new" matter.
 
The Pedros argued that they were "immediate family" for
 
the purposes of application of Article 3-5.6 and "by any
 definition" in their Partial Objection. Therefore, the Pedros'
 arguments not only could have been made, but were made and
 rejected prior to their Motion for Reconsideration. 
Similarly, whether the Trust language providing for a
 
residence for the benefit of Michael's immediate family was
 mandatory was before and decided by the Probate Court in ruling
 on the Petition. Again, this argument was not newly discovered
 and therefore did not qualify as a basis for relief under HPR
 Rule 36.
 
As each of the arguments made in the Motion for
 
Reconsideration was not based on "newly discovered evidence which
 by due diligence could not have been discovered in time before
 the order was issued," HPR Rule 36(b)(2), the Pedros have failed
 to show the Probate Court's denial of their Motion for
 Reconsideration "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
 substantial detriment of a party-litigant." Amfac, Inc. v.
 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26-27
 (1992). As a result, it is unnecessary to address the Pedros'
 other arguments on appeal.
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, the Probate Court of the First
 
Circuit's February 7, 2013 Order Denying Respondents Susan and
 Matthew Pedro's Motion for Reconsideration of Order Granting
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Petition For Approval of Ninth Triennial Accounts and Judgment
 
Pursuant to Order Granting Petition For Approval of Ninth
 Triennial Accounts is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 26, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
John S. Carroll
 
for Respondents-Appellants.
 
Chief Judge
 
Rhonda L. Griswold and

 
Cheryl A. Kinoshita,
(Cades Schutte)
for Co-Trustees-Appellees. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7

 