NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000141 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
EDWARD G. STANLEY, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Respondent-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(S.P.P. NO. 17-1-0007 (CR. NO. 1PC880000418))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Edward G. Stanley (Stanley)
appeals from the "Order Dismissing Edward G. Stanley's Hawaii
Rules of Penal Procedure [(HRPP)] Rule 40 Petition, filed on
March 30, 2017, Without Hearing," filed on February 23, 2018, in
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
On September 22, 1988, Stanley was convicted of: two
counts of Reckless Endangering in the First Degree (Counts I and
II), as lesser included offenses of Attempted Murder in the First
Degree; one count of Attempted Murder in the First Degree, in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500 (1985),
707-701(1)(b) (Supp. 1988), and 706-656 (Supp. 1988) (Count III);
one count of Attempted Manslaughter (Count V), as a lesser
included offense of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree; and
1  The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
one count of Place to Keep Firearm, in violation of HRS § 134-6
(Supp. 1988) (Count VI).   Stanley was sentenced to five years
imprisonment for Counts I and II, life imprisonment without the
possibility of parole for Count III, ten years imprisonment with
a mandatory minimum of five years for Count V, and five years
imprisonment for Count VI, all sentences to be served
concurrently.2
On December 18, 1989, in appeal No. 13402, the Hawai# i
Supreme Court issued a Memorandum Opinion affirming Stanley's
conviction.  State v. Stanley, No. 13402 (Haw. Dec. 14, 1989)
(mem.) at 1-2.  The court held Stanley's claims of (1) erroneous
jury instructions on attempted first degree murder and attempted
manslaughter, (2) a deputy prosecutor's alleged improper comment
during closing rebuttal argument, (3) insufficient evidence to
support the attempted first degree murder conviction, and (4)
unlawful imposition of sentence in the form of life imprisonment
without the possibility of parole for attempted first degree
murder were without merit.  Id.
On August 14, 2001, the Circuit Court denied Stanley's
pro se April 24, 2001 HRPP Rule 35 Motion for Correction of
Illegal Sentence, which claimed he should have been sentenced to
a 20-year term of imprisonment instead of life imprisonment
without the possibility of parole under HRS § 706-610 because he
was convicted of a Class A felony.
Stanley also filed two habeas corpus petitions in the
United States District Court for the District of Hawai#i, both
contending: (1) erroneous jury instructions; (2) "improper
statement made;" and (3) "insufficient evidence to support guilt
findings."  Stanley v. State, 76 Hawai#i 446, 448, 879 P.2d 551,
553 (1994).  The petitions were denied on October 11, 1991 and
January 1, 1992.  Id.
2 Each count of attempted murder involved a different complaining
witness.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On June 4, 1992, the Circuit Court denied Stanley's
Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (First Petition), which
alleged ineffective assistance of counsel and insufficient
evidence to support his convictions for attempted first degree
murder and attempted manslaughter.  Id.  The Hawai#i Supreme
Court affirmed the denial of the First Petition but declined to
rule on his claim that the Circuit Court erred by refusing
certain jury instructions related to attempted first degree
murder because he had not made that claim in the First Petition.
Id. at 451-52, 879 P.2d at 556-57.
On March 30, 2017, Stanley filed his "Hawaii Rules of
Penal Procedure Rule 40 Petition" (Second Petition).  Stanley
stated seven claims in the Second Petition: (1) his sentence is
illegal because HRS specifically provides attempted murder is a
Class A felony subject to 20 years imprisonment; (2) attempted
manslaughter is not a crime; (3) the indictment presented to the
grand jury and petit jury was fatally defective; (4) Place to
Keep Firearm is an included offense of Attempted Murder,
Attempted Manslaughter, and Reckless Endangering; (5) his
multiple mandatory minimum terms imposed by the Circuit Court is
illegal, redundant, multiplicious, excessive, and/or prejudicial
because the sentencing court was not the trier of fact and only a
jury can determine facts allowing an extended or enhanced
sentence; (6) the errors in the case amount to cumulative error
which was prejudicial and requires reversal of his conviction;
and (7) the Circuit Court erred by denying an August 1, 1998
Motion for Extension of Time.
On February 23, 2018, the Circuit Court issued an
"Order Dismissing Edward G. Stanley's Hawaii Rules of Penal
Procedure Rule 40 Petition, filed on March 30, 2017, Without
Hearing," which denied the Second Petition.
On appeal, Stanley contends: (1) the Circuit Court
erred by denying the Second Petition without issuing findings of
fact and conclusions of law; (2) the Circuit Court erred by
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
holding some of his claims were waived for failing to raise them
previously or were previously ruled upon; (3) his sentence is
illegal because he could not have been convicted of Attempted
Manslaughter as a matter of law; (4) the Circuit Court erred by
denying his Motion for Production of Documents; (5) his sentence
of life without parole for Attempted Murder in the First Degree
constitutes cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the
Eight Amendment of the United States Constitution because no
injury resulted when he discharged a firearm; and (6) his
conviction and sentence for Attempted Murder in the First Degree
violates the Equal Protection clause of the United States and
Hawaii Constitutions because judges, prosecutors, and police
officers are afforded greater protection or there is unequal
application of the law.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Stanley's points of error as follows:
(1)  The Circuit Court did not fail to issue findings
of fact and conclusions of law when denying the Second Petition.
The Circuit Court sufficiently stated its reasoning in denying
Stanley's claims in the Second Petition as either being
previously ruled upon or waived due to the failure to raise the
issues in prior requests for relief and/or failure to prove the
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure
to raise the issues previously.
(2)  Stanley claims the Circuit Court erred by ruling
his claims were previously ruled upon or were waived because he
presented newly discovered evidence or new facts related to the
applicable provisions of the Hawaii Revised Statutes at the time
of his conviction and sentencing which were not available or
known to him, thus, he did not waive his claims.
Except for the claim related to attempted involuntary
manslaughter below, Stanley failed to explain how his claims were
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not previously ruled upon or how he proved the existence of
extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise the
claims in his direct appeal, Motion for Correction of Illegal
Sentence, pursuant to HRPP Rule 35, two habeas corpus petitions
to the United States District Court for the District of Hawai#i,
and the First Petition.  Thus, Stanley failed to present any
facts to rebut the presumption that the failure to raise the
issues was made knowingly.  Stanley, 76 Hawai#i at 451, 879 P.2d
at 556.
(3)  Citing State v. Holbron, 80 Hawai# i 27, 904 P.2d
912 (1995), and State v. Loa, 83 Hawai# i 335, 926 P.2d 1258
(1996), which were issued more than six years after he was
convicted, Stanley claims he could not have been convicted of
Attempted Manslaughter because it is not a crime cognizable under
Hawai#i law.
In Holbron, the court held "as a matter of law that HRS
§§ 705-500 and 707-702(1)(a) do not and cannot give rise to the
offense of 'attempted manslaughter' under any circumstances" and
thereby overruled State v. Tagaro, 7 Haw. App. 291, 757 P.2d 1175
(1987).  Holbron, 80 Hawai#i at 29, 904 P.2d at 914.  The Holbron
court held that there is no offense of attempted involuntary
manslaughter premised upon the defendant attempting recklessly to
cause the death of another person, in violation of HRS §§ 705-500
and 707-702(1)(a) (Supp. 1988).   Id. at 29, 34, 904 P.2d at 914,3
3 HRS § 707-702 states:
§707-702  Manslaughter.  (1)  A person commits the
offense of manslaughter if:
     (a) He recklessly causes the death of another person;
or
(b) He intentionally causes another person to commit
suicide.
(2)  In a prosecution for murder in the first and
second degrees it is a defense, which reduces the offense to
manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the time he caused
the death of the other person, under the influence of
extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a
reasonable explanation.  The reasonableness of the
explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint of a
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
919.  However, the court also held that a defendant may be
convicted of attempted voluntary manslaughter as a lesser
included offense of attempted murder, in violation of HRS §§ 705-
500 and 707-702(2), when the State fails to negative a defense of
extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) for which there is
a reasonable explanation.  Id. at 43-45, 904 P.2d at 928-30. 
In the Second Petition, Stanley admitted he made an
EMED defense by noting that his counsel requested an EMED jury
instruction and the jury "rejected the Petitioner's EMED
defense."  Stanley points to his convictions for two counts of
Reckless Endangering in the First Degree as proof his EMED
defense was rejected by the jury and the jury found he acted
recklessly.  Stanley implies his conviction for Attempted
Manslaughter was for attempted involuntary manslaughter because
the jury found his conduct in Counts I and II to be reckless
after rejecting his EMED defense.
Stanley's convictions for Reckless Endangering in the
First Degree do not support a conclusion that he was convicted of
attempted involuntary manslaughter in Count V.  Stanley was
charged with three counts of Attempted Murder in the First Degree
(Counts I, II, and III) and one count of Attempted Murder in the
Second Degree (Count V).  Stanley was convicted of two counts of
Reckless Endangering in the First Degree, the lesser included
offense of Attempted Murder in the First Degree in Counts I and
II.  But he was also convicted of Attempted Murder in the First
Degree in Count III and the lesser included offense of Attempted
Manslaughter in Count V.
When Stanley made an EMED defense, the jury did reject
it in Count III because he could not have been convicted of
Attempted Murder in the First Degree if the State did not
person in the defendant's situation under the circumstances
as he believed them to be.
(3)  Manslaughter is a class B felony.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
negative the EMED defense.  However, the jury did not reject the
EMED defense when Stanley was convicted of Attempted Manslaughter
in Count V because he could only be convicted of Attempted
Manslaughter if the State failed to negative his EMED defense.
Stanley's convictions for Reckless Endangering in the
First Degree did not depend on the jury accepting or rejecting
his EMED defense because the jury did not consider an EMED
defense for Counts I and II.  Consideration of an EMED defense
would only arise if the jury believed the State proved all
elements of Attempted Murder in the First Degree because EMED is
a defense that mitigates Murder or Attempted Murder.  Holbron, 80
Hawai#i at 43, 904 P.2d at 928.  If the State had proven
Attempted Murder in the First Degree in Counts I and II, the jury
would not consider the lesser included offense of Reckless
Endangering in the First Degree because the outcome of the jury
considering the EMED defense could only lead to a conviction for
Attempted Murder in the First Degree or Attempted Manslaughter,
depending on whether the jury believed the State negated the EMED
defense.  Rejecting Stanley's EMED defense after the State proved
all elements of Attempted Murder in the First Degree cannot
result in a conviction for Reckless Endangering in the First
Degree.  Only a failure to prove Attempted Murder in the First
Degree could lead to the jury considering Reckless Endangering in
the First Degree.  Thus, the jury did not reject Stanley's EMED
defense in Counts I and II.
As Stanley's convictions for Attempted Murder in the
First Degree in Count III and Attempted Manslaughter in Count V
demonstrate, the jury may decide whether the State negated an
EMED defense for each charge and is not required to apply the
same finding as to EMED to all charges.
The State's concession that Stanley stated a colorable
claim based on Holbron and Loa and the jury instruction given
based on the language of HRS §§ 707-702(1)(a) and (2) is
unwarranted.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The jury was instructed, inter alia, as follows:
In a prosecution for Attempted Murder in the First
Degree or Second Degree, Attempted Manslaughter is an
included offense.  The offense of Attempted
Manslaughter is committed if the Defendant attempted
to recklessly cause the death of another person.
In a prosecution for Attempted Murder in the First
Degree or Second Degree, it is also a defense, which
reduces the offense to Attempted Manslaughter, that
the Defendant was, at the time he attempted to cause
the death of another person, under the influence of
extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which
there is a reasonable explanation.  The reasonableness
of the explanation shall be determined from the
viewpoint of a person in the Defendant's situation
under the circumstances as he believed them to be.
The burden is upon the State to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the Defendant was not acting
under the influence of extreme mental or emotional
disturbance for which there is a reasonable
explanation.  If the State has not done so, you must
find the Defendant guilty of the included offense of
Attempted Manslaughter.  If the State has done so, you
must find the Defendant guilty of the offense of
Attempted Murder in the First Degree or Second Degree.
In his Opening Brief on direct appeal, Stanley raised a
claim that the jury instructions on Attempted Manslaughter were
erroneous and confused the jury.  Stanley argued:
[T]he use of the term "recklessly" in the instruction
would undeniably lead a layperson to conclude that the
instruction applied to both forms of attempted
manslaughter.
No rational trier of fact could be expected to
differentiate the two forms of attempted manslaughter
and the different circumstances under which they were
to be considered based upon the instructions in the
case at bar.  . . .
The jury's confusion is all too well illustrated
by their repeated communications seeking clarification
of attempted manslaughter.  The court merely referred
the jury to the instructions already provided, which
had, of course, triggered the questions in the first
place.  (RA: 248-254).  Even the verdict forms were of
no assistance as they, too, indicated the existence of
only one form of attempted manslaughter.
The defective attempted manslaughter
instructions in their entirety rendered the jury
instructions prejudicially erroneous and misleading,
affecting substantial rights of Stanley at trial and
depriving him of due process of law under the Hawaii
and federal constitutions.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Hawai#i Supreme Court affirmed Stanley's
convictions and specifically noted Stanley raised the issue of
"erroneous attempted first degree murder and attempted
manslaughter instructions" and held "we discern no reversible
error."  State v. Stanley, No. 13402 (Haw. Dec. 14, 1989) (mem.)
at 1-2.  Therefore, Stanley did not state a colorable claim in
the instant appeal based on an erroneous Attempted Manslaughter
jury instruction because the issue was previously raised and
ruled upon.  Stanley failed to state a factual basis to support a
claim that his conviction for Attempted Manslaughter was for
attempted involuntary manslaughter based on reckless conduct, in
violation of HRS § 707-702(1)(a).  Therefore, Stanley failed to
state a colorable claim that he could not have been convicted of
Attempted Manslaughter and that his sentence was illegal.
(4)  Stanley claims the Circuit Court erred by denying
his Motion for Production of Documents.  The record on appeal
does not contain a Motion for Production of Documents.  It is the
responsibility of each appellant to provide a record that is
sufficient to review the points of error asserted and to pursue
appropriate proceedings in the court appealed from to correct any
omission.  Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
11(a).  Stanley did not request the Circuit Court or this court
to correct or modify the record on appeal, pursuant to HRAP Rule
10(e).  This court is limited to review of the record on appeal.
State v. Tarape, 107 Hawai# i 519, 523, 115 P.3d 698, 702 (App.
2005).  The record on appeal does not show the Circuit Court
denied a Motion for Production of Documents and we are thus
unable to address this point of error.
(5)  Stanley's claim that his sentence of life without
the possibility of parole for Attempted Murder in the First
Degree constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of
the Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution was raised
and ruled upon in his direct appeal.  In his direct appeal,
Stanley claimed his sentence of life without the possibility of
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
parole was greatly disproportionate to the criminal activity he
engaged in, and thus, it was cruel and unusual punishment, in
violation of the Eighth Amendment of the United States
Constitution.  The Hawai#i Supreme Court found Stanley's claim of
"unlawful imposition of sentence in the form of life imprisonment
without the possibility of parole for the attempted first degree
murder conviction" was without merit.  State v. Stanley, No.
13402 (Haw. Dec. 14, 1989) (mem.) at 1-2. 
(6)  Stanley did not claim his sentence for Attempted
Murder in the First Degree violated the Equal Protection clause
of the United States and Hawaii Constitutions in the Second
Petition.  "[T]he general rule is that an issue which was not
raised in the lower court will not be considered on appeal[.]" 
Stanley, 76 Hawai#i at 451, 879 P.2d at 556.  In addition,
Stanley failed to prove the existence of extraordinary
circumstances to justify his failure to raise the claim in his
direct appeal, two habeas corpus petitions to the United States
District Court for the District of Hawaii, and the First
Petition.  Therefore, relief is not available under HRPP Rule 40.
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order
Dismissing Edward G. Stanley's Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure
Rule 40 Petition, filed on March 30, 2017, Without Hearing,"
filed on February 23, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 22, 2019.
On the briefs:
Edward G. Stanley,
Pro Se, Petitioner-Appellant.
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
10