NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000412 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
WILLIAM TERRY EVANS, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-17-0000726(4)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant William Terry Evans (Evans) appeals 
from the Judgment (Judgment
) entered by the Circuit Court of the 
Second Circuit (trial court)  on April 20, 2018.  Evans was 
convicted of Assault in the Third Degree.   He contends that he 
received ineffective assistance of counsel.  For the reasons 
explained below, we affirm the Judgment without prejudice to a subsequent proceeding by Evans under Hawai# i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (eff. 2006). 21
The standard for determining the adequacy of counsel's
representation is whether, viewed as a whole, the assistanceprovided is within the range of competence demanded ofattorneys in criminal cases.  Counsel's assistance need not 
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. 
2 Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-712 (2014) provides, in 
relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the third
degree if the person: 
(a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causesbodily injury to another person[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be errorless nor will it be judged ineffective solely by
hindsight. 
The burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
rests upon the appellant.  [The] burden is twofold:  First,the appellant must establish specific errors or omissions ofdefense counsel reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgmentor diligence.  Second, the appellant must establish thatthese errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritoriousdefense.  [A]n appellant [who] successfully meets theseburdens . . . will have proven the denial of assistancewithin the range of competence demanded of attorneys incriminal cases. 
A finding of ineffective assistance of counsel mandates
reversal of a defendant's conviction. 
State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348-49, 615 P.2d 101, 104-05 (1980)
(cleaned up).3  
In this case Evans was charged with assaulting Solomon 
Kapule (
Kapule)
 on July 30, 2017.   The State filed a motion in 
limine requesting, among other things, "An order precluding the defense from introducing any testimonial or documentary evidence relating to other crimes, wrongs or acts on the part of any of the State's witnesses unless offered in compliance with HRE Rule[] 404(b)[.]"   The trial court granted the motion.  Evans's 
trial attorney did not provide the State with any Rule 404(b) information. 
54
3 "Cleaned up" is a relatively new parenthetical designed to tell
readers that extraneous material (such as internal brackets, ellipses,
quotation marks, citations, footnote reference numbers, and changes incapitalization) has been removed from a quotation for readability, and thatnone of it matters for understanding the quotation or evaluating its weight. See Metzler, Jack, Cleaning Up Quotations, 18 J. App. Prac. & Process 143,147, 154 (2017).  As of March 31, 2018, "(cleaned up)" has appeared in morethan 150 judicial opinions, both state and federal.  Id. at 160; see, e.g.,United States v. Steward, 880 F.3d 983, 986 n.3 (8th Cir. 2017); United Statesv. Reyes, 866 F.3d 316, 321 (5th Cir. 2017); Smith v. Kentucky, 520 S.W.3d340, 354 (Ky. 2017). 
4 Evans was also charged with third degree promoting a detrimental
drug and harassment, but the State dismissed those charges before trial. 
5 Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 404 (2016) provides, in 
relevant part: 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. . . . In criminal cases, the
proponent of evidence to be offered under this subsection shall providereasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the courtexcuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location, andgeneral nature of any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During presentation of the State's case, the jury heard 
testimony from Kapule.  He testified that he was 58 years old. 
He said he had a stroke several years before and used a cane to balance himself to keep from falling.  He was walking into Foodland to shop for groceries.  His cane was in his shopping cart.  He saw Evans walking out of Foodland.  Evans was "mumbling something about something."  Evans "looked mad."  They passed each other.  Kapule "didn't say nothing" to Evans.  Kapule testified: 
A. So then he -- he came back in behind me on the 
right side of me. 
Q.  Okay.  And then what happened after he came
back on the right side of you? 
A.  And all I saw was a fist that came into my 
mouth. 
Kapule said he hadn't expected the punch and was stunned.  He testified that Evans then walked out of the store.  Kapule had a cut lip. 
The State also called Foodland assistant manager John 
Cabbat (Cabbat) as a witness.  Customers had alerted him to an 
argument happening in front of the store.  He went to the front 
and saw Kapule and Evans having an argument.  He saw that Kapule had "a busted lip" that was "slightly bleeding."  Kapule and Evans both appeared to be angry and were yelling at each other. Evans "took couple swings (inaudible) hit [Kapule.]"  Kapule was poking Evans with his cane to keep Evans away.  Cabbat separated the men and called 911. 
Maui County Police Department officer Vance Vickers 
responded.  Officer Vickers testified that he found Kapule standing near Foodland.  Kapule told him that Evans approached him from the rear and punched him in the face.  Kapule had a small cut to the upper inner side of his lip.  Officer Vickers located Evans in the Foodland parking lot.  Evans did not appear to be injured and did not complain of any injury. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After the State rested, Evans testified on his own 
behalf.  He said he was 73 years old, disabled, had back 
problems, had a heart attack, and has a defibrillator in his chest.  He had known Kapule for a couple of years.  As he was walking to Foodland he heard Kapule say "don't worry, Terry,
6 God 
still loves you, or Jesus still loves you."  Evans "Cussed [Kapule] out."  (He was not asked to explain why he did that.) Evans went into Foodland.  Kapule came up behind Evans with a shopping cart.  The cart came within two inches of Evans.  Evans heard Kapule laugh.  Evans testified: 
I was afraid he was going to hit me over the head with his
cane.  And I turned around and hit him with my left hand inthe mouth. 
Evans stepped back and went outside.  Cabbat came to get him and 
they went back to where Kapule was in Foodland.  Evans testified that Kapule stabbed him twice in the chest with his cane.  Cabbat made Kapule step away from Evans.  Evans left Foodland.  A police officer stopped him and arrested him. 
On cross-examination by the deputy prosecuting attorney 
(DPA) Evans testified: 
[DPA]: . . . So [Kapule is] on the side of you, behind 
you? 
A.  Yes, ma'am. 
Q.  And he's laughing in your ear? 
A.  Correct. 
Q.  And then you tell us at this point it was -- at
this point you decide to turn and hit [Kapule] in the mouth? 
A.  Right.  Before he could hit me with his cane. 
Which he's done (inaudible) times. 
Q.  And you -- you struck him right after you heard
the laughter in your ear? 
A.  Yes, ma'am. 
6 Evans testified that his middle name is Terrel but "Everyone calls
me Terry pretty much." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q.  Okay.  And he was close to you? 
A.  Yes, ma'am. 
Q.  Ah, standing next to you, behind you? 
A.  Correct. 
Q.  So you didn't see where his hands were?  If 
he's behind you? 
A.  I believe they were on the cart.  Both –-
Q.  Both hands were on the cart? 
A.  I believe so.  I'm not sure. 
Q.  You mentioned [Kapule] by name.  So you know 
him? 
A.  Yes, ma'am. 
Q.  You know that, um, he walks with a cane.  You 
mentioned the cane. 
A.  He hits people with it. 
The trial court allowed jurors to submit written 
questions for witnesses to the court.  After Evans testified, a 
juror submitted the question: 
Has Soloman [sic] hit John [sic] in the past?  Has 
John [sic] hit Soloman [sic] in the past? 
The trial court, the DPA, and Evans's trial attorney were confused about who "John" was.  The trial court stated (at sidebar): 
THE COURT: John is who? 
[DPA]: The store manager.  I guess I would object
on relevance, since that's not the parties.  (Inaudible). 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Um, I mean I'll just defer to the 
Court at this point. 
THE COURT:  Well, here's the thing, while he was
testifying he said two things that neither party said
anything about. 
He said, he's done it in the past.  And he said, other 
people were there.  And obviously he's trying to slide that in there.  Ah, I mean I already made my rulings about anypast conduct because that was not brought before the Court. And so I don't know if this has anything to do with that. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
What is Mr. Kapule's first name?  Soloman [sic]. 
[DPA]: Soloman [sic].  And John is Cabbat. THE COURT:  I know who John is.  Who is this?  What is 
his name? 
[DPA]: William Terry or Terrel Evans. THE COURT:  I have no idea if the person has the names 
mixed up or not. 
[DPA]: I suspect. 
THE COURT:  Even if it were the correct names I 
wouldn't allow it.  So you both agree I should not ask this 
question? 
[DPA]: 
Yes. 
No response from Evans's trial attorney was noted on the 
transcript of proceedings.  The trial court did not read the juror's question to Evans.  The defense rested. 
The trial court read the instructions to the jury.  The 
instruction on self-defense stated: 
Self-defense is a defense to the charge of Assault in
the Third Degree.  The burden is on the prosecution to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the force used by thedefendant was not justified.  If the prosecution does notmeet its burden then you must find the defendant not guilty. 
The use of force upon or toward another person is
justified if the defendant reasonably believes that force is
immediately necessary to protect himself on the present
occasion against the use of unlawful force by the otherperson.  The reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the use of protective force was immediately necessary shallbe determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person inthe defendant's position under the circumstances of whichthe defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonablybelieved them to be.  The defendant may estimate thenecessity for the use of force under the circumstances as hereasonably believes them to be when the force is used,without retreating, doing any other act that he has no legalduty to do or abstaining from any lawful action. 
"Force" means any bodily impact, restraint or
confinement, or the threat thereof. 
"Bodily injury" means physical pain, illness, or any
impairment of physical condition. 
Self-defense is not available for the offense of 
Assault in the Third Degree as to the reckless state of mindif the prosecution proves that: 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) the defendant was reckless in believing that he
was justified in using force against the other person; or 
(2) the defendant was reckless in acquiring or
failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which was
material to the justifiability of his use of force againstthe other person. 
The jury found Evans guilty of Assault in the Third Degree.  This 
appeal followed. 
The error specified by Evans is his trial attorney's 
failure to disclose "evidence of prior assaultive conduct against Mr. Evans by [Kapule]" as required by HRE Rule 404(b) (and the trial court's order granting the State's motion in limine). However, Evans has not provided any information "of the date, location, and general nature of any such evidence" he contends his attorney should have disclosed and used at trial.  See HRE Rule 404(b).  Without this information in the record — i.e., whether Kapule had a modus operandi of approaching Evans from behind, saying "don't worry, Terry, God still loves you, or Jesus still loves you[,]" laughing in his ear, then hitting him with his cane — we are unable to determine whether the alleged error "resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense."  Antone, 62 Haw. at 348-49, 615 P.2d at 104 (citations omitted). 
[W]here the record on appeal is insufficient to demonstrate
ineffective assistance of counsel, but where: (1) thedefendant alleges facts that if proven would entitle him orher to relief, and (2) the claim is not patently frivolousand without trace of support in the record, the appellatecourt may affirm defendant's conviction without prejudice toa subsequent Rule 40 petition on the ineffective assistanceof counsel claim. 
State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592–93 (1993) 
(footnote omitted).  Accordingly, we affirm the Judgment without prejudice to a subsequent HRPP Rule 40 petition by Evans on his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel.  We note that where ineffectiveness of counsel is the basis for a Rule 40 petition, 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the defendant must serve written notice of the hearing on counsel
whose assistance has been challenged as ineffective, and the
counsel shall be given an opportunity to be heard.  See HRPP Rule
40(f).
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 12, 2019.
On the briefs:
John F. Parker, 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate JudgeRenee Ishikawa Delizo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
8