NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000417

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOHN GANJALI, Defendant-Appellant

APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

HONOLULU DIVISION

(CR. NO. 1P110-4458)

SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

Defendant-Appellant John Ganjali (
Ganjali) appeals from

the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on January

25, 2011, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu

Division (District Court).
1

Ganjali was found guilty of Harassment, in violation of

Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1)(b) (Supp. 2010).

On appeal, Ganjali contends: (1) there was
 
insufficient evidence to convict him of Harassment; (2) the

District Court erred by denying his motion for a new trial; (3)

the District Court erred by failing to, sua sponte, hold an

evidentiary hearing on his motion for new trial; (4) the District

Court plainly erred by failing to make sufficient findings of

fact to permit meaningful appellate review; and (5) the District

Court erred by applying a preponderance of the evidence standard,

instead of proof beyond a reasonable doubt when finding him

guilty.

1

The Honorable Leslie Hayashi presided.

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to

the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we

resolve Ganjali's points of error as follows:

(1) When the evidence adduced in the trial is 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution, there was substantial evidence to support Ganjali's conviction for Harassment. State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 
322, 330-31 (2007). 
HRS ยง 711-1106(1)(b) provides:

ยง 711-1106 Harassment.  (1) A person commits
the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass,
annoy, or alarm any other person, that person:

. . . .

(b) 	 
Insults, taunts, or challenges another person in
a manner likely to provoke an immediate violent
response or that would cause the other person to
reasonably believe that the actor intends to
cause bodily injury to the recipient or another
or damage to the property of the recipient or
another[.]

Based on the complaining witness's testimony, which the

District Court found to be credible, it appears that Ganjali

insulted, taunted, or challenged the complaining witness in a

manner that would cause the complaining witness to reasonably

believe that Ganjali intended to cause bodily injury to the

complaining witness or damage to his property. Ganjali
 
reportedly yelled at the complaining witness that if he touched

Ganjali's car, Ganjali would break the complaining witness's

neck. The complaining witness testified that Ganjali then went

under a chain between himself and the complaining witness,

approached with a closed fist, stated that he was going to "get

[the complainant's] ass," and stuck his closed fist in through

the window of the complaining witness's truck, although Ganjali

did not attempt to hit the complainant. The complaining witness
 
stated that he feared for his life. 
 
"And as trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make

all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in

evidence, including circumstantial evidence." State v. Batson,

2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
73 Haw. 236, 249, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992). It was reasonable

for the trial judge to infer that Ganjali intended to harass,

annoy, or alarm the complaining witness when Ganjali committed

the acts described in the complaining witness's testimony. 
 Although Ganjali denied committing those acts, the District Court

found the complaining witness to be more credible than Ganjali. 
 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai
'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 
697 (1999) (brackets, citations and internal quotation marks omitted; block quote format changed). 
Accordingly, we reject Ganjali's argument that the

evidence was insufficient to support his conviction.

(2) Ganjali challenges the District Court's denial of

Ganjali's motion for a new trial, which motion was based on "new

evidence," specifically the complaining witness's statements at

the time of Ganjali's sentencing. "A motion for new trial based

on newly discovered evidence will be granted only if all of the

following requirements have been satisfied: (1) the evidence has

been discovered after trial; (2) such evidence could not have

been discovered before or at trial through the exercise of due

diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the issues and not

cumulative or offered solely for purposes of impeachment; and (4)

the evidence is of such a nature as would probably change the

result of a later trial." State v. Teves, 5 Haw. App. 90, 94,

679 P.2d 136, 140 (1984) (citing Terr. v. Abad, 39 Haw. 393, 395

(1952)). The District Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
concluding that Ganjali failed to meet the requirements to grant

a new trial based on newly discovered evidence because, inter

alia, the new evidence was offered solely to show that the

complaining witness was untruthful and delusional, i.e., to

impeach the complaining witness.

(3) We conclude that Ganjali's contention that the

District Court erred by failing to, sua sponte, hold an

evidentiary hearing on his motion for new trial is without merit.

3

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4) Upon review of the record, including the

transcript of the January 25, 2011 proceedings, we reject

Ganjali's argument that the District Court's findings were

insufficient to permit meaningful appellate review.

(5) Based on the evidence presented at trial, the

District Court concluded that the State had proven all three

elements of the offense of Harassment beyond a reasonable doubt.

Ganjali's argument that the District Court applied an improper

standard is baseless.

For these reasons, we affirm the District Court's 
January 25, 2011 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 10, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Earle A. Partington
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4

