NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000541
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
IN THE INTEREST OF AG
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 16-00057)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Appellant CG1 (Father) appeals from the Order
Terminating Parental Rights (Order) entered by the Family Court
of the First Circuit ( Family Court)2 on June 21, 2018.  Father
contends: (1) the State of Hawai# i Department of Human Services
(DHS) did not make a reasonable effort to reunify him with his
child, AG (Child), by failing to provide him with a customized
service plan to address his mental health needs;  and (2) the
Family Court erred by terminating both parents' parental rights
instead of only terminating the parental rights of MS ( Mother)3
because there was insufficient evidence to meet the clear and
convincing standard to support termination of his parental
rights.
For the reasons explained below, we affirm the Order.
1Only the parties' initials are used because this case involves
custody of a minor child.  Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 571-54 (2018).
2The Honorable Jennifer L. Ching presided.
3Mother is not a party to Father's appeal.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.
Father contends DHS "made no reasonable efforts to
comply with the recommendations of Father's psychological
evaluations and craft a service plan customized for his
particular mental health needs."  Father claims that
recommendations for case management services, individual therapy,
and anger management were not included in his service plan and
not provided to him.  Father contends his mental health issues
impaired his ability to participate in services and DHS washed
its hands of any responsibility to properly handle the situation
other than pointing in the direction of services.
DHS must provide a reasonable opportunity to parents
through a service plan to reunify the family.  In re Doe, 100
Hawai#i 335, 343, 60 P.3d 285, 293 (2002).  Father's contention
that his mental health issues impaired his ability to recognize
the need for and to participate in services is without merit. 
Father's July 5, 2017 psychological evaluation report stated
Father "understands the legal significance of [Child Welfare
Services] and the potential for [termination of parental rights],
and although he doesn't agree with having to complete services,
he understands that completion of services is required for
reunification."
Recommendations for case management services,
individual therapy, and anger management were not included in the
December 2017 Family Service Plan, the last service plan ordered
prior to termination of Father's parental rights.  However, no
substantial prejudice resulted to Father because Father does not
dispute that he refused to participate in any services, failed to
object to any service plan, and did not request additional
services prior to trial on the Motion to Terminate Parental
Rights.  Under the circumstances, Father has no cognizable
procedural complaint.  In re Doe, 100 Hawai# i at 343-44, 60 P.3d
at 293-94.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
Father contends that there was no clear and convincing
evidence to support termination of his parental rights, thus, his
parental rights should have been left intact even though Mother's
parental rights were terminated.  Termination of parental rights
requires clear and convincing evidence "that the parent is
unwilling or unable to provide his or her child with a safe
family home at the time a permanent plan hearing is conducted and
that the parent will not become willing or able to do so within a
reasonable period of time."  In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 192, 20
P.3d 616, 625 (2001).
Father testified that he is not employed and he lives
in a "nonlivable" 8' x 12' shed on property that does not have
running water or power.  Father did not believe it was a safety
concern that he lives in a nonlivable home.  Father denied having
a history of using illicit substances but admitted he uses
marijuana, beer, and meth "[w]henever I have to and whatever I
have to."  Father denied his child was removed because the
property was unlivable or he did drugs, but rather "something
completely different than all of this."  Father also did not
agree with the diagnoses in his psychological evaluations and did
not believe he needed substance abuse treatment, individual
therapy, anger management, parent education, or case management
services.  Father admitted he did not complete any of those
services "[b]ecause I think it's a waste of time for me[.]" 
Father stated he would not participate in a service plan because
"I'm not retarded."
A DHS social worker, Ching Duncan ( Duncan), testified
Father did a few random drug tests and a couple of intensive
outpatient sessions but he was not willing to participate in any
other recommended services.  DHS did not allow unsupervised
visits because Father self-medicates with marijuana, which also
put Father's ability to provide a safe family home into question. 
Father tested positive for amphetamine, methamphetamine, and THC
on April 21, 2016, and did not participate in any further random
urinalyses; DHS did not believe Father would be able to provide a
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
safe family home because his judgment would be altered by
possible continuing drug use.  Duncan stated that Father "appears
to have a pattern of misinterpreting social cues and act on it,"
even though "his version of what's going on around him cannot be
verified by another person."  That would affect the decisions he
makes about providing a safe home for Child.  Duncan stated
Father does not believe he needs to make any changes.  In her
opinion, it is not reasonably foreseeable that Father will become
willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time
because Father is convinced he does not have to make any changes
and sees himself as a good parent.
Child entered foster care on June 3, 2016.  Trial on
the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights was held two years later,
on June 20, 2018.  Father admitted to continued drug use
throughout the case, did not believe he needed substance abuse
treatment because it was a waste of time, and stated that he
would not participate in any service plan.  There was clear and
convincing evidence "that [Father] is unwilling or unable to
provide his . . . child with a safe family home . . . and that
the [Father] will not become willing or able to do so within a
reasonable period of time."  In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i at 192, 20
P.3d at 625.  The Family Court did not err by terminating
Father's parental rights.
Based on the foregoing, the Family Court's Order
Terminating Parental Rights is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, March 20, 2019.
On the briefs:
Jacob G. Delaplane, 
for Father-Appellant. Chief Judge
Kellie M. Kersten,
Julio C. Herrera,
Patrick A. Pascual,
Erin L.S. Yamashiro, Associate Judge
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee.
Associate Judge
4