NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001066
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NATIONAL INTERSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY, INC.,
Plaintiff/Appellee,
v.
 
SAVIO REINHARDT, WILLIAM CORNELIO, JR.,
Defendants/Appellees,
and
 
KAWIKA FRANCO, INDIVIDUALLY and AS PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE FOR
THE ESTATE OF TIARE FRANCO; PEACHES KONG and APPLES ELABAN,
AS NEXT FRIENDS OF LOVELY FRANCO (MINOR); TAUA GLEASON,
AS NEXT FRIEND OF KOLOMANA KONG KANIAUPIO GLEASON and KAULANA
 
KONG KANIAUPIO GLEASON (MINORS); AND CHERYL RUSSELL,
AS NEXT FRIEND OF JEANNE RUSSELL (MINOR),
Defendants/Intervenors/Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0387(1))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of an action for declaratory
 
relief brought by National Interstate Insurance Company, Inc.
 
(NIIC), which sought a judicial determination that there was no
 potential for insurance coverage and thus no duty to defend or
 indemnify the driver of an insured vehicle following a fatal car
 accident. NIIC issued a commercial automobile liability
 insurance policy (Policy) to William A. Cornelio, Jr., (Cornelio)
 covering a 2005 Dodge Ram pickup truck (Truck) owned by
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cornelio's ex-wife, Reinette Kama (Kama).1/ On May 14, 2011,
 
Kama's boyfriend, Savio Reinhardt (Reinhardt), was allegedly
 
driving the Truck when he lost control of the Truck, drove over a
 cliff, and crashed. Tiare Franco (Franco), who was in the Truck,
 was ejected from the Truck during the accident and died at the
 scene. 
Franco's estate, her spouse, and her four minor
 
2/
children (collectively, the Franco Parties)  filed a wrongful
death action against Reinhardt, and NIIC retained counsel to

 
defend Reinhardt. NIIC subsequently filed the instant action for
 declaratory relief against Reinhardt and Cornelio. The Franco
 Parties were allowed to intervene in the action for declaratory
 relief.
 
The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 
3/
Court) granted NIIC's motion for summary judgment, ruling that
NIIC had no potential coverage obligation under its Policy for
 the Truck and therefore no duty to defend or indemnify Reinhardt
 or Cornelio. NIIC's summary judgment motion turned on the
 question of whether Reinhardt had a reasonable belief that he was
 entitled to operate the Truck when the accident occurred -- if
 Reinhardt had such a reasonable belief, then he would be an
 insured covered by the Policy. In granting summary judgment in
 favor of NIIC, the Circuit Court ruled that there was no genuine
 issue of material fact that Reinhardt lacked a reasonable belief
 that he was entitled to operate the Truck at the time the fatal
 accident occurred. The Circuit Court also denied the Franco
 
1/ Cornelio registered the Truck and he was the named insured under the
NIIC Policy. Kama represented that she was the owner of the Truck, and the
parties to this appeal do not dispute that at the time of the fatal accident,
Kama was the owner of the Truck and that her permission to use the Truck is
relevant to the scope of insurance coverage under the NIIC Policy. 
2/ The Franco Parties include Kawika Franco, Individually and as
Personal Representative for the Estate of Tiare Franco, Peaches Kong and
Apples Elaban, as Next Friends of Lovely Franco (Minor); Taua Gleason, as Next
Friend of Kolomana Kong Kaniaupio Gleason and Kaulana Kong Kaniaupio Gleason
(Minors); and Cheryl Russell, as Next Friend of Jeanne Russell (Minor). 
3/ The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Parties' motion for summary judgment that was based on their
 
claim that NIIC was estopped from denying coverage. Although the
 Circuit Court's exact basis for this denial is unclear, the
 Circuit Court indicated that it believed the Franco Parties'
 motion had been rendered moot by its grant of summary judgment in
 favor of NIIC. 
The Franco Parties appeal from the Circuit Court's
 
Judgment in favor of NIIC. On appeal, the Franco Parties argue
 that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) granting NIIC's motion for
 summary judgment, because they claim that there were genuine
 issues of material fact regarding whether Reinhardt had a
 reasonable belief that he was entitled to operate the Truck at
 the time of the accident; (2) denying the Franco Parties' motion
 for reconsideration of the order granting NIIC's motion for
 summary judgment; (3) denying the Franco Parties' motion for
 summary judgment as moot without addressing the merits of the
 motion; (4) failing to set aside the defaults entered against
 Reinhardt and Cornelio; (5) failing to grant the Franco Parties'
 motion to compel discovery; and (6) denying the Franco Parties'
 motion for leave to depose Reinhardt.
 
As explained below, we hold that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting NIIC's motion for summary judgment because we
 conclude that there were genuine issues of material fact
 regarding whether Reinhardt reasonably believed he was entitled
 to operate the Truck at the time of the fatal accident. Our
 decision on this issue makes it unnecessary for us to address the
 Franco Parties' challenge to the Circuit Court's denial of their
 motion for reconsideration of the order granting NIIC's motion
 for summary judgment. We also hold that the Circuit Court did
 not err in denying the Franco Parties' motion for summary
 judgment as there were genuine issues of material fact regarding
 their equitable estoppel claim. With respect to the other issues
 raised by the Franco Parties on appeal, the Circuit Court's
 rulings (or failure to rule) appear to have been based upon, or
 affected by, its decision to grant NIIC's motion for summary
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment. We remand the case without deciding these issues to
 
give the Circuit Court the opportunity to rule on them in light
 of our decision to vacate its grant of NIIC's motion for summary
 judgment. Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment
 and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
At about 1:00 a.m. on May 14, 2011, a police officer
 
saw the Truck being driven on Kahekili Highway without its lights
 on. The officer activated his blue lights and siren and
 accelerated in an attempt to catch the Truck. The officer,
 however, was unable to catch up to the Truck because of its speed
 and the poor visibility and road conditions, and the officer
 terminated his pursuit.
 
A short time later, the driver of the Truck apparently
 
lost control, drove off the roadway, struck a barbed wire cattle
 fence, went over a cliff, and came to rest down a steep
 embankment. Franco, an occupant of the Truck, was ejected and
 died at the scene. Another occupant of the Truck fled the scene.
 
For purposes of its summary judgment motion, NIIC
 
accepted the Franco Parties' allegation that Reinhardt was
 driving the Truck when the accident occurred. We similarly
 assume for purposes of this appeal that Reinhardt was the
 driver.
4/
 
At the time of accident, the Truck was insured by NIIC
 
under the Policy issued to Cornelio as the named insured. 
Cornelio's ex-wife, Kama, was the owner of the Truck during the
 relevant time period. 
4/ NIIC asserts that "[i]t is unclear who was driving the vehicle and
whether Reinhardt was in the truck as either a driver, passenger, or at all."
The Franco Parties, on the other hand, assert that the final police accident
report concludes that Reinhardt was the driver based on the investigation
conducted by the police, which included witness interviews, polygraph
examinations, and "Reinhardt's DNA results." They also presented evidence in
the Circuit Court that the police investigation showed that samples of blood-
like stains taken from the Truck matched Reinhardt's DNA profile.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Reinhardt began working for Kama's landscaping and
 
grounds maintenance business in April 2010. In August 2010,
 
Reinhardt and Kama were involved in boyfriend-girlfriend
 relationship that continued through the date of the accident. 
During this relationship, Reinhardt would come over and spend
 time at Kama's house, and he spent the night on "a couple" of
 occasions.
 
On the evening of May 13, 2011, Reinhardt went to
 
Kama's house after work. Later that evening, he left Kama's
 residence driving her Truck. In an interview with the police on
 May 14, 2011, following the accident, Kama stated that Reinhardt
 and his friends left her house between 10:30 and 11:00 p.m. on
 May 13, 2011, that she did not know where he was going or what he
 was going to do, and that he did not come home that night.
 
At a deposition taken on September 21, 2012, in
 
connection with the Franco Parties' wrongful death action against
 Reinhardt, Kama stated that during the evening of May 13, 2011,
 Reinhardt was at Kama's house when Reinhardt received phone calls
 from a person he said was his niece and from Franco. Kama
 testified as follows:
 
A. . . . And [Reinhardt] said, "I gotta borrow your
truck, drop my niece off."
 
Q. So you let him borrow your truck?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And your -- you said to drop off his niece?
 
A. I said, "What you gonna use it for? 'Cause you
dropping her off and that's it, bringing that truck right
back."
 
Q. Anything else you said to him?
 
A. No.
 
Kama further testified that after Reinhardt left her
 
house with the Truck, she received a call from Reinhardt around
 
midnight:
 
A. It was about midnight. I was sleeping.
[Reinhardt] called, said that he was on his way back.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . 
Q. He was calling to say he was on his way back
from where?
 
A. Wailuku.
 
Q. Anything else he told you?
 
A. He was going to stop at his family land to go
check on the -- on his other car and he'd be right back.
 
. . . . 
Q. When he told you he was going to come right
back, what did you say?
 
A. "Whatever," and I hung up, went back to sleep.
 
When interviewed by the police on May 16, 2011,
 
Reinhardt stated that prior to leaving Kama's house on May 13,
 
2011, he received a call from Franco who was upset because she
 stated that Reinhardt's niece had stolen money from her. 
Reinhardt told the police that after he left Kama's house with
 the Truck, he dropped off his friend at a church, picked up and
 dropped off another person, and went to meet Franco in Wailuku. 
According to Reinhardt, after he met Franco and agreed to set up
 a meeting with his niece, he drove the Truck to his family
 property where he fell asleep in another vehicle that was parked
 there. Reinhardt told the police that when he woke up in the
 morning, the Truck was gone and he called Kama to tell her that
 the Truck had been stolen. Reinhardt then changed his story and
 told the police that he let Franco borrow the Truck. Reinhardt
 claimed that he was not in the Truck at the time of the accident. 
However, other witnesses interviewed by the police contradicted
 certain statements made by Reinhardt. In addition, the police
 report notes that swabs of blood-like stains recovered from the
 Truck's exterior driver's window frame and interior driver's side
 door frame matched Reinhardt's DNA profile.
 
III.
 
Officer Dawn Danley, the police officer who interviewed
 
Kama just after the accident, testified that Kama said that it
 was Reinhardt who normally used the Truck and that Reinhardt used
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Truck more than she did. In addition, people who knew
 
Reinhardt signed declarations or testified about Reinhardt's use
 of the Truck prior to the accident. Clayton Gomes, Jr., stated
 that he saw Reinhardt drive or use the Truck around ten different
 times when Reinhardt came to his house or was "cruising around
 our neighborhood or in the Happy Valley area," and that during
 these occasions, Reinhardt's "girlfriend" was not in the Truck
 with Reinhardt and Reinhardt did not appear to be working. 
Steven Rodrigues testified that Reinhardt began driving the Truck
 after Reinhardt's own truck broke down and that Reinhardt would
 be driving the Truck "almost every night that we hung out
 together." Reinhardt's relative testified that Reinhardt arrived
 at her house on two occasions driving the Truck.
 
IV.
 
The Franco Parties filed a complaint against Reinhardt
 
raising claims of negligence, gross negligence, and/or
 recklessness (Count 1) and negligent and/or intentional
 infliction of emotional distress (Count 2) for allegedly causing
 the May 14, 2011, accident and the death of Franco (the Wrongful
 Death Action).
5/ NIIC assigned a lawyer to defend Reinhardt in
 
that action.
 
Ten and a half months after the Franco Parties filed
 
the Wrongful Death Action, NIIC filed its action for declaratory
 relief against Reinhardt and Cornelio (Declaratory Relief
 Action), seeking a determination that Reinhardt was not covered
 as an "insured" under the NIIC Policy issued to Cornelio and that
 NIIC therefore had no duty to defend or indemnify Reinhardt in
 connection with the Wrongful Death Action. The Franco Parties
 were subsequently allowed to intervene in the Declaratory Relief
 Action.
 
5/ The Franco Parties note that "[o]ut of abundance of caution," they
later amended their complaint in the Wrongful Death Action to add Josiah
Okudara as a defendant. In his statement to the police, Reinhardt indicated
that Okudara could have been driving the Truck when the accident occurred.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shortly before the Franco Parties were allowed to
 
intervene, NIIC requested entry of default, and the Circuit Court
 
clerk entered default, against Reinhardt and Cornelio based on
 their failure to answer or otherwise defend against the complaint
 in the Declaratory Relief Action. The record indicates that both
 Reinhardt and Cornelio were incarcerated during this time. The
 Franco Parties filed a motion to set aside the entry of defaults
 against Reinhardt and Cornelio. However, the Circuit Court did
 not rule on this motion. 
NIIC filed a motion for summary judgment on its
 
Declaratory Relief Action. NIIC argued that its Policy restricts 
coverage to "permitted drivers who had a 'reasonable belief' they
 were entitled to use the insured vehicle." NIIC asserted that
 assuming Reinhardt was driving the Truck when the fatal accident
 occurred, he could not have had a reasonable belief that he was
 entitled to use the Truck at that time, and accordingly, there
 was no possibility that Reinhardt could fall within the coverage
 provided by the Policy.
 
The Franco Parties filed their own competing motion for
 
summary judgment. The Franco Parties argued that NIIC was
 equitably estopped from denying coverage for Reinhardt because
 (1) NIIC accepted and controlled Reinhardt's defense in the
 Wrongful Death Action without a timely reservation of rights; and
 (2) NIIC was using information obtained through its defense of
 Reinhardt to deny coverage.
 
After a hearing on both motions, the Circuit Court
 
granted NIIC's motion for summary judgment, ruling that NIIC had
 no duty to defend and/or indemnify Reinhardt under the Policy. 
The Circuit Court found that under the particular circumstances
 presented, Reinhardt could not have had a reasonable belief that
 he was entitled to operate the Truck at the time of the accident
 and that there were no genuine issues of material fact concerning
 this issue.
 
The Circuit Court also denied the Franco Parties'
 
motion for summary judgment, indicating that its granting of
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NIIC's motion for summary judgment had rendered the Franco
 
Parties' motion moot. The Circuit Court stated:
 
The Court having had an opportunity to review the
[Franco Parties'] motion, the opposition, the reply, and
having heard the oral arguments in Court this morning, in
light of the Court's granting of plaintiff NIIC's motion for
summary judgment, the Court is going to deny this motion.
 
The Court finds at this time that this motion as well
 
is moot. The instant motion essentially requests for the
Court to rule that [NIIC] be estopped from denying coverage
for Reinhardt's liability for defendant intervenor's
compensatory bodily injury damages for the subject motor
vehicle collision. 
During the prior hearing on the motion for summary
judgment, the Court did rule that NIIC's policy did not
cover Reinhardt because the Court determined that Reinhardt
 could not have a reasonable belief to go joyriding with
Franco under the particular circumstances at issue.
 
I'm going to ask [NIIC's counsel] to prepare the order
on this matter as well.
 
After the Circuit Court entered its written orders 
granting NIIC's motion for summary judgment and denying the 
Franco Parties' motion for summary judgment, the Franco Parties filed: (1) a motion for leave to take Reinhardt's deposition (Motion to Depose Reinhardt); (2) a motion for reconsideration of the order granting NIIC's motion for summary judgment and/or for a Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(f) continuance 
(Motion for Reconsideration); and (3) a motion to compel NIIC to produce documents and information responsive to the Franco Parties' discovery requests (Motion to Compel Discovery). The Circuit Court denied the Franco Parties' Motion to Depose Reinhardt and their Motion for Reconsideration. The Circuit Court did not rule on the Franco Parties' Motion to Compel Discovery. 
On July 28, 2014, the Circuit Court filed its Judgment
 
pursuant to its orders granting NIIC'S motion for summary
 judgment and denying the Franco Parties' Motion for
 Reconsideration. The Circuit Court entered judgment in favor of
 NIIC and against Reinhardt, Cornelio, and the Franco Parties. 
The Franco Parties appeal from the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
The Franco Parties argue that the Circuit Court erred
 
in granting NIIC's motion for summary judgment. As explained
 
below, we agree.
 
A.
 
We review a trial court's grant of summary judgment de 
novo, under the same standard applied by the trial court. Crichfield v. Grand Wailea Co., 93 Hawai
'i 477, 482, 6 P.3d 349, 
354 (2000). "[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. (block quote 
format and citation omitted); see HRCP Rule 56(c) (2000). "A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Id. at 482-83, 6 
P.3d at 354-55 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In reviewing a trial court's grant of summary judgment, 
we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. at 483, 6 P.3d at 355. "In other words, 
'we must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.'" Id. (citation and brackets omitted). "[A]ny doubt 
concerning the propriety of granting the motion should be resolved in favor of the non-moving party." GECC Fin. Corp. v. 
Jaffarian, 79 Hawai
'i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 (App. 1995). 
B.
 
NIIC's obligations to an insured arise from the terms 
of its Policy. The duty to defend is broader than the duty to indemnify. Dairy Road Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 Hawai
'i 
398, 412, 992 P.2d 93, 107 (2000). The duty to defend arises "whenever there is the mere potential for coverage." Id. 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The duty to 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indemnify arises when an insured becomes legally obligated to pay
 
damages in circumstances falling within the scope of the
 insurance policy. See id. at 413; 992 P.2d at 108; Regent Ins.
 
Co. v. Strausser Enterprises Inc., 902 F.Supp.2d 628, 636-37
 (E.D. Pa. 2012) ("The duty to indemnify arises only if it is
 established that the insured's [liability for the insured's
 conduct is] actually covered by the terms of the policy."
 (internal quotation marks, citation, ellipsis points, and
 brackets omitted)).
 
"[I]nsurance policies are subject to the general rules 
of contract construction; the terms of the policy should be interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech unless it appears from the policy that a different meaning is intended." Dairy Road, 92 Hawai
'i at 411, 
992 P.2d at 106 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). However, "because insurance policies are contracts of adhesion[,] . . . they must be construed liberally in favor of the insured and any ambiguities must be resolved against the insurer." Id. at 411-12, 992 P.2d 106-07 (internal quotation 
marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
C.
 
NIIC's Policy for the Truck provides that NIIC will
 
"pay all sums the insured legally must pay as damages because of
 bodily injury or property damage to which this insurance applies,
 caused by an accident and resulting from the ownership,
 maintenance or use of a covered auto." The Policy further
 provides that NIIC has "the right and duty to defend any suit
 asking for these damages. However, [NIIC has] no duty to defend
 suits for bodily injury or property damage not covered by this
 policy. [NIIC] may investigate and settle any claim or suit as
 NIIC consider[s] appropriate." 
With respect to who is insured under the Policy, the
 
Policy provides: "1. You are an insured for any covered auto. 
2. Anyone else is an insured while using a covered auto you own,
 hire or borrow with a reasonable belief that such insured is
 entitled to do so . . . ." 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In addition to their contract terms, "insurance 
policies are governed by statutory requirements in force and 
effect at the time such polices are written. Such provisions are read into each policy issued thereunder, and become a part of the contract with full binding effect upon each party." AIG Hawai
'i 
Ins. Co. v. Vicente, 78 Hawai 'i 249, 251, 891 P.2d 1041, 1043 
(1995) (internal quotation marks, citation, and ellipsis points omitted). 
The NIIC Policy's description of who constitutes an
 
insured is generally consistent with HRS § 431:10C­301(a)(2)(2005), which provides, in relevant part:
 
Required motor vehicle policy coverage.  (a) An
insurance policy covering a motor vehicle shall provide:
 
. . . . 
(2)	 Insurance to pay on behalf of the owner or any
operator of the insured motor vehicle using the
motor vehicle with a reasonable belief that the
 person is entitled to operate the motor vehicle,
sums which the owner or operator may legally be
obligated to pay for injury, death, or damage to
property of others, except property owned by,
being transported by, or in the charge of the
insured, which arise out of the ownership,
operation, maintenance, or use of the motor
vehicle[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) Prior to its amendment in 1998, HRS § 431:10C­
301(a)(2) required insurance coverage for any operator of the
 insured motor vehicle using the motor vehicle with "the express
 or implied permission of the named insured." See 1998 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws Act 275, § 16 at 928. The 1998 amendment, which amended the
 statute to its present form, was enacted to clarify "that drivers
 using other people's vehicles, with a reasonable belief that the
 person has permission to use the vehicle, will not be in
 violation of the mandatory insurance requirement and will retain
 coverage in the event of an accident." Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 117,
 in 1998 House Journal, at 1000.
 
D.
 
The Franco Parties and NIIC basically agree that
 
whether Reinhardt was covered as an insured under NICC's Policy
 turns on whether he drove the Truck with a reasonable belief that
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
he was entitled to operate the Truck when the fatal accident 
occurred.6/ As noted, the duty to defend is broader than the 
duty to indemnify. Dairy Road, 92 Hawai 'i at 412, 992 P.2d at 
107. In seeking summary judgment on its duty to defend, NIIC had
 
the burden of proving that there was no genuine issue of material
 fact with respect to whether a possibility of coverage existed. 
Id. In other words, NIIC had the burden of proving that there
 
was no genuine issue of material fact as to whether it was
 possible that Reinhardt had a reasonable belief that he was
 entitled to operate the Truck when the accident occurred. See
 
id. In seeking summary judgment on its duty to indemnify, NIIC
 
had the lower burden of proving the absence of a genuine issue of
 material fact with respect to whether coverage existed. Id. at
 
413, 992 P.2d at 108. In other words, NIIC had the burden of
 proving that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to
 whether Reinhardt had a reasonable belief that he was entitled to
 operate the Truck when the accident occurred. See id. 
As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting NIIC's motion for summary judgment because
 there were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether
 Reinhardt had a reasonable belief that he was entitled to operate
 the Truck when the accident occurred. Because NIIC failed to
 satisfy its lower summary judgment burden of proof regarding its
 duty to indemnify, it necessarily also failed to satisfy its
 higher burden regarding its duty to defend. We hold that the
 Circuit Court erred in granting NIIC's motion for summary
 judgment with respect to both its duty to defend and its duty to
 indemnify.
 
6/ As previously discussed, for purposes of its summary judgment motion,
NIIC assumed that Reinhardt was driving the Truck when the fatal accident
occurred. In addition, although the named insured on the policy was Cornelio,
NIIC does not dispute that Reinhardt would qualify as an insured under the
Policy if he had Kama's permission to drive the Truck, or he reasonably
believed he was entitled to operate the Truck, at the time of the accident.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
Because the term "reasonableness" is inherently 
ambiguous and subject to differing interpretations, the question 
of reasonableness is "ordinarily for the trier of fact" and generally precludes summary judgment. Courbat v. Dahana Ranch, 
Inc., 111 Hawai
'i 254, 263, 141 P.3d 427, 436 (2006). "Where 
ambiguity exists, summary judgment is usually inappropriate because the determination of someone's state of mind usually entails the drawing of factual inferences as to which reasonable minds might differ." Id. (internal quotation marks, citation, 
and brackets omitted). "Reasonableness can only constitute a question of law suitable for summary judgment when the facts are undisputed and not fairly susceptible of divergent inferences," and upon all the evidence, only one inference may reasonably be drawn. Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In granting summary judgment, the Circuit Court
 
determined that given the evidence presented, there was only one
 inference that could be drawn, namely, that Reinhardt could not
 have reasonably believed that he was entitled to operate the
 Truck at the time of the accident. We disagree with the Circuit
 Court. We conclude that when viewed in the light most favorable
 to the Franco Parties, the evidence presented and the inferences
 drawn from such evidence raised genuine issues of material fact
 regarding whether Reinhardt reasonably believed he was entitled
 to operate the Truck.
 
NIIC and the Franco Parties agree that Reinhardt would 
be entitled to operate the Truck if he had the express or implied permission of Kama, the Truck's owner, to use the Truck when the accident occurred. Implied permission "may arise as a product of the present or past conduct of the insured, and the relationship between the parties, including the lack of any objection to the use by the permittee, which signifies acquiescence or consent of the insured." Vicente, 78 Hawai
'i at 252, 891 P.2d at 1044 
(internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). In opposing NIIC's motion for summary judgment, the Franco Parties 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presented evidence that Kama and Reinhardt were in a girlfriend-
boyfriend relationship at the time of the accident; that prior to
 the accident, Reinhardt had used the Truck on numerous occasions
 without Kama being present for purposes unrelated to work, such
 as personal errands, visits, "cruising around the neighborhood,"
 or hanging out with friends at night; and that during the
 relevant period, Reinhardt was the primary user of the Truck. 
Viewed in the light most favorable to the Franco Parties, this
 evidence supports the inference that prior to the accident,
 Reinhardt generally had Kama's implied permission to use the
 Truck for his own personal purposes.
 
NIIC relies on Kama's deposition testimony to argue
 
that on the night of the accident, Kama's permission was strictly
 limited to Reinhardt's dropping off his niece in Wailuku,
 checking on a car at his family's property, and then coming right
 back to Kama's residence. When Reinhardt told Kama he had to
 borrow the Truck to drop off his niece, Kama testified she said,
 "What you gonna use it for? 'Cause you dropping her off and
 that's it, bringing that truck right back[,]" but that she did
 not say anything else to him. Kama testified that Reinhardt
 later called her and told her he was going to check on a car on
 his family's property and then "be right back." When asked
 whether she told him on the night of the accident not to let
 anyone else borrow the Truck, Kama answered, "'Do what you gotta
 do, go drop off your niece and come right back. Nobody -- nobody
 else is to take that truck.' Every time he has come or used the
 truck, he is not to use -- let nobody use the truck." 
While Kama's deposition testimony shows that she gave
 
Reinhardt permission to use the Truck to drop off his niece and
 to go to his family's property to check on his car on the night
 of the accident, it does not clearly show that she prohibited him
 from using the Truck for any other purpose. Moreover, viewed in
 the context of their girlfriend-boyfriend relationship and
 Reinhardt's prior frequent use of the Truck for personal
 purposes, Kama's deposition testimony fails to establish that
 
15
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reinhardt did not reasonably believe that he could use the Truck
 
for other purposes on the night of the accident.7/
 
Significantly, Kama also testified that Reinhardt
 
called at midnight, shortly before the accident, while she was
 sleeping, and told her he was going to stop at his family's
 property to check on his car and then be right back. Kama
 testified that in response, she said to Reinhardt, "Whatever,"
 and then she "hung up, [and] went back to sleep." A reasonable
 inference from this evidence is that Kama was informing Reinhardt
 that she did not care what he did with the Truck -- that he could
 use the Truck for whatever purpose he wanted -- thereby negating
 any limitations she had previously imposed on his use that night. 
Such evidence would also support a reasonable belief by Reinhardt
 that he had Kama's permission to use the Truck at the time of the
 accident. The Circuit Court acknowledged that Kama's "whatever"
 statement to Reinhardt "could possibly be translated to a 'Yes,
 do whatever you want[.]'" However, the Circuit Court concluded
 that this statement and the evidence that Reinhardt had borrowed
 the Truck in the past was insufficient to "transform[] [Kama's]
 express limitations that evening into the implied permission to
 use the truck for unlimited purposes of going joyriding with
 Franco."
 
Under the applicable standards for summary judgment,
 
which require us to view all of the evidence and the inferences
 drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing
 the motion, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 NIIC's motion for summary judgment. In opposing NIIC's motion
 for summary judgment, the Franco Parties presented evidence that
 Kama and Reinhardt were in a romantic relationship; that prior to
 
7/ We are also not persuaded by NIIC's reliance on Kama's statements
that nobody besides Reinhardt had her permission to use the Truck and that the
Truck's primary purpose was for work. Our analysis focuses on whether
Reinhardt reasonably believed he was entitled to operate the Truck, and thus
whether someone besides Reinhardt had permission to use the Truck is not
directly relevant. That the primary purpose of the Truck was for work also
misses the mark as the evidence showed that Reinhardt as well as Kama used the
 Truck outside of work.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the accident, Kama had given Reinhardt implied permission to
 
routinely use the Truck for his own personal purposes; and that
 on the night of the accident, Kama gave Reinhardt permission to
 use the truck for particular purposes, and then subsequently
 responded "Whatever" when Reinhardt said he would be going to his
 family's property to check on his car before returning with the
 Truck. Viewing the evidence in the appropriate light, we
 conclude that the Franco Parties presented sufficient evidence to
 raise genuine issues of material fact regarding whether Reinhardt
 reasonably believed he was entitled to operate the Truck at the
 time of the fatal accident. Accordingly, NIIC was not entitled
 to summary judgment on its complaint for declaratory relief.
 
II.
 
The Franco Parties contend that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying their Motion for Reconsideration. In light of our
 decision to vacate the Circuit Court grant of NIIC's motion for
 summary judgment, we need not address the Franco Parties' claim
 of error regarding the denial of their Motion for
 Reconsideration. 
III.
 
The Franco Parties filed a motion for summary judgment
 
arguing that NIIC was equitably estopped from denying coverage
 for Reinhardt because it accepted and controlled Reinhardt's
 defense in the Wrongful Death Action without a timely reservation
 of rights and used information obtained thought its defense of
 Reinhardt to deny coverage. The Franco Parties argue that the
 Circuit Court erred in denying their motion as moot, without
 addressing the merits of the motion. 
The exact basis for the Circuit Court's decision to
 
deny the Franco Parties' motion for summary judgment is not
 clear. In stating that it was denying the motion, the Circuit
 Court referred to the parties' pleadings and arguments on the
 Franco Parties' motion, but it also referred "as well" to its
 earlier decision to grant NIIC's motion for summary judgment and
 its belief that this rendered moot the Franco Parties' motion for
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summary judgment. The Circuit Court's granting of NIIC's motion
 
for summary judgment did not render the Franco Parties' motion
 moot, and thus the Circuit Court erred to the extent it relied
 upon the ground of mootness to deny the Franco Parties' motion. 
In any event, our decision to vacate the Circuit Court's granting
 of NIIC's summary judgment motion invalidates the Circuit Court's
 reliance on its grant of summary judgment to deny the Franco
 Parties' motion. 
The Franco Parties' equitable estoppel claim was based 
on its contention that NIIC accepted and controlled Reinhardt's defense in the Wrongful Death Action without a timely reservation of rights, which resulted in prejudice to Reinhardt. However, "[a]n insurance company . . . may initially assume the unconditional defense of an insured while it performs its own reasonable investigation to determine whether coverage exists[,]" without being estopped to deny coverage, if it promptly serves a reservation of rights on the insured once it receives information concerning the possible absence of coverage. AIG Hawai
'i Ins. 
Co. v. Smith, 78 Hawai 'i 174, 177-78, 891 P.2d 261, 264-65 
(1995). In addition, absent manifest injustice, to invoke the doctrine of equitable estoppel, an insured must show that "he or she has detrimentally relied on the representation or conduct of the person sought to be estopped, and that such reliance was reasonable." Id. at 179, 891 P.2d at 266 (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). 
Based on our review of the record available to the
 
Circuit Court at the time it decided the Franco Parties' motion
 for summary judgment, there were genuine issues of material fact
 concerning the Franco Parties' equitable estoppel claim. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 denying the Franco Parties' summary judgment motion.
 
IV.
 
The Franco Parties contend that the Circuit Court erred
 
in failing to set aside the defaults entered against Reinhardt
 and Cornelio; failing to grant the Franco Parties' Motion to
 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Compel Discovery; and denying the Franco Parties' Motion to
 
Depose Reinhardt. The Circuit Court did not render a decision on
 the Franco Parties' motion to set aside the defaults entered
 against Reinhardt and Cornelio and their Motion to Compel
 Discovery.
8/ This was perhaps because the Circuit Court believed
 
that deciding these motions was unnecessary given its decision to
 grant NIIC's motion for summary judgment. The Circuit Court's
 denial of the Franco Parties' Motion to Depose Reinhardt may also
 have been based on its determination that its grant of NIIC's
 summary judgment motion rendered further discovery unnecessary. 
We decline to address the Franco Parties' claims of error on
 these matters and instead direct the Circuit Court, on remand,
 (1) to render a decision in the first instance on the Franco
 Parties' motion to set aside the defaults and Motion to Compel
 Discovery; and (2) to reconsider the Franco Parties' Motion to
 Depose Reinhardt in light of our decision to vacate its grant of
 summary judgment in favor of NIIC. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Circuit Court's
 
Judgment, and we remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Sue V. Hansen 
for Defendants/Intervenors/Appellants. Chief Judge 
Gregory K. Markham(Chee Markham & Feldman)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8/ The Franco Parties contend that the Circuit Court's failure to rule 
on its Motion to Compel Discovery constituted a "deemed denial" of its motion
under Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3) (2012).
However, the "deemed denial" provision of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) cited by theFranco Parties only applies to certain types of motions, and a motion tocompel discovery is not one of the included motions. 
19
 