NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000205
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARK ALLEN BEARD, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 3P7 09-0943)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Mark Allen Beard (Beard) appeals
 
from the Amended Judgment of Conviction & Sentence (Judgment)
 
filed on October 5, 2010 in the District Court of the Third
 
Circuit, North and South Kona Division (district court).1 After
 
a bench trial, the district court convicted Beard of Abuse of
 Family or Household Member, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 709-906; Terroristic Threatening in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-717; and Interference with
 
Reporting an Emergency or Crime, in violation of HRS § 710­
1010.5.
 
On appeal, Beard raises the following points of error:
 
(1) his trial counsel, Keola A. Siu (Siu), provided him with
 
ineffective assistance of counsel by incorrectly advising him to
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
waive his right to a jury trial and (2) due to the incorrect
 
advice of counsel, his waiver of his right to a jury trial was
 
not knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily made. Beard also
 
argues that his subsequent trial counsel, Ann S. Datta (Datta),
 
was ineffective for eliciting prejudicial and irrelevant
 
testimony from the complainant, then failing to object or move to
 
strike the testimony, and in failing to object or move to strike
 
particular testimony from Officer Hanoa. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve this appeal as follows.
 
We first address Appellee State of Hawaii's (Appellee 
State) suggestion in its Answering Brief that the failure of the 
district court to conduct a colloquy with Beard regarding his 
waiver of a jury trial is a basis for overturning his conviction 
and requiring a new trial, regardless of the effectiveness of 
trial counsel's advice. Appellant Beard did not raise this issue 
on appeal. In his Reply Brief, Beard acknowledges that under 
Rule 5(b)(3) of the Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP), the 
waiver of the right to a jury trial can be made "in writing or orally." Appellant Beard further notes that he signed a written 
waiver indicating that he understood his right to a jury trial 
and that he was waiving that right of his own free choice and 
with a clear mind.
2 Defendant Beard does not argue that a 
2 Beard's written waiver of jury trial states:
 
I, MARK ALLEN BEARD, hereby withdraw my demand for
jury trial made on May 4, 2009, before the District Court of
the Third Circuit, North & South Kona Division.
I, MARK ALLEN BEARD, am charged with Abuse of Family
or Household Member, Reporting an Emergency or Crime,
Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree (Ct.'s 3, 4)
have been informed by my attorney, Deputy Public Defender
KEOLA A. SIU that I have the right to have a trial by jury.
I understand that in a jury trial, my attorney and I have
the right of selecting 12 persons from a panel of potential
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
colloquy by the court was necessarily required, but instead
 
states in his Reply Brief that "if the State's contention is
 
correct and an in-court colloquy in addition to the signed
 
written waiver was required, then Defendant-Appellant agrees that
 
the court plainly erred in accepting Beard's waiver of his right
 
to jury trial and this case must be remanded for a new trial." 
In turn, the Office of the Public Defender in its Answering Brief
 
states that "as to the State's contention that an in-court
 
colloquy is required to obtain a valid waiver of the right to
 
jury trial where Defendant-Appellant executed a written waiver,
 
the OPD respectfully disagrees."3
 
Although a colloquy is no doubt advisable, it is not 
required for every waiver of a jury trial. In determining the 
validity of a defendant's waiver of jury trial, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court "will look to the totality of facts and circumstances of each particular case." State v. Friedman, 93 
Hawai'i 63, 68-69, 996 P.2d 268, 273-74 (2000). The supreme 
court in Friedman rejected "a 'bright line rule' that a jury 
waiver can never be voluntary and knowing if a trial court fails 
to advise a defendant of any of the four aspects of a jury 
trial[.]"
4 Id. at 69, 996 P.2d at 274. Moreover, the Friedman 
2 (...continued)
jurors; that we have a certain number of peremptory
challenges which can be used to excuse a juror for any
reason; that all 12 jurors must unanimously agree before a
verdict can be rendered. 
I understand that in a non-jury
trial, a judge alone hears the evidence and decides my guilt
or innocence.
 
I hereby WAIVE (give up) my right to a jury trial, and
agree to a trial by a judge without a jury. I make this
 waiver of my own free choice and with a clear mind. 
3
 The Office of the Public Defender filed an Answering Brief after this
court's March 23, 2012 order requiring that the Opening Brief be served on Siu
and Datta and allowing Siu and Datta to file an Answering Brief. 
4
 The written waiver in this case actually covers Beard's understanding
about the four aspects of waiving a jury trial that the Hawai' i Supreme Court
considered but did not require as a "bright line rule." Friedman 93 Hawai' i 
at 69, 996 P.2d at 274 (declining to adopt as constitutionally required for
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court relied on United States v. Cochran, 770 F.2d 850 (9th Cir.
 
1985), noting that Cochran held "that the [trial] court's failure
 
to conduct a colloquy informing the defendant of all aspects of
 
the right to a trial by jury does not ipso facto constitute
 
reversible error[.]" Id. at 70, 996 P.2d at 275.
 
Given the totality of the circumstances in the record
 
on appeal before us, including the written waiver executed by
 
Beard and Beard's own position on this issue, the district
 
court's failure to conduct a colloquy in this case was not, in
 
and of itself, plain error. 
With regard to Beard's points of error, all of which
 
are grounded on his allegations that he received ineffective
 
assistance of counsel, the record is not sufficiently developed. 
"If the record is unclear or void as to the basis for counsel's
 
actions, counsel shall be given the opportunity to explain his or
 
her actions in an appropriate proceeding before the trial court
 
judge." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 463, 848 P.2d 966, 977
 
(1993); See State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592­93 (1993).
 
As to Beard's first two points of error, the record
 
does not contain Siu's position as to whether in fact he provided
 
Beard with the alleged faulty advice or provide Siu's explanation
 
for the alleged advice he provided to Beard. Thus, the record is
 
unclear as to whether Siu's assistance was ineffective. The
 
record is also unclear whether Beard's waiver of his right to a
 
jury trial was thus invalid due to the alleged faulty advice. 
These issues may be raised in a petition as allowed under HRPP
 
Rule 40. Moreover, although we concluded above that lack of a
 
colloquy in and of itself was not plain error, the lack of a
 
4
 (...continued)
every waiver of jury trial that a trial court advise the defendant that
"(1) twelve members of the community compose a jury, (2) the defendant may
take part in jury selection, (3) a jury verdict must be unanimous, and (4) the
court alone decides guilt or innocence if the defendant waives a jury trial.")
(Citation omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
colloquy may be considered as part of the totality of the
 
circumstances in an HRPP Rule 40 Petition addressing whether
 
Beard's waiver of a jury trial was invalid due to the alleged
 
faulty advice of trial counsel.
 
As to Beard's remaining points of error, the record
 
does not contain Datta's explanation with regard to Beard's
 
claims that she was ineffective in her examination of the
 
complainant, that she failed to object and move to strike
 
complainant's testimony regarding Beard's demeanor, and that she
 
failed to object to Officer Hanoa's testimony that the neighbors
 
did not hear any shots fired. Therefore, it is also appropriate
 
that Beard raise these issues in an HRPP Rule 40 proceeding where
 
the record can be properly developed.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended Judgment of
 
Conviction & Sentence, filed on October 5, 2010 in the District
 Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed without prejudice to
 
Beard filing a petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 on the issues
 
raised in this appeal.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 25, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Alen M. Kaneshiro 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Jon N. IkenagaDeputy Public Defenderfor Office of the Public Defender 
Associate Judge 
5
 