FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–

 
MARTIN S. GOUR, Claimant-Appellant,
vs.
 
HONSADOR LUMBER, LLC, Employer-Appellee,
and
 
INSURANCE COMPANY OF THE STATE OF 
PENNSYLVANIA/CHARTIS CLAIMS, INC., Adjusted by
JOHN MULLEN AND COMPANY, INC.,
Insurance Carrier/Insurance Adjuster-Appellee.
 
CAAP-12-0000202
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2011-443(WH)(9-11-00285))

 
JULY 11, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Claimant-Appellant  Martin S. Gour (Gour) sought to
 
appeal a decision (Decision) of the Director of the Department of
 
Labor and Industrial Relations (Director) to the Labor and
 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB). The Director's
 
Decision deferred determination of Gour's workers' compensation
 
claim until he complied with an order to undergo an independent
 
medical examination (IME), and it also imposed a no-show fee of
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
up to $250 for his failure to appear for a scheduled IME. The
 
LIRAB dismissed Gour's appeal without considering it on the
 
merits because the LIRAB ruled that the Director's Decision was
 
not an appealable decision.
 
As explained below, we conclude that Gour was entitled
 
to appeal and obtain review of the Director's Decision. We
 
therefore vacate the LIRAB's "Order Dismissing Appeal" and remand
 
the case for a decision on the merits. 
BACKGROUND
 
Gour was employed by Employer-Appellee Honsador Lumber,
 
LLC (Honsador) as a truck driver. Gour claimed that on March 15,
 2011, he left work due to stress and accompanying symptoms
 
arising from alleged threats and verbal abuse directed at him by
 
a co-worker. Gour filed a workers' compensation claim for mental
 
stress injury, asserting that he suffered from headaches, bloody
 
stools, and a sleep disorder as a result of being threatened at
 
work. Gour subsequently resumed working as a truck driver, but
 
with a new employer, after he was told by Honsador that he had
 
walked off the job and therefore had resigned.
 
In response to Gour's claim for mental stress injury,
1
Employer  notified Gour that it had scheduled an independent
psychological examination for him with Joseph Rogers, Ph.D (Dr.

 
Rogers).2 When Gour did not appear for the scheduled
 
examination, Honsador sought and obtained an order dated June 20,
 2011, from the Director, compelling Gour to undergo an
 
independent psychological examination. The Director's order
 
required Gour "to submit [himself] for an evaluation and 
1/ We use "Employer" to refer collectively to Honsador and Insurance-
Carrier Appellee Insurance Company of the State of Pennsylvania/Chartis
Claims, Inc., adjusted by John Mullen and Company, Inc. 
2/ Employer notified Gour that the examination consisted of two parts,
psychometric testing and clinical interview, each lasting approximately four
hours.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an interview by [Dr. Rogers]" on July 9 and July 12, 2011, at the
 
office of Stephen Carter. The Director's order further provided:
 
If you refuse to submit to or [in] any way obstruct the
ordered examinations, your right to claim compensation may,
after a hearing by the Director, be suspended until such
refusal or obstruction ceases, and no compensation may be
payable for the period during which the refusal or
obstruction continues.
 
Gour failed to appear as ordered for the independent
 
psychological examination.
 
After a hearing on September 22, 2011, the Director
 
issued the Decision on November 10, 2011. In the Decision, the
 
Director deferred determination of compensability on Gour's
 
workers' compensation claim until he complied with the ordered
 
independent medical examination. The Director ruled:
 
The determination of compensability is deferred until such
time that [Gour] complies with the ordered independent
medical evaluation as requested by [Employer].
 
The Director also ruled that Gour was liable for a no-show fee of
 
up to $250.
 
Gour appealed the Director's Decision to the LIRAB. 
Without considering the merits of Gour's appeal, the LIRAB
 
dismissed Gour's appeal on the ground that "[t]here is no
 
appealable decision or final order because compensability remains
 
undetermined." The LIRAB issued its "Order Dismissing Appeal" on
 
February 29, 2012, and the appeal to this court followed.
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-73 (Supp. 2013) 
grants the Director original jurisdiction over disputes arising 
under Hawai 'i's workers' compensation law, HRS Chapter 386, and 
establishes the right to appeal from the Director's decisions. HRS § 386-73 provides: 
Unless otherwise provided, the director of labor and
industrial relations shall have original jurisdiction over
all controversies and disputes arising under this chapter.
The decisions of the director shall be enforceable by the
circuit court as provided in section 386-91. There shall be
 
a right of appeal from the decisions of the director to the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
appellate board[ 3
] and thence to the intermediate appellate
court, subject to chapter 602, as provided in sections 
386-87 and 386-88, but in no case shall an appeal operate as

a supersedeas or stay unless the appellate board or the
appellate court so orders.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
HRS § 386-87 (1993) establishes procedures for a party
 
to appeal a decision of the Director to the LIRAB and for the
 
LIRAB to decide that appeal. HRS § 386-87 states in relevant
 part:
 
(a) A decision of the director shall be final and
conclusive between the parties, except as provided in
section 386-89,[ 4
] unless within twenty days after a copy
has been sent to each party, either party appeals therefrom
to the appellate board by filing a written notice of appeal

with the appellate board or the department. In all cases of
 
appeal filed with the department the appellate board shall
be notified of the pendency thereof by the director. No
 compromise shall be effected in the appeal except in
compliance with section 386-78.
 
(b) The appellate board shall hold a full hearing de
novo on the appeal.
 
(c) The appellate board shall have power to review the
findings of fact, conclusions of law and exercise of
discretion by the director in hearing, determining or
otherwise handling of any compensation[ 
5
] case and may
affirm, reverse or modify any compensation case upon review,

or remand the case to the director for further proceedings
and action.
 
(Emphasis added.) The decision or order of the LIRAB may, in
 
turn, be appealed to the Intermediate Court of Appeals by the
 Director or any other party. HRS § 386-88 (Supp. 2013).
 
II.
 
In Tam v. Kaiser Permanente, 94 Hawai
'i 487, 17 P.3d 
219 (2001), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court addressed a situation very 
3/ HRS § 386-1 (1993) defines the term "appellate board" to mean the
LIRAB.
 
4/ HRS § 386-89 (1993) permits the Director to reopen a case under
certain conditions.
 
5/ HRS § 386-1 (1993) defines the term "compensation" to mean "all
benefits accorded by this chapter to an employee or the employee's dependents
on account of a work injury as defined in this section; it includes medical
and rehabilitation benefits, income and indemnity benefits in cases of
disability or death, and the allowance for funeral and burial expenses."
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
similar to this case. Tam, a registered nurse for Kaiser 
Foundation Hospital (Kaiser), had injured her back at work. Tam, 
94 Hawai 'i at 491, 17 P.3d at 223. Kaiser accepted liability for 
Tam's injury, but when the progress of Tam's recovery became prolonged, Kaiser requested that Tam undergo a medical examination by a physician selected by Kaiser (independent medical examination (IME)). Id. Tam participated in the first 
IME ordered by the Director at Kaiser's request. Id. However, 
when the Director, at Kaiser's request, issued an order on April 13, 1995, requiring Tam to undergo a second IME, Tam refused to comply. Id. at 492, 17 P.3d at 224. After a hearing held on 
July 26, 1995, the Director issued a decision dated September 19, 1995, which suspended Tam's workers' compensation benefits until she complied with the order to undergo the second IME. Id. at 
492-93, 17 P.3d at 224-25. Tam appealed the Director's September 19, 1995, decision to the LIRAB. Id. at 493, 17 P.3d at 225. In 
her appeal to the LIRAB, Tam challenged the validity of the Director's order requiring her to undergo the second IME. Id. 
The LIRAB issued a decision and order affirming the Director's September 19, 1995, decision. Id. 
Tam appealed the LIRAB's decision and order to the 
Hawai
'i Supreme Court.6 Kaiser questioned the supreme court's 
jurisdiction over Tam's appeal because the LIRAB's decision did not finally determine Tam's entitlement to benefits under the workers' compensation law. Id. at 494, 17 P.3d at 226. The 
supreme court held that it had jurisdiction over Tam's appeal, reasoning as follows: 
As a threshold matter, Kaiser questions this court's
jurisdiction over the present appeal, inasmuch as the
LIRAB's order did not finally determine Tam's entitlement tobenefits under the Workers' Compensation Law. The appeal ofa decision or order of the LIRAB is governed by HRS§ 91–14(a). Bocalbos v. Kapiolani Medical Center for Women
and Children, 89 Hawai' i 436, 439, 974 P.2d 1026, 1029
(1999). HRS § 91–14(a) (1993) provides in relevant part 
6/ At that time, the decision or order of the LIRAB was directly
appealable to the Hawai' i Supreme Court. See HRS § 386-88 (1993). 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that "[a]ny person aggrieved by a final decision and order
in a contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature
that deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final
decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief is
entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter [.]"
The record reflects that Tam was still receiving benefits
for medical care at the time of the [Department of Labor and
Industrial Relations'] hearing. Inasmuch as Kaiser accepted
liability and did not challenge the reasonableness of the
medical care provided, HRS § 386–21(a) (1993 & Supp. 1999)
created a statutory entitlement to those benefits. See
 
State ex rel. Haylett v. Ohio Bureau of Workers'
Compensation, 87 Ohio St.3d 325, 720 N.E.2d 901, 906–07
(1999). Accordingly, Tam was entitled to the July 26, 1995
hearing, which, was a contested case hearing for purposes of
HRS § 91–14(a). Moreover, although the LIRAB's decision
does not end the proceedings in Tam's case, it is clear that
"deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final
decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief." In
 fact, no relief is or will be available to Tam with respect
to her challenge to the present suspension of her workers'
compensation benefits absent this court's review. Of
 
course, Tam could comply with the Director's order and
thereby have her benefits restored, but it is precisely the
validity of that order and her right to ignore it that she
asks this court to review in the present appeal. Given the
 parties' positions, and particularly Tam's claim that the
order was unlawful, the option of complying with the
Director's order is not "adequate relief." Accordingly,
pursuant to HRS § 91–14(a), we have jurisdiction over the
present appeal.
 
Tam, 94 Hawai 'i at 494-95, 17 P.3d at 226-27 (some brackets in 
original; emphasis added).
 
III.
 
We conclude that  Tam's holding and analysis controls
 
our decision in this case. Although the supreme court did not
 
explicitly address whether the LIRAB had jurisdiction to decide
 Tam's appeal from the Director's decision suspending her benefits
 until she complied with the second IME order, the conclusion that
 the LIRAB had jurisdiction is implicit in the supreme court's
 decision. For if the LIRAB lacked jurisdiction over Tam's appeal
 from the Director's decision, then the LIRAB could not have
 addressed the underlying merits of the Director's decision, and
 the supreme court could not have addressed, as it did, the merits
 of the LIRAB's decision to affirm the Director. 
Based on 
Tam, we conclude that the LIRAB was required
 
to exercise jurisdiction over Gour's appeal because the LIRAB's
 failure to review the Director's Decision until the entry of a
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
final decision on Gour's entitlement to benefits will deprive
 
Gour of adequate relief. Similar to the circumstances in Tam,
 Gour wants to challenge the validity of the Director's order
 compelling him to undergo an independent psychological
 examination in his appeal to the LIRAB. No adequate relief with
 respect to this challenge will be available to Gour if the LIRAB
 refuses to consider his challenge on the merits until he
 undergoes the psychological examination. As in Tam, Gour could
 comply with the Director's order to undergo the psychological
 examination and thereby end the deferral imposed on the
 determination of his workers' compensation claim. But this would
 require Gour to submit to the very psychological examination he
 claims is unjustified and was not ordered "in accordance with the
 law[,]" and to comply with the order of the Director for which he
 seeks review. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the LIRAB had
 
jurisdiction to consider the merits of Gour's appeal from the
 Director's Decision and that the LIRAB erred in dismissing Gour's
 appeal. We therefore vacate the LIRAB's Order Dismissing Appeal
 and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Martin S. Gour
 
Claimint-Appellant Pro Se
 
Robert C. Kessner
 
Sylvia K. Higashi
for Employer-Appellee and
Insurance Carrier/Insurance
Adjuster-Appellee
 
7
 