 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0001009
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DARIN F. LAU, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-12-003777)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Darin F. Lau (Lau) by complaint with
 
Operating a Vehicle After License and Privilege Have Been
 Suspended or Revoked for Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence
 of an Intoxicant (OVLPSR-OVUII) as a first offender, in violation
 of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-62(a)(1) and/or (a)(2)
 and (b)(1) (Supp. 2014).
12 After a bench trial, the District
 
1HRS ยง 291E-62 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) No person whose license and privilege to operate a
vehicle have been revoked, suspended, or otherwise restricted
pursuant to this section or to part III or section 291E-61 or
291E-61.5, or to part VII or part XIV of chapter 286 or section
200-81, 291-4, 291-4.4, 291-4.5, or 291-7 as those provisions were
in effect on December 31, 2001, shall operate or assume actual
physical control of any vehicle:
 
(1)	 In violation of any restrictions placed on the
person's license; [or]
 
(2) 	While the person's license or privilege to operate a
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
Court of the First Circuit (District Court)  found Lau guilty as
charged of OVLPSR-OVUII. 
The District Court sentenced Lau to
 
three days in jail, imposed a $500 fine and other fees and
 
assessments, and revoked his driver's license for one year. The
 District Court entered its Judgment on October 19, 2012.
 
On appeal, Lau contends that: (1) the District Court 
erred in failing to properly advise him of his right to testify pursuant to 
Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai 'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 
(1995), and to ensure that he validly waived that right; (2) the District Court erred in admitting State's Exhibit 3, an Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office (ADLRO) Notice of Administrative Review Decision, which Lau claims was not properly certified; and (3) there was insufficient evidence to support the District Court's guilty verdict. As explained below, we conclude that the District Court failed to comply with the 
1(...continued)
vehicle remains suspended or revoked[.] 
. . . .
 
(b) Any person convicted of violating this section shall
be sentenced as follows without possibility of probation or
suspension of sentence:
 
(1)	 For a first offense, or any offense not preceded
within a five-year period by conviction for an offense
under this section, section 291E-66, or section
291-4.5 as that section was in effect on December 31,
2001:
 
(A)	 A term of imprisonment of not less than three
consecutive days but not more than thirty days;
 
(B) 	A fine of not less than $250 but not more than
 $1,000;
 
(C) 	Revocation of license and privilege to operate a
vehicle for an additional year; and
 
(D) 	Loss of the privilege to operate a vehicle
equipped with an ignition interlock device, if
applicable[.] 
2The complaint also charged Lau with driving without insurance, but this
charge was dismissed before trial.
 
3The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirements of Tachibana. We reject Lau's other points of
 
error. Based on the District Court's Tachibana error, we vacate
 Lau's OVLPSR-OVUII conviction and remand the case for a new
 trial.
 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Lau on appeal as

 
follows:
 
I.

 
Lau argues that the District Court's Tachibana
 
advisement was "woefully deficient." We conclude that the
 District Court failed to comply with the requirements of
 Tachibana and that this failure requires that we vacate Lau's
 conviction.
 
A.
 
Prior to the defense resting, Lau's counsel notified
 
the District Court that Lau would not be testifying. The
 District Court then conducted the following colloquy:
 
THE COURT:  Okay. Do you understand you have the
right to testify or not testify? 
And if you elect not to
testify, I cannot make any negative inferences against you
with regard to your decision not to testify, okay? 
You had an opportunity to discuss whether or not you

want to testify with your attorney?
 
[LAU]: 
Right. Yes, I did.
 
THE COURT:  
Have you made a decision as to whether or
not you're going to testify or not?
 
[LAU]: 
I did.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. And you've conveyed that decision
to your attorney?
 
[LAU]: 
Right.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay, I'll let your attorney then advise
the Court as to whether or not you're going to be
testifying.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
Your Honor, he will not be
testifying this morning.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay, thank you. Any other witnesses
you'd like to offer [defense counsel]?
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, defense has no other
witnesses.

 
It is not clear why the District Court chose to have
 
defense counsel, rather than Lau, state for the record whether or
 
not Lau had decided to testify. What is clear is that the
 District Court should not continue this practice. 
B.
 
In Tachibana, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that "in 
order to protect the right to testify under the Hawai 'i 
Constitution, trial courts must advise criminal defendants of their right to testify and must obtain an on-the-record waiver of that right in every case in which the defendant does not testify." Tachibana, 79 Hawai
'i at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303 
(footnotes omitted; emphasis added). 
In State v. Staley, 91 Hawai 'i 275, 982 P.2d 904 
(1999), the trial court engaged in a colloquy with the defendant regarding the Tachibana advisements at the close of the prosecution's case in chief. Staley, 91 Hawai
'i at 279-80, 982 
P.2d at 908-09. However, at the close of the co-defendant's case, the defendant's waiver of his right to testify consisted solely of his attorney's on-the-record answer of "No" to the trial court's question, "Your client going [to] testify?"
4 Id. 
at 280, 982 P.2d at 909. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the 
trial court had committed plain error in the manner in which it had obtained the defendant's waiver of his right to testify. Id. 
at 286-87, 982 P.2d at 915-16. 
The supreme court observed that "[w]hile the circuit
 
court did engage in a colloquy with [the defendant] regarding
 [the defendant's] understanding of his right to testify, the
 circuit court failed to elicit an on-the-record waiver of [the
 defendant's] right. The circuit court simply asked [the
 defendant's] attorney whether [the defendant] was 'going [to]
 
4The trial court apparently adduced this waiver without reviewing the
Tachibana advisements at the close of the co-defendant's case. See Stanley, 
91 Hawai' i at 280, 982 P.2d at 909. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testify.'" Id. at 286, 982 P.2d at 915 (brackets in original). 
The supreme court concluded:

 
In the present matter, the circuit court did not
elicit from [the defendant] an on-the-record waiver of his
right to testify. The record affords no means by which this
court can discern whether [the defendant] actually waived
his right to testify or whether the decision was made
entirely by his attorney. Based on the rule established in
 Tachibana, we hold that the circuit court's failure to
establish on the record that [the defendant's] decision not

to testify was made knowingly and voluntarily constituted
plain error.
 
Id. at 287, 982 P.2d at 916 (citations omitted).
 
In State v. Hoang, 94 Hawai 'i 271, 12 P.3d 371 (App. 
2000), the trial court provided the defendant with Tachibana
 
advisements, but obtained the on-the-record waiver from the
 defendant's attorney, and not from the defendant himself:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: The judge is asking you do you
understand that you have the right to testify and aright

[sic] not to testify. And that if you choose not to
testify, that cannot be used against you. Do you understand
that?
 
[HOANG]: Yes.
 
 
THE COURT: Sir, do you understand that?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That's right, your Honor. 
He has
 
elected not to testify.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Very well. You may continue, Mr.
[Prosecutor].
 
Hoang, 94 Hawai 'i at 278, 12 P.3d at 378 (brackets in original). 
This court held that the defendant had not validly waived his
 
right to testify. Id. at 278-79, 12 P.3d at 378-79. We stated:
 
Tachibana is not satisfied, however, by a waiver by
 
proxy. And we do not niggle when we insist that the court
obtain the defendant's waiver directly from the defendant.
For another of the primary purposes of the Tachibana
colloquy is to ensure that the waiver is indeed thedefendant's and not that of the defendant's attorney. The
 constitutional right to testify is personal to the
defendant, to be relinquished only by the defendant, and may
not be waived by counsel as a matter of trial strategy.
 
Id. at 278, 12 P.3d at 378.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
Staley and Hoang make it clear that the trial court
 
should obtain an on-the-record waiver of the right to testify
 
from the defendant's own mouth, and not from the defendant's
 attorney. The State, however, suggests that under the particular
 circumstances of this case, the trial court's failure to obtain a
 waiver directly from Lau was immaterial because the record shows
 that Lau understood and personally waived his right to testify. 
The State notes that the District Court had verified through its
 colloquy with Lau that Lau had made a decision on whether to
 testify and had communicated his decision to defense counsel,
 whom the District Court then asked to communicate Lau's decision. 
The State asserts that it "strains credulity" to suggest that
 given this preface, "Lau's defense counsel may have misinformed
 the [District Court] about Lau's decision not to testify and that
 Lau stood by silently while his counsel misinformed the court."
 
We need not decide whether the District Court's failure 
to obtain an on-the-record waiver directly from Lau, by itself, was sufficient to require overturning Lau's conviction. This is because, as Lau argues, the District Court's Tachibana advisement was deficient for failing to advise Lau that (1) if he wanted to testify, that no one could prevent him from doing so; and (2) if he testified, the prosecution would be allowed to cross-examine him.
5 See Tachibana, 79 Hawai 'i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 
n.7. We conclude that the District Court failed to comply with 
the requirements of Tachibana. We further conclude that the District Court's error in failing to comply with the requirements of Tachibana was not harmless. See Hoang, 94 Hawai
'i at 279, 12 
P.3d at 379 (observing that "it is inherently difficult . . . to divine what effect a violation of the defendant's constitutional 
5We are not persuaded by the State's argument that these deficiencies
were cured by the District Court's prior advisement of Lau of these matters
after the State's first witness. Lau did not acknowledge his understanding of
these matters during the prior advisement.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to testify had on the outcome of any particular case"). 
Accordingly, we must vacate Lau's OVLPSR-OVUII conviction.
 
II.
 
Lau contends that the District Court erred in admitting 
Exhibit 3, an ADLRO Notice of Administrative Review Decision,
 which showed that Lau's driver's license was administratively
 revoked for operating a vehicle under the influence of an
 intoxicant at the time of the offense charged in this case. In
 particular, Lau contends that the document was not properly
 authenticated because the certification appearing on the document
 was insufficient. We disagree.
 
The record shows that Exhibit 3 contained an embossed
 
seal and a certification which stated: "I do hereby certify that
 this is a full, true, and correct copy of the document on file in
 this office. I attest that I am authorized to certify copies for
 the ADLRO[.]" The certification was signed and dated, and the
 words "Judiciary, Admin. Driver's License Revocation Office,
 State of Hawaii" appeared below the signature and date.
 
We conclude that the certification was sufficient to 
authenticate Exhibit 3, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 902 (1993 & Supp. 2014).6 Exhibit 3 was a document 
6HRE Rule 902 provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 902 Self-authentication. Extrinsic evidence of
 
authenticity as a condition precedent to admissibility is not
required with respect to the following:
 
(1)	 Domestic public documents under seal. A document
 bearing a seal purporting to be that of the United
States, or of any state, district, commonwealth,
territory, or insular possession thereof, or the
Panama Canal Zone, or the Trust Territory of the
Pacific Islands, or of a political subdivision,
department, officer, or agency thereof, and a
signature purporting to be an attestation or
execution.
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Certified copies of public records. A copy of an
official record or report or entry therein, or of a
document authorized by law to be recorded or filed and
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bearing the seal purporting to be that of a state department,
 
officer, or agency and a signature purporting to be an
 attestation or execution; it was also a copy of an official
 record certified as correct by a person authorized to certify
 copies for the ADLRO. See HRE Rule 902(1) and (4). Lau argues
 
that the certification was insufficient because the signature of
 the ADLRO official was illegible and he could not determine the
 identity of the signer from the certification. However, Lau
 cites no authority for the proposition that a legible signature
 permitting the identification of the signer are preconditions for
 a valid certification. Moreover, since the records of the ADLRO
 are accessible to the public, Lau could have examined the ADLRO
 records if he had any concerns about the authenticity of Exhibit
 3. See Hawai
'i Court Record Rules Rule 10 (2012). 
III.
 
Lau argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support the District Court's guilty verdict because: (1) without
 Exhibit 3, there was no evidence that his license was suspended
 or revoked at the time of the charged offense; and (2) the State
 failed to prove that he operated a vehicle on a public way,
 street, or highway. We disagree.
 
As previously noted, Exhibit 3 was admissible, which 
disposes of Lau's first argument. As to Lau's second argument, the State presented evidence at trial that Lau was observed stopped at a light at the intersection of Kapi
'olani Boulevard 
and Pensacola Street, and that Lau was subsequently stopped by a police officer after Lau proceeded through the intersection traveling westbound on Kapi
'olani Boulevard. In State v. Davis, 
133 Hawai 'i 102, 121-22, 324 P.3d 912, 931-32 (2014), the Hawai 'i 
6(...continued)
actually recorded or filed in a public office,
including data compilations in any form, certified as
correct by the custodian or other person authorized to
make the certification, by certificate complying with
paragraph (1), (2), or (3) or complying with any
statute or rule prescribed by the supreme court.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Supreme Court took judicial notice on appeal of a City and County 
of Honolulu ordinance and speed schedule, which showed that a section of Kamehameha Highway at issue in that case was a "public way." The supreme court relied upon its taking of such judicial notice in rejecting Davis's claim that the State had failed to establish that he operated a vehicle on a public way, street, or highway. Id. We similarly take judicial notice of the same 
ordinance and speed schedule in concluding that the evidence that Lau drove his vehicle westbound on Kapi
'olani Boulevard through 
the intersection of Kapi 'olani Boulevard and Pensacola Street was 
sufficient to establish that he operated a vehicle on a public way, street, or highway. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the District
 
Court's Judgment with respect to Lau's OVLPSR-OVUII conviction
 based on the District Court's Tachibana error, and we remand the
 case for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Titiimaea N. Ta 'ase 
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting Attorney

City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
9
 