NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000128
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JOSEPH W. HARTLEY,
Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN MARSH,
Defendant/Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
C. MIKAHALA KERMABON,
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
HEIRS OR ASSIGNS OF AKI, ET AL,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0456(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
1
Pro Se Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant  C. Mikahala
Kermabon (Kermabon) appeals from the "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, And Decision And Order" entered October 11,
 
1
 The initiating notice of appeal was filed by John Marsh on
November 8, 2010. His portion of this appeal was dismissed by "Order Granting
Stipulation to Dismiss Appeal of Defendant-Appellant John Marsh" entered on
November 22, 2011. 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
2010 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit court). 
The circuit court found in favor of Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-
Appellee Joseph W. Hartley III (Hartley) as the sole, exclusive
 
owner of the property at issue (Property) in a quiet title
 
action. On appeal, Kermabon contends the circuit court erred in
 
finding Hartley established title through adverse possession and
 
superior paper title. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Kermabon's appeal is without merit.
 
Kermabon contends the circuit court erroneously 
concluded Hartley proved title by adverse possession. 
The 
circuit court concluded in its Findings of Facts (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law (COLs) that "[Hartley] has proven by clear, 
convincing, and positive proof that he and his predecessors in 
interest, and his family and invitees had hostile, actual, 
visible, notorious, exclusive, and continuous possession of 
[Property] for at least fifty (50) years under claim of 
ownership." "A COL that is supported by the trial court's FOFs 
and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will 
not be overturned." Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai' i 445, 
453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004) (brackets omitted). In this case, 
the factual findings support the circuit court conclusion and the 
conclusion shows no error in application of the law in adverse 
possession. 
"It is well established that one claiming title to real
 
property by adverse possession must bear the burden of proving by
 
clear and positive proof, each element of actual, open,
 
notorious, hostile, continuous, and exclusive possession for the
 
2
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory period." Mauna Kea Agribusiness Co., Inc. v. Nauka, 
105 Hawai' i 252, 255, 96 P.3d 581, 584 (2004) (quoting Morinoue 
v. Roy, 86 Hawai' i 76, 81, 947 P.2d 944, 949 (1997) (brackets 
omitted). "The burden of clear and positive proof derives from 
the long-observed proposition that adverse possession is to be 
taken strictly, and every presumption is in favor of a possession 
in subordination to the rightful owner." Id. 
A claimant establishes actual, open, and notorious 
possession by use of the land in a manner that puts the world on 
notice and attracts the attention of adverse claimants. Wailuku 
Agribusiness Co., Inc. v. Ah Sam, 114 Hawai' i 24, 33, 155 P.3d 
1125, 1134 (2007). A claimant proves hostility "by showing 
possession for oneself under a claim of right, and such 
possession must import a denial of the owner's title." Id. 
(brackets and internal quotation marks omitted). A presumption of hostility arises when all other elements of adverse possession 
are satisfied. Id. at 34, 155 P.3d at 1135. To show continuous, 
exclusive use, the claimant must show use of the land similar to that of an average land owner with similar property. Id. at 34, 
155 P.3d at 1135. 
The statutory period has changed over the years. From 
1898 to 1973, adverse possession could be established after satisfying all requisite elements for ten years. Wailuku 
Agribusiness Co., Inc., 114 Hawai' i at 34 n. 19, 155 P.3d at 1135 
n. 19. After 1973, the statutory period increased whereby
 
claimants may successfully prove adverse possession upon proof of
 
fulfilling all requisite elements for twenty years. Id. 
In this case, the earliest possible commencement of
 
Hartley's possession of the Property began with the conveyance
 
from Keokea Five, LLC to Hartley in March 2007. Hartley's
 
possession came no more than seven months before the "Complaint
 
To Quiet Title And Partition" filed October 25, 2007, well short
 
of the requisite twenty years.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Generally, the statutory period for adverse possession
 
cannot be satisfied by tacking together successive possessions so
 
as to create a continuous period of possession. Kainea v.
 
Kreuger, 31 Haw. 108, *4 (Haw. Terr. 1929). However, successive
 interests may be tacked to create a continuous possession where
 
there is privity of estate or title between each of the
 
successive possessors so as to link each to the original entry. 
Kainea, 31 Haw. at *4. Privity may be established by any
 
conveyance or agreement whether in writing or oral. Id. The
 
claimant need only establish that each successive possession was
 connected and continuous. Id. 
Hartley presented the circuit court with ample evidence
 
establishing Kaonoulu Ranch as the original entry. Constructing
 
fences and using the land for pasture constitutes evidence of
 
actual, open, notorious, and continuous use. Deponte v.
 
Ulupalakua Ranch, Limited, 48 Haw. 17, 18-19, 395 P.2d 273, 274­75 (1964). A managing partner/ranch hand employed by Kaonoulu
 
Ranch testified that part of his duties at Kaonoulu Ranch
 
included repairing stonewall and wire fences, and driving bulls
 
in and out of the property. The ranch hand further testified to
 
the presence of water troughs and waterlines maintained by
 
Kaonoulu Ranch. The ranch hand testified that such activities
 
continued from 1954 until 1989.
 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of 
fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 
(2006) (internal quotation marks omitted). Therefore, the circuit court's findings regarding adverse possession remain 
undisturbed where the finding is supported by witness testimony 
deemed credible by the trier of fact. As such, the activities 
conducted by Kaonoulu Ranch on the property comprise actual, 
open, notoriously, continuous use of the property for over   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thirty-five years, supporting Hartley's assertion that Kaonoulu
 
Ranch was the original entry. 
Hartley submitted evidence confirming privity of estate
 
or title between Hartley and Kaonoulu Ranch, linking Hartley's
 
interest to the original entry. Hartley presented a recorded
 
deed or evidence of descent for each mesne conveyance linking
 
Kaonoulu Ranch's interest to Hartley's interest. Hartley
 
submitted the deed from Rice to Kaonoulu Ranch recorded October
 
3, 1955. In evidence is the deed from Kaonoulu Ranch to Thomas
 
DeCoite recorded August 15, 1989. In evidence is the deed
 
conveying interest from DeCoite to Toyoko Okuno recorded by deed
 
August 16, 1989 and then the Correction Deed February 19, 1997.
 
Hartley submitted into evidence the "Judgment of Order
 
Granting Petition For Approval of Final Accounts and Distribution
 
and Complete Settlement of Estate" entered March 14, 2007, by the
 
3
circuit court  , granting the Personal Representative of Okuno's
estate the right to settle accounts for Okuno, deceased. 
Hartley
 
submitted the deed from the Personal Representative of Okuno's
 estate, Meyer M. Ueoka, to Michael Szymanski recorded May 21,
 
2003. Hartley then submitted into evidence the deed conveying
 
interest from Szymanski to Hartley and four others recorded May
 
21, 2003. Also in evidence is the deed from Hartley and others
 
to Keokea Five LLC recorded July 29, 2003.
 Hartley presented the deed recorded March 9, 2007, and
 
the Correction Deed recorded June 6, 2007, conveying interest
 
from Keokea Five LLC to Hartley. 
Having established grounds for
 
tacking successive interests through extensive records of
 conveyances and devise, Hartley satisfied the statutory period
 
for adverse possession. The record in this case supports the
 
circuit court conclusion that Hartley successfully demonstrated
 
all requisite elements of adverse possession. 
3
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffeto presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 The circuit court determined Hartley "owns exclusive
 
paper title to that portion of Apana 1 within TMK Parcel No. (2)
 
2-2-05-3[]" and "that portion of Apana 2 within TMK Parcel 
(2) 2-2-05-03." "Where there is substantial evidence, which is 
credible evidence of sufficient quality and probative value to 
justify a reasonable person in reaching conclusions that support 
the FOF's, the FOF's cannot be set aside." Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 116, 839 P.2d 10, 28 (1992). "The appellate court will neither reconcile conflicting 
evidence nor interfere with the decision of the trier of fact 
based on the witnesses' credibility or the weight of the 
evidence." Onaka v. Onaka, 112 Hawai' i 374, 384, 146 P.3d 89, 99 
(2006). So long as the circuit court's findings are supported by credible evidence, even where conflicting evidence is presented, 
the findings will stand undisturbed. 
Substantial evidence supports the circuit court
 
findings of fact regarding the chain of paper title. Hartley
 
presented recorded deeds and evidence of descent to support each
 
conveyance from the original grantor through each mesne
 
conveyance to Hartley. Hartley effectively established a chain
 
of title from each predecessor in interest to his own title in
 
the Property. Though Kermabon submitted two quitclaim deeds
 
apparently contradicting Hartley's claim to paper title, it is
 
the province of the circuit court to weigh the evidence. Here,
 
the circuit court found Hartley's evidence supporting his paper
 
title superior to Kermabon's evidence. The record in this case
 
supports the circuit court findings regarding Hartley's claim to
 
paper title in the Property; therefore, the findings of fact
 
regarding paper title are not clearly erroneous. 
In an action to quiet title, the plaintiff bears the 
burden to show that either he holds paper title or holds title by 
adverse possession. Makila Land Co., LLC v. Kapu, 114 Hawai' i 
56, 58, 156 P.3d 482, 484 (App. 2006). "While it is not     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessary for the plaintiff to have perfect title to establish a
 
prima facie case, he must at least prove that he has a
 
substantial interest in the property and that his title is
 
superior to that of the defendants." Id.
 
The plaintiff's prima facie case can be made in various
ways, but it is usually done by bringing forward evidence of
the initial land grant award and tracing ownership forward
to the plaintiff through "mesne conveyances, devise, or
descent" or through evidence of adverse possession, as
provided in the quiet title statute.
 
Alexander & Baldwin, Inc. v. Silva, 124 Hawai' i 476, 482, 248 
P.3d 1207, 1213 (App. 2011). Once the plaintiff meets the 
initial burden, the defendant must establish superior title than 
that of the plaintiff in order to defeat Plaintiff's claim. Id. 
"If the plaintiff and defendant both bring forward evidence supporting their claims of title, then the court must decide, 
based on the evidence presented, which party has superior 
title[.]" Id. 
In this case, Hartley demonstrated substantial interest 
in the Property by tracing ownership from the original land grant 
to Hartley through mesne conveyances, devises, and records of 
descent entered into evidence. Having satisfied the initial 
burden of a prima facie case, Kermabon must demonstrate that her 
claim to title is superior to that of Hartley. See, e.g., Makila 
Land Co., LLC, 114 Hawai' i at 58, 156 P.3d at 484. Kermabon 
claims interest in the Property as a descendant of W. L. Puleloa 
and substantiates her claim with evidence of two quitclaim deeds 
executed by other named defendants. Other than these two 
quitclaim deeds recorded in 2005 that fail to show Kermabon's 
interest in the Property, Kermabon did not produce any evidence 
that she holds paper title superior to Hartley's title. In light 
of the evidence, the circuit court did not err in concluding 
Hartley holds superior title than that of Kermabon. 
Therefore,
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, And Decision And Order" entered October 11,
 
2010 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 31, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
C. Mikahala Kermabon 
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant pro se. 
Presiding Judge 
Michael W. Gibson Connie C. Chow (Ashford & Wriston)for Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellee Joseph W. Hartley. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
