NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000484
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SUSANNE M. LUNSFORD, Individually
and as Personal Representative of the
Estate of BRIAN F. MCVEY, Deceased,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
SURGICAL ASSOCIATES, INC.;
FONG-LIANG FAN, M.D.; JOSE A. GANEL, M.D.,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOES 1-100, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2310)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In an appeal arising out of alleged negligence in
 
obtaining informed consent, Plaintiffs-Appellants Susanne M.
 
Lunsford (Lunsford) and Brian F. McVey (McVey) (collectively,
 
Plaintiffs) appeal from the February 1, 2012 judgment and the
 
April 12, 2012 "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion For Judgment As
 
A Matter Of Law Notwithstanding The Verdict And For New Trial On
 
Damages (Filed February 13, 2012)" entered in the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit1 (circuit court). The judgment followed a
 
jury verdict in favor of Defendants-Appellees Surgical
 
1
 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Associates, Inc., Fong-Liang Fan, M.D. (Dr. Fan), and Jose A.
 
Ganel, M.D. (Dr. Ganel) (collectively, Defendants).
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
McVey was born in 1973 and was diagnosed with type 1,
 
insulin-dependent diabetes when he was nine years old. McVey's
 
kidneys failed in 1996, after which he required dialysis sessions
 
three times a week. As a dialysis patient, McVey needed
 
continued vascular access through which dialysis therapy could be
 
delivered.
 
Three primary methods are used to gain access to a
 
patient's circulation: an intravenous catheter, an arteriovenous
 
(AV) graft, or an AV fistula. In 1997, Dr. Fan placed the first
 
access site, an AV graft on McVey's left forearm. From then
 
until June 2007, with Dr. Fan as his vascular surgeon, McVey
 
underwent over forty surgical procedures to gain or maintain
 
access sites for dialysis. McVey received additional AV grafts
 
as well as AV fistulas and catheters.
 On March 1, 2007, McVey felt a blister on the AV graft
 
on his left leg, which at the time was being used as a permanent
 
access site. On March 13, 2007 McVey visited Dr. Fan, who
 
informed McVey that the poking of dialysis needles had caused a
 
pseudoaneurysm at the graft site. Dr. Fan recommended McVey
 
undergo surgery to treat the pseudoaneurysm. McVey agreed and
 
received surgery on March 16, 2007.
 
A few days later, McVey's nephrologist, Dr. Ganel,
 
informed McVey the left leg AV graft site was failing. McVey's
 
mother, Lunsford, called Dr. Fan, and Dr. Fan informed her that
 
despite the repair to the pseudoaneurysm, the site could fail at
 
any time. Dr. Fan then recommended placing an access site on
 
McVey's right leg so that McVey would have a site available when
 
the left site failed. Dr. Fan did not mention any other options
 
or alternatives to Lunsford or McVey. McVey signed a form
 
consenting to the surgery, and on March 21, 2007, Dr. Fan placed
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an AV graft in McVey's right leg. This procedure became the
 
subject of this appeal. 
On May 22, 2007, McVey was admitted to the emergency
 
room with a fever and with bleeding from the AV graft on his left
 
leg. Dr. Fan conducted ligation surgery on the site that day,
 
tying a suture around the AV graft. McVey then moved to Texas in
 
June 2007, where he continued receiving treatment and underwent
 
further surgical procedures.
 
On October 5, 2009, Plaintiffs filed a complaint in the
 
circuit court alleging in relevant part that Defendants had been
 
negligent in obtaining informed consent from McVey for the March
 
21, 2007 surgery. Lunsford also raised derivative claims of loss
 
of consortium and negligent infliction of emotional distress.
 
On November 16, 2011, following trial, the jury
 
returned a verdict in Defendants' favor, determining in relevant
 
part that Dr. Fan did not breach his duty to obtain informed
 
consent from McVey. Consequently, the jury did not reach the
 
questions regarding Plaintiffs' damages and Lunsford's derivative
 
claims. On February 1, 2012, the circuit court entered a
 
judgment in Defendants' favor as to all claims in Plaintiffs'
 
complaint.
 
Plaintiffs filed a "Motion For Judgment As A Matter Of
 
Law Notwithstanding The Verdict And For New Trial On Damages"
 
(Motion For JMOL And New Trial) on February 13, 2012. Plaintiffs
 
argued they were entitled to judgment as a matter of law on the
 
issue of whether Dr. Fan breached his duty to obtain informed
 
consent, and they requested a new trial to determine causation
 
and damages. The circuit court denied Plaintiffs' motion on
 
April 12, 2012, and Plaintiffs filed a timely notice of appeal on
 
May 11, 2012.
 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court
 
erroneously (1) denied their Motion For JMOL And New Trial,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) excluded evidence of Lunsford's damages consisting of lost
 
income, and (3) awarded costs to Defendants.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
It is well settled that a trial court's rulings
on motions for judgment as a matter of law are
reviewed de novo.
 
When we review the granting of a [motion for
judgment as a matter of law], we apply the same
standard as the trial court.
 
A [motion for judgment as a matter of law] may
be granted only when after disregarding conflicting
evidence, giving to the non-moving party's evidence
all the value to which it is legally entitled, and
indulging every legitimate inference which may be
drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party's
favor, it can be said that there is no evidence to
support a jury verdict in his or her favor.
 
Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai' i 1, 6-7, 84 P.3d 509, 514-515
(2004) (internal citations omitted). 
Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. Hirayasu, 110 Hawai' i 248, 251, 
131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 671-3 (Supp. 2007)
("Informed consent") states, in pertinent part:
 
(b) The following information shall be supplied to the
patient or the patient's guardian or legal surrogate prior
to obtaining consent to a proposed medical or surgical
treatment or a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure:
 
.  .  .
 
(4) The recognized alternative treatments or
procedures, including the option of not
providing these treatments or procedures[.]
 
It is undisputed that Dr. Fan did not disclose any
 
alternatives to McVey or Lunsford before obtaining McVey's
 
consent to the March 21, 2007 surgical implantation of the AV
 
graft on McVey's right leg. Plaintiffs therefore assert they are
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law on the issue of whether
 
Dr. Fan breached his duty to obtain informed consent under HRS
 
ยง 671-3(b)(4).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Our courts have adopted the patient-oriented standard 
for determining whether particular information must be disclosed 
to a patient. Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai' i 
253, 267, 259 P.3d 569, 583 (2011). Under the patient-oriented standard, the scope of a physician's duty of disclosure is 
measured by what a reasonable patient would need to know in order 
to make an informed and intelligent decision regarding proposed 
medical treatment. Id. at 267, 259 P.3d at 583. What 
constitutes material information about a patient's treatment is a question of fact dependant on the particular circumstances of 
each informed consent case. Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 Hawai' i 93, 111 
n.17, 947 P.2d 961, 979 n.17 (App. 1997), rev'd and vacated on other grounds, 86 Hawai' i 84, 947 P.2d 952 (1997); see also 
Barcai v. Betwee, 98 Hawai' i 470, 486, 50 P.3d 946, 962 (2002) 
(question of whether physician owed duty to disclose risk of 
developing side effects from medication was for the jury). 
Here, substantial evidence supported the jury's verdict 
that Dr. Fan did not breach his duty to obtain informed consent. 
Although Plaintiffs offered testimony regarding several 
alternatives to the AV graft procedure, Defendants presented 
evidence that those alternatives were unreasonable or infeasible, 
given McVey's condition. "Verdicts based on conflicting evidence 
will not be set aside where there is substantial evidence to 
support the jury's findings." Ray, 125 Hawai' i at 262, 259 P.3d 
at 578 (brackets omitted). 
At trial, Plaintiffs offered evidence of the following
 
alternatives to the March 21, 2007 surgery: (1) waiting and
 watching to see how McVey's left leg access site performed, while
 
continuing to use that access site; (2) using a temporary
 
catheter if his left leg access site failed; (3) creating a
 
necklace graft; (4) using preoperative mapping to determine if
 
other sites were available; (5) creating an access site on
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
McVey's arm; and (6) doing exploratory surgery on McVey's right
 
arm to determine its accessibility.
 
Defendants countered with expert testimony from a
 
vascular surgeon who testified that, given McVey's complicated
 
history and condition, each of the above alternatives was
 
unreasonable. First, the expert disagreed that waiting was a
 
reasonable option. Both parties' witnesses agreed that failure
 
of an access site is unpredictable, and a newly placed access
 
site takes three to six weeks to heal before it can be used for
 
dialysis. Defendants' expert stated that because Dr. Fan
 
believed McVey's existing access site could fail soon, Dr. Fan
 
acted appropriately by creating a new access site that would be
 
ready when the left leg site failed, as it did on May 22, 2007. 
Second, the expert testified that creating an access site was
 
always preferable to using temporary catheters because catheters
 
damage the veins and can be subject to infection. Dr. Fan also
 
testified that McVey had asked to avoid catheter usage because he
 
found catheters uncomfortable. Third, Defendants' expert stated
 
placing leg grafts was always preferred over placing necklace
 
grafts. Fourth, the expert testified that preoperative mapping
 
procedures would be of limited benefit to McVey and that certain
 
procedures would have been life-threatening because of McVey's
 
allergies. Finally, the expert stated creating an access site on
 
McVey's arm was not reasonable because McVey had obstructed veins
 
in his arms, which Dr. Fan was aware of. Defendants' expert
 
concluded that under McVey's circumstances, there were no other
 
reasonable alternatives available to Dr. Fan other than
 
performing the March 21, 2007 procedure.
 
The jury "weighs the contradictory evidence and 
inferences, judges the credibility of witnesses, receives expert 
instructions, and draws the ultimate conclusion as to the 
facts[,]" Stallworth v. Boren, 99 Hawai' i 287, 307, 54 P.3d 923, 
943 (App. 2002) (internal quotation marks omitted), and we 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude there was substantial evidence to support the jury's
 
verdict that Dr. Fan did not breach his duty to obtain informed
 
consent from McVey. Therefore, the circuit court properly denied
 
Plaintiffs' Motion For JMOL And New Trial, and Plaintiffs'
 
remaining points of error are moot.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the February 1, 2012 Judgment and the April
 
12, 2012 "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion For Judgment As A
 
Matter Of Law Notwithstanding The Verdict And For New Trial On
 
Damages (Filed February 13, 2012)" entered in the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 19, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Dennis W. King
William J. DeeleyAaron Loeser (Deeley King Pang & Van Etten)for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Arthur F. Roeca April LuriaJodie D. Roeca (Roeca Luria Hiraoka)for Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 