FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MICHELLE HELEN CASTILLON, Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000421
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 3DTC-15-042273)

 
MAY 31, 2017

 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE
 
In this appeal, we address the question of whether the 
exceptions to the prohibition against driving without a license 
(DWOL) set forth in the statute defining the offense constitute defenses to the offense or essential elements of the offense. 
As 
explained below, we hold that the statutory exceptions to the DWOL offense are defenses for which the defendant bears the initial burden of producing evidence, and not essential elements that the prosecution in every case must prove do not apply. In doing so, we overrule our characterization in State v. Matautia, 81 Hawai
'i 76, 83, 912 P.2d 573, 580 (App. 1996), of the 
statutory exceptions as elements of the DWOL offense. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Defendant-Appellant Michelle Helen Castillon 
(Castillon) was charged with and convicted of DWOL. At trial, 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) proved that Castillon 
did not have a vaild Hawai 'i driver's license on November 19, 
2015, when she was observed driving a car on a public road. On appeal, Castillon argues that there was insufficient evidence to support her DWOL conviction because the State failed to prove that all the statutory exceptions to the DWOL offense did not apply. In particular, Castillon argues that the State failed to prove that she did not fall within the exceptions for persons who possess driver's licenses issued by Canada or Mexico. Castillon, on her part, did not present any evidence that she had a driver's license issued by Canada or Mexico or that she fell within any of the other statutory exceptions to the DWOL offense. Based on our holding that the statutory exceptions to the DWOL offense constitute defenses to, and not essential elements of, the DWOL offense, we reject Castillon's argument that there was insufficient evidence to support her DWOL conviction. 
Castillon also argues on appeal that the District Court 
of the Third Circuit (District Court)
1/ failed to obtain a valid 
waiver of her right to testify as required by Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995). The District Court did not 
obtain a waiver directly from Castillon, and instead accepted the representation of Castillon's counsel that Castillon did not want to testify. We conclude that this was insufficient to satisfy Tachibana. We therefore vacate Castillon's DWOL conviction and remand the case for a new trial. 
BACKGROUND
 
The underlying facts are not disputed. On November 19, 
2015, Hawai
'i County Police Department Officer Aron Tomota 
(Officer Tomota) observed Castillon driving a car on a public road. Officer Tomota effected a traffic stop of Castillon's car 
1/ The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after noticing that her "vehicle tags" were expired. Castillon
 
was not able to provide Officer Tomota with a driver's license.
 
Castillon was charged with DWOL. At trial, Officer 
Tomota testified about his traffic stop and identified Castillon in court as the person he had stopped. The State also called Shannon McCandless (McCandless), the supervising driver's license examiner for the County of Hawai
'i (County). Through McCandless' 
testimony and records of the County's Driver's License Section, the State established that on November 19, 2015, the date Castillon was stopped by Officer Tomota, Castillon did not possess a valid Hawai
'i driver's license and she was not duly 
licensed as a qualified driver. McCandless, however, was not able to conduct research on whether Castillon possessed a driver's license from Canada, and McCandless did not testify about whether Castillon had been issued a driver's license by Canada or Mexico. 
Castillon did not offer any evidence that she possessed
 
a driver's license from Canada or Mexico, or that she fell within
 any other statutory exception to the DWOL offense.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 A.
 
Castillon's claim that there was insufficient evidence
 
to support her DWOL conviction turns on whether the exceptions to
 the DWOL offense constitute defenses or essential elements. The
 DWOL offense is set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 286­102. At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 286-102 provided,
 in pertinent part, as follows:
 
(a) No person, except one exempted under section
286–105, one who holds an instruction permit under section
286–110, one who holds a provisional license under section
286–102.6, one who holds a commercial driver's license
issued under section 286–239, or one who holds a commercial
driver's license instruction permit issued under section
286–236, shall operate any category of motor vehicles listed
in this section without first being appropriately examined
and duly licensed as a qualified driver of that category of
motor vehicles.
 
HRS § 286-102(a) (2007) (emphasis added). One of the statutory
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceptions to the DWOL offense is for people exempted from
 
licencing requirements under HRS § 286-105 (2007). HRS § 286-105
 provides as follows:
 
The following persons are exempt from license:
 
(1)	 Any person while driving or operating a motor
vehicle in the service or employ of any branch
or agency of the federal government; provided
that the person has received a license or permit
from the branch or agency to operate and drive
the motor vehicle; provided further that the
branch or agency has been duly authorized by the
federal government to issue the license or
permit;
 
(2)	 Any person while driving or operating any road
machine, farm tractor, or implement of husbandry
temporarily operated or moved on a highway;
provided that no person under the age of
thirteen years shall be permitted to drive or
operate any such road machine, farm tractor, or
implement of husbandry on a highway;
 
(3)	 Any person who is at least eighteen years of age
and who has in the person's possession a valid
driver's license to drive the categories of
motor vehicles listed in section 286-102(b),
except section 286-102(b)(4), that is equivalent
to a driver's license issued in this State but
 was issued to the person in another state of the
United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
Guam, a province of the Dominion of Canada, or
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
 for that category of motor vehicle which the
person is operating;
 
(4)	 Any person who has in the person's possession a
valid commercial motor vehicle driver's license
 issued by any state of the United States,
Mexico, or a province of the Dominion of Canada
that issues licenses in accordance with the
 minimum federal standards for the issuance of
 commercial motor vehicle driver's licenses; and
 
(5)	 Any person who drives or operates state or
county motor vehicles while employed by, in the
service of, or volunteering for the state or
county fire departments, provided that they are
trained and certified to drive category (4)
motor vehicles as set forth in section
 286-102(b)(4) by the state or county government,
as appropriate, and provided that the person
maintains a category (3) license as set forth in
section 286-102(b)(3).
 
(Emphases added.)
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Castillon contends that an essential element of the
 
DWOL offense that the State had the prima facie burden of proving
 
was that she did not fall within any of the exceptions to the
 DWOL offense. Castillon argues that there was insufficient
 evidence to support her DWOL conviction because the State failed
 "to affirmatively disprove that Castillon was exempted from
 licensure under HRS §§ 286-102 and 286-105." In particular,
 Castillon argues that the State failed to present evidence that
 the exemptions for a person possessing a valid driver's license
 from a province of Canada (HRS § 286-105(3)) or a valid
 commercial motor vehicle driver's license from Mexico or a
 province of Canada (HRS § 286-105(4)) did not apply to her. We
 conclude that proving that Castillon did not fall within any of
 the exceptions to the DWOL offense was not an essential element
 of the offense, and therefore, Castillon's insufficiency of
 evidence claim is without merit. 
B.
 
In State v. Nobriga, 10 Haw. App. 353, 873 P.2d 110 
(1994), overruled on other grounds by State v. Maelega, 80 Hawai
'i 172, 178–79, 907 P.2d 758, 764–65 (1995), this court set 
forth a framework for determining whether a statutory exception is a "defense" to or an "element" of an offense. In Nobriga, we stated: 
The general and well-settled common law rule is that
where an exception is embodied in the language of the
enacting clause of a criminal statute, and therefore appears
to be an integral part of the verbal description of the
offense, the burden is on the prosecution to negative that
exception, prima facie, as part of its main case.
Annotation, Burden of Averment and Proof As to Exception in
Criminal Statute on Which the Prosecution Is Based, 153
A.L.R. 1218, 1226 (1944); 1 Wharton's Criminal Evidence §
20, at 35 (C. Torcia 13th ed. 1972).
 
This general rule does not apply, however, "when the
facts hypothesized in the exceptive provision are peculiarly
within the knowledge of the defendant, or the evidence
concerning them is within the defendant's private control."
1 Wharton's Criminal Evidence § 20, at 35. Furthermore,
when the exception appears somewhere other than in the
enacting clause, and is thus a distinct substantive
exception or proviso, the burden is on the defendant to
bring forward evidence of exceptive facts that constitute a
defense. Annotation, 153 A.L.R. at 1277–78; 1 Wharton's
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Criminal Evidence § 20, at 35. The prosecutor is not
required in such instances to negative, by proof in advance,
exceptions not found in the enacting clause. 1 Wharton's
 Criminal Evidence § 20, at 33–34.
 
Nobriga, 10 Haw. App. at 357–58, 873 P.2d at 112–13 (footnote and
 
brackets omitted) (emphasis added).
 
In State v. Lee, 90 Hawai 'i 130, 976 P.2d 444 (1999), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court applied the Nobriga framework to a 
statute defining the offense of driving without insurance that was very similar in structure to the statute defining the offense of driving without a license at issue in this case. Similar to the DWOL statute, the statute defining the offense of driving without insurance, HRS § 431:10C-104 (1993), contained an exception for drivers that were self-insured. HRS § 431:10C-104 stated in relevant part: 
Except as provided in section 431:10C-105 [(the section
pertaining to self-insurance)], no person shall operate or
use a motor vehicle upon any public street, road, or highway
of the State at any time unless such motor vehicle is
insured at all times under a no-fault policy.
 
Lee, 90 Hawai 'i at 132 n.1, 976 P.2d at 446 n.1 (emphasis added) 
(quoting HRS § 431:10C-104 (1993)). 
In Lee, the supreme court addressed the question of
 
whether the statutory exception for self-insured drivers was a
 
defense to or an element of the offense of driving without
 insurance. Id. at 135–39, 976 P.2d at 449–53. Applying the
 
Nobriga framework for determining whether a statutory exception
 is a defense (on which the defendant bears the initial burden of
 producing evidence) or an element of the offense (which the
 prosecution must disprove in every case), the supreme court
 concluded that the self-insurance exception was a defense. Id.
 
at 137–38, 976 P.2d at 451–52. 
The supreme court reasoned that although the statute
 
defining the offense of driving without insurance (HRS 
§ 431:10C–104) referred to the HRS § 431:10C-105 self-insurance
 provisions, the self-insurance provisions were not located in the
 enacting clause of the statute defining the driving without
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2/
insurance offense.  Id. at 138, 976 P.2d at 452. In addition,
 
the supreme court concluded that "[i]nasmuch as self-insurance is
 
likely to be quite rare, it would be absurd to require the
 prosecution to disprove it in every case." Id.
 
As in Lee, although HRS § 286-102(a) refers to a series 
of separate provisions that establish exceptions to the offense of DWOL, the provisions defining the exceptions are not located within the enacting clause of the DWOL offense. More importantly, given the large number of statutory exceptions, and the relatively small number of drivers who would appear to qualify for the exceptions when compared to those who need a valid Hawai
'i driver's license to drive, it would be absurd to 
require the prosecution to disprove all the possible exceptions in every case in which the State charged a driver with driving without a license. See id.; State v. Turping, 136 Hawai
'i 333, 
337, 361 P.3d 1236, 1240 (App. 2015) (concluding that it would be absurd to require the prosecution to disprove the statutory exception for denatured or other non-potable alcohol in every drunk driving case). 
In addition, under the Nobriga framework, when the 
facts or evidence concerning the exception are "peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant" or "within the defendant's private control[,]" the exception constitutes a defense, and not an essential element of the offense. Nobriga, 10 Haw. App. at 
358, 873 P.2d at 113 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). This principle provides further support for the conclusion that the exceptions to the DWOL offense are properly characterized as defenses. A person who satisfies one of the statutory exceptions would certainly have knowledge of that fact and would have evidence concerning the exception within his or her control. See State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 87, 107, 
2/ "In criminal nomenclature, the term 'enacting clause' has long been
applied to the prohibitory declaration of the statute which contains the
general or preliminary description of the acts prohibited; i.e., the clause
which proscribes the offensive deed." Nobriga, 10 Haw. App. at 357 n.1, 873
 
P.2d at 112 n.1 (citation omitted). 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
997 P.2d 13, 33 (2000) (holding that whether the defendant did or
 
did not possess a hunting license was a fact peculiarly within
 the defendant's knowledge, and therefore, the statutory exception
 to the "place to keep" offense pertaining to individuals with a
 hunting license constituted a defense). 
In contrast, if the statutory exceptions are deemed an
 
essential element of the offense, the State would have the
 burdensome task of negating in every case all of the numerous
 exceptions, including exceptions having no possible relevance to
 the defendant, in order to establish the DWOL offense. For
 example, in this case, there is no indication of any possibility
 that the exceptions for a person possessing a valid driver's
 license from a province of Canada or a valid commercial motor
 vehicle driver's license from Mexico or a province of Canada
 might apply to Castillon. Nevertheless, Castillon argues that
 there was insufficient evidence to find her guilty because the
 State failed to prove that she did not possess a driver's licence
 from Canada or Mexico.
 
In accordance with Lee, we conclude that the statutory 
exceptions referred to in HRS § 286-102(a) are not elements of the DWOL offense, but constitute defenses to the offense. Lee, 
90 Hawai
'i at 138, 976 P.2d at 452; see Jenkins, 93 Hawai 'i at 
107, 997 P.2d at 33; Turping, 136 Hawai 'i at 335-37, 361 P.3d at 
1238-40 (holding that the statutory exception for denatured or other non-potable alcohol is a defense to and not an element of the offense of operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant). Because Castillon did not offer any evidence that she qualified for any of the statutory exceptions, the burden never shifted to the State to disprove an exception. We therefore conclude that Castillon's insufficiency of evidence claim is without merit. 
C.
 
In support of her claim that the statutory exceptions
 
were essential elements of the DWOL offense, Castillon cites this
 court's decision in Matautia, 81 Hawai'i 76, 912 P.2d 573. In
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Matautia, we characterized proof that "the defendant . . . was
 
not excepted by statute from the driver's licencing
 requirements[,]" as an essential element of the DWOL offense. 
Id. at 83, 912 P.2d 580. Our decision in Matautia, however, did
 not focus on, and we were not called upon to apply, the test for
 determining whether a statutory exception is a defense to or an
 element of an offense. Instead, we simply characterized proof
 that the defendant did not fall within the statutory exceptions
 as an essential element of the DWOL offense without explaining
 how or why we reached this conclusion. 
Under similar circumstances, the supreme court in Lee 
overruled a prior decision of this court, which had suggested that the self-insurance exception to the driving without insurance offense was an element of, rather than a defense to, the offense, because the prior decision was "devoid of any explanation of its suggestion in that regard." Lee, 90 Hawai
'i 
at 135, 137, 139, 976 P.2d at 449, 451, 453. Based on our analysis in this case, and in accordance with the supreme court's reasoning in Lee, we likewise overrule our characterization in Matautia of the statutory exceptions to the DWOL offense as essential elements of the offense. 
II. 
Castillon argues on appeal that the District Court
 
failed to obtain a valid waiver of her right to testify as
 required by Tachibana. Castillon contends that the District
 Court violated Tachibana in a number of ways, including that it:
 (1) failed to advise her that she had the right not to testify;
 (2) failed to engage her in a "true colloquy"; and (3) failed to
 obtain an on-the-record waiver of the right to testify directly
 from Castillon. We conclude that the District Court violated
 Tachibana by failing to obtain an on-the-record waiver directly
 from Castillon, and that this error was not harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt. Based on this conclusion, we need not address
 Castillon's claim that the District Court violated Tachibana in
 other ways.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
After the State rested its case-in-chief, the District
 
Court engaged in the following exchange with Castillon and her
 
counsel:
 
THE COURT: . . . Okay. So, Ms. Castillon, I gotta
ask you again -- okay?[3/]
 
[CASTILLON]: Mm-hmm.
 
THE COURT: -- that if you -- you have a right to
testify. If you want to testify, no one can prevent you
from testifying. If you choose to testify, the prosecutor
can cross-examine you. If you choose not to testify, the
Court cannot hold that against you. You understand?
 
[CASTILLON]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Okay. So we both -­[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: And, your Honor, Ms. Castillon -­
Ms. Castillon doesn't wanna -- she doesn't wish to testify,
your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
After defense counsel interjected and stated that 
Castillon did not want to testify, the District Court accepted 
defense counsel's representation and did not obtain a response on the record from Castillon. This was insufficient to satisfy Tachibana. See State v. Staley, 91 Hawai
'i 275, 286-87, 982 P.2d 
904, 915-16 (1999). 
B.
 
In Tachibana, the Supreme Court recognized that a 
defendant's constitutional right to testify is a personal constitutional right that may not be waived by defense counsel as a matter of trial strategy, but may be relinquished only by the defendant. Tachibana, 79 Hawai
'i at 232, 900 P.2d at 1299. One 
of the purposes of the Tachibana inquiry is to ensure that the decision not to testify is truly the decision of the defendant, and not that of his or her attorney. In other words, to ensure that the defendant's attorney does not prevent a defendant who 
3/ Although the District Court states, "I gotta ask you again," it had
not previously asked Castillon whether she waived her right to testify. The
 
District Court was apparently referring to the pre-trial advisement it gave to
Castillon regarding her testimonial rights. The District Court did not ask
 Castillon at that time for a decision on whether she would be testifying.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
wants to testify from exercising his or her right to testify. 
Given the purpose of the Tachibana inquiry, a representation by
 the defendant's attorney is not enough. 
In Staley, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that the 
trial court's failure to obtain an on-the-record waiver directly from Staley, but instead relying on the representation of Staley's counsel that Staley would not be testifying, violated Tachibana and did not constitute a valid waiver of Staley's right to testify. Staley, 91 Hawai
'i at 287, 982 P.2d at 916. Based 
on Staley, we conclude that the District Court in this case did not obtain a valid waiver from Castillon of her right to testify. We further conclude that the District Court's error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Hoang, 94 
Hawai
'i 271, 279–80, 12 P.3d 371, 379–80 (App. 2000) ("In 
general, it is inherently difficult, if not impossible, to divine what effect a violation of the defendant's constitutional right to testify had on the outcome of any particular case."). Accordingly, we vacate Castillon's DWOL conviction. 
CONCLUSION
 
The statutory exceptions to the DWOL offense constitute
 
defenses to, and not essential elements of, the DWOL offense. 
The State presented sufficient evidence at trial to prove the
 DWOL charge against Castillon. However, because the District
 Court did not obtain a valid waiver of Castillon's right to
 testify as required by Tachibana, we vacate the District Court's
 Judgment and remand the case for a new trial on the DWOL charge.
 
On the briefs:
 
Charles M. Cryan
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Dale Yamada Ross 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
11
 