FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
BRENDA J. FORD, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
BOBBY JEAN LEITHEAD-TODD, Respondent-Appellee
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000561 

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 13-1-52K)
 
SEPTEMBER 8, 2016
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Petitioner-Appellant Brenda J. Ford (Ford) appeals from 
(1) the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order Granting Respondent Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd's Motion for 
Summary Judgment in Favor of Respondent on the Verified Petition of Brenda J. Ford for an Order in the Nature of Quo Warranto Directing the Respondent Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd to Show the Authority Under Which She Purports to Hold the Office of Director of the Department of Environmental Management for the County of Hawai
'i Filed December 9, 2013" (FOF/COL) entered on May 26, 
2015; FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) the "Order Denying Petitioner Brenda J. Ford's
 
Motion for Reconsideration of [the FOF/COL]", entered on July 6,
 
2015; and
 
(3) the "Final Judgment" entered on July 6, 2015 in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit court).
 
The subject of Ford's petition and the dispute on
 
appeal is whether Leithead-Todd has "an engineering degree or a
 degree in a related field" to qualify her to hold the office of
 the Director of the Department of Environmental Management.
 
On appeal, Ford contends the circuit court erred in:
 
(1) concluding that the 2010 Charter Commission rather than the voters of the County of Hawai
'i had amended the Charter of the 
County of Hawai 'i (CCH); (2) applying agency deference to the 
decisions of the Hawai 'i County Council (County Council) and the 
Hawai'i County Mayor (Mayor) and an "abuse of discretion" 
standard of review; (3) deferring to the opinion of the County's counsel; (4) placing the burden of proof on Ford as the Petitioner; (5) concluding that the 2010 amendment to the CCH was ambiguous; (6) concluding that the 2010 Charter Commission granted the Mayor and County Council wide latitude to interpret the language "degree in a related field"; (7) failing to interpret the language of the 2010 amendment; and (8) denying Ford's motion for reconsideration. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
In 2000, the CCH was amended to include a chapter on
 
the Department of Environmental Management. CCH Chapter 5
 (2006). The CCH stated that the Director of the Department of
 Environmental Management "shall have had a minimum of five years'
 administrative experience in a related field." CCH § 6-5.3.
 
In 2010, the County of Hawai
'i Charter Commission 
(Commission) proposed an amendment to the CCH to add a "degree 
requirement" to the existing qualifications for Director of the 
Department of Environmental Management. The Commission deliberated the amendment prior to seeking the public's approval. 
1 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2 Commission members mentioned here are: Ed Haitsuka, Chair; Casey
Jarman, Commissioner; Susie Osborne, Commissioner; Todd Shumway, Commissioner;
Scott Unger, Commissioner; and Alapaki Nahale-a, Commissioner.
3 Lono Tyson (Tyson) is the former Director of the Department of
Environmental Management.
3At a meeting on September 11, 2009, the commissioners2 evaluated
the language of the amendment:
CHR. HAITSUKA: Is there any discussion on Mr. Tyson's[3]
request to amend the Charter to reflect that the Director of
the Department of Environmental Management would be required
to have some type of engineering degree?
MR. UNGER: I know we have had this discussion before about
us micro-managing county titles and the requirements for
people assuming these positions, but if ever a department
screams out for a professional degree, this might very well
be it.  I don't know what you guys think, but I understand
if we address this, we might be opening up a can of worms
and have to address qualifications for the other departments
as well, but I think this is unique and honestly I'm kind of
in favor of it.
MR. SHUMWAY: Alapaki has spoken persuasively about not
putting all of these details in the Charter, but I agree
with Scott on this, that especially because this is coming
from the department themselves.  They are asking for this,
and that speaks loudly for me, and I would support it as
well.
CHR. HAITSUKA: Ms. Jarman.
MS. JARMAN: I'm not convinced it needs to be an Engineering
degree, but maybe a degree in a related field.  They are
basically saying you want the person to be an engineer, but
I'm not convinced it needs to be an engineer, but that in a
related field would make more sense to me.  
MR. UNGER: The current language says, ". . . administrative
experience in a related field."  So, are you suggesting
maybe a degree in a related field as opposed to experience?
MS. JARMAN: Experience and a degree, if that's what he is
trying to get at.  I can see somebody with some kind of
environmental background that could equally do a good job,
without having to be an engineer.
MR. UNGER: Yes, there are all kinds of different degrees out
there that could pertain to this type of situation.  That
makes sense as well.
CHR. HAITSUKA: We could say, ". . . a degree in engineering
or a related field[."] The related field would have to be
related to something, so I think we have to have the word
engineering in there, so it doesn't disqualify someone who
has an engineering degree.
MR. UNGER: So a degree in engineering or a degree in a
related field?
MS. JARMAN: Related to what?  Related to engineering, or
related to the environment?  That's why I don't see why weFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4would have to say engineering.  If we just say a related
field, it would include engineering and any other field.
MS. OSBORNE: I would concur with that.
CHR. HAITSUKA: The related field would be related to what?
MS. JARMAN: To the duties of the Department of Environment al
Management.
At the January 21, 2010 Commission meeting, Tyson
addressed the Commission on the proposed amendment:
CHR. HAITSUKA: Mr. Tyson, you submitted some communication
to us regarding your recommendations.  Is that correct?
MR. TYSON: Yes, that is correct.  The testimony that I
submitted was basically in opposition to the current
amendment which adds an additional to the minimum of five
years of administrative experience in a related field; so
that the director also possesses a degree in a related
field.
My original Communication 27 to the Charter Commission
recommended that the director also possess an engineering
degree and in the communication that I just submitted, I
also added some additional information regarding the fact
that prior to December, 2000, when the solid waste division
and the waste water division were a part of the department
of public works, the director for that department was
required to be a registered engineer and additionally, the
Charter also requires that the department of water supply,
that department head, be a registered engineer as well.  So
I just wanted to take into consideration politics and
negotiation that there be further consideration of the
importance that the director of this department have some
engineering experience: henceforth, my recommendation that
the amendment be modified to include an engineering degree
or a degree in a related field.
CHR. HAITSUKA: Are there any questions for Mr. Tyson?
MRS. KAWAUCHI: I have a question.  I'm not sure what a
related field would be in this area: what would a related
field be, other than engineering?
MR. TYSON: The Department of Environmental Management is
responsible for the over sight [sic] of the county's solid
waste and waste water divisions, and the recycling programs
including the abandon[ed] vehicle disposal program.  So, a
related field could be anything ranging from environmental
science to even geology to a certain extent.  But, a
technical background that supports a lot of the very
difficult decisions that the director has to make.  
Although we do have division heads for waste water and solid
waste who are registered engineers, decisions are made not
strictly based upon their recommendations; although their
recommendations are highly put into that equation.  It's
important for the director to also have an understanding in
regards to the other potential ramifications beyond the
technical issues.  But having an understanding of those
technical issues is critical to making the correct decision.
CHR. HAITSUKA: Are there any further questions for Mr.
Tyson?  Thank you, Mr. Tyson.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The electorate approved the amendment, and on November
 
2, 2010, CCH § 6-10.3 was amended to read:
 
Section 6-10.3. Director.
 
The director of environmental management shall be
appointed by the mayor, confirmed by the council, and may be
removed by the mayor. The director shall have had a minimum
 of five years of administrative experience in a related
field and an engineering degree or a degree in a related
field.
 
On July 10, 2013, the County Council voted to approve
 
the appointment of Respondent-Appellee Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd
 
(Leithead-Todd) as the Director of the Department of
 
Environmental Management.
 
On December 9, 2013, Ford filed a quo warranto
 
4
petition  challenging Leithead-Todd's qualifications for office.
On December 18, 2013, the circuit court issued an "Order in the
 
Nature of Quo Warranto," ordering Leithead-Todd to answer the
 petition in writing and state the authority under which she
 claimed to act as the Director of the Department of Environmental
 Management. Leithead-Todd answered the petition on June 13,
 2014, stating that she "possessed a Bachelors of Arts degree with
 a major in English literature (and minor in Hawaiian studies),
 and a Juris Doctor degree." Regarding her administrative
 qualifications, Leithead-Todd answered that she "had once served
 as the Director of the Department of Environmental Management for
 the County of Hawaii . . . [and] had served as Legislative
 Auditor for the County of Hawaii from 1996 to 2003."
 
On January 27, 2015, both Ford and Leithead-Todd filed

 
motions for summary judgment. The circuit court held a hearing
 on these motions on February 23, 2015. On May 26, 2015, the
 circuit court entered its FOF/COL granting summary judgment in
 favor of Leithead-Todd because Ford "did not meet [her] burden of
 proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Mayor and
 Council abused their discretion [in] interpreting the "related
 field" language in Article VI, Section 6-10.3 of the [CCH]."
 
4
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 659 governs "Quo Warranto"
actions. "A petition for a writ of quo warranto seeks a court order directing
a person who claims or usurps a state office to show by what authority he or
she claims the office." Application of Ferguson, 74 Haw. 394, 399, 846 P.2d
 
894, 897 (1993). 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court entered its "Final Judgment" on July
 
6, 2015. Ford filed her notice of appeal on August 4, 2015.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A.	 Summary Judgment
 
Appellate courts review a grant or denial of summary
 
judgment de novo. Cty. of Kaua 'i ex rel. Nakazawa v. Baptiste, 
115 Hawai 'i 15, 25, 165 P.3d 916, 926 (2007) (citing Yamagata v. 
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 107 Hawai 'i 227, 229, 112 P.3d 
713, 715 (2005)).
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, [an appellate court] must
view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom
 in the light most favorable to the party opposing the
motion.
 
Baptiste, 115 Hawai 'i at 25, 165 P.3d at 926 (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai 'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 
697 (2005)).
B.	 Interpretation of a Charter
 
"[T]he interpretation of a charter is similar to the 
interpretation of a statute." Save Diamond Head Waters LLC v. 
Hans Hedemann Surf, Inc., 121 Hawai 'i 16, 25, 211 P.3d 74, 83 
(2009) (brackets omitted) (quoting Maui Cty. Council v. Thompson, 
84 Hawai 'i 105, 106, 929 P.2d 1355, 1356 (1996)). An appellate 
court "reviews the interpretation of a statute de novo." Save 
Diamond Head, 121 Hawai 'i at 25, 211 P.3d at 83 (citing Hawai 'i 
Org. of Police Officers v. Soc'y of Prof. Journalists-Univ. of Hawai
'i Chapter, 83 Hawai 'i 378, 402, 927 P.2d 386, 410 (1996)).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. 	Standard of Review, Burden of Proof, Administrative
Deference, and the Political Question Doctrine
 
Ford contends the circuit court identified the wrong
 
burden of proof and applied the wrong standard of review when it
 
stated:
 
30. The Court concludes [Leithead-Todd's] answer
filed on June 13, 2014, to be sufficient; thereby shifting
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the burden of proof back to [Ford]. [HRS § 659-6 (1993);
Application of Ferguson].
 
. . . .
 
41. The burden is on the Petitioner to prove the
allegations in the petition by a preponderance of evidence.
Lymer v. Kumalae, 29 Hawai' i 392, 399 (1926). See also: 
McGroarty v. Ferretti, 56 R.I. 152, 152, 184 A. 508, 508(1936). This includes proving, by a preponderance of theevidence, what degrees are in a related field. 
42. Discretionary decisions of a governmental body
are reviewed for abuse of discretion. "An appellant seekingto overturn an agency's determination made within theagency's sphere of expertise has a high burden todemonstrate that the agency abused its discretion. A "highburden," a "heavy burden," and "deference" are all ways ofexpressing this same concept: that a determination made byan administrative agency acting within the boundaries of itsdelegated authority will not be overturned unless"arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by . . . aclearly unwarranted exercise of discretion." Paul's Elec. 
Serv. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 419, 91 P.3d 494, 501
(2004) See Also: "discretionary decisions of a governmentalbody will not be reversed absent a showing that the decisionwas arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion orotherwise not in accordance with the law." Brown v. State,
172 Ind. App. 31, 34, 359 N.E.2d 608, 610 (1977). 
43. Petitioner presented no evidence that the
Council and Mayor abused their discretion nominating and
confirming [Leithead-Todd] as Director of the Department of
Environmental Management as defined by Article VI, Section
6-10.3.
 
. . . .
 
46. [Ford] did not meet [her] burden of proof, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the Mayor and Council
abused their discretion interpreting the "related field"
language in Article VI, Section 6-10.3 of the [CCH].
 
1. Applicable Burden of Proof
 
Once a writ for quo warranto has been issued, the
 
burden of proof rests upon the respondent. Ferguson , 74 Haw. at
 
399, 846 P.2d at 897. It is not Ford's burden, as the quo
 
warranto petitioner, to prove that Leithead-Todd is not qualified
 for the office she holds, or to prove that the County Council and
 Mayor abused their discretion in interpreting the CCH. Instead,
 it is Leithead-Todd's burden to prove that she is qualified for
 the office she holds. See Okuda v. Ching, 71 Haw. 140, 144, 785
 
P.2d 943, 946 (1990) (holding that the respondent-appellee, a
 deputy prosecutor, had established the validity of his
 appointment and right to serve for the prosecution). The circuit
 
7

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court erred in allocating the burden of proof to Ford instead of
 
Leithead-Todd.
 
2. Standard of Review
 
The circuit court applied the abuse of discretion 
standard of review because it viewed the Mayor's and County 
Council's decision as agency decisions. The circuit court cited Befitel for the proposition that an agency's exercise of discretion is to be afforded deference. See Befitel, 104 Hawai
'i 
at 417, 91 P.3d at 499 ("HRS § 91-14(g)(6) [(2012 Repl.)] provides that an agency's exercise of discretion will not be disturbed unless 'arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.'" (brackets omitted)). 
Under HRS § 91-1 (2012 Repl.), an "agency" is a "state 
or county board, commission, department, or officer authorized by law to make rules or to adjudicate contested cases, except those in the legislative or judicial branches." The County Council is clearly excepted from the definition of "agency" because it is a legislative body. See Sandy Beach Defense Fund v. City Council 
of City & Cty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 368-69, 773 P.2d 250, 255-56 (1989) "Section 91-1 clearly excludes the legislative branch from the definition of 'agency' and therefore, from compliance with the procedural requirements contained in Chapter 91." Id. at 369, 773 P.2d at 256. The Mayor of Hawai
'i County 
similarly falls outside of the scope of an "agency" because the Mayor was not involved in rule-making when appointing Leithead-Todd to her position as Director of the Department of Environmental Management. See Gibb v. Spiker, 68 Haw. 432, 435­
36, 718 P.2d 1076, 1078-79 (1986) (holding that a police chief was not an "agency" under HRS § 91-1 because the police chief was not promulgating or enforcing any rules in his decision not to rehire a former police officer). 
The Mayor and the County Council are not entitled to
 
deference as political bodies or as agencies in their appointment
 of Leithead-Todd in this quo warranto action. In a quo warranto
 action, the circuit court is not acting as an appellate court,
 like it would in an appeal from an agency decision under HRS
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
§ 91-14(a) (2012 Repl.),  but instead reviews whether a person
who claims office has the authority to do so. 
The circuit court
 
erred in requiring Ford to prove that the Mayor and the County
 
Council abused their discretion in appointing Leithead-Todd.
3. Political Question Doctrine 

In support of the circuit court's decision to defer to
 
the decisions of the Mayor and County Council, Leithead-Todd
 makes a cursory argument that this court should abstain from
 interfering with political questions, which we address in depth.
 
In Trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs v.
 
Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 737 P.2d 446 (1987), the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court adopted the test established by the United States Supreme
 Court in Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962):
 
Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a
political question is found a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate
 political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable
and manageable standards for resolving it; or the
impossibility of deciding without an initial policy
determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion;
or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent
resolution without expressing lack of the respect due [to]
coordinate branches of government; or an unusual need for
unquestioning adherence to a political decision already
made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious
pronouncements by various departments on one question.
 
Unless one of these formulations is inextricable from
 
the case at bar, there should be no dismissal for
nonjusticiability on the ground of a political question's
presence.
 
Yamasaki , 69 Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455 (quoting Baker, 369
 
U.S. at 217). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has clarified that under 
the state political question doctrine, "it can be said that a 
court is to interpret constitutional questions as long as there do not exist uncertainties surrounding the subject matter that have been clearly committed to another branch of government to resolve." Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 127 Hawai
'i 185, 197, 
277 P.3d 279, 291 (2012). 
In 
Nelson, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court addressed whether 
5 HRS § 91-14(a) provides, "Any person aggrieved by a final decision and
order in a contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature that
deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final decision would deprive
appellant of adequate relief is entitled to judicial review thereof under this
chapter[.]"
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the political question doctrine bar[s] Hawaiian Homes
Commission Act (HHCA) beneficiaries from using Haw. Const.
Article XII, Section 1's "sufficient sums" provision to
demand more legislative funding of the Department of
Hawaiian Home [L]ands [(DHHL)], when that provision provides
no guidance at all as to how quickly homesteads must be
developed?
 
Nelson, 127 Hawai 'i at 187, 277 P.3d at 281. Article XII, 
section 1 of the Hawai 'i Constitution provides: 
The legislature shall make sufficient sums available for the
following purposes: (1) development of home, agriculture,
farm and ranch lots; (2) home, agriculture, aquaculture,
farm and ranch loans; (3) rehabilitation projects to
include, but not limited to, educational, economic,
political, social and cultural processes by which the
general welfare and conditions of native Hawaiians are
thereby improved; (4) the administration and operating
budget of the department of Hawaiian home lands; in
furtherance of (1), (2), (3) and (4) herein, by
appropriating the same in the manner provided by law.
 
Nelson, 127 Hawai 'i at 187, 277 P.3d at 281 (emphasis omitted). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the 1978 constitutional 
convention history provided judicially discoverable and 
manageable standards and made initial policy determinations as to what constituted "sufficient sums" for DHHL's administration and operation budget, the fourth purpose identified in article XII, section 1 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. Id. at 197-203, 277 P.3d 
at 291-97 (holding that the convention history showed that "the $1.3 to $1.6 [million] figure represented 'sufficient sums' for administrative and operating expenses only"). The other three purposes, however, were deemed nonjusticiable political questions in light of the lack of clarity as to what would constitute "sufficient sums" for these purposes. Id. at 203-06, 277 P.3d at 
297-300. 
a.	 Textually Demonstrable Constitutional Commitment
of the Issue to a Coordinate Political Department
 
CCH § 6-10.3 does not constitute a textually
 
demonstrable commitment to either the Mayor or County Council. 
The language of CCH § 6-10.3 prior to the 2010 amendment arguably
 committed the evaluation of the qualifications of the Director to
 the Mayor and County Council. If the question of the Director's
 degree was nonjusticiable, then the 2010 CCH amendment, requiring
 the Director of the Department of Environmental Management to
 have "an engineering degree or a degree in a related field,"
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would be devoid of any real substance or effect. The Mayor and 
County Council would have unreviewable discretion in determining the qualifications of the Director, contrary to the stated intent of the 2010 CCH amendment. We cannot ascribe to the charter "framers the intent to enact laws devoid of any real substance and effect[.]" In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 
97, 142, 9 P.3d 409, 454 (2000). "A constitutional provision must be construed to avoid an absurd result and to recognize the mischief the framers intended to remedy." United Pub. Workers, 
AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Yogi, 101 Hawai
'i 46, 53, 62 P.3d 
189, 196 (2002) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Therefore, we cannot conclude that the evaluation of
 
the qualifications of the Director of Environmental Management
 has been textually committed to a coordinate political
 department.
6
 
b.	 Lack of Judicially Discoverable and Manageable
Standards
 
The testimony at the Commission meetings reveal that
 
the commissioners understood the amended language to require that
 
the Director have a degree in engineering or a degree in a field
 related to the duties of the Department of Environmental
 Management. Additionally, Tyson, the then-Director of the
 Department of Environmental Management and proponent of the
 amendment, stated his preference for a Director with a background
 in engineering but agreed that any degree in a technical field
 
6 See e.g., State ex rel. Swanson v. Maier,  999 N.E.2d 639, 643 (Ohio
2013) (holding that although the county sheriff was a political appointment,
the qualifications for sheriff were set by the General Assembly and "the
courts may be called upon in a quo warranto action such as this one to make a
determination whether an appointee meets those qualifications"); 
State ex rel.
James v. Reed, 364 So.2d 303, 308 (Ala. 1978) (holding that a quo warranto
action regarding a state representative who was convicted of a crime rendering
him ineligible for office under the Alabama Constitution was not a political
question). "We are clear that this section [prohibiting a person convicted of
certain crimes from eligibility for public office] is a specific
constitutional limitation on legislative authority, and judicial enforcement
of its mandate does not derogate the principle of separation of powers." Id.
 
at 306; cf. In re Jones, 476 A.2d 1287, 1290-93 (Pa. 1984) (holding that
judicial inquiry into the qualifications of a prospective legislator running
for office violates separation of powers, but that a quo warranto action is
available to test an elected legislator's right to hold public office); State
 
ex rel. Turner v. Scott, 269 N.W.2d 828, 832 (Iowa 1978) (holding that where
the Iowa Constitution provides that each house of the Iowa Legislature judges
the qualification of its members, a quo warranto action to remove a state
senator from office was a political question).
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
related to the duties of the Department of Environmental 
Management would prepare the Director for her or his duties. Just as the constitutional convention history revealed the meaning of "sufficient sums" for DDHL's administrative and operating expenses in Nelson, the history of the charter amendment here provides judicially manageable standards by which a court may judge "degree in a related field." It is within a court's ability to judge whether a specific degree is related to the duties of the Department of Environmental Management. See 
Nelson, 127 Hawai
'i at 197-203, 277 P.3d at 291-97; see e.g., 
State ex rel. Oregon Consumer League v. Zielinksi, 654 P.2d 1161, 1163 (Or. 1982) (holding that the standards set out in statute were "sufficiently definite to permit judicial inquiry into the validity of defendant's appointment as one of the two consumer representatives on the State Board of Agriculture"). 
c.	 Initial Policy Determination of a Kind Clearly for
Nonjudicial Discretion
 
As discussed above, it was the Commission members who 
made the initial policy determination that "related field" meant 
related to the duties of the Department of Environmental Management, and therefore, it is not left to the judiciary to make this policy determination. Like the constitutional convention history in Nelson, the testimony at the Commission meetings provided sufficient guidance for the judiciary, so that a court may avoid making a policy determination about whether the Director's degree should be related to the duties of the Department of Environmental Management. See Nelson, 127 Hawai
'i 
at 197-203, 277 P.3d at 291-97. 
d.	 Lack of Respect Due to Coordinate Branches of
Government
 
There is no lack of respect to the Mayor or County 
Council in a court's determination of whether Leithead-Todd's law 
degree is a degree related to the duties of the Department of Environmental Management. "[T]he courts, not the legislature, are the ultimate interpreters of the Constitution[,]" or in this case, the CCH. Alakai Na Keiki, Inc. v. Matayoshi, 127 Hawai
'i 
263, 276, 277 P.3d 988, 1001 (2012). 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
e.	 Unusual Need for Unquestioning Adherence to a
Political Decision Already Made
 
This case does not present an unusual need for
 
unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made. 
The need is for adherence to the language and intent of the 2010
 CCH amendment. Beyond the interpretation of the language of the
 charter, the decision to appoint and confirm a Director is a
 political decision for the Mayor and County Council.
f.	 Potential Embarrassment from Multifarious
 
Pronouncements by Various Departments on One
Question
 
There is no potential for embarrassment from
 
multifarious pronouncements by various departments on one
 
question. All that is required of the circuit court is to
 determine whether Leithead-Todd's law degree is related to the
 duties of the Department of Environmental Management.
 
Because none of the six factors set forth in Yamasaki
 
are present in this case, the question of whether a degree is
 related to the duties of the Department of Environmental
 Management is not a political question.
B. 	Resolution of the Petition
 
Ford challenges the circuit court's resolution of the
 
ambiguity in CCH § 6-10.3. During proceedings at the circuit
 
court and on appeal, the parties agree that the provision "an
 engineering degree or a degree in a related field" is ambiguous.
 Ford's position is that the language of the CCH requires the
 Director of the Department of Environmental Management to have a
 degree in engineering or a degree in a field related to
 engineering. According to Leithead-Todd, however, the CCH
 requires the Director to have a degree in engineering or a degree
 in a field related to the duties and authority of the Department
 of Environmental Management.
 
As discussed above, it is clear that the Commission
 
intended to require the Director of the Department of
 Environmental Management to hold a degree in engineering or a
 degree in a field related to the duties of the Department of
 Environmental Management. Leithead-Todd has the burden of
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proving that she is qualified for the office she holds. Because
 
the circuit court applied the wrong standard of proof to this quo
 warranto action, we remand this case to the circuit court to
 evaluate whether Leitead-Todd's law degree is a degree related to
 the duties of the Department of Environmental Management.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore,
 (1) the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and 
Order Granting Respondent Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd's Motion for Summary Judgment in Favor of Respondent on the Verified Petition of Brenda J. Ford for an Order in the Nature of Quo Warranto Directing the Respondent Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd to Show the Authority Under Which She Purports to Hold the Office of Director of the Department of Environmental Management for the County of Hawai
'i Filed December 9, 2013" entered on May 26, 2015; 
(2) the "Order Denying Petitioner Brenda J. Ford's 
Motion for Reconsideration of Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Respondent Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd's Motion for Summary Judgment in Favor of Respondent on the Verified Petition of Brenda J. Ford for an Order in the Nature of Quo Warranto Directing the Respondent Bobby Jean Leithead-Todd to Show the Authority Under Which She Purports to Hold the Office of Director of the Department of Environmental Management for the County of Hawai
'i Filed December 9, 2013, Filed May 26, 2015" 
entered on July 6, 2015; and 
(3) the "Final Judgment" entered on July 6, 2015 in the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit are vacated and this case is
 remanded for proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 On the briefs:
 
Michael J. Matsukawa
 
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Laureen L. Martin
 
Deputy Corporation Counsel Section
Chief,
Office of the Corporation Counsel,
County of Hawai
'i
 
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
14
 