NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003755 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRANDON J. DALUMPINIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1796)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon J. Dalumpinis (Defendant)
 
appeals from the September 11, 2013 "Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence" (Judgment) entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit  (circuit court). Defendant was found guilty on Counts I
 
and II of sexual assault in the second degree under Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-731(1)(a) (Supp. 2013),  and on
Count III of sexual assault in the fourth degree under HRS § 707­
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-731, provides in relevant part:
 
§707-731 Sexual assault in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the second degree if:
 
(a)	 The person knowingly subjects another person to
an act of sexual penetration by compulsion;
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Sexual assault in the second degree is a class B
felony.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
733(1)(a) (1993).3 Defendant was sentenced to ten years of
 
imprisonment for each count of second degree sexual assault and
 
to one year for sexual assault in the fourth degree, sentences to
 run concurrently.
 
Defendant contends: 
(1)
 the circuit court erred by finding Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) presented sufficient evidence 
to support convictions of sexual assault in the second degree in
 this case; and
 
(2) Defendant's counsel's representation resulted in
 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense.
4
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
3	 HRS § 707-733, provides: 
§707-733 Sexual assault in the fourth degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth degree if:
 
(a)	 The person knowingly subjects another person to

sexual contact by compulsion or causes another
person to have sexual contact with the actor by
compulsion;
 
(b)	 The person knowingly exposes the person's
genitals to another person under circumstances
in which the actor's conduct is likely to alarm
the other person or put the other person in fear
of bodily injury; or
 
(c)	 The person knowingly trespasses on property for
the purpose of subjecting another person to
surreptitious surveillance for the sexual
gratification of the actor.
 
(2)	 Sexual assault in the fourth degree is a
misdemeanor.
 
(3)	 Whenever a court sentences a defendant for an
 offense under this section, the court may order
the defendant to submit to a pre-sentence mental
and medical examination pursuant to section
706-603.
 
4
 Defendant states that the record on appeal is not paginated and
therefore did not include page references. Defendant's counsel is advised that page citations to electronic records on appeal are required and shouldrefer to the page number when the record is viewed electronically. See 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(3) ("Record references shall
include page citations and the volume number, if applicable.").
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Defendant's points of error as follows: 
Defendant first contends the circuit court erred by
 
finding that the State presented sufficient evidence to support
 convictions of sexual assault in the second degree. Defendant
 argues the Complainant's acts "varied" over their four sexual
 encounters and that Defendant's acts did not change, therefore
 the circuit court "used the changed behavior of [the Complainant]
 to infer a change in [Defendant's] state of mind" from the second
 to the third and fourth encounters. This inference as to
 Defendant's state of mind was not sufficient evidence to support
 conviction as second degree sexual assault on Counts I and II.
 
Sexual assault in the second degree is committed where 
"a person knowingly subjects another person to an act of sexual penetration by compulsion[.]" HRS § 707-731(1)(a). "Compulsion" means the "absence of consent[.]" HRS § 707-700 (1993). The Complainant testified that she told Defendant to "stop" or said "no" during each of their sexual encounters. The circuit court found the Complainant's testimony that Defendant had subjected her to sexual penetration without her consent on the two charged occasions credible, found the Complainant had not consented to the four sexual encounters, and "disbelieved" the Defendant's testimony. Appellate courts "will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence[,]" which is within the province of the circuit court, as the trier of fact. State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai
'i 255, 259, 
978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (quoting State v. Buch, 83 Hawai 'i 308, 
321, 926 P.2d 599, 612 (1996)). The circuit court's credibility determination was supported by the Complainant's testimony, which was corroborated by testimonies from the Complainant's boyfriend, the physician who attended her after the fourth encounter, and to some extent, the Defendant. 
On appeals, the standard of review for sufficiency of 
the evidence is substantial evidence. See State v. Matavale, 115 
Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007). Substantial 
evidence is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
support a conclusion." State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831
 
P.2d 924, 931 (1992). Further, the circuit court, as trier of
 
fact, "is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." 
Batson, 73 Haw. at 249, 831 P.2d at 931. The Complainant's
 testimony constituted substantial evidence supporting convictions
 of sexual assault in the second degree in Counts I and II. 
Defendant's second contention is that his defense
 
counsel's representations to the circuit court resulted in the
 withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 defense by: (1) stipulating to the DNA results before evaluating
 the report or explaining the results to Defendant; (2) failing to
 adequately argue for acquittal on Counts I and II; (3) failing to
 cross-examine the Complainant about Defendant's videorecording of
 sexual penetration in the first encounter and leaving the circuit
 court with a negative impression of Defendant; and (4) failing to
 object to the prosecutor's leading questions during the
 Complainant's direct examination.
 
Defendant has the burden of establishing that his 
defense counsel's assistance was not "within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). To meet his burden, Defendant must establish: 
1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that
such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal
 or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense. To satisfy this second prong, the defendant needs
to show a possible impairment, rather than a probable
impairment, of a potentially meritorious defense. A
 defendant need not prove actual prejudice. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327 (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and footnote omitted).
 
General claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and every
action or omission is not subject to inquiry. Specific
actions or omissions alleged to be error but which had an
obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case
will not be subject to further scrutiny. If, however, the
action or omission had no obvious basis for benefitting the
defendant's case and it "resulted in the withdrawal or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense," then it will be evaluated as information that an
ordinary competent criminal attorney should have had.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. De Guair, 108 Hawai 'i 179, 187, 118 P.3d 662, 670 (2005) 
(emphasis, ellipses and brackets omitted) (quoting Briones v. 
State, 74 Haw. 442, 462–63, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993)). 
Defendant contends the defense counsel erred by
 
stipulating to the DNA report and thus "excluded the possibility
 that another person contributed" to the secretions found on the
 Complainant, which could have produced an inference that the
 Complainant was more sexually active than the circuit court
 believed. Defendant's contention fails to establish a possible
 impairment because the DNA report results showed the DNA profile
 of the secretions recovered from the Complainant matched
 Defendant's DNA profile. This result was consistent with the
 Complainant's testimony regarding the fourth encounter. Defense
 counsel's stipulation to the DNA report prior to receiving the
 results did not impair a possible defense that another person
 contributed to the specimens recovered from the Complainant.
 
Further, Defendant's counsel explained that stipulating
 
to the DNA results was a tactical decision in light of
 Defendant's defense of consent. "Defense counsel's tactical
 decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a
 reviewing court." State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 352, 615 P.2d
 
101, 106 (1980). 
Defendant's contention that his defense counsel should
 
have focused on the State's decision not to charge him in the
 second encounter does not establish error on the part of his
 counsel that possibly impaired a defense to the charged
 encounters. Not drawing attention to similarities between
 charged encounters and an encounter for which Defendant was not
 charged had an obvious tactical basis and does not establish
 ineffective assistance of counsel. There were also distinctions
 between the charged and uncharged encounters. 
Defendant contends the circuit court was left with a
 
negative view of Defendant because his defense counsel did not
 cross-examine the Complainant about her testimony that Defendant
 had videorecorded the first encounter. Defendant does not
 articulate the possible defense impaired by his defense counsel's
 alleged erroneous failure to clarify this testimony and the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possibility the circuit court was left with a "negative view" of
 
Defendant is too speculative to constitute possible impairment of
 any defense.
 
Defendant contends his counsel's failure to object to
 
the prosecutor's "leading" examination of the Complainant
 constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. Defendant
 specifies no particular leading questions nor does he articulate
 how failing to object to leading questions "surrendered fertile
 ground from penetrating cross examination." Defendant's
 contention that his counsel's alleged failure to object to
 unspecified leading questions amounts to a general claim of
 ineffectiveness that does not warrant relief.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 11, 2013
 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 22, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Dana S. Ishibashi
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 James M. Anderson

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
6

 