NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000464
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
MOLOKAI SERVICES INCORPORATED,
a Hawai#i corporation, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
PEARL A. HODGINS, FRIEL ENTERPRISES, INC.,
a Hawai #i corporation, PAULINE L. CASTANERA,
CORNWELL S. FRIEL, GERALDINE M. SHAH,
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0392(1))
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Molokai Service's Inc. ( Molokai
Services ) appeals from the June 10, 2015 Final Judgment
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
(Circuit Court).1  The Circuit Court entered judgment against
Molokai Services, and in favor of Defendants-Appellees Pearl
Hodgins ( Hodgins), Friel Enterprises, Inc. ( Friel Enterprises),
Pauline Castanera ( Castanera), Cornwell Friel (Friel), and
Geraldine Shah (Shah ) (collectively, the Defendants ), on all
counts.   Molokai Services also challenges the Circuit Court's
1The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
May 18, 2015 Order Granting Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Molokai
Services First Amended Complaint ( Dismissal Order ), and September
16, 2015 Order Granting Defendants' Motion for Attorneys' Fees
and Costs.
I.BACKGROUND
A.The Dismissed Claims
On March 2, 2015, Molokai Services filed its First
Amended Complaint ( Complaint), which included the following
allegations:
Molokai Services is a Hawai# i corporation, incorporated
in 1963, doing business as the Molokai Drive Inn, a fast food
establishment in Moloka #i.  Friel Enterprises was incorporated in
Hawai#i in 1983.  Hodgins was the secretary, treasurer, and a
director of Friel Enterprises since 1983.  Hodgins was also the
secretary and treasurer of Molokai Services from 1982 until July
14, 2014, and a director of Molokai Services in 1994 and from
2008 through July 14, 2014.  Shah has been an officer and
director of Friel Enterprises at all relevant times, and from
1989 through the filing of the Complaint.  
Pearl Friel Petro ( Petro) was president and director of
both Friel Enterprises and Molokai Services from 1982 to 2008, as
well as a shareholder of Molokai Services.  Petro passed away on
April 30, 2009.  Friel became a director of Molokai Services in
2008.  Castanera became a director of Molokai Services in 2011. 
Friel and Castanera became officers and directors of Friel
Enterprises in 2011. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Complaint alleges that, on June 12, 1963, Molokai
Services signed a thirty-year lease (1963 Lease) between Molokai
Ranch, Ltd., as landlord, and Molokai Services, as tenant.  The
1963 Lease provided for a rent of approximately $361.00 per
quarter.
Hodgins allegedly was aware of and authorized all of
Petro's actions and communications.  In May 1983, Petro sent a
letter dated August 27, 1982, and addressed it to the
stockholders of Molokai Services, and to Molokai Services
director and shareholder Elizabeth Medeiros ( Medeiros).  The
letter stated in relevant part:
1. The Molokai Ranch has again offered to sell us our
Drive Inn lot . . . as follows:
a. $160,000.00 on terms, 20% down, 5 year agreement
of sale, 12% interest per annum payable yearly.
b. $136,000.00 cash payable by September 15, 1982.
If we do not respond by September 10, 1982 then it
will be offered to anyone who is interested in
purchasing a business lot.
2. If we do not purchase the area, our lease will be
increased to $13,234.00 per year commencing in 1983
for the balance of the last 10 years of our lease.  At
present we are paying $386.00 per month which was the
original amount twenty years ago.  They did not
increase our rent after the first ten years, even
though there was such a clause in our lease. 
As you well know business has not been that good even though
we have tried to offer the public various new menus. 
Molokai has been a very depressed area with about 20%
unemployed. The future does not look very promising with
increased labor and supply costs.
The Complaint alleges that Petro and Hodgins
intentionally misrepresented the existing and proposed rent in
the 1963 Lease, misrepresented the economic viability of Molokai
Drive Inn, and provided insufficient notice to Molokai Services
and its officers, directors, and shareholders, all for the
purpose of depriving Molokai Services and its shareholders of the
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
corporate opportunity to purchase the leased property.  This was
allegedly done to set the stage for the Friel family members and
Friel Enterprises to purchase the property, become the landlord
of Molokai Services, and collect rent from Molokai Services, to
the financial benefit of Friel Enterprises and to the detriment
of Molokai Services. 
A deed for the purchase of the leased property was
recorded on July 22, 1983.  Friel Enterprises purchased the
property from Cooke Land Company, subject to the 1963 Lease.  
Petro and Hodgins then formed Friel Enterprises in August 1983.
The Complaint further alleges that, after the purchase
of the property by Friel Enterprises, between 1983 and June 30,
1992, Petro and Hodgins conspired to increase Molokai Services's
rent without Molokai Services's Board of Directors or
shareholders' consideration or approval, in violation of the 1963
Lease.  Petro and Hodgins are alleged to have, unlawfully and in
a manner ultra vires , imposed rent increases upon Molokai
Services and in favor of themselves and Friel Enterprises, in
violation of their fiduciary duties.  
The Annual Stockholders Meeting Minutes of March 19,
1988, allegedly contains the following relevant passages:  "Pearl
Petro - President.  Discussion on the land lease - The lease runs
through June 30, 1992.  Options:  (1) Negotiate a new long term
lease (2) Sell the lease (3) Come up with a plan at a special
meeting."  
The minutes of the Annual Shareholders Meeting held on
July 9, 1989, allegedly reflect the following:
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Our lease will expire on June 30, 1992 and we have to plan
to continue or terminate our business. . . .  The owners
have decided to increase their rent to $1,500 per month, we
are paying $950.00 now and you must realize that our present
lease is a 30 year lease.  Nothing is cheap today.
Discussion on the Lease: Lease ends June 30, 1992.  Shimizu
made a motion to begin paying $1,500 on January 1, 1990 and
negotiate for a new lease to start on July 1, 1992 for 10
years and an option for another 10 years.  Medeiros seconded
the motion.  The president would negotiate the new land
lease and report back to us. 
The minutes of the Stockholders Annual Meeting held on
January 21, 1991, allegedly contain the following:
OLD BUSINESS:  Discussion was shared by all that the renewal
of our lease is most urgent.  Pearl Petro will speak to the
land owners on the amount that they would consider in order
for us to renew our lease and the terms of the new lease
agreement.
The President's Report by Petro, dated December 10,
1992, and recorded and ratified by Hodgins, reportedly stated:
Our secretary will present the figures for our new lease
which has to be approved by this board.  Land with a
building in Kaunakakai is very expensive and unavailable. 
There were two other offers on our present site, but the
landlords felt they were obligated to us for the many years
we have worked together.
. . . .
Looking ahead to the balance of 1992 and the year 1993, I do
not think we will make as much profit as we have done in the
past.  The economy is down and additional competition on a
small island where welfare is very prevalent makes business
very difficult. 
It is alleged that Petro and Hodgins fraudulently
misrepresented to Molokai Services and its shareholders the
economic health and viability of Molokai Services, and the
unavailability of other properties to lease, in order to create
reliance by Molokai Services and its shareholders, and to lull
Molokai Services and its shareholders into accepting Petro's and
Hodgins's recommendation to renew a lease with Friel Enterprises. 
The Complaint alleges that a lease dated June 9, 1994,
was entered into by Friel Enterprises, as landlord, and Molokai
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Services, as tenant, for the period of July 1, 1992, through June
30, 2012 (the 1994 Lease ).  The 1994 Lease was executed on behalf
of Molokai Services by Petro, Hodgins and Nobu Shimizu ( Shimizu). 
The lease was executed on behalf of Friel Enterprises by Petro
and Hodgins.  At the time of the execution of the 1994 Lease,
Petro was president and director of both Friel Enterprises and
Molokai Services, and Hodgins was secretary, treasurer, and a
director of both Friel Enterprises and Molokai Services.    
The 1994 Lease allegedly was executed for the financial
benefit of Friel Enterprises and to the extreme detriment of
Molokai Services.  It is alleged that the execution of the 1994
Lease was a breach of fiduciary duties and constituted self-
dealing. 
It is alleged that no negotiations on the lease terms
were held prior to the 1994 Lease's execution and that the 1994
Lease was drafted by Friel Enterprises and accepted without
question by Petro and Hodgins.  It is further alleged that the
proposed lease terms were never presented to the Molokai Services
shareholders for review prior to the execution of the 1994 Lease
and that Petro and Hodgins intended that the 1994 Lease terms be
grossly excessive and unconscionably favorable to Friel
Enterprises, with the goal of siphoning out and converting
Molokai Services funds to Friel Enterprises, Friel, Castanera,
and Shah. 
The 1994 Lease was for a period of twenty years.  For
the first ten years of the lease, Molokai Services had to pay
$2,500.00 per month in rent, 5% of its gross sales, and the
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
amount of "gross income taxes payable by the Lessor under the
Hawaii General Excise Tax Law."  The Complaint alleges that the
standard industry practice on Moloka #i for commercial food
service establishment lease rents is significantly less than
$2,500.00 per month, and does not include a gross sales
percentage increase or the payment of the "Gross Excise Tax" to a
landlord. 
The Complaint alleges that there were no negotiations
between Molokai Services and Friel Enterprises for the second
ten-year period for the 1994 Lease at any Executive Board or
Annual Shareholder's Meeting, prior to the expiration of the
first ten-year period on June 30, 2002.  In 2004, Petro and
Hodgins, allegedly, unilaterally raised Molokai Services base
rent to $3,000 per month plus 6% of gross sales in breach of the
1994 Lease terms (as it was already two years into the second
ten-year term), without Molokai Services Board or shareholders'
approval, without fair and full disclosure to the Molokai
Services Board and shareholders that the lease terms exceeded
fair market value, and in violation of Petro's and Hodgins's
fiduciary duties to Molokai Services. 
It is alleged that, at the Annual Shareholders Meeting,
on October 30, 2004, Petro and Hodgins misrepresented to the
Molokai Services directors that the lease rent was a
"renegotiated percentage rent from 5% to 6% for 7 more years
beginning July 1, 2004.  Basic rent went up from $500 from $2,500
to $3,000."  This is alleged to have falsely conveyed that the
purported "renegotiation" had been conducted properly, with
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
authorization by the full Board or shareholders, and in the best
interest of Molokai Services. 
The Complaint alleges that Friel and Castanera
benefitted financially from the funds siphoned from Molokai
Services through the excessive lease payments and that, since
their nomination as directors to Molokai Services, neither Friel
or Castanera has exercised their fiduciary duties to Molokai
Services regarding to the lease payments to Friel Enterprises. 
From 2011, Molokai Services's directors and
shareholders (excluding Hodgins, Friel, Castanera, and Shah)
purportedly sought to negotiate lease terms with Friel
Enterprises.  It is alleged that Hodgins, Friel, and Castanera,
despite being directors of Molokai Services, fraudulently
resisted and delayed discussions regarding the lease terms, in
contravention of their fiduciary obligations to Molokai Services,
and continued to do so through the filing of the Complaint.  
The Complaint alleges that the purportedly fraudulent,
self-dealing lease terms are part of a continuing and ongoing
pattern and practice of fraud, bad faith, breach of fiduciary
duties, breach of contracts, and unjust enrichment, by all
Defendants.  The Complaint includes eight counts, as follows:  
breach of fiduciary duties; breach of contract; conversion; fraud
and misrepresentation; aiding and abetting and participating in
breach of fiduciary duty; unjust enrichment; declaratory relief;
and injunctive relief.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.The Motion to Dismiss
On March 30, 2015, the Defendants filed a Motion to
Dismiss Molokai Services's First Amended Complaint, arguing that
all claims are barred by the applicable statute of limitations of
six years.  Defendants also argued, inter alia , that the
"continuing tort exception" to the statute of limitations does
not apply because the acceptance of rent by Friel Enterprises did
not constitute a "continuing tort." 
On April 15, 2015, Molokai Services filed a memorandum
in opposition, contending that Defendants had a continuing
fiduciary obligation for the entire time they were officers or
directors of Molokai Services and that each of the Defendants had
an affirmative fiduciary obligation to rectify the fraud, and not
to benefit from it.  Molokai Services further contended that,
from June 1994 through October 2014, Friel Enterprises
fraudulently converted funds to its use through the 1994 Lease.  
Molokai Services contended that Defendants' continuing diversion
of Molokai Services's funds constitutes both a continuing injury
and continuing tortious act.  Molokai Services argued that the
2012 extension of the 1994 Lease terms was an additional
"separate tortious act" that was "in violation of Defendants'
fiduciary obligations."
In reply, Defendants argued that the receipt of rents
was based on an agreement reached years earlier, Molokai Services
knew about the terms of the lease, as well as the Defendants'
alleged conflict of interest, and Molokai Services took no action
for roughly twenty years.  Defendants asserted that Friel
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Enterprises's acceptance of rent is neither a breach of fiduciary
duty nor conversion and does not toll the statute of limitations. 
Defendants also contended that the Complaint does not contain any
allegation regarding the extension of the Lease in 2012, and even
if it had been pled, the allegation would fail to state a cause
of action because Friel Enterprises had no duty to extend or
negotiate any further lease terms with Molokai Services.
After an April 23, 2015 hearing, the Circuit Court
granted Defendants' motion to dismiss, on the grounds that the
maximum statute of limitations was six years and that all of the
allegedly wrongful acts occurred more than six years prior to the
filing of the original complaint.  In the May 18, 2015 Dismissal
Order, the Circuit Court further stated, in relevant part:
As an initial matter, the Court finds that the maximum
statute of limitations for all of these claims asserted by
Plaintiff is six years.  Plaintiff's original Complaint was
filed on June 27, 2014.  In that regard, the Court finds the
wrongful acts upon which Plaintiff's claims are based
occurred before June 27, 2008, or at least six years prior
to the filing of the original Complaint.
. . . .
Having reviewed the record, the Court notes that
[Molokai Services] does not seem to dispute that it knew A)
that Friel Enterprises, Inc. purchased the land upon which
the Molokai Drive Inn sits, back in 1983; B) that some
individuals were directors or officers of both [Molokai
Services] and Friel Enterprises, Inc.; and C) that [Molokai
Services] was aware of the terms of the lease entered into
in 1994, the recomputation in 1998, and in the renegotiation
of the lease sometime between 2002 and 2004.
With regards to the Continuing Tort Doctrine and
whether it applies under these circumstances to toll the
statute of limitations, as explained by the Intermediate
Court of Appeals in the case of Anderson v. State, 88
Hawai#i 241, 965 P.2d 783 (App. 1998), a continuing tort is
a tortious act that occurs so repeatedly that it can be
termed continuance [sic], such that one may say that the
tortious conduct has not yet ceased.  Accordingly, the
statute of limitations cannot run because the tortious
conduct is on-going.
In the Court's view, Plaintiff did not allege the type
of conduct that the Continuing Tort exception is intended to
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
encompass.  Although Plaintiff suggests that the diverted
water that caused property damage in Anderson is analogous
to the funds being diverted from [Molokai Services] to Friel
Enterprises, Inc., the Court finds the circumstances alleged
in the Complaint are factually distinguishable from prior
Hawaii cases.  What we have here, more closely, is a series
of separate and distinguishable acts that have been alleged
throughout the numerous paragraphs of the Complaint.
Accordingly, it appears beyond a doubt that Plaintiff
can prove no set of facts entitling it to relief.  As such,
the Court grants Defendants' Motion to Dismiss the First
Amended Complaint with prejudice, for failure to state a
claim upon which relief can be granted. . . . 
Further, the Court denies [Molokai Services] oral
motion for leave to amend its First Amended Complaint.  
The Judgment was entered on June 10, 2015.  The Notice
of Appeal was filed on June 15, 2015.  Defendants' Motion for
Attorneys' Fees and Costs was filed on June 19, 2015, and granted
in an order entered on September 16, 2015.
II.POINTS OF ERROR
Molokai Services raises six points of error, contending
that the Circuit Court erred in:  (1) concluding that Molokai
Services did not allege the type of conduct that the continuing
tort doctrine is intended to encompass; (2) finding that the
wrongful acts upon which Molokai Services's claims are based
occurred at least six years prior to the filing of the original
complaint; (3) stating that it did not view the act of accepting
voluntarily-paid rent equivalent to a conversion or a breach of
fiduciary duty; (4) determining that it appears beyond a doubt
that Plaintiff can prove no set of facts entitling it to relief;
(5) denying Molokai Services's oral motion to amend its First
Amended Complaint; and (6) awarding attorneys' fees and costs to
the Defendants.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo.  A complaint should not be dismissed for
failure to state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that
the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or
her claim that would entitle him or her to relief.  This
court must therefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light
most favorable to him or her in order to determine whether
the allegations contained therein could warrant relief under
any alternative theory.  For this reason, in reviewing a
circuit court's order dismissing a complaint . . . this
court's consideration is strictly limited to the allegations
of the complaint, and this court must deem those allegations
to be true.
Cnty. of Kaua# i ex rel. Nakazawa v. Baptiste , 115 Hawai# i 15, 24,
165 P.3d 916, 925 (2007) (citations and brackets omitted; format
altered).
[The appellate] court reviews a denial of leave to
amend a complaint under HRCP Rule 15(a) or (b) under the
abuse of discretion standard.  The trial court abuses its
discretion if it bases its ruling on an erroneous view of
the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the
evidence.  Stated differently, an abuse of discretion occurs
where the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel , 117 Hawai# i 92, 104,
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008) (citations omitted; format altered).
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard."
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. , 120 Hawai# i 181, 197, 202 P.3d
1226, 1242 (2009) (citations, internal quotation marks, and
brackets omitted).
IV.DISCUSSION
Under Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP ) Rule
12(b)(6), a complaint may be dismissed for "failure to state a
claim upon which relief can be granted." 
[I]n weighing the allegations of the complaint as against a
motion to dismiss, the court is not required to accept
conclusory allegations on the legal effect of the events
alleged.  While a complaint attacked by a Rule 12(b)(6)
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
motion to dismiss does not need detailed factual
allegations, a plaintiff's obligation to provide the grounds
of his entitlement to relief requires more than labels and
conclusions, and a formulaic recitation of the elements of a
cause of action will not do.  Factual allegations must be
enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative
level on the assumption that all of the complaint's
allegations are true (even if doubtful in fact).
Pavsek v. Sandvold , 127 Hawai #i 390, 403, 279 P.3d 55, 68 (App.
2012) (citations and quotations marks omitted, format altered).
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 657-1 (2016) states, in
relevant part:
ยง 657-1  Six years .  The following actions shall be
commenced within six years next after the cause of action
accrued, and not after:
(1) Actions for the recovery of any debt founded
upon any contract, obligation, or liability,
excepting such as are brought upon the judgment
or decree of a court; . . .
. . . .
(3) Actions for taking or detaining any goods or
chattels, including actions in the nature of
replevin; and
(4) Personal actions of any nature whatsoever not
specifically covered by the laws of the State.
Molokai Services initially filed a complaint in this
case on June 27, 2014.  "[A] claim accrues when the plaintiff
knew or should have known that an actionable wrong has been
committed."  Garner v. State , 122 Hawai# i 150, 168, 223 P.3d 215,
233 (App. 2009).  It is undisputed that the statute of
limitations for all of the claims asserted by Molokai Services is
six years.  Thus, as there is no allegation that Molokai Services
could not have reasonably discovered the allegedly wrongful
nature of the Defendants' conduct at an earlier date, it appears
that the statute of limitations bars all claims that accrued
prior to June 27, 2008.  The Circuit Court dismissed all claims
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on the grounds that they accrued at least six years prior to
expiration of the statute of limitations.
C.Breach of Fiduciary Duty
"To claim breach of fiduciary duty, a plaintiff must
show that a fiduciary relationship existed between the parties,
the defendant breached a fiduciary duty to the plaintiff, and the
breach proximately caused injury to the plaintiff."  Swift v.
Swift, No. CAAP-13-0000101, 2016 WL 3573970, at *3 (Haw. App.
June 30, 2016) (mem.) (citing 37 C.J.S. Fraud ยง 15 (2012);
Cochrane v. Azman, No. 29562, 2011 WL 661714, at *5 (Haw. App.
Feb. 22, 2011) (mem.)).  "The relation of directors to
corporations is a fiduciary one and the well-established rule
both in Hawaii and in a majority of the States is that when
fiduciaries deal with themselves relative to their trust property
the burden is upon such fiduciaries to establish the fairness of
the transaction."  Lum v. Kwong, 39 Haw. 532, 538 (1952)
(citation omitted).  "The principle applies to leases as well as
to other corporate transactions."  Id. at 540 (citation omitted).
A fiduciary's duties to the corporation "include
undivided, unselfish and unqualified loyalty, unceasing effort
never to profit personally at corporate expense, and unbending
disavowal of any opportunity which would permit the director's
private interests to clash with those of his corporation." 
Lussier v. Mau-Van Dev., Inc., 4 Haw. App. 359, 381, 667 P.2d
804, 819-20 (1983) (citation omitted).  A fiduciary "will not be
permitted to make a private or secret profit" out of the
fiduciary's official position.  Id.  at 381, 667 P.2d at 820
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(citation omitted).  "Generally it is held that a director will
not be permitted to receive and retain a commission or other
secret profit or advantage in the case of a sale or lease o[f]
property by or to the corporation."  Hawaiian Int'l Finances,
Inc. v. Pablo, 53 Haw. 149, 153, 488 P.2d 1172, 1174 (1971). 
"Unless otherwise agreed, an agent who makes a profit in
connection with transactions conducted by him on behalf of his
principal is under a duty to turn over such profits to his
principal."  Id.  at 152, 488 P.2d at 1174 (citation omitted).
Molokai Services contends, inter alia, that the
Complaint alleged a breach of fiduciary duty claim by asserting
that:  (1) Petro and Hodgins intended that the 1994 Lease be
unfair to Molokai Services; (2) neither Friel nor Castanera has
exercised their fiduciary duties with regard to rent payments;
(3) Hodgins, Friel, and Castanera delayed discussions regarding
the Lease terms; and (4) the Defendants had a fiduciary duty to
rectify the fraud, and not to benefit from it.  The Complaint
also alleges that Hodgins, Castanera, and Friel were directors of
Molokai Services.  Taking this allegation as true (and it appears
to be undisputed), Hodgins, Castanera, and Friel each owed a
fiduciary duty to Molokai Services.  See Lum, 39 Haw. at 538. 
The Defendants respond, however, that a director or officer does
not owe a duty to go back in time and undo an allegedly unfair
contract, and that mere acceptance of rent is not a breach of
fiduciary duty. 
We reject Defendants' characterization of Molokai
Services's breach of fiduciary duty claims.  We also reject
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendants' related argument that Molokai Services's breach of
fiduciary claim is entirely barred because the alleged initial
breach occurred outside the statute of limitations and the
continuing tort doctrine is inapplicable, as a matter of law.  A
"continuing tort" is "a tortious act that occurs so repeatedly
that it can be termed 'continuous,' such that one may say that
the tortious conduct has not yet ceased.  Accordingly, the
statute of limitations cannot run, because the tortious conduct
is ongoing."  Anderson v. State , 88 Hawai #i 241, 248, 965 P.2d
783, 790 (App. 1998).  More specifically, a continuing tort is 
one inflicted over a period of time; it involves a wrongful
conduct that is repeated until desisted, and each day
creates a separate cause of action. A continuing tort
sufficient to toll a statute of limitations is occasioned by
continual unlawful acts, not by continual ill effects from
an original violation, and for there to be a continuing tort
there must be a continuing duty.
Id. at 247, 965 P.2d at 789 (quoting 54 C.J.S. Limitations of
Actions ยง 177 (1987)).
The continuing tort doctrine "recognizes that though
the statute of limitations is tolled by a continuing tortious
act, in such a case, a recovery may be had for all damages
accruing within the statutory period before the action, although
not for damages accrued before that period."  Id. at 250, 965
P.2d at 792 (citations, quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Hawai#i case law developing the continuing tort doctrine arose in
other contexts.  See , e.g., Wong Nin v. City & Cty. of Honolulu,
33 Haw. 379, 386 (1935) (arising out of diversion of waters,
depriving landowner of necessary irrigation); Anderson, 88
Hawai#i at 242-44, 965 P.2d at 784-86 (alleging that the State
wrongfully diverted stream onto plaintiff's property).  However,
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
other jurisdictions have applied the continuing tort doctrine to
breaches of fiduciary duty involving periodic payments, similar
to Molokai Services's allegations here.  See, e.g., Butler v.
Gibbons, 569 N.Y.S.2d 722 (N.Y. App. Div. 1991) (defendant
allegedly breached fiduciary duty by collecting rents but not
accounting to partner for share of proceeds); Marzec v. Nye, 690
S.E.2d 537, 542 (N.C. Ct. App. 2010) (cause of action for breach
of fiduciary duty for failure to pay salary to other shareholder,
while continuing to pay himself and failing to provide an
accounting, accrued each time defendant failed to pay, for the
period within the statute of limitations).  While not all courts
are in accord, we conclude that this application of the
continuing tort doctrine to alleged breaches of fiduciary duty is
most consonant with other Hawai #i jurisprudence.  See , e.g.,
Garner, 122 Hawai #i at 169, 223 P.3d at 234; but see Thorndike v.
Thorndike, 910 A.2d 1224, 1225 (N.H. 2006) (rejecting the
application of the continuing tort doctrine to a claim for breach
of fiduciary duty by freeze-out of brother from business).
Nevertheless, with respect to the claim that Hodgins
knew and intended the 1994 Lease to be unfair, it appears that a
cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty based the act of
entering into the 1994 Lease is time barred to the extent that
the allegedly excessive payments were made outside the six-year
statute of limitations.
However, the Complaint further alleges that from 2011,
Molokai Services directors (excluding Hodgins, Friel, Castanera,
and Shah) sought to negotiate lease terms with Friel Enterprises,
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
but that Hodgins, Friel, and Castanera resisted and delayed
discussions regarding the lease terms, in furtherance of their
own interests and to the detriment of Molokai Services.  Thus,
the Complaint sufficiently alleged a claim that the Defendants
violated their duties of "undivided, unselfish and unqualified
loyalty" and "unbending disavowal of any opportunity to permit
[their] private interests to clash with those of" Molokai
Services.  See Lussier , 4 Haw. App. at 381, 667 P.2d at 819-20.
In addition, for the reasons stated above, it appears
that the Complaint also sufficiently pled a claim for breach of
fiduciary duty each time that, within the statute of limitations
period, the individual director-defendants allegedly collected
excess rent from Molokai Services, retained a profit, and failed
to account for such profit to Molokai Services.  Molokai Services
sufficiently stated a claim that Hodgins, Castanera, and Friel
violated their fiduciary duty to "never profit personally" at
Molokai Services's expense.  Id.  Even if certain profits were
allegedly taken outside the statute of limitations period,
thereby limiting the extent of Molokai Services's claims for
recovery, those defendants were not thereafter forever permitted
to receive and retain a secret profit in the lease of the
property to Molokai Services.  Although Molokai Services has the
burden to prove its claims of a breach, and it is premature to
further discuss such proof and/or defenses that might be
established, Molokai Services sufficiently alleged that the
director-defendants had a continuing fiduciary duty to turn over
wrongfully obtained profits.  See Pablo , 53 Haw. at 152-53, 488
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
P.2d at 1174.  We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court erred
when it dismissed Molokai Services's claim of breach of fiduciary
duty in its entirety.  See Baptiste , 115 Hawai #i at 24, 165 P.3d
at 925.
D.Conversion
"Conversion encompasses the following acts:  '(1) A
taking from the owner without his consent; (2) an unwarranted
assumption of ownership; (3) an illegal use or abuse of the
chattel; and (4) a wrongful detention after demand.'"  Freddy
Nobriga Enterprises, Inc. v. State, Dep't of Hawaiian Home Lands,
129 Hawai #i 123, 129, 295 P.3d 993, 999 (App. 2013) (quoting
Tsuru v. Bayer , 25 Haw. 693, 696 (1920)).  Molokai Services
contends that each monthly receipt of the excess rent by Friel
Enterprises was a fraudulent conversion of funds.  The Defendants
argue that they did not take the rent from Molokai Services
without its consent, Friel Enterprises's acceptance of the rent
payments based on the 1994 Lease terms does not constitute an
"unwarranted assumption of ownership," and the acceptance of a
contractual benefit is not a continuing tort.
Upon review, it does not appear that the Complaint
alleges, inter alia , that Friel Enterprises took rents without
Molokai Services's consent.  Nor does it allege that taking rents
constituted an unwarranted assumption of ownership of Molokai
Services's property.  Indeed, Molokai Services cites no authority
to support their theory that acceptance of voluntarily paid rents
can satisfy the elements of conversion.  In addition, the
Complaint does not sufficiently allege that the individual
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defendants took property from Molokai Services without its
consent, wrongfully assumed ownership of such property, or
wrongfully detained Molokai Services's property after demand. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
dismissing Molokai Services's claim for conversion.
E.Aiding and Abetting a Breach of Fiduciary Duty
"A claim for aiding and abetting a breach of fiduciary
duty requires:  (1) a breach by a fiduciary of obligations to
another, (2) that the defendant knowingly induced or participated
in the breach, and (3) that plaintiff suffered damage as a result
of the breach."  Combs v. Case Bigelow & Lombardi , No. 28773,
2010 WL 370275, at *8 (Haw. App. Jan. 27, 2010) (mem.) (quoting
Kaufman v. Cohen , 760 N.Y.S.2d 157, 169 (N.Y. App. Div. 2003)). 
Molokai Services contends that the directors of Friel
Enterprises, including Shah, knowingly participated in Hodgins's
continuing violation of fiduciary duties, and that any actions by
the Defendants in furtherance of the violations of fiduciary
duties would be a continuing tortious act.  The Defendants
contend that because "Molokai Services' underlying breach of
fiduciary duty claim is barred by the statute of limitations, so
too is its claim for aiding and abetting."  
As discussed above, the Complaint sufficiently pled a
claim that Hodgins breached a fiduciary duty to Molokai Services. 
The Complaint alleged that non-fiduciary defendants knew of the
fiduciary relationship of Hodgins, and approved, assisted, and
encouraged the breaches of fiduciary duties.  We would therefore
conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing Molokai
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Services's claim for aiding and abetting a breach of fiduciary
duty.
F.Breach of Contract
Molokai Services contends that the breach of contract
"commenced in 2004 when the 1994 Lease rent was fraudulently
increased, in specific breach of the 1994 Lease terms," and that
the continuing obligation doctrine would extend the action to
either the end of the 1994 Lease in 2012 or the end of the
extension of the 1994 Lease in 2015.  The Defendants contend that
the continuing obligation doctrine is inapplicable because
Molokai Services fails to identify any term of the contract that
was continually breached.  The Defendants' argument is well-
founded.  Molokai Services does not identify the contractual
provision under the 1994 Lease that imposed a continuing duty on
the Defendants, and how that continuing duty was breached.  We
would therefore conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
dismissing Molokai Services's breach of contract claim.
G.Fraud/Unjust Enrichment
Molokai Services pled claims of fraud and unjust
enrichment, independent of its breach of fiduciary duty claim
(although such claims appear to be based on the same underlying
factual allegations).  The Circuit Court dismissed all claims. 
Molokai Services makes no argument on appeal that the Circuit
Court erred in dismissing the fraud and unjust enrichment claims,
and provides no applicable law regarding those claims.  We
therefore conclude that Molokai Services waived its independent
claims of fraud and unjust enrichment.  See Hawai#i Rules of
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7); Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill
Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawai #i 251, 280 n.20., 151 P.3d
732, 761 n.20 (2007) ("Inasmuch as KRC and KHALP fail to address
their unfair methods of competition claims against the Lawyers on
appeal, it appears that such claims have been abandoned.  Thus,
KRC's and KHALP's claim of unfair methods of competition against
the Lawyers is deemed waived.").
H.Motion to Amend
At the conclusion of the hearing on Defendants' motion
to dismiss the Complaint, counsel for Molokai Services asked the
court, "Your honor, is it possible for us to have leave to amend
the complaint?"  The Circuit Court responded, "Not after I
dismissed it."  No other reasons, such as undue delay, bad faith,
repeated failure to cure deficiencies, undue prejudice, or
futility, were referenced by the Circuit Court.  See, e.g.,
Dejetley v. Kaho #ohalahala , 122 Hawai #i 251, 270, 226 P.3d 421,
440 (2010) (discussing motions to amend under HRCP Rule 15).  In
light of our conclusion that the Circuit Court erred in
dismissing Molokai Services's Complaint in its entirety, it
appears that the Circuit Court based its denial of the request to
amend on a wrong view of the law.  We therefore conclude that the
Circuit Court erred in denying leave to amend on this ground.  On
remand, Molokai Services may file a written motion for leave to
amend, which shall then be considered in accordance with HRCP
Rule 15(a) and applicable case law.
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.Attorneys' Fees
In light of our conclusion that the Circuit Court erred
in dismissing the Complaint, we vacate the Circuit Court's order
awarding Defendants' attorneys' fees and costs, without prejudice
to a renewed request upon conclusion of further proceedings on
remand.
V.CONCLUSION
As set forth above, the Circuit Court's June 10, 2015
Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated in part; this case is
remanded to the Circuit Court for proceedings consistent with
this Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2018.
On the briefs:
Bruce F. Sherman,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Jonathan H. Steiner,
Jesse J.T. Smith,
Kurt W. Klein,
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
 MacKinnon LLP),
for Defendants-Appellees.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
23