NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NO. CAAP-22-0000348 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
 
 
HAWAII NATIONAL BANK, Plaintiff- Appellee,  
v. 
SUTAH CHIRAYUNON, Defendant- Appellant  
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CC131000998) 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION O RDER 
(By:  Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
 
Defendant- Appellant Sutah Chirayunon ( Chirayunon ) 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's  (circuit  
court) "Findings of Fact a nd Conclusions of Law"  (FOF/COL), 
filed April 20, 2022, and Final Judgment, filed July 21, 2022.  
This appeal ar ises out of a dispute regarding 
Chirayunon's claim to real property ( Unit 9) located at Kahala 1
 
1  The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided.  Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-22-0000348
03-JUL-2025
08:01 AM
Dkt. 49 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
2 
 Garden Apartments, Inc. ( KGAI).  In August 1952, KGAI entered 
into a master lease with fee owner/lessor Trustees of the Estate 
of Bernice Pauahi Bishop ( Bishop Estate ).  KGAI, as a 
residential cooperative ( co-op), issued shares of stock and 
"proprietary leases"  for individual residential units.  
Shareholders did not own title to their units, had no leasehold 
interest from Bishop Estate, and held no interest in the real 
property.  The unit leases were due to expire upon termination 
of the master lease on July 31, 2007.  2
Marjorie Parker (Parker)  held a KGAI proprietary lease 
for Unit 9 that was to run until July 31, 2007.  In 1999, 
Chirayunon became a residential tenant of Unit 9.  In October 
2003, Parker sold her interest in the KGAI co- op to Chirayunon 
via an "Agreement of Sale" for $95,500.  The interest conveyed 
through the Agreement of Sale was one share of common stock in 
the KGAI co-op, and Parker's interest under the proprietary 
lease to Unit 9. 
Parker did not , at that time,  seek or obtain consent 
from KGAI to transfer her interest to Chirayunon, as was 
required by KGAI's Articles of Association:  
(f) No owner or holder of any share or shares of 
stock of 
the corporation which have been so allocated to an 
apartment shall sell, assign, transfer , mortgage, pledge, 
hypothecate, or otherwise dispose of or encumber such stock 
without the prior written consent of the corporation given 
by majority vote of the Board of Directors , and any 
 
2  The following background facts are  largely taken from the circuit 
court's unchallenged findings of fact (FOFs ).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
3 
 purported disposition or encumbrance of such stock in 
violation hereof shall be null and void and of no effect 
whatsoever .  Any transfer of stock consented to as 
aforesaid may be made in any manner permitted by law, these 
Articles of Association, and the By -Laws of the 
corporation, but no such transfer shall be valid except 
between the parties thereto until such transfer shall have 
been duly recorded in the stock books of the corporation 
and a new certificate shall have been issued in accordance 
therewith.  No certificate of stock shall be delivered 
unless the person entitled to such certificate or some 
person duly authorized by such person shall receipt for the 
same and agree to be bound by all of the provisions of the 
Articles of Association and By -Laws of the corporation 
applicable to such shares.  The corporation shall have the 
first privilege of purchasing stock offered for sale by any 
stockholder.  
 
(Emphasis added.) 
In June 2007, KGAI obtained a loan from Plaintiff-
Appellee Hawaii National Bank ( HNB) for $5,390,000 "[t]o finance 
the purchase of the leased fee land underlying the Kahala Garden 
Apartment Project."  The loan was secured by a mortgage, and was 
intended as a temporary bridge loan to give the KGAI 
shareholders time to arrange financing to buy their units in fee 
simple.  KGAI purchased the entire fee simple interest from 
Bishop Estate in July 2007.  KGAI officially converted from a 
co-op to a condominium association in February 2008.   
In July 2007, the proprietary lease for Unit 9 expired 
when the master lease from Bishop Estate expired.  In August 
2007, KGAI's board, in a letter to Parker and Chirayunon, 
unanimously refused to consent to the transfer of Parker's stock 
to Chirayunon, on the basis that KGAI was in the process of 
converting from a co- op to a condominium association.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
In August 2008, Parker and Chirayunon executed a 
document for the assignment of stock, proprietary lease, and 
satisfaction of the 2003 Agreement of Sale.  KGAI, as lessor, 
provided written consent, with the express reservation that 
consent would automatically be rescinded and revoked if 
Chirayunon did not close on the purchase of the leased fee 
interest in Unit 9 from KGAI within thirty  days after the 
document was recorded.  
4 
 Chirayunon did not close on the purchase of the fee 
simple interest in Unit 9.  Chirayunon continued to possess, and 
remodeled, Unit 9.  KGAI defaulted on its loan from HNB in 2011, 
and, in lieu of foreclosure, KGAI transferred to HNB its rights 
to Unit 9 via a Warranty Deed.  
In April 2011, HNB sent a letter to Chirayunon stating 
that ownership of Unit 9 would be transferred to HNB shortly, 
and offering Chirayunon a six-month window during  which 
Chirayunon could purchase Unit 9.  In May 2011, Chirayunon 
signed, in the presence of his counsel, an agreement that was 
executed by KGAI in March 2011 for the cancellation of the 
proprietary lease for Unit 9 ( Cancellation Agreement ).  
Chirayunon also entered into a short- term residential lease with 
HNB that would expire on December 31, 2011.  This lease and an 
option to buy Unit 9 were extended by HNB to August 31, 2012.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
5 
 Chirayunon did not buy Unit 9 by August 31, 2012.  HNB 
declined to extend the residential lease, and gave Chirayunon 
forty-five  days to vacate Unit 9.  Chirayunon did not vacate 
Unit 9, and HNB filed an eviction action.   
HNB filed its circuit court complaint on  April 3, 
2013, asserting the following claims for relief: (1) a 
declaratory judgment that Chirayunon "has no right, 
title, or 
interest" in Unit 9; (2) a writ of possession; and (3) damages 
"in an amount to be proven at trial."  Prior to this appeal, HNB 
filed three motions for partial summary judgment.  The first two 
were granted by the circuit court, but this court, on appeal, 
determined that there were genuine issues of material fact 
precluding summary judgment.   The third was denied by the 
circuit court.  3
The matter proceeded to a jury
-waived trial in July 
2021.  In April 2022, the circuit court entered its FOF/COL, and 
this appeal followed.    
Chirayunon raises the following points of error on 
appeal, contending that the circuit court erred: (1) "by 
concluding that [Chirayunon] never held stock in [KGAI] and thus 
did not have rights as a [KGAI] shareholder to purchase Unit 9"; 
 
3  Haw. Nat'l Bank v. Chirayunon, No. CAAP -14-0000994, 2015 WL 
6080387 (Haw. App. Oct. 15, 2015) ( mem. op.); Haw. Nat'l Bank v. Chirayunon, 
Nos. CAAP-16-0000649 & CAAP-16-0000676, 2020 WL 433368 (Haw. App. Jan. 28, 
2020) (m em. op.). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
(2) "because if [Chirayunon] never held, or held and 
transferred, the [KGAI] stock associated with Unit 9, then the 
party that retained the rights associated with said stock is an 
indispensable party to the instant matter [but] was not added as 
a party to the matter"; (3) "by concluding that the 
'Cancellation Agreement' could have had any effect on 
[Chirayunon's] ownership interest where . . . [Chirayunon's] 
ownership interest had already vested pursuant to the terms of 
the earlier 'Warranty Deed'"; and (4) "by concluding that the 
'Rental Agreements' were valid despite [HNB] presenting the 
agreements to [Chirayunon] under misrepresentations about his 
rights to [Unit 9], or under fraudulent inducement."   
6 
 Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Chirayunon's points of error as follows: 
(1) Chirayunon contends that the circuit court erred 
in determining that he held no shareholder interest in Unit 9.  
Chirayunon specifically challenges 
FOF 31(D)- (G), which states, 
in relevant part, 
31. This court finds no persuasive evidence that  
[Chirayunon]  had a right to occupy Unit 9 after August 31, 
2012 (the expiration of the last  of multiple deadlines to 
buy the unit.)  The court's reasons include:  
 
 . . . .  
 
 D. [Chirayunon] did not have the established  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
7 
 rights of a [KGAI] shareholder because he did not obtain 
consent of [KGAI]  to the 2003 [Agreement of Sale]  so he 
never owned stock .  See Exhibit J -1, the governing document 
of [KGAI]  which requires consent of [KGAI] and bars 
delivery of any stock to an alleged new shareholder unless 
after consent the transaction is registered in the 
corporate books and a new stock certificate is issued.  Any 
purported transfer of a unit without [KGAI']s consent 
(based on majority vote) "shall be null and void and of no 
effect whatsoever."  Id.  
 
 E. Further, in 2007 [KGAI]  expressly  
refused to consent unless [Chirayunon]  bought the unit, 
which [he] never did, and when [KGAI] consented in 2008, it 
was with the express requirement that [Chirayunon] buy the 
unit within 30 days, which [Chirayunon]  failed to do.  This 
failure expressly voided the conditional Consent.  
 
 F. After 8/15/07, when the Board officially  
notified [Chirayunon] regarding the invalid consent for the 
[Agreement of Sale], [Chirayunon]  was clearly on notice he 
had a significant problem with any ownership of Unit 9.  
 
 G. [Chirayunon], with the advice of counsel,  
expressly surrendered any rights he had as a [KGAI] 
shareholder when he signed the Cancellation Agreement in 
May 2011.  
 
(Emphasis added.) 
We review FOF 31  as a mixed question of law and fact 
under the clearly erroneous standard.   
A mixed question of law and fact exists when the conclusion 
is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the 
particular case.   
 
A finding of fact or mixed determination of law and fact is 
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial 
evidence to support the finding or determination, or (2) 
despite substantial evidence to support the finding or 
determination, the appellate court is left with the 
definite and firm conviction that a mistake ha s been made.  
We have defined substantial evidence as credible evidence 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion. 
 
Keep the N. Shore Country v. Bd. of Land 
& Nat. Res., 150 Hawaiʻi 
486, 503-04, 506 P.3d 150, 167-68 (2022) (cleaned up).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
In FOF 31, the circuit court concluded that Chirayunon 
was not a KGAI shareholder, based on evidence introduced at 
trial, which included the testimony from KGAI board members, HNB 
officers, and Chirayunon.   The circuit court, as finder of fact, 
was "free to make all reasonable and rational inferences under 
the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence."  Est. 
of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 4
Hawaiʻi 332, 352, 152 P.3d 
504, 524 (2007) (citation omitted).  It is well-settled that,  
8 
 [i]n cases of conflicting evidence, the credibility of the 
witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are 
within the province of the trial court and, generally, will 
not be disturbed on appeal.  It is not the function of  
appellate courts to second -guess the trier of fact where 
there is substantial evidence in the record to support its 
conclusion.  
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawaiʻi 286, 
296-97, 141 P.3d 459, 469-70 (2006) (citations omitted).  
In light of the testimony and exhibits presented at 
trial, we conclude that there is substantial evidence to support 
the circuit court's determination that Chirayunon was not  a KGAI 
co-op shareholder, or that he otherwise had the rights of a 
shareholder as to Unit 9.   Among other things, the record 
reflects that the KGAI board did not consent to the sale of 
Parker's stock to Chirayunon until August 2008, when it 
 
4  We note that the record does not include any transcript of the 
trial proceedings.  "The burden is upon [the] appellant in an appeal to show 
error by reference to matters in the record, and he or she has the 
responsibility of providing an adequate transcript."  Bettencourt v. 
Bettencourt, 80 Hawai ʻi 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (cleaned up).   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
conditioned its agreement to the sale on Chirayunon's purchase 
of the fee interest in Unit 9 within thirty days.  Chirayunon's 
failure to comply with this express condition rescinded KGAI's 
consent.  Moreover, the record reflects that Chirayunon agreed, 
in the presence of his attorney
 in May 2011, to the  cancellation 
of any interest he may have held in Unit 9.  
9 
 Chirayunon's first point of error lacks merit.  
(2) Chirayunon contends that the circuit court erred 
in entering the judgment in HNB' s favor because it failed to 
join either  the former Unit 9 owner Parker or KGAI, who 
Chirayunon contends would be indispensable parties,  to this 
action.  Although Chirayunon failed to make this argument below, 
"[a]bsence of indispensable parties can be raised at any time 
even by a reviewing court on its own motion."  Haiku Plantations 
Ass'n v. Lono, 56 Haw. 96, 103, 529 P.2d 1, 5 (1974) (citation 
omitted).  Where this issue is raised for the first time on 
appeal, "the appellate court must perform a de novo [ Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP)] Rule 19 analysis, there being 
no analysis from the trial court to review."  Marvin v. 
Pflueger, 127 Hawai ʻi 490, 503, 280 P.3d 88, 101 (2012).   
"Under our precedents, an analysis under HRCP Rule 19 
follows two steps."  Ching v. Case, 145 Hawaiʻi 148, 169, 449 
P.3d 1146, 1167 (2019) (citation omitted).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
10 
 First, courts must determine if the party is a "necessary" 
party under part (a) of th e rule, and if so, whether 
joinder of the party is feasible .  If the court finds that 
a party is necessary and joinder is not feasible, it then 
proceeds to part (b) of the rule, under which it analyzes 
whether "in equity and good conscience" the case can 
continue in the party's absence.  
 
Id. (emphasis added)  (citations omitted).  An absent party is 
"necessary" if one or more of the following factors apply:  
(1) [I]n the person's absence complete relief cannot be 
accorded among those already parties , or (2) the person 
claims an interest relating to the subject of the action  
and is so situated that the disposition of the action in 
the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter impair 
or impede the person's ability to protect that interest or 
(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to a 
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or 
otherwise inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed 
interest.  
 
HRCP Rule 19(a) (emphasis added); see also Civ . Beat L. Ctr. for 
the Pub. Int., Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 144 Hawaiʻi 466, 
485, 445 P.3d 47, 66 (2019) (emphasis added) ( citation omitted).   
We conclude that the HRCP Rule 19 factors are not 
satisfied.  HNB can pursue complete relief from Chirayunon.  
Moreover, neither Parker nor KGAI has an interest to claim in 
this case.  Parker and KGAI are not necessary parties pursuant 
to HRCP Rule 19(a), and Chirayunon's second point of error 
therefore lacks merit.  
(3) Chirayunon next contends that the Cancellation 
Agreement had no effect on his ownership interest because 
Chirayunon's ownership interest "had already vested" under the 
Warranty Deed.  Chirayunon argues that KGAI, which had already 
executed the Warranty Deed in March 20 11, lacked the authority NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
to subsequently execute the Cancellation Agreement with 
Chirayunon in May 2011 .   
11 
 The Warranty Deed, by its plain language, conveyed 
KGAI's rights in Unit 9 to HNB.  The Cancellation Agreement 
between KGAI and Chirayunon, states, in pertinent part,  
[T]he parties . . . do hereby mutually agree that as of the 
Effective Date, the Lease is cancelled and terminated [.] . 
. . Lessee does hereby release, remise and quitclaim unto 
Lessor whatever estate or interest Lessee may have in and 
under the Lease as of the Effective Date so that from and 
after said Effective Date, Lessee shall have no further 
right, title or interest in and to the leasehold estate 
described in the Lease . 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Chirayunon contends that the circuit court erred in 
its FOF 31(L), which reads,  
[Chirayunon]  makes much of the fact that [HNB's] deed in 
lieu of foreclosure should have been executed after the 
Cancellation Agreement.  The documents were clearly 
supposed to be signed in conjunction with each other, but 
were not executed at the same time.  [HNB's] own letter 
states the Cancellation Agreement would come first.  The 
court concludes the documents being signed out of order 
changes nothing under the history and circumstances of this 
case.  First, [Chirayunon] was not a shareholder, having 
failed to obtain consent to the initial [Agreement of Sale]  
in 2003.  Second, in August 2007, [Chirayunon] was 
expressly denied consent for the [Agreement of Sale] by the 
Board.  Third, in August 2008, the Board granted 
[Chirayunon]  consent for a lease, but in the same paragraph 
stated the consent would be automatically rescinded and 
revoked if [Chirayunon] did not buy his unit within 30 days 
of recordation of the consent .  So at least three times 
[Chirayunon]  failed to get the required consent.   Tr. 7/19, 
Ichikawa, p. 123:9 to 128:24.  And fourth, regardless of 
the order the documents were signed in, the clear intent of 
the Cancellation Agreement was in fact to cancel any lease 
while [Chirayunon]  was still being given another 
opportunity to buy the Unit.  Apparently [Chirayunon's]  
argument is that he had a perpetual, non -waivable right to 
buy a fee interest at any time until the bank loan expired, 
and the bank could not foreclose on his interest even if 
the loan was in default.  The court concludes there is no 
support in the evidence for that theory.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
12 
 (Emphasis added.) 
We review FOF 31(L) as a mixed question of law and 
fact under the clearly erroneous standard.  Keep the N. Shore 
Country, 150 Hawai ʻi at 503, 506 P
.3d at 167.  
The circuit court did not clearly err in finding that 
the Cancellation Agreement demonstrated Chirayunon's intent to 
"cancel any lease."  (Emphasis omitted.)  Moreover, there is 
substantial evidence in the record to support the circuit 
court's finding that Chirayunon did not have any shareholder or 
other interests to 
cancel.  Because Chirayunon did not satisfy 
the KGAI board's conditions, the KGAI board's conditional 
approval in 2008 was rescinded.  The circuit court did not err 
in finding that the 
board never approved the transfer of 
Parker's stock to Chirayunon.   
Chirayunon's third point of error lacks merit.   
(4) Chirayunon contends that the circuit court erred 
in concluding that 
his rental agreements with HNB were valid 
because he was fraudulently induced to enter into those 
agreements.   
To constitute  fraudulent inducement sufficient to 
invalidate the terms of a contract, there must be (1) a 
representation of material fact, (2) made for the purpose 
of inducing the other party to act, (3) known to be false 
but reasonably believed true by the other party, and (4) 
upon which the other party relies 
and acts to his or her 
damage.   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawaiʻ i 149, 162-
63, 73 P.3d 687, 700- 01 (2003) (cleaned up).  The party 
asserting fraud "must prove that their reliance . . . was 
reasonable."  Id. at 163, 73 P.3d at 701.  "[T]he question of 
whether one has acted reasonably under the circumstances is for 
the trier of fact to determine."  Id. (citations omitted).  
13 
 Here, Chirayunon appears to argue that he was 
fraudulently induced to "accept terms as a renter with [HNB] as 
landlord" based on HNB's misrepresentation that this was 
necessary "for [Chirayunon] to remain occupying [Unit 9]."  
Chirayunon contends that HNB misrepresented his rights, as a 
KGAI "shareholder," which "guaranteed [him] a right to a 
proprietary lease to reside in Unit 9."  
The circuit court addressed and rejected Chirayunon's 
claims of misrepresentation in the  following conclusions of law 
(COLs): 
13. 
A claim of duress by a party represented by 
counsel during the events at issue is implausible [.] . . . 
The court concludes that given counsel's participation and 
even physical presence when the cancellation Agreement was 
signed, the claim that this agreement was signed under 
duress is not credible . 
 
14. . . . "[D]uress" during the execution of the 
Rental Agreement and Cancellation Agreement was not a 
material issue .  Even if these documents (Exhibits J -14 and 
J-15) were nullified or otherwise disregarded as having 
been procured under duress, it does not affirmatively 
create for [Chirayunon] a fee simple interest in Unit 9.   
At best, [Chirayunon] had a contingent right in a single 
share of a dissolved Co -Op and an expired proprietary 
lease. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
14 
 15. [Chirayunon's] title claims to Unit 9 as former 
shareholder of the Co -Op also are not valid because the Co -
Op never consented to [Chirayunon's] acquisition of the 
stock from Parker, as required by the Co -Op's Articles of 
Association, and never actually succeeded to the rights of 
a shareholder in the Co -Op. 
 
16. Even if [Chirayunon] was a shareholder, 
[Chirayunon's] execution of the Cancellation Agreement 
effectively quitclaimed any of [Chirayunon's] potential 
shareholder interests in Unit 9.  
 
17. Mr. Yoshik ami's alleged inducement of 
[Chirayunon] to enter into the Cancellation Agreement and 
Rental Agreement does not constitute duress since 
[Chirayunon] had other options.  Instead of signing the 
Cancellation Agreement and Rental Agreement, [Chirayunon] 
had years to obtain financing to buy the fee simple 
interest to Unit 9.  He could promptly assert his alleged 
rights in any eviction proceeding.  
 
(Emphasis added.)  
The above COLs are unchallenged by Chirayunon, and, 
moreover, are supported by the circuit court's FOFs and the 
record evidence.  
See Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. 
Co., 74 Haw. 85, 125, 839 P.2d 10, 31 (1992) (recognizing that 
an unchallenged COL may be treated as binding on the appellate 
court); see also Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce
, 105 Hawai ʻi 445, 
453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (
2004) (COLs are "freely reviewable" on 
appeal, and a COL "that is supported by the trial court's FOFs 
and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will 
not be overturned." (cleaned up)).   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's FOF/COL and Final Judgment.  
15 
 DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ʻi, July 3 , 2025. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew K. Yoshida,  
for Defendant-Appellant.  
 
Leroy E. Colombe, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Presiding Judge  
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge
 