 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NOS. CAAP-19-0000816 AND CAAP-19-0000840 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
LAURIE A. DARGIS, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 1CPC-19-0000056) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
In this consolidated appeal, Plaintiff-Appellant State 
of 
Hawai# i (State) appeals from the "Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Second Motion 
to Suppress Evidence" (Order Granting Motion to Suppress
) entered 
on October 23, 2019,1 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(Circuit Court).2 
On January 11, 2019, the State charged Defendant-
Appellee Laurie A. Dargis (Dargis) by Complaint with: Promoting a 
Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised 
1 The Circuit Court filed an identical Order Granting Motion to
Suppress on November 7, 2019 which the State appealed in CAAP-19-0000840. This
court consolidated the appeals under CAAP-19-0000816. 
2 The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided.  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243 (2014)3 (Count I), and Promoting a 
Detrimental Drug in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 712-
1249 (2014)4 (Count II).5 
On appeal, the State contends the Circuit Court erred: 
(1) by suppressing the "ice pipe" found in open view and the container of marijuana found in plain view in Dargis's vehicle because the seizure of that evidence did not require a search warrant, and even if it did, that evidence would have been inevitably seized pursuant to a valid warrant; and (2) in its Conclusions of Law (COL) 4, COL 5, COL 10, COL 11, and COL 12. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the Circuit 
Court's Order Granting Motion to Suppress.
I. Background 
On May 28, 2019, Dargis filed a Motion to Suppress 
Evidence (First Motion to Suppress) arguing that there had been a 
lack of reasonable suspicion for the stop of her vehicle. On 
June 28, 2019, Honolulu Police Department Officer Jarrett Atkins (Officer Atkins) testified at the hearing on Dargis's First 
Motion to Suppress, after which the Circuit Court denied the 
motion, finding there was reasonable suspicion for the stop of the vehicle. 
On August 5, 2019, Dargis filed a Second Motion to 
Suppress Evidence (Second Motion to Suppress). In her memorandum 
3 HRS § 712-1243 provides, in relevant part: 
Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous drug in the
third degree if the person knowingly possesses any dangerous drugin any amount. 
4 HRS § 712-1249 provides, in relevant part: 
Promoting a detrimental drug in the third degree. (1)
A person commits the offense of promoting a detrimental drugin the third degree if the person knowingly possesses anymarijuana or any Schedule V substance in any amount. 
5 Dargis's co-defendant Gerry K. Kawaguchi ( Kawaguchi ), who is not a
party in this appeal, was charged with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the FirstDegree in violation of HRS § 712-1241(1)(a)(i) ( Count III ). 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in support of her Second Motion to Suppress, Dargis argued, inter 
alia, that Officer Atkins illegally searched her vehicle without first obtaining a warrant because there were no exigent circumstances to justify the warrantless search. The parties stipulated to the June 28, 2019 testimony by Officer Atkins and no witnesses testified at the hearing on Dargis's Second Motion to Suppress. 
After a hearing on September 18, 2019, the Circuit 
Court entered its Order Granting Motion to Suppress, in which it held there were no exigent circumstances and a search warrant was required to seize the evidence from Dargis's vehicle. The Circuit Court thus suppressed the evidence. The Circuit Court's findings of fact in its Order Granting Motion to Suppress are not challenged and are therefore binding on appeal. Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai# i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 
(2002). The unchallenged findings state in pertinent part: 
8. The following information was provided by Officer Atkins
in his previous testimony on June 28, 2019: 
a. On January 6, 2019, at approximately 3:[5]4 a.m.,6 
Officer Atkins was on duty and on patrol in his markedblue and white vehicle traveling on KamehamehaHighway. 
b. While on patrol, Officer Atkins noticed a vehicle
parked along the area of 56-565 Kamehameha Highway andapproached the vehicle. 
c. When Officer Atkins was approximately 15 feet away
from the vehicle he noticed that the vehicle was a green Honda that he had observed a few days prior atKahana Bay. 
d. Officer Atkins related that a few days prior while
he had been transporting a prisoner to the KaneohePolice Station, Officer Atkins had observed a greenHonda parked at Kahana Bay. Per Officer Atkins therewere a number of abandoned cars in the area of Kahana Bay. Officer Atkins was familiar with Defendant Dargisand observed her next to the green Honda. OfficerAtkins slowed down and ran the license plate of thegreen Honda. Officer Atkins learned that the greenHonda had an expired safety check and vehicle tax. 
6 The Circuit Court's findings incorrectly state the time was
approximately 3:24 a.m., which the parties concede is a typographical error. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
e. On January 6, 2019, after Officer Atkins realized
that the green Honda was the same that he had seen andrun the plate a few days prior, Officer Atkins pulledhis vehicle to a stop approximately 10 feet from thegreen Honda. Officer Atkins car was parked facing thefront of the green Honda. Officer Atkins headlightswere on as his car approached the green Honda and hisheadlights remained on and were facing the driver’sdoor area when he parked his vehicle. 
f. Prior to getting out of his vehicle, Office Atkins
confirmed that the green Honda had expired vehicle taxand safety. Officer Atkins then got out of his car andapproached the green Honda. As he approached the greenHonda, Officer Atkins observed Defendant Dargis in thedriver seat of the vehicle ignite a lighter with herright hand and put the lighter to the bulbous end of aglass pipe that was pressed to her lips and in herleft hand. Officer Atkins further observed white residue in the pipe and smoke emit from the bulbousend of the pipe. 
g. Upon becoming aware of Officer Atkins, Defendant
Dargis dropped the pipe to the floor of the vehicle. 
h. Officer Atkins reached the door of the vehicle and 
order [sic] Defendant Dargis out of the vehicle. Hetook Defendant Dargis to the rear of the vehicle andarrested her for Promoting a Dangerous Drug in theThird Degree. 
i. After Defendant Dargis exited the vehicle, Officer
Atkins observed the pipe on the floor of the vehiclewhere Defendant Dargis's feet had been in the vehicle. 
j. Officer Atkins then ordered the passenger, co-
Defendant Gerry Kawaguchi, out of the vehicle. 
k. After the defendants were out of the vehicle,
Officer Atkins retrieved the pipe that he had observedDefendant Dargis drop onto the floor of the vehicle. 
l. As he was retrieving the pipe, Officer Atkins
observed and recovered two other items from the floor of the vehicle: a clear glass tube with a brokenbulbous end and a jar that contained a green leafysubstance which Officer Atkins identified as marijuana.
II. Standard of Review 
We review the circuit court's ruling on a motion to suppressde novo to determine whether the ruling was right or wrong.The circuit court's conclusions of law underlying its rulingon a motion to suppress are also reviewed de novo under theright/wrong standard. Under the right/wrong standard, weexamine the facts and answer the question without beingrequired to give any weight to the trial court's answer toit. 
State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai# i 472, 480, 32 P.3d 116, 124 (App. 
2001) (quotation marks and citations omitted). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, findings of fact are reviewed under 
the clearly erroneous standard, and will not be set aside on
appeal unless they are determined to be clearly erroneous. Afinding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the recordlacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, theappellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been made. 
Id. at 480-81, 32 P.3d at 124-25 (quotation marks and citations 
omitted) (format altered).
III. Discussion 
A. Warrant Requirement and Legally Recognized Exceptions 
The United States Supreme Court and the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court have recognized that although an automobile, because of its mobility, may be treated less stringently than a private residence for Fourth Amendment purposes, a search and seizure involving a motor vehicle is still subject to the warrant requirement. State v. Elliott, 61 Haw. 492, 494, 605 P.2d 930, 
932 (1980) (citing Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443 (1971)). Further, it is well established that any warrantless search of a constitutionally protected area, such as an automobile, is presumptively unreasonable unless there is both probable cause and a legally recognized exception to the warrant requirement. State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i 87, 102, 997 P.2d 13, 
28 (2000). 
There is no dispute that probable cause was present in 
this case. The dispute in this case centers on whether a search warrant for the Honda was required before the subject items were seized from the vehicle. In support of its contention that a warrant was not required, the State relies on State v. Chong, 52 Haw. 226, 473 P.2d 567 (1970) and argues that the facts in Chong and this case are similar. Specifically, the State argues that in Chong, the police knew that the defendants had a reputation for being narcotic users. 52 Haw. at 228, 473 P.2d at 569. The police spotted the defendants and when they pulled up alongside the defendants' vehicle, Mrs. Chong was holding an eyedropper. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. A few seconds later, Mrs. Chong threw the eyedropper out of 
the vehicle and swallowed something she had in her hand. Id.
The police then arrested the defendants, searched the vehicle, 
and found heroin and drug paraphernalia. Id. at 229, 473 P.2d at 
570. The exception to the warrant requirement articulated in 
Chong was that a limited warrantless search is constitutionally permissible incident to an arrest based upon probable cause.
7 
Id. (emphasis added). 
In this case, the State did not assert the warrant 
exception that is articulated in Chong. Instead, in its opposition to Dargis's Second Motion to Suppress, the State argued that the police action was justified at its inception (apparently referring to Officer Atkins' investigation of Dargis's vehicle on the side of the road), and that "the search was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances that justified the interference in the first place." The State's opposition then appears to make an argument based on Officer Atkins seeing Dargis in the vehicle with drug paraphernalia and making confusing references to both "open view" and "plain view" without distinguishing between the two.
8 Similarly, at the 
hearing on September 18, 2019, the State argued that, after Officer Atkins saw Dargis through a vehicle window, lighting what appeared to be a methamphetamine pipe, he had observed a crime, and had probable cause "to intrude upon the defendant's 
7 The State mentions, for the first time on appeal, that a search
conducted incident to a proper arrest is constitutional, but does not argue
that exception as being applicable in this case. Thus, we do not addresswhether the search of Dargis's vehicle was constitutionally valid as a searchconducted incident to a proper arrest. See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate
Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived"); see
also, State v. Moses, 102 Hawai #i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("[a]s a
general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argumentwill be deemed to have been waived on appeal"). 
8 In its Memorandum in "Opposition to [Dargis's Second Motion to
Suppress]," the State referred to the open and plain view doctrinesinterchangeably. Although the State provided a brief explanation of the openview doctrine, it did not explain the plain view doctrine or how the twodoctrines differ. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
situation," order her out of the vehicle and search for the pipe 
he saw her drop. The State also attempted to address the open and plain view exceptions to the warrant requirement, apparently arguing that the open view doctrine allowed Officer Atkins to search the vehicle, without a warrant, for the pipe he had seen Dargis drop, and that the marijuana was found based on the officer's plain view. The State also asserted Chong allowed Officer Atkins to search the car without a warrant, arguing that in Chong, officers were allowed to make a vehicle search without a warrant based only on observing furtive suspicious behavior. On appeal, the State continues to argue the pipe was found based on the open view doctrine, the marijuana was found in plain view, and that Chong supports its position that Officer Atkins did not require a warrant. 
Although the underlying facts in Chong may be somewhat 
similar to the facts of this case, Chong is inapposite because the Hawai# i Supreme Court did not consider the open or plain view 
doctrines in Chong. Further, the State argues for an incorrect reading of Chong. During the September 18, 2019 hearing, the State argued that: 
the facts in -- Chong is not a plain view, it's acting --
it's talking about whether it's okay to conduct a
warrantless search. 
And in Chong , they were acting furtive, they were
acting suspicious, and they were dropping, like, eye dropsin their eyes, and based just on those -- that basis, theywere permitted to go inside the car and do a search of thecar. 
. . . . 
[The State:] Okay, but for the initial going into the car toretrieve what [the police] just observed was a crime in the
commission under Chong , a warrantless search is permitted,
going into the car without a warrant if you see what -- whatthey just saw. And again, in Chong , they were permitted to
go into the car without a warrant based on furtive
suspicion. 
On appeal, the State argues for a similarly incorrect reading of 
Chong, that a warrantless search of a constitutionally protected area is permitted based solely on suspicion by the police that a crime had been committed or to retrieve suspected contraband. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 This argument is contrary to the holding in Chong and is without 
merit. 
The State also argues the search of Dargis's vehicle is 
valid based on Hawai# i Supreme Court decisions in State v. 
Elliott, 61 Haw. 492, 605 P.2d 930 (1980), State v. Agnasan, 62 Haw. 252, 614 P.2d 393 (1980), and State v. Powell, 61 Haw. 316, 603 P.2d 143 (1979). However, these cases are distinguishable. In both Elliot, 61 Haw. at 497-98, 605 P.2d at 934, and Agnasan, 
62 Haw. at 255-56, 614 P.2d at 395-96, the Hawai# i Supreme Court 
held that both probable cause and exigent circumstances were present to justify the immediate warrantless search of a defendant's vehicle. The Hawai# i Supreme Court did not consider 
the open or plain view doctrines in Elliott or Agnasan. In Powell, the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that the plain view 
doctrine justified the seizure of evidence from the defendant's vehicle. 61 Haw. at 325, 603 P.2d at 149-50. 
Here, however, the 
State does not explain how Powell is relevant to this case. Powell
 is inapplicable in supporting the State's position that 
the open view doctrine allowed Officer Atkins to initially search the vehicle for the ice pipe. Thus, Powell is unhelpful to the State in justifying Officer Atkins initially searching the vehicle, such that the plain view doctrine could apply to his discovery of the marijuana. Accordingly, Elliott, Agnasan, and Powell are inapposite.
B. Plain View and Open View 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has distinguished between the 
plain view doctrine and open view doctrine as follows: 
In the plain view situation, the view takes place after  an 
intrusion into activities or areas as to which there is a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. The officer has alreadyintruded, and, if his or her intrusion is justified, theobjects in plain view, sighted inadvertently, will beadmissible. 
In the open view situation, however, the observation takes
place from a non-intrusive vantage point. The governmentalagent is either on the outside looking outside or on theoutside looking inside at that which is knowingly exposed tothe public. The object under observation is not within thescope of the constitution. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai# i 308, 312-13, 893 P.2d 159, 163-64 
(1995) (brackets and citation omitted). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court also explained that for open 
view sightings: 
the warrantless seizure of the evidence in question depends
on whether the item is in a constitutionally protected area.If the evidence is not in an area where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, that is, if it is locatedin a common space, such evidence is subject to seizure bythe governmental agent who spots it, without the necessityof a warrant or exigent circumstances. . . . 
However, if the evidence in question is in open view in an
area in which the evidence retains its constitutional protection, a warrant is required or exigent circumstancesmust exist before the object may be seized. 
Id. at 313, 893 P.2d at 164 (emphasis added). 
With respect to seizure of evidence under the plain 
view doctrine, three factors are required: "(1) prior 
justification for the intrusion; (2) inadvertent discovery; and (3) probable cause to believe the item is evidence of a crime or contraband." Id. at 314, 893 P.2d at 165. Under the plain view 
doctrine, once a warrantless intrusion is justified and the police are placed in plain view of the evidence, exigent circumstances are not necessary to seize the evidence. Id. at 
316, 893 P.2d at 167. 
Here, the Circuit Court correctly concluded that the 
open view doctrine applies to the "ice pipe" in Dargis's hand, which Officer Atkins observed while outside the vehicle. Dargis then dropped the pipe, Officer Atkins ordered her to exit the vehicle, took her to the rear of the vehicle and arrested her. At some point after Dargis exited the vehicle, Officer Atkins observed the pipe on the floor of the vehicle where Dargis's feet had been.
9 Under the open view doctrine, exigent circumstances 
9 Among its various positions on appeal, the State claims the pipe on
the floor was "easily visible through the driver's-side window or the
windshield to any passerby that had bothered to look into the car[,]" and thatthe pipe had been discovered in open view. The State apparently agrees thatthe open view doctrine applies to the pipe and, in any event, does notchallenge COL 2 in which the Circuit Court concluded that the open viewdoctrine applies given Officer Atkins being outside of the vehicle when heobserved the pipe with residue in Dargis's hand. Further, the State does notargue that Officer Atkins saw the pipe in plain view while Dargis exited the
(continued...) 
9 9(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were required before seizing the pipe from Dargis's vehicle 
without a warrant. See State v. Kapoi, 64 Haw. 130, 141, 637 
P.2d 1105, 1114 (1981) ("even the 'open view' of possible contraband, without more, furnished no basis for its seizure without a warrant. For 'no amount of probable cause can justify a warrantless search or seizure absent exigent circumstances.'" (quoting Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 468)). 
For purposes of the open view doctrine, the State had 
the burden to establish exigent circumstances to seize items without a search warrant. State v. Ramos-Saunders, 135 Hawai# i 
299, 306, 349 P.3d 406, 413 (App. 2015). The State failed to provide any evidence or argument to the Circuit Court that exigent circumstances existed to allow the warrantless search of the vehicle. 
At the hearing on Dargis's Second Motion to 
Suppress, the parties stipulated to the testimony by Officer Atkins from the hearing on Dargis's First Motion to Suppress, during which Officer Atkins mainly testified as to whether there had been reasonable suspicion for the stop of the vehicle. During the hearing on Dargis's Second Motion to Suppress, the Circuit Court asked the State whether Officer Atkins should have obtained either a warrant or needed exigent circumstances to seize the pipe under the open view doctrine and the State replied, "[it] would not agree with that under the Chong case." The State then continued to rely on an incorrect reading of Chong
, as discussed above, and argued that neither a search 
warrant nor exigent circumstances were required to search the vehicle. Thus, the State waived any argument that there were exigent circumstances. See Moses, 102 Hawai# i at 456, 77 P.3d at 
947 ("[a]s a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal"). 
vehicle. 
Therefore, we consider the pipe under the open view doctrine. See
HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Similarly, the State's contention that the evidence 
from Dargis's vehicle would have been inevitably seized was not  
raised before the Circuit Court and is waived on appeal.   Id. 
C.  The Circuit Court's Conclusions of Law 
Finally, the State argues that the Circuit Court erred 
in concluding there were no exigent circumstances and challenges 
the Circuit Court's COLs 4, 5, 10, 11, and 12.  The State 10
10 The Circuit Court numbered its COLs from 1 through 5, included
subsections "a" through "e" for COL 5, then resumed numbering the remaining
COLs starting from 10. The challenged COLs state: 
4. In regard to exigent circumstances, no testimony wasprovided by Officer Atkins that Defendant Dargis's car maybe moved or that the pipe observed by Officer Atkins mightbe removed or destroyed before a warrant could be obtained. 
5. The following supported Defendant's argument that no
exigent circumstances existed: 
a. The car was parked along Kamehameha Highway in
Kahuku, which is arguably a rural area of the island of Oahuwhich limited the risk of the car or the evidence beingremoved. 
b. At approximately 4 a.m. in the morning there was
not a lot of traffic or people in the area who could havedisturbed the car. 
c. The defendants were alone in the vehicle and both 
were arrested. No one else at the time had access to the car. 
d. There was no testimony presented that the pipe was
visible in the car such that someone would be tempted toremove it. 
e. No evidence was presented that an officer could not
have been posted to watch over the car while a warrant wasobtained. 
10. There was no realistic threat that the evidence would be 
lost while Officer Atkins sought a warrant to search thecar. 
11. While it may have been inconvenient to obtain a warrant,
such inconvenience does not justify a violation ofDefendant's right to be free from an illegal search andseizure. 
12. The pipe was illegally seized and therefore is excluded
from evidence. The marijuana that was located during theseizure of the pipe is "fruit of the poisonous tree" and isalso excluded from evidence. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends that there is no evidence to support the majority of the 
Circuit Court's COLs and that the COLs are speculative.11 
We note that the Circuit Court's determinations in COLs 
5 and 10 appear to be more akin to findings of fact. Nevertheless, even if we assume the record lacks substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's findings in this regard, it was the State's burden to prove exigent circumstances. As the Hawai# i Supreme Court has explained, an exigent circumstance 
exists when the demands of the occasion reasonably call for
an immediate police response. More specifically, it includessituations presenting an immediate danger to life or seriousinjury or an immediate threatened removal or destruction ofevidence. However, the burden, of course, is upon thegovernment to prove the justification, and whether therequisite conditions exist is to be measured from thetotality of the circumstances. And in seeking to meet thisburden, the police must be able to point to specific andarticulable facts from which it may be determined that theaction they took was necessitated by the exigencies of thesituation. 
Ramos-Saunders, 135 Hawai# i at 306, 349 P.3d at 413 (emphases 
added) (ellipses omitted) (quoting Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i at 103, 
997 P.2d at 29). As discussed above, the State waived its 
arguments in the Circuit Court whether exigent circumstances were present in this case. 
The State did not offer any argument that 
exigent circumstances were present at the time Officer Atkins conducted a warrantless search of Dargis's vehicle and Officer Atkins did not provide any testimony that his search was necessitated by the exigencies of the situation. 
Thus, the State did not meet its burden of establishing 
exigent circumstances to justify the warrantless search of the vehicle. Therefore, even if the record lacks evidence in support of COLs 5 and 10, the pertinent rulings in COLs 4, 11, and 12 are not wrong. 
11 For example, the State argues there is no evidence to support the
Circuit Court's COL 5.c., that after Dargis and Kawaguchi were arrested, no
one else at the time had access to the car and thus, COL 5.c. is "purespeculation and is clearly erroneous." 
The State also argues COL 5.a. is erroneous because the State of Hawai #i 
has a higher motor vehicle theft rate than the rest of the United States onaverage and that an automobile in a less populated area is arguably easier tobreak into. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the Order Granting Motion to 
Suppress entered on October 23, 2019, by the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeBrian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Phyllis J. Hironaka, 
Deputy Public Defender, for Defendant-Appellee. 
13 