NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0005434 and CAAP-13-0005679
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-0103
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CATHERINE C. RUSSELL, Defendant-Appellant
CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-0346
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
BLADE MICHAEL WALSH, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Ginoza, and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Catherine C. Russell (Russell) and Defendant-
Appellant Blade Michael Walsh (Walsh) by complaint, in separate
cases, with Obstructing Government Operations, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 710-1010(1)(a) (2014).1  The
1HRS § 710-1010(1)(a) provides:
(1) A person commits the offense of obstructing
government operations if, by using or threatening to
use violence, force, or physical interference or
obstacle, the person intentionally obstructs, impairs,
or hinders:
(a) The performance of a governmental function by
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
charges against Russell and Walsh stemmed from their actions in
chaining themselves and a third person together and refusing to
leave a tent that had been designated for removal pursuant to the
City and County of Honolulu's Stored Property Ordinance, Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) Chapter 29, Article 19.2  Russell's
and Walsh's cases were consolidated for a jury trial.  The jury
found Russell and Walsh guilty as charged.  The Circuit Court of
the First Circuit (Circuit Court)3 sentenced Russell to sixty
days of imprisonment and Walsh to forty-five days of
imprisonment.  Russell and Walsh separately appealed from their
respective Judgments of Conviction and Sentence, and we
1(...continued)
a public servant acting under color of the
public servant's official authority[.]
2ROH § 29-19.3 (1990 & Supp. No. 20, 1-2012) provides:
(a) No person shall store personal property on public
property. All stored personal property may be
impounded by the city. In the event personal
property placed on public property interferes with
the safe or orderly management of the premises or
poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare
of the public, it may be impounded at any time by
the city.
(b) Personal property placed on public property shall
be deemed to be stored personal property if it has
not been removed from public property within
twenty-four hours of service of the written notice
required by Section 29-19.4, which requires such
removal, and the city may cause the removal and
impoundment of such stored personal property;
provided that moving the personal property to
another location on public property shall not be
considered to be removing the personal property
from public property; and provided further that
this section shall not apply to personal property
that, pursuant to statute, ordinance, permit,
regulation, or other authorization by the city or
state, is placed on property that is owned or
controlled by the city.
3The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
consolidated their appeals.
On appeal, Russell contends that the Circuit Court: (1)
erred in refusing to admit a copy of the Stored Property
Ordinance into evidence; (2) erred in refusing her request to
instruct the jury on the choice-of-evils defense; and (3) abused
its discretion in denying her motion for a mistrial, which was
based on alleged prosecutorial misconduct for remarks made by the
prosecutor during closing argument.
Walsh contends that: (1) the Circuit Court erred in
denying his pretrial motion to dismiss; (2) the Circuit Court
erred in preventing him from introducing relevant state of mind
evidence at trial; (3) there was insufficient evidence to support
his conviction; (4) because the evidence was insufficient,
reprosecution should be barred by double jeopardy; (5) the
Circuit Court erred in failing to conduct individual voir dire of
the jury panel; (6) the jury instructions were deficient for
failing to include a specific unanimity instruction; and (7) the
prosecutor's remarks during closing argument constituted
prosecutorial misconduct and the Circuit Court's curative
instruction was defective.
As explained below, we affirm Russell's conviction, and
we vacate Walsh's conviction and remand Walsh's case for a new
trial.
BACKGROUND
I.
The Stored Property Ordinance prohibits the storage of
personal property on public property, and it establishes
procedures for providing 24-hour notice that stored personal
property will be impounded if not removed, impoundment and
storage of property that is not removed, and repossession of
impounded property by its owner or disposal of such property. 
ROH Chapter 29, Article 19.
In this case, on the morning of September 25, 2012,
employees of the City and County of Honolulu (City) affixed
removal notices to personal property deemed to be improperly
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
stored in Thomas Square Park, including a red tent owned by
Russell.  The removal notice on Russell's tent stated that
"PERSONAL PROPERTY STORED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY SHALL BE IMPOUNDED
IF NOT REMOVED WITHIN 24 HOURS." 
When they arrived at Thomas Square Park the following
day, City workers began the process of impounding property, which
had been tagged with removal notices the previous day, that had
not been removed.  The removal notice that had been posted on
Russell's tent was gone, and a sign reading "NO TRESPASSING" had
been posted on the front of the tent.  When City enforcement
personnel approached the tent, they found that its zipper was
closed and secured with a padlock from the outside.
After the padlock was removed and the tent's zipper was
being opened, a voice from inside the tent stated "No
trespassing.  I do not consent to your entry."  Once the tent's
door was opened, the City workers discovered three people inside
the tent: Russell, Walsh, and another woman.  The three had used
chains covered by PVC pipes to bind themselves together and to a
wooden pallet on the floor of the tent.  The use of the PVC pipes
made it difficult to safely cut and remove the chains.4
City Housing Coordinator, Trish Morikawa (Morikawa),
who was present to coordinate the various agencies involved in
the Stored Property Ordinance enforcement process, approached the
tent and asked Russell, Walsh, and the other occupant three times
to vacate the tent so that the enforcement action could proceed. 
Morikawa recognized Russell and Walsh from past encounters at
Thomas Square Park.  Morikawa told Russell and Walsh:
I'm going to ask you folks three times nicely.  We're doing
stored property ordinance enforcement, so we're asking you
to get out of the tent so that we can conduct the
enforcement.  If you don't leave the tent, you're gonna be
arrested for obstructing governmental operations.
During Morikawa's second request for Russell and Walsh
4This apparatus/technique was referred to as the "sleeping
dragon" at trial. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to exit the tent, Russell responded "and I'm going to tell you
no."  Russell also told Morikawa, "You're violating the
constitution, and you're tormenting the houseless population, and
for that, you are despicable[.]"  During Morikawa's third
request, Russell and Walsh began chanting "Fight, fight, fight. 
Housing is a human right."  Neither Russell nor Walsh attempted
to exit the tent or remove the apparatus binding them together in
response to Morikawa's requests, and Morikawa turned the matter
over to the police.
Corporal Kevin Nakano (Nakano) of the Honolulu Police
Department (HPD) approached Russell and Walsh and asked them to
exit the tent voluntarily, but they refused, and Russell
responded by stating her belief that the City's actions pursuant
to the Stored Property Ordinance were unconstitutional.  When
Nakano again asked Russell and Walsh if they would cooperate,
both refused to move from the tent or remove the apparatus
binding them together.   
An ambulance, the fire department, and other HPD
officers were called to the scene to assess the situation and
determine whether the apparatus could be removed without causing
injury.  The fire department determined that a special team would
need to be assembled to safely remove the apparatus.  The HPD
also concluded that it would be "too intrusive or dangerous to
try and cut the device off" and "decided to pull [their] units
back."  Because Russell, Walsh, and the third person remained in
the tent bound together with the apparatus, the enforcement crew
was unable to impound the tent.  The crew was delayed at Thomas
Square Park for about an hour by the actions of Russell and
Walsh, and the crew left for another site without impounding
Russell's tent.  If the tent had been unoccupied, it would have
only taken "[a] couple of minutes" for the crew to impound it. 
II.
Both Russell and Walsh testified at trial.  Russell
testified that she moved to Hawai# i from Chicago in June of 2012,
expecting to get a job, which fell through.  While in Chicago,
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
she participated in Occupy Chicago protests.  Upon arriving in
Honolulu, Russell associated with the De-Occupy Honolulu movement
and began living in Thomas Square Park.  Russell testified that
during prior Stored Property Ordinance enforcement actions, City
employees had seized her tent and property in her tent without
complying with the requirements of the Stored Property Ordinance. 
She also experienced difficulty reclaiming her property that had
been impounded and had not been able to recover all of such
property.  Russell said that during prior enforcement actions,
the City had improperly discarded property and that she knew of
people who had lost property removed by the City.   
Russell testified that as a result of these prior
experiences, she was afraid she would lose her tent and other
personal property if she allowed them to be taken by the City
workers on the day in question.  She stated that her goal on that
day was not to obstruct the City enforcement crew, but to protect
her property.   
Walsh testified that he was affiliated with the De-
Occupy Honolulu movement and occasionally slept overnight at
Thomas Square Park.  Walsh stated that he decided to stay with
Russell in her tent and refused to leave in order to protest
homelessness and help Russell protect her property.  
DISCUSSION
I.
We first address the points of error raised by Russell
in her appeal.
A.
Russell contends that the Circuit Court erred in
refusing to admit a copy of the Stored Property Ordinance into
evidence as an exhibit.  We conclude that Russell is not entitled
to relief based on this claim.
During trial, Russell sought to enter a copy of the
Stored Property Ordinance into evidence.  The Circuit Court
denied this request, stating that the exhibit "creates an issue
of law" and that the jury's role was to decide facts and not to
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
interpret the law.5  Russell sought the admission of the Stored
Property Ordinance to show that the City was not complying with
the requirements of the ordinance for impounding and storing
property.  She contends that the admission of the ordinance would
have supported her claim that the reason she refused to leave her
tent was to protect her property because she knew from prior
experience of the City's noncompliance with the ordinance. 
Russell argues that the Circuit Court erred in refusing to admit
the ordinance as evidence because it was relevant to her state of
mind and that her interpretation of the ordinance was relevant to
her mistake of fact defense. 
At the outset, we note that the charged offense of
Obstructing Government Operations does not require proof that the
government operations being obstructed were lawful.  See State v.
Line, 121 Hawai #i 74, 82, 214 P.3d 613, 621 (2009) ("[C]ontrary
to Petitioner's argument, it would appear that it is not required
that a government action be only lawful for a violation of HRS §
710–1010 to occur.").  In concluding that obstruction of unlawful
government operations may violate HRS § 710–1010, the Hawai #i
Supreme Court cited the commentary to the analogous Model Penal
Code provision which "specifies that an actor will be liable for
obstruction even if the government function involved is
unlawful ."  Id.  (emphasis in original) (citing Model Penal Code
& Commentaries, Part II § 242.1 (Comment 7), American Law
Institute (1980). 
Assuming that the Stored Property Ordinance was
arguably relevant to Russell's state of mind, we conclude that
the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to
5The State objected to the introduction of the Stored
Property Ordinance as an exhibit when offered by Russell even
though the State itself had earlier moved to introduce the Stored
Property Ordinance as an exhibit.  The Circuit Court also denied
the State's request to introduce the ordinance as an exhibit. 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
admit it.6  Russell was permitted to testify that she believed,
based on her prior experiences, that City workers were violating
the ordinance in a manner which resulted in the improper loss or
destruction of property seized.  Thus, the introduction of the
ordinance was not necessary for Russell to present her claim that
her actions in refusing to leave her tent were motivated by and
done with the goal of protecting her property, and not with the
intent to obstruct, impair, or hinder the enforcement of the
ordinance by City workers.  As the Circuit Court noted, the role
of the jury is to find facts and not to interpret the law.  The
Circuit Court could reasonably have determined that the probative
value of introducing the ordinance as an exhibit was
substantially outweighed by the danger of confusion of the issues
or misleading the jury.  See Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule
403 (2016). 
In any event, we conclude that any error in the Circuit
Court's failure to admit the ordinance was harmless.  The State
presented compelling evidence of Russell's guilt.  There was
undisputed evidence that on the previous day, the City had posted
a removal notice on the tent, which warned that the tent would be
impounded if not removed within 24 hours.  The next day, the
notice had been removed and replaced with a no trespassing sign;
a padlock had been placed on the zipper that opened the tent; and
Russell, Walsh, and another person were inside bound together
with an apparatus consisting of PVC pipes and chains.  The State
introduced a videotape which captured the City's multiple
requests to Russell to leave the tent and Russell's persistent
refusal.  The videotape showed Russell, Walsh, and the third
person sitting bound together in Russell's tent; City Housing
Coordinator Morikawa informing Russell that the City workers were
there to enforce the Stored Property Ordinance and asking Russell
6Russell does not explain why the introduction of the Stored
Property Ordinance was relevant to a mistake of fact defense. 
Her misinterpretation of the ordinance would have been a mistake
of law, not a mistake of fact. 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
three times to leave the tent so the workers could proceed with
their enforcement actions; and Russell's responses which
demonstrated her deliberate refusal to leave the tent.  The
videotape also showed HPD Corporal Nakano's efforts to have
Russell leave the tent voluntarily, and Russell's refusal.  The
State presented undisputed evidence that Russell's actions
delayed and prevented City workers from impounding her tent, and
that the City workers left Thomas Square Park without impounding
the tent.
Russell testified that her goal was to protect her
property, and not to interfere with the government's operations. 
However, instead of removing her property after the 24-hour
removal notice was posted on her tent, Russell kept her property
at Thomas Square Park, and her property was still there when the
City workers returned the following day.  Moreover, it is clear
that a motive or desire by Russell to protect her property would
not negate, or even be incompatible with, an intent to obstruct
government operations.  Russell testified that based on her prior
experiences, she was afraid that her property would be lost or
destroyed if she allowed it to be impounded by the City workers. 
Thus, obstructing the City workers from impounding her tent was
the means by which she sought to protect her property.  In other
words, Russell's goal of protecting her property was fully
consistent with an intent to obstruct, impair, or hinder the City
workers from performing their enforcement activities. 
Given the strength of the State's evidence, we conclude
that there is no reasonable possibility that any error in
refusing to admit the Stored Property Ordinance as an exhibit 
affected the outcome of Russell's case.  
B.
Russell contends that the Circuit Court erred in
refusing Russell's request to instruct the jury on the choice-of-
evils defense.  We disagree.  Russell asserts that the "evil" she
sought to prevent by her conduct was the "taking of her property
by [City] employees."  
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The choice-of-evils defense is set forth in HRS § 703-
302, which provides:
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary
to avoid an imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another
is justifiable provided that:
(a) The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be
prevented by the law defining the offense
charged;
(b) Neither the Code nor other law defining the
offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing
with the specific situation involved; and
(c) A legislative purpose to exclude the
justification claimed does not otherwise plainly
appear.
In State v Jim, 105 Hawai #i 319, 332, 97 P.3d 395, 408
(App. 2004), this court held, under circumstances analogous to
this case, that there was no basis for a choice-of-evils
instruction for defendants charged with obstructing government
operations, in violation of HRS § 710-1010(1)(a).  In Jim, a
county work crew dug a hole to locate an unauthorized connection
that was diverting water from the main water line.  Jim , 105
Hawai#i at 322-23, 97 P.3d at 398-99.  The defendants entered the
hole and sat in it, thereby preventing the crew from proceeding
with their work.  Id.  at 323, 97 P.3d at 399.  The defendants
claimed that the county had been illegally removing water from
Hawaiian home lands and that they entered the hole to protest the
county's actions.  Id.  at 323-28, 97 P.3d at 399-404.  This court
held that: (1) the harm or evil sought to be avoided by the
defendants' conduct was not greater than that sought to be
prevented by the law defining the charged HRS § 710-1010(1)(a)
offense; and (2) "a legislative purpose to exclude the
justification claimed plainly appears."  Id.  at 332, 97 P.3d at
408.  Based on Jim, we conclude that the Circuit Court properly
denied the choice-of-evils instruction. 
Moreover, we conclude that Russell failed to come
forward with some credible evidence that she reasonably believed
that her actions were necessary to avoid an imminent harm or
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evil.  See  HRS § 701-115 (2014) cmt.; HRS § 703-300 (2014)
("'Believes' means reasonably believes.").  Here, the undisputed
evidence shows that a notice was posted on Russell's tent
informing her that she had 24 hours to remove the tent before it
would be impounded.  Russell admitted that she "got notice" on
the day the removal notice was posted, but did not remove the
tent.  The conduct for which Russell was charged occurred the day
after Russell became aware of the removal notice.  Russell was
arrested several hours after her initial encounter with Morikawa
and the police.  Russell testified that by that time, her
property was safe, she did not resist arrest, and she handed her
property to her "comrades."  Given these circumstances, Russell
failed to produce sufficient evidence of an imminent harm or evil
to justify a choice-of-evils defense.
C.
Russell contends that the Circuit Court abused its
discretion in denying Russell's motion for a mistrial, which was
based on alleged prosecutorial misconduct for remarks made by the
prosecutor during closing argument.  We disagree.
1.
During closing argument, Russell's counsel questioned
Morikawa's credibility by maintaining that she was evasive and
uncomfortable in responding to questions.  During rebuttal, the
prosecutor defended Morikawa's credibility and attacked Russell's
credibility.  Russell claims that the following highlighted
remarks by the prosecutor were improper:
[Prosecutor]: Ladies and gentlemen, the testimony of 
. . . Trish Morikawa was addressed by defense counsel. 
Trish Morikawa testified candidly and her demeanor remained
the same throughout her testimony.   The State questioned
her.  She was very candid with the court telling -- uh,
speaking as to the events that took place described in the
video.
And in cross-examination she was . . . answering
defense counsel's questions.  However, if you remember
defendant Russell's answers to the State's questions, they
are very different than the answers that she gave to her
defense counsel.  If you remember, uh, the defense counsel
would ask, uh -- would ask a question and she would -- she
would answer it very sincere.  However, when the State --
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the State asked her questions, she became argumentative,
combative .
Simple yes or no questions.  She wouldn't answer them. 
For instance, when the State asked her, uh, isn't it true
that you refused to get out of the tent, she says I was
protecting my property.  When I asked her -- when the State
asked her again, isn't it true that you didn't leave the
tent or you didn't ask for help to remove the apparatus, she
says I was protecting my property.  It was only after judge
told her to answer the question that she finally said yes.
Turn to your credibility instruction on whether to
assess witness credibility on Page 9 of the jury
instructions.  It states in the second -- in the second
sentence it states "In evaluating the weight and credibility
of a witness' testimony, you may consider the witness'
appearance, demeanor; the witness' manner of testifying; the
frankness, the . . . witness' intelligence; the witness'
candor or frankness or lack thereof; the witness' interest,
if any, in the result of this case."
Let's go through this a little bit.  Uh, when you
think about Catherine Russell, the defendant, what's her
interest in the result of this case?  She's the defendant .
[Russell's counsel]: Objection, Your Honor.  I believe
if we could approach.
THE COURT: No, there's no need.
[Russell's counsel]: Okay.  This goes against the
instruction that there is to be no comment made on the
defendant's right to testify.
THE COURT: No, that's --
[Russell's counsel]: That should not be used as --
THE COURT: Okay.
[Russell's counsel]: -- something to evaluate
credibility, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay. Um, that's, um -- that objection is
overruled.
[Prosecutor]:  Think about the defendant's result. 
They have the biggest result in this case.  Think about the
result that Trish Morikawa and the City and County of
Honolulu employees enforcing the enforcing crew, what are
their interests in the result of the case?  Their interest
was defendants obstructed our operations so we will testify .
Witness' candor -- uh, witness' intelligence, the
defendant Russell --  
[Russell's counsel]: Your Honor, I'm sorry.  I must
object again.  If I could approach?
THE COURT: You may not.
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[Russell's counsel]: Okay.  I'm referring to Page 15
of the jury instructions as the basis for my objection.
THE COURT: Please continue.  The objection's
overruled.
[Prosecutor]: Ladies and gentlemen, if I could please
finish up here with the credibility instruction, the
witness' appearance and demeanor; manner of testifying,
defendant Russell when she was testifying . . . her defense
attorney[] asked her do you have any tattoos or do you have
a tattoo of Abraham Lincoln.  The judge sustained the
objection which means she's not allowed to answer the
question.  However, shortly thereafter I -- the State of
Hawaii placed on the record that she rolled her shirt to the
side --
. . . .
She turned -- she pulled her strap to the side and --
to show her tattoo because she wanted that information in
after the judge had already kept it out.  She did not follow
the instructions of the court that day.  She did not follow
the instructions of the governmental employees on September
26, 2012.
2.
Russell contends that the prosecutor engaged in
misconduct by personally vouching for the credibility of the
government's witnesses.  This claim is without merit.  The
prosecutor did not express an improper personal opinion about the
credibility of Morikawa and other State witnesses, but rather
argued that they were credible based on factors such as demeanor
while testifying, responses to questions, and lack of personal
interest in the outcome of the case.  These are all legitimate
bases for arguing that a witness was credible.
3.
Citing State v. Basham , 132 Hawai# i 97, 319 P.3d 1105
(2014), which was decided after the trial in this case, Russell
argues that the prosecutor made an improper generic argument that
Russell was not credible because she had an interest in the
result of the case.  Prior to Basham, the long established rule
in Hawai# i was that it was permissible for the prosecutor to
argue that a defendant's interest in the outcome of the case gave
him or her a motive to lie.  In State v. Apilando, 79 Hawai# i
128, 142, 900 P.2d 135, 149 (1995), the defendant Apilando argued
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that it was improper for the prosecutor to attack Apilando's
credibility in closing argument by stating that because Apilando
"had the highest stake in the outcome of the case, he had the
greatest motive to lie."  The Hawai #i Supreme Court rejected
Apilando's argument, reasoning as follows: 
This court has held that, when a defendant takes the stand
to testify, his or her credibility can be tested in the same
manner as any other witness.  Apilando testified on his own
behalf, and, by so doing, subjected himself to attacks on
his credibility.  We believe the prosecution's comments
regarding Apilando's interest in the case were not improper.
Apilando , 79 Hawai# i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149 (emphasis added;
citations omitted).
However, twenty years later, the supreme court in
Basham held that
it is improper for a prosecutor in summation to make generic
arguments regarding credibility based solely upon the status
of a defendant.  Accordingly, a prosecutor may not argue
during closing argument that defendants, because they are
defendants, have no reason to tell the truth or have the
"greatest motive to lie."  Apilando , 79 Hawai #i at 142, 900
P.2d at 149.
 
Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126 (one citation
omitted).  We conclude that Basham overrules Apilando, at least
with respect to Apilando's holding that it was not improper for
the prosecutor to argue that because Apilando "had the highest
stake in the outcome of the case, he had the greatest motive to
lie."  State v. Magbulos, No. CAAP-14-0001337, 2018 WL 949728, at
*13 (Hawai #i App. Feb. 20, 2018).
The supreme court majority in Basham did not have to
address the issue of the prospective/retrospective application of
Basham's "generic argument" holding because it had already
decided to vacate Basham's conviction before sua sponte
addressing the generic argument issue.  Because Basham  overturned
long-standing precedent which permitted a prosecutor to argue in
closing that the defendant had the greatest motive to lie due to 
the defendant's interest in the outcome of the case, we hold that
Basham's "generic argument" holding only applies prospectively to
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trials occurring after the Basham decision was issued.  See State
v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai# i 302, 315-18, 227 P.3d 1027, 1040-43
(2012) (applying decision which overturned existing precedent
prospectively and affirming defendant's conviction based on
precedent in effect when he was tried); State v. Auld, 136
Hawai#i 244, 255-57, 361 P.3d 471, 482-84 (2015) (applying new
rule prospectively only to events occurring after the decision);
State v. Jess, 117 Hawai #i 381, 400-04, 184 P.3d 133, 152-56
(2008).  Here, the prosecutor's argument that Russell (and Walsh)
had the "biggest" interest in the outcome or result of the case
was permissible under supreme court precedent existing at the
time the argument was made.  Accordingly, we conclude that this
argument was not improper.
4.
Based on the foregoing, the prosecutor's comments
challenged by Russell did not constitute prosecutorial
misconduct.  Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Russell's motion for mistrial.
D.
Having addressed Russell's points of error on appeal,
we conclude that she is not entitled to relief, and we affirm her
conviction.  
II.
We now turn to Walsh's points of error on appeal.
A.
Prior to trial, Russell filed a motion to dismiss her
complaint, arguing that HRS § 710-1010, as applied the her, was
an unconstitutional abridgment of her First Amendment rights. 
Walsh joined in Russell's motion to dismiss.  The Circuit Court
denied the motion as to both Russell and Walsh.  On appeal, Walsh
argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying the motion to
dismiss.  We disagree.
Walsh contends that the State adduced no testimony at
the hearing.  However, the State proffered the statements of
Morikawa in opposing the motion; the Circuit Court admitted a
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
video recording, which was played at the hearing, of the events
on the day in question that included audio of what Morikawa had
said that day; and the Circuit Court accepted the video recording
(including the audio of what Morikawa had said) as a
representation of how Morikawa would have testified if called at
the hearing.  Walsh provides no authority that the Circuit Court 
could only consider live testimony at the hearing in ruling on
the motion to dismiss.7
With respect to the substance of the Circuit Court's
ruling, legislative enactments are presumptively constitutional,
"and a party challenging the statute has the burden of showing
unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt."  State v.
Mueller, 66 Haw. 616, 626-27, 671 P.2d 1351, 1358 (1983).  In
addressing a similar challenge to the constitutionality of HRS 
§ 710-7010, this court in Jim cited the following test:
a government regulation is sufficiently justified if it is
within the constitutional power of the Government; if it
furthers an important or substantial governmental interest;
if the governmental interest is unrelated to the suppression
of free expression; and if the incidental restriction on
alleged First Amendment freedoms is no greater than is
essential to the furtherance of that interest.
Jim, 105 Hawaii at 333, 97 P.3d at 409 (quoting United States v.
O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 377 (1968).  We concluded in Jim  that HRS
§ 710-1010, as applied to the defendants' conduct of obstructing
county workers, who were attempting to locate an unauthorized
water line, to protest county actions on Hawaiian home lands, did#
7Walsh also appears to suggest that the Circuit Court erred
in not permitting him to testify.  However, Russell testified at
the hearing regarding the events on the day in question.  When
Walsh indicated he also wanted to testify, the Circuit Court
asked for an offer of proof.  Walsh's offer of proof was that his
testimony regarding the events on the day of the charged incident
would be consistent with Russell's testimony.  The State
stipulated to this offer of proof, which the Circuit Court
accepted.  The Circuit Court declined to hear testimony by Walsh
about his conduct on other days besides the day of the charged
incident on the ground that such testimony was not relevant to
the motion to dismiss.  Walsh does not demonstrate that this
limitation was in error. 
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not violate their First Amendment rights.  Id. at 334, 97 P.3d at
410.   
Similarly, in this case, the application of HRS § 710-
1010(1)(a) to Walsh's conduct in obstructing the City's
enforcement of the Stored Property Ordinance did not violate the
First Amendment.  HRS § 710-1010 is within the constitutional
power of the State government to enact; it furthers an important
governmental interest of ensuring that government operations are
conducted and carried out without intentional interference; this
governmental interest is unrelated to the suppression of free
expression; and the incidental restriction on Walsh's alleged
First Amendment freedoms was no greater than that essential to
further the government's interest.  Indeed, in this case, no
attempt was made to forcibly remove Walsh from the tent or to
preclude his "protest" activities.  Moreover, other persons
present on the day in question, who voiced their opposition to
the Stored Property Ordinance without chaining themselves
together or obstructing the removal of impounded property, were
not arrested for violating HRS § 710-1010.  We conclude that the
Circuit Court properly denied the motion to dismiss.
B.      
Walsh contends that the Circuit Court erred in
preventing him from introducing relevant state-of-mind evidence
at trial.  During trial, the following took place:
Q. [By Walsh's counsel]:  Okay.  Now when you first
sat in the tent, was it your -- your desire or your
intention to obstruct any government operations?
[Prosecutor]:  Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
Q. BY [Walsh's counsel]:  Was it your goal to stifle Trish
Morikawa?
A.  No.
. . . .
Q.  So when Ms. Morikawa told you to move and you
didn't, was that because you wanted to stifle Ms. Morikawa
still?
[Prosecutor]:  Objection, Your Honor.
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  Sustained.
Q.  BY [Walsh's counsel]:  What was your primary
concern as you were sitting in the tent with Ms. Morikawa
standing --
THE COURT:  Would -- would the -- would the counsel
for all sides join me at this point.
. . . .
(Bench conference begun.)
THE COURT:  I -- I have a concern now.  What were you
thinking and what was your intent, uh, at that time?  Um, I
note that the intents which have been described would not
provide a defense.  And I think we're getting to the point
where, um, he's beyond describing his story and is now
talking about a movement.
And so he is, you know -- I'm not otherwise
restricting him, and I think you've covered as much as is
appropriate for state of mind because when you get back to
that, we get into issues that are not involved here.  This
is a criminal prosecution for obstructing government
operations.  There are a certain number of elements to it. 
The State has to prove that if there are any over-arching
rights, then they don't -- they don't compete with the
facts.  They trump the facts of the case.
So if you have some case that you wish to prove for
some constitutional violation, I guess you're free to do
that.  And I think you're pursuing that in federal court
now.  However, let's get to the facts of the case.  If there
are other matters that you want to bring up that I'm not
thinking about, that's a possibility too, but I think we
should focus at this point.
[Walsh's counsel]:  Your Honor, I'll just note that
the reason is because obstructing governmental operations
requires an intentional state of mind.  And since it's a
specific intent crime, he has to have intended to commit the
crime.
THE COURT:  No.
[Walsh's counsel]:  It's not a knowingly or a
recklessly.
THE COURT:  Well, yeah.  No.  That's -- that's true.
And he's already denied that he wanted to, so let's move on
because, uh, whether or not he has a constitutional level,
uh, feeling for what he's doing, um, after a point he's
expressed his intention.  Let's move on.
[Walsh's counsel]:  Sure.
THE COURT:  Okay.
[Walsh's counsel]:  Thank you.
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Emphases added.)
We agree with Walsh's argument that the Circuit Court
erred in "not allowing questions regarding Walsh's intent,
effectively depriving [Walsh of] the opportunity to present a
complete defense."  Essential to the State's establishing that
Walsh committed the charged crime was proof that he acted with
the requisite criminal intent.  The State was required to prove
that Walsh acted intentionally to obstruct, impair, or hinder the
performance of a governmental function by a public servant.  The
question by Walsh's counsel regarding whether it was Walsh's
intent to obstruct any government operations was directly
relevant to whether Walsh acted with the requisite mens rea to
commit the charged offense.  The Circuit Court erred in
sustaining the prosecutor's objection to this question.  
The record also shows that the Circuit Court dissuaded
Walsh's counsel from asking additional questions regarding
whether Walsh possessed the requisite criminal intent, by calling
counsel to a bench conference and telling him to "move on." 
Indeed, after the bench conference, Walsh's counsel did not ask
any questions directly related to Walsh's intent in refusing to
leave Russell's tent, but only asked Walsh whether he wanted "to
get arrested" on the day in question, to which Walsh replied
"No."
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in unduly
restricting Walsh's counsel ability to question Walsh about
whether he possessed the requisite criminal intent for the
charged offense.  We also conclude that we cannot say this error
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  Proof that Walsh acted
with the requisite criminal intent was essential to the State's
establishing his guilt.  Walsh was entitled to defend against the
charge by presenting evidence that he did not act with the
requisite criminal intent.  The Circuit Court's rulings deprived
Walsh of a fair opportunity to present such a defense.  We
therefore vacate Walsh's conviction. 
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
C.
Walsh argues that there was insufficient evidence to
show that Walsh obstructed a "public servant acting under color
of the public servant's official authority."  HRS § 710-
1010(1)(a).  We disagree.
The State presented evidence that Morikawa, Corporal 
Nakano, and other members of the enforcement crew who arrived at
the scene were City employees who were there to enforce the
Stored Property Ordinance.  The State also presented evidence of
the various actions taken by City workers to implement and
enforce the requirements of the Stored Property Ordinance and how
Walsh's actions obstructed, hindered, and impeded their ability
to carry out their duties.  When viewed in the light most
favorable to the State, we conclude that the State presented
substantial evidence that Morikawa and other members of the
enforcement crew were "public servant[s] acting under color of
[their] official authority."  See HRS § 710-1010(1)(a).
Walsh cites no authority to support his claims
that to prove this element, the State was required to produce an
official to testify that the City employees were acting under his
or her orders or a witness to testify that the City employees
were specifically authorized to enforce the Stored Property
Ordinance. We therefore reject these claims. 
Because we reject Walsh's contention that there was
insufficient evidence to support his conviction, we also reject
his claim that his retrial is barred by double jeopardy.
D.
In light of our decision to vacate Walsh's conviction,
we need not address the remaining points of error raised by Walsh
on appeal.
CONCLUSION
We affirm the Judgment against Russell.  We vacate the
Judgment against Walsh and remand Walsh's case for a new trial.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 22, 2018.
On the briefs:
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
CATHERINE C. RUSSELL Chief Judge
Andrew T. Park
(Urbanc Willard Park & Kim LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant
BLADE MICHAEL WALSH Associate Judge
Sonja P. McCullen (CAAP-13-5434)
Brian R. Vincent (CAAP-13-5679)
Deputy Prosecuting Attorneys
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge
21