NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000728
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPLICATION OF
 
JOHN FRANCIS BOWLER and AUGUST AHRENS LIMITED,
GUARDIAN TRUST COMPANY LIMITED, ELIZABETH K.
BOOTH AND OTHERS AND MAGOON ESTATE LIMITED
 
to register and confirm title to land situate
at Kalia, Waikiki, City and County of Honolulu,
State of Hawai' i, HISAKO KOIWA, Petitioner-Appellant
v. CHRISTIANA TRUST, A DIVISION OF WILMINGTON SAVINGS
FUND SOCIETY, FSB, not in its individual capacity
but as trustee of ARLP TRUST 3, a Delaware
statutory trust, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LAND COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
(CASE NO. 1 L.D. 15-1-3762)
(APPLICATION NOS. 537, 570, 830, 1293)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
Petitioner-Appellant Hisako Koiwa (Koiwa) appeals from
 
the Judgment entered on October 12, 2016, by the Land Court of
 
the State of Hawai' i (Land Court) in favor of Respondent-Appellee 
Christiana Trust, a Division of Wilmington Savings Fund Society,
 FSB (Trust) and against Koiwa on all claims.
1 Koiwa also
 
challenges the Land Court's August 5, 2016 Order Granting [the
 Trust's] Second Motion to Dismiss Verified Petition of Hisako
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Koiwa for Amendment of Land Court Certificate of Title No.
 
489,503 (Order Granting Motion to Dismiss).
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On October 12, 2015, Koiwa filed a Verified Petition
 
for Amendment of Land Court Certificate of Title 489,503
 
(Petition) seeking to "expung[e] a mortgage interest under
 
Respondent Christiana Trust, a Division of Wilmington Savings
 
Fund Society, FSB, not in its individual capacity but as trustee
 of ARLP Trust 3, a Delaware statutory trust." The Petition
 states that it was made pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 501-138
2 and Rule 63 of the Rules of the Land Court (RLC),3 and
 
contains the following pertinent allegations:
 
2 HRS § 501-138 (2006) provides for the discharge of liens on Land
Court properties as follows: 
§ 501-138. Discharge or modification of liens to be
recorded.  Attachments on mesne process and liens of every
description upon registered land shall be continued,
reduced, discharged, and dissolved by any method sufficient
in law to continue, reduce, discharge, or dissolve like
liens on unregistered land. All certificates or other
 instruments which are permitted or required by law to be
recorded in the bureau of conveyances to give effect to the
continuance, reduction, discharge, or dissolution of
attachments or other liens upon unregistered lands, or to
give notice of such continuance, reduction, discharge, or
dissolution, shall in the case of like liens upon registered
land be filed and registered with the assistant registrar.
 
3 RLC Rule 63 provides as follows: 
Rule 63. Discharge or Modification of Liens.  The
 
continuation, reduction, discharge and dissolution of liens
shall be as provided by law (see HRS § 501-138). Every
certificate or other instrument which is permitted or
required by law to be recorded in the bureau of conveyances
to give effect to the continuance, reduction, discharge or
dissolution of attachments or other liens upon unregistered
lands, or to give notice of such continuance, reduction,
discharge or dissolution, may in the case of like liens upon
registered land be recorded with the assistant registrar, if
it contains a reference to the number of the proper
certificate containing the memorandum of the attachment or
other liens.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
•	 On August 15, 2007, Hisako Koiwa and her late husband,
 
Kunio Koiwa,4 (together, the Koiwas) executed a promissory
 
note for $347,200.00 (Note), secured by a mortgage on a
 
leasehold interest in real property located at 2121 Ala Wai
 
Boulevard (Property), which is registered in the Office of
 
the Assistant Registrar of the Land Court.5 The mortgage
 
was executed in favor of Mortgage Electronic Registration
 
Systems (MERS), as nominee for Colorado Federal Savings
 
Bank, and was recorded in both the Land Court and the Bureau
 
of Conveyances on August 21, 2007 (Mortgage).  (A copy of
 
the Mortgage is attached to the Petition.)
 
•	 The Trust is the trustee for ARLP Trust 3 which "has
 
[the] alleged mortgage interest in Petitioner's leasehold
 
interests."
 
•	 The Koiwas stopped making payments on April 6, 2009. 
Countrywide Home Loans sent the Koiwas a Notice of Intent to
 Accelerate, dated April 16, 2009, which informed them of the
 default and right to cure by May 16, 2009. The Koiwas "did
 not exercise that right." The date of last payment, April
 6, 2009, or the date of the Notice of Intent to Accelerate,
 April 16, 2009, are, according to Koiwa, the dates
 triggering the statute of limitations.
 
4
 Kunio Koiwa died on October 18, 2010.
 
5
 All filings in the Land Court were filed under Certificate of
Title No. 489,503.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
•	 On January 20, 2010, BAC Home Loans filed a Notice of
 
Mortgagee's Intention to Foreclose Under Power of Sale
 
(Notice of Sale) in the Bureau of Conveyances, which we do
 
not find in the record. Koiwa alleged that "there was no
 
power of sale clause in the Mortgage warranting non-judicial
 foreclosure."
6
 
•	 On March 21, 2010, and "[i]n commencement of non­
judicial foreclosure," the Koiwas vacated the Property,
 "surrendering possession and control to the alleged trustee
 of the lender."
 
•	 On June 15, 2011, BAC Home Loans filed a Notice of
 
Rescission in the Bureau of Conveyances, canceling the
 Notice of Sale.
 
•	 The Trust "has not foreclosed on the subject property
 
and has failed to mitigate its damages."
 
•	 "The six year statute of limitations has expired . . .
 
sometime between April 6, 2015 and April 16, 2015 to claim
 an interest in the property or upon a promissory note."
 
•	 Koiwa alleged that she "is entitled to the amendment of
 
Certificate of Title No. 489,503 or cancellation order to
 entitle her to an expungement of the Mortgage interest in
 favor of [the Trust] in Land Court."
 
6
 To the contrary, it appears that the Mortgage that Koiwa attached
to her Petition contains a power of sale. Section 22 of the Mortgage provides
that if the borrower defaults on the loan and fails to cure, the lender may
accelerate the loan and may invoke the power of sale. This page of the
Mortgage is initialed at the bottom, apparently by the Koiwas. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 1, 2016, the Trust filed a motion to 
dismiss the Petition pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6), and asserted that the Petition failed to 
allege that "the twenty year limitations period for enforcement 
of the mortgage has run" pursuant to HRS § 657-31, and therefore, the Land Court lacked a legal basis to "expunge, strike, or otherwise order Lender's mortgage to be released." In sum, the Trust argued that it has twenty years to foreclose on the Mortgage after default, even if a six-year statute of limitations had run on an action to enforce the Note. 
Upon further briefing and oral argument, the Land Court
 
agreed with the Trust and in its August 5, 2016 Order Granting
 the Motion to Dismiss, the court dismissed the Petition on the
 grounds that "[t]he applicable limitation periods for an action
 to enforce a mortgage is twenty years" pursuant to HRS § 657-31.
 
On October 12, 2016, the Land Court entered its
 
Judgment in favor of the Trust on all claims. On October 26,
 2016, Koiwa filed a timely notice of appeal therefrom.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
Koiwa raises four points of error and argues that the
 
Land Court erred in: (1) concluding that the statute of
 limitations governing real actions applies to modern-day
 foreclosure; (2) permitting enforcement of the subject mortgage
 by splitting the note into a personal cause of action and real
 cause of action; (3) applying Kipahulu Sugar Co. v. Nakila, 20
 Haw. 620 (Haw. Terr. 1911), to modern mortgage foreclosure action
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in light of the Uniform Commercial Code and the Mortgage
 
Foreclosure Act; and (4) not overruling Kipahulu Sugar. Based on
 the foregoing, Koiwa contends that the Land Court erred in
 dismissing Koiwa's Petition for failure to state a claim upon
 which relief can be granted. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
 
reviewed de novo." Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai' i 62, 74, 315 
P.3d 213, 225 (2013) (citing Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 115
 Hawai'i 299, 312, 167 P.3d 292, 305 (2007)). It is well-
established that:
 
A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a
claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can
prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that
would entitle him or her to relief. [The appellate court]
must therefore view a plaintiff's complaint in a light most
favorable to him or her in order to determine whether the
 allegations contained therein could warrant relief under any
alternative theory. For this reason, in reviewing [a]
circuit court's order dismissing [a] complaint . . . [the
appellate court's] consideration is strictly limited to the
allegations of the complaint, and [the appellate court] must
deem those allegations to be true.
 
Id. (alterations in original) (quoting County of Kaua' i v. 
Baptiste, 115 Hawai' i 15, 24, 165 P.3d 916, 925 (2007)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
The Petition alleges that Koiwa "is entitled to the
 
amendment of [the Certificate of Title] or [a] cancellation order
 
to entitle her to an expungement of the Mortgage interest in
 favor of [the Trust] in Land Court," because "the six year
 statute of limitations has expired for Respondent sometime
 between April 6, 2015 and April 16, 2015 to claim an interest in
 the property or upon a promissory note." The Petition was filed
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pursuant to HRS § 501-138, which does not appear to authorize the
 
Land Court to amend a certificate of title under these
 circumstances.
7
 
It appears, however, that a memorandum8 may be removed
 
from a certificate of title pursuant to HRS § 501-196, which
 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 501-196. Alterations upon registration book
prohibited when; court hearings; limitations.  No erasure,
alteration, or amendment shall be made upon the registration
book after the entry of a certificate of title or of a
memorandum thereon, and the approval of the same by the
registrar or an assistant registrar except by order of the
court recorded with the assistant registrar, provided that
the registrar or assistant registrar may correct any
clerical error made by personnel of the registrar's or
assistant registrar's office. Any registered owner or other
person in interest may at any time apply by petition to the
court, upon the ground that registered interests of any
description, whether vested, contingent, expectant, or
inchoate have terminated and ceased . . . . The court shall
 have jurisdiction to hear and determine the petition after
notice to all parties in interest and may order the entry of
a new certificate, the entry or cancellation of a memorandum
upon a certificate, or grant any other relief upon such
terms and conditions, requiring security if necessary, as it
may deem proper.
 
(Emphasis added) (2006); see also HRS § 501-52.9
 
7 As cited in footnote 2, HRS § 501-138 provides in pertinent part
that "liens of every description" upon a Land Court property shall be
discharged or dissolved by any method that is legally sufficient to discharge
or dissolve such a lien upon unregistered land; it does not articulate the
grounds upon which a lien may be "discharged" or "dissolved."
 
8 The registration of a mortgage in the Land Court involves, inter
 
alia, placing a memorandum of the mortgage on the certificate of title. See
 
HRS § 501-117 (2006) ("Registration of a mortgage shall be made in the manner
following: the mortgage shall be presented to the assistant registrar who
shall enter upon the original certificate of title a memorandum of the purport
of the mortgage, the time of filing or recording, the document number of the
mortgage, and shall sign the memorandum. The assistant registrar shall also
note upon the mortgage the time of filing or recording, and a reference to the
volume and page of the registration book where it is registered.").
 
9
 HRS § 501-52 (2006) provides:
 
§ 501-52. Powers of the court.  The court may make
and award all such judgments, decrees, orders, and mandates,
issue all such executions, writs of possession, and other
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Koiwa does not cite to any authority supporting
 
the proposition that a registered mortgage interest has
 
"terminated" or "ceased" upon the expiration of a limitation
 period on bringing an action "to claim an interest in the
 property or upon a promissory note," and we find none. 
We note that a promissory note is "an instrument that 
evidences a promise to pay a monetary obligation," HRS § 490:9­102 (2008), whereas "[a] mortgage is a conveyance of an interest in real property that is given as security for the payment of the note." Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i 361, 367­
68, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254-55 (2017) (citing HRS § 490:9-102). The supreme court has explained that "the mortgage and note are two distinct securities, and nothing but payment of the debt will discharge the mortgage." Campbell v. Kamaiopili, 3 Haw. 477, 478 
(Haw. Kingdom 1872); see also HRS § 506-8 ("The mortgagee of real property or the record assignee of a mortgage interest shall provide to the mortgagor a release of mortgage upon full satisfaction of the mortgage and discharge of any secured debt."). 
Hawai'i courts have allowed or precluded foreclosure of 
a real property mortgage based on applicable statutes of limitations. See, e.g., Hilo v. Liliuokalani, 15 Haw. 507, 508 
(Haw. Terr. 1904); Campbell, 3 Haw. at 478; Kaikainahaole v. 
9(...continued)
processes, and take all other steps necessary for the
promotion of justice in matters pending before it, and to
carry into full effect all powers which are, or may be given
to it by law.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Allen, 14 Haw. 527, 528 (Haw. Terr. 1902). Here, however, Koiwa 
did not seek to prevent the Trust from attempting to foreclose on the Mortgage; instead, she sought to remove the Mortgage from the certificate of title. We do not find a single case, nor does Koiwa cite to one, where a Hawai' i court has removed a mortgage 
from the chain of title or removed a memorandum of mortgage from a certificate of title on these, or analogous, grounds. 
The great weight of authority in other jurisdictions
 
supports the proposition that the statute of limitations is
 available only as a defense against a foreclosure action, and not
 as a cause of action. See F. G. Madara, Annotation, Statute of
 
Limitations or Presumption of Payment from Lapse of Time as
 Ground for Affirmative Relief from Debt or Lien, 164 A.L.R. 1387,
 Westlaw (Aug. 2018).
10 This doctrine is supported by a number of
 
cases holding that the presumption of payment, arising from lapse
 of time, can be used only as a shield, not as a basis for
 affirmative relief. See id. In the absence of a statute to the
 
contrary, a majority of courts hold that a court of equity will
 not cancel a mortgage on real property where the only ground
 urged for such relief is that the statute of limitations has run
 against the right to enforce the encumbrance, while the debt
 secured remains unpaid in accordance with the equitable maxim
 that "he who seeks equity must do equity." See id. We agree
 
with this rationale.
 
10
 There are no Hawai 'i cases in this annotation. 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For this reason, we conclude that the Land Court did
 
not err in determining that Koiwa failed to state a claim upon
 
which relief can be granted. 
Nevertheless, we address, in the alternative, the issue
 
as it is raised by Koiwa on appeal, i.e., that the Trust is
 barred from foreclosing on the Mortgage, and therefore, the Land
 Court erred in refusing to remove the Mortgage from the
 certificate of title. 
"Foreclosure is an equitable action." Peak Capital
 
Grp., LLC v. Perez, 141 Hawai' i 160, 172, 407 P.3d 116, 128 
(2017) (citing Hawaii Nat. Bank v. Cook, 100 Hawai' i 2, 7, 58 
P.3d 60, 65 (2002)). As to the timeliness of bringing an
 equitable action, the supreme court has held, 
A court of equity is not bound by the statute of
limitations, but, in the absence of extraordinary
circumstances, it will usually grant or withhold relief in
analogy to the statute of limitations relating to law
actions of like character. Under ordinary circumstances, a
suit in equity will not be stayed for laches before, and
will be stayed after, the time fixed by the analogous
statute. If, however, unusual conditions or extraordinary
circumstances make it inequitable to do so, a court of
equity will not be bound by the statute, but will determine
the extraordinary case in accordance with the equities which
condition it. When a suit is brought within the time fixed
by the analogous statute, the burden is on the defendant to
show that extraordinary circumstances exist which require
the application of the doctrine of laches. On the other
hand, when the suit is brought after the statutory time has
elapsed, the burden is on the complainant to establish
circumstances making it inequitable to apply laches to his
case. 
Yokochi v. Yoshimoto, 44 Haw. 297, 300–01, 353 P.2d 820, 823
 
(1960) (citations omitted). 
Koiwa argues that a foreclosure action is "of like
 
character" to "[a]ctions for the recovery of any debt founded
 upon any contract, obligation, or liability[,]" which are subject
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to a six year limitation period. HRS § 657-1.11 The Trust,
 
however, argues that a foreclosure action is "of like character"
 
to an "action to recover possession of any lands, or make any
 entry thereon," which is subject to a twenty-year limitation
 period. HRS § 657-31.
12
 
As stated above, "[a] foreclosure action is a legal 
proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the property for satisfaction of a note that is in default and secured by a lien on the subject property." Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i at 390 P.3d 
at 1255 (citing HRS § 667-1.5). A promissory note is "an instrument that evidences a promise to pay a monetary obligation," HRS § 490:9-102, whereas "[a] mortgage is a conveyance of an interest in real property that is given as security for the payment of the note." Id. at 367-68, 390 P.3d 
at 1254-55 (emphasis added) (citing HRS § 490:9-102). The supreme court has long distinguished an action to recover a debt 
11 HRS § 657-1 (2016) provides more fully in relevant part:
 
§ 657-1. Six years. The following actions shall be
commenced within six years next after the cause of action
accrued, and not after: (1) Actions for the recovery of any
debt founded upon any contract, obligation, or liability,
excepting such as are brought upon the judgment or decree of
a court; excepting further that actions for the recovery of
any debt founded upon any contract, obligation, or liability
made pursuant to chapter 577A shall be governed by chapter
577A; 
12
 HRS § 657-31 (2016) provides,
 
§ 657-31. Twenty years.  No person shall commence an
action to recover possession of any lands, or make any entry
thereon, unless within twenty years after the right to bring
the action first accrued.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or enforce a promissory note from an action to foreclose a
 
mortgage. 
In Hilo v. Liliuokalani, 15 Haw. 507 (Haw. Terr. 1904),
 
the supreme court considered an appeal from a decree dismissing a
 bill for an injunction against the foreclosure of two mortgages
 on real property. One issue presented was whether the
 foreclosure of the mortgages were barred by lapse of time because
 a statute of limitation barred "[a]ctions on the notes." Id. at
 
508. The court held that an action to foreclose a mortgage on
 
land is not time-barred because an action to recover on the
 underlying note is barred by the statute of limitations. Id. 
Specifically, the supreme court stated:
 
[A] contention is that the foreclosure of the mortgage
was barred by lapse of time. The notes secured by the
mortgages, dated in 1878 and 1879 respectively, were for
four years and one year respectively. Actions on the notes
 were of course barred long ago by the statute, there having
been nothing to take them out of the statute or keep them
alive.[
13] But that did not bar the remedy against the
land. See Campbell v. Kamaiopili, 3 Haw. 477; Kaikainahaole
v. Allen, 14 Haw. 527.[14] The remedy at law against the
 
13 Presumably, by "the statute" the Court was referring to the six-
year statute of limitation for "[a]ctions for the recovery of any debt founded
upon any contract, obligation or liability." See Civil Laws of the Hawaiian
 
Islands (1897) § 1287 (1), at 506. And by "nothing to take them out of the
statute or keep them alive," presumably, the Court was referring to various
exceptions which affect tolling and accrual of statutes of limitations. E.g.,
 
id. § 1291, at 507 (tolling rules for disabled persons).
 
14 In Campbell v. Kamaiopili, 3 Haw. 477 (Haw. Kingdom 1872), the
complainants, assignees of a mortgage of real estate, brought a bill of
foreclosure against the mortgagor's heirs who asserted that a statute barred
the foreclosure, which required creditors to bring claims against estates of
decedents, including claims "secured by mortgage on real estate," within six
months from the publication of a notice. Id. at 478 (internal quotation marks
 
omitted). The supreme court held that this statute did not bar the
foreclosure action as it only barred "[t]he remedy on the mortgage note," and
not "the remedy against the land by foreclosure of the mortgage." Id. at 478. 
The court reasoned that "as the mortgage and note are two distinct securities,
and nothing but payment of the debt will discharge the mortgage, it follows
that the mortgage is not barred, as the statute only refers to claims secured
by mortgage, and not to the mortgage itself." Id. (emphasis added); see also
(continued...)
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
land, however, would be barred by the period applicable to
real actions, and while, strictly speaking, the statute is
not applicable to suits in equity, yet equity follows it by
analogy . . . .
 
Id. (citations omitted).
 
The supreme court arrived at the same conclusion in
 
Kipahulu Sugar, 20 Haw. 620. There, the issue was "whether the
 
mortgage was extinguished or barred by reason of the fact that
 the statute of limitations had run against the note." Id. at
 
621. The Kipahulu Sugar court rejected the defendant's argument
 
that Hilo should be overruled; the court noted that the principle
 that "[t]he remedy at law against the land" is barred by the
 period applicable to real actions was approved in later cases. 
See id. (citations omitted). The court also observed that this
 is also the doctrine of many state courts. Id. The court went
 
on to hold as follows:
 
The statute that applies, in equity, by analogy, is that
which limits the time within which a right of entry upon
lands may be enforced. A presumption of payment arises from
the adverse possession of the mortgagor for the period
prescribed by that statute. 2 Jones on Mortgages (5th ed.),
Sec. 1192 et seq. Hilo v. Liliuokalani , supra.
 
In the case at bar the statute has run against the note, but
the period prescribed for the recovery of land has not
expired. The plaintiff was, therefore, entitled to a decree
of foreclosure.
 
Id. at 621 (citations omitted).15
 
14(...continued)
Kaikainahaole v. Allen, 14 Haw. 527, 529 (Haw. Terr. 1902) (upholding the
dismissal of a bill for an injunction against foreclosure on the same grounds
and declining to overrule Campbell).
 
15
 The Kipahulu Sugar court nonetheless reversed in part and remanded
the foreclosure decree, concluding that it was erroneous in that it provided
for the entry of a deficiency judgment against the mortgagor should the sale
proceeds be insufficient. The court reasoned, "[t]o allow a deficiency
judgment would virtually be to enforce payment of the defendant's note, action
upon which is, concededly, barred." 20 Haw. at 622.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Koiwa argues that Kipahulu Sugar, and cases decided in 
the 1900s are distinguishable because Hawai' i has since "adopted 
the [Uniform Commercial Code] which has a six year statute of 
limitations to bring an action on a promissory note," under HRS § 490:3-118. However, as the Trust points out, Koiwa does not identify how the enactment of HRS § 490:3-118, or any other developments in the law since Kipahulu Sugar was decided, weakens the holding therein. Nor does Koiwa explain how "modern mortgage foreclosures" differ materially from foreclosures in 1911. Koiwa does not explain how any developments under Hawai' i's 
Foreclosures statute, HRS chapter 667, impacts our analysis. 
Koiwa asserts that, "[u]nder the common law, entry can
 
take place when another person who has no right to the property
 takes possession but in modern foreclosures, the mortgagor owns
 the property until the judicial sale is confirmed." Koiwa
 ignores that, just like today, in the early 1900's, the mortgagor
 retained ownership of the property until the foreclosure was
 complete. For example, in Hilo v. Liliuokalani, 15 Haw. at 508,
 the mortgagee argued that the mortgagor's bill for an injunction
 against a foreclosure of real property should be dismissed
 because the mortgagee had entered the property, and thus the
 mortgage had "been foreclosed by entry." The Hilo court held
 that the mortgage had not been foreclosed because, under the law
 at the time affording a one-year redemption period, the
 foreclosure was not complete as entry occurred two months prior
 to suit, not one year. Id. Therefore, the mortgagee could be
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"enjoined against continuing that attempt at foreclosure." Id.
 
at 508. Thus, Kipahulu Sugar is not distinguishable on this
 
basis.
 
Koiwa further attempts to distinguish Kipahulu Sugar on
 
the basis that the court relied on authority of other
 jurisdictions and today, "many states now bar foreclosure when
 the action on the note is barred." Koiwa neither identifies any
 particular legal authority that the Kipahulu Sugar court relied
 on that is invalid nor presents any further authority in support
 of this point. 
Koiwa argues that the "common law meaning" of an action
 
for entry on land illustrates that HRS § 657-31 is not analogous
 to a foreclosure action, and relies on the supreme court's
 description of "common law entry" in Sylva v. Wailuku Sugar Co.,
 19 Haw. 681, 682 (Haw. Terr. 1909). In Sylva, the supreme court
 was asked to interpret an instruction, presumably used at trial
 in an adverse possession action. Id. The issue presented was
 
whether the word "entry" for the purposes of an adverse
 possession instruction required dispossessing the owner. Id. 
The court held that it did and had this to say about the
 predecessor to HRS § 657-31:
16
 
16
 The 1905 Revised Session Laws of the Territory of Hawaii, § 1988
provided: 
Sec. 1988. Ten years. No person shall commence an
action to recover possession of any lands, or make any entry
thereon, unless within ten years after the right to bring
such action, first accrued. 
See id. at 782. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[I]n requiring that no person shall make an entry upon any
land unless within ten years after the right to bring an
action to recover possession of it first accrued, means that
the entry must be made within the time named and not after
and implies that the person entitled to possession was
ousted by the disseizor or otherwise, for if in possession
he would have no occasion to "recover" it.
 
Id. at 683. However, relying on Sylva for the proposition that
 
HRS § 657-31 is not analogous in a foreclosure action ignores
 that the supreme court held exactly that in cases decided before
 and after the supreme court's 1909 decision in Sylva. See Hilo,
 
15 Haw. 507; Kipahulu Sugar Co., 20 Haw. 620. We conclude that
 
Sylva is inapposite.
 
Koiwa also argues that "the right of entry is not 
analogous to a foreclosure because the mortgagee does not enter upon land." Koiwa disregards that the determinative issue is not the method of the foreclosure or the purpose of the security interest, but rather the fact that a mortgage is a conveyance of a real property interest, which allows the mortgagee to sell and take possession of the property. See Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i 
at 367-68, 390 P.3d at 1254-55. This is what makes the statute of limitations on actions "to recover possession of any lands, or make any entry thereon," under HRS § 657-31 most analogous to a foreclosure action, as opposed to an action to recover a debt, as held by the supreme court cases discussed above. 
Lastly, Koiwa argues that applying a different
 
limitations period to a foreclosure action and an action to
 recover on the note violates the prohibition against splitting a
 cause of action. Again, this argument ignores the supreme court
 precedent in Hilo and Kipahulu Sugar which provides that a
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mortgagee may foreclose on the mortgage after the statute of
 
limitations has run on an action to recover on the underlying
 note, except that the mortgagee is not entitled to a deficiency
 judgment against the debtor. See Kipahulu Sugar, 20 Haw. at 622. 
In sum, we reject Koiwa's argument that the Land Court
 
erred in: (1) concluding that the statute of limitations
 governing real actions applies to modern-day foreclosure; (2)
 permitting enforcement of the subject mortgage by splitting the
 note into a personal cause of action and real cause of action;
 (3) applying Kipahulu Sugar to a modern mortgage foreclosure
 action in light of the Uniform Commercial Code and the Mortgage
 Foreclosure Act; and (4) not overruling Kipahulu Sugar.
17
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Land Court's
 
August 5, 2016 Order Granting Motion to Dismiss.
 
17
 The Hawai 'i Supreme Court's decision in Kipahulu Sugar, which
directly addresses the issue presented here, is binding upon this court, as
well as the Land Court. See, e.g., State v. Jim, 105 Hawai 'i 319, 331, 97
P.3d 395, 407 (App. 2004) (stare decisis requires inferior courts to adhere tolegal decisions made by court of last resort). 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 28, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Junsuke Aaron Otsuka, 
Shelby Taguma,
(Otsuka & Associates)
for Petitioner-Appellant,
HISAKO KOIWA. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 
Peter T. Stone,
Robin Miller,
(TMLF HAWAII, LLLC) for Respondent-Appellee,
CHRISTIANA TRUST, A DIVISION OF
WILMINGTON SAVINGS FUND SOCIETY,
FSB, not in its individual
capacity but as trustee of
ARLP TRUST 3
 Associate Judge
18
 