NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-19-0000138
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JUSTIN P. NAMAUU, Defendant-Appellant
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 2CPC-18-0000399(4))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Justin P. Namauu (Namauu) appeals
from the Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Recusal of the
Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr., entered on January 15, 2019
(Order Denying Recusal ), in the Circuit Court of the Second
Circuit ( Circuit Court).   This is an interlocutory appeal, which
was filed pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 641-171
1The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr., presided ( Judge Bissen ).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2016) and the Circuit Court's Order Granting Motion for Leave
to File Interlocutory Appeal, entered on February 5, 2019.2
On appeal, Namauu contends that the Circuit Court
abused its discretion in refusing to reassign this case because a
prior judgment of conviction, which was entered by the presiding
judge in this case, will be used as evidence in a jury trial,
creating an appearance of impropriety.3
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Namauu's contention as follows:
Namauu has been charged with Murder in the Second
Degree in violation of HRS § 707-701.5 (2014), Carrying or Use of
Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of
HRS § 134-21(a) (2011), two counts of Ownership or Possession
Prohibited in violation of HRS § 134-7(b) (2011) ( Felon-in-
2HRS § 641-17 provides:
§ 641-17  Interlocutory appeals from circuit courts,
criminal matters.   Upon application made within the time
provided by the rules of court, an appeal in a criminal
matter may be allowed to a defendant from the circuit court
to the intermediate appellate court, subject to chapter 602,
from a decision denying a motion to dismiss or from other
interlocutory orders, decisions, or judgments, whenever the
judge in the judge's discretion may think the same advisable
for a more speedy termination of the case.  The refusal of
the judge to allow an interlocutory appeal to the appellate
court shall not be reviewable by any other court.
3Namauu's point of error is stated in terms of an "appearance of
impartiality" – and this phrase is used multiple times elsewhere in his
argument – but in context, an appearance of impartiality is nonsensical, and
it seems clear that he is asserting an appearance of impropriety.  For
clarity, we will disregard the erroneous wording.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Possession Counts),4 and Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in
violation of HRS § 134-25(a) (2011).  
Namauu argues that Judge Bissen cannot preside over
Namauu's trial because:  (1) an essential element of the Felon-
in-Possession Counts is proof beyond a reasonable doubt that
Namauu had a prior felony conviction at the time he possessed the
pistol and ammunition; (2)  the best evidence to prove a prior
conviction is the judgment of conviction itself, citing State v.
Sanchez, 82 Hawai# i
 517, 524, 923 P.2d 934, 941 (App. 1996); (3)
Judge Bissen signed and entered the prior judgment of conviction
here; and (4) because the judgment of conviction signed by Judge
Bissen is a crucial piece of evidence, it creates an appearance
of impropriety for Judge Bissen to preside over the case and,
therefore, Judge Bissen abused his discretion in entering the
Order Denying Recusal.  Namauu does not assert that Judge Bissen
holds any bias or prejudice against him.  Namauu cites no
authority, from any jurisdiction, supporting his proposition that
where a prior judgment of conviction signed by a presiding judge
may be used as evidence, it creates an appearance of impropriety
for the judge to preside over the subsequent case.
4HRS § 134-7 provides, in relevant part:
§ 134-7 Ownership or possession prohibited, when ;
penalty. . . . 
(b)No person who is under indictment for, or has
waived indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit
court for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere
of having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or
an illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control
any firearm or ammunition therefor.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Disqualification or recusal cases involve a two-part
analysis.  State v. Ross, 89 Hawai#i 371, 377, 974 P.2d 11, 17
(1998) (citing State v. Brown, 70 Haw. 459, 467, 776 P.2d 1182,
1187 (1989)).  First, "HRS § 601–7  is applied to determine
whether the alleged bias is covered by any of the specific
instances prohibited therein."  Id.  Then, "[i]f the alleged bias
falls outside of the provisions of HRS § 601–7, the court may [ ]
turn, if appropriate, to the notions of due process described in[5]
5HRS § 601-7 (2016) provides:
§ 601-7  Disqualification of judge; relationship,
pecuniary interest, previous judgment, bias or prejudice. 
(a)  No person shall sit as a judge in any case in which:
(1)The judge's relative by affinity or
consanguinity within the third degree is
counsel, or interested either as a plaintiff or
defendant, or in the issue of which the judge
has, either directly or through such relative, a
more than de minimis pecuniary interest; or
(2)The judge has been of counsel or on an appeal
from any decision or judgment rendered by the
judge;
provided that no interests held by mutual or common funds,
the investment or divestment of which are not subject to the
direction of the judge, shall be considered pecuniary
interests for purposes of this section; and after full
disclosure on the record, parties may waive disqualification
due to any pecuniary interest.
     (b)  Whenever a party to any suit, action, or proceeding,
civil or criminal, makes and files an affidavit that
the judge before whom the action or proceeding is to be
tried or heard has a personal bias or prejudice either
against the party or in favor of any opposite party
to the suit, the judge shall be disqualified from
proceeding therein.  Every such affidavit shall state
the facts and the reasons for the belief that bias or
prejudice exists and shall be filed before the trial
or hearing of the action or proceeding, or good cause
shall be shown for the failure to file it within such
time.  No party shall be entitled in any case to file
more than one affidavit; and no affidavit shall be
filed unless accompanied by a certificate of counsel of
record that the affidavit is made in good faith.  Any
judge may disqualify oneself by filing with the clerk
of the court of which the judge is a judge a certificate
that the judge deems oneself unable for any reason to
preside with absolute impartiality in the pending suit
or action.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Brown in conducting the broader inquiry of whether 'circumstances
. . . fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety and . . .
reasonably cast suspicion on the judge's impartiality.'"  Id.
(quoting Brown, 70 Haw. at 467 n.3, 776 P.2d at 1188 n.3)
(ellipses in original; brackets omitted).
Here, there is no allegation of bias or prejudice, or
any assertion that HRS § 601-7 otherwise applies.  In such
situations, a court "may then turn, if appropriate, to the
notions of due process in conducting the broader inquiry of
whether circumstances fairly give rise to an appearance of
impropriety and reasonably cast suspicion on the judge's
impartiality."  Chen v. Hoeflinger, 127 Hawai#i 346, 361, 279
P.3d 11, 26 (App. 2012) (citations, internal quotation marks,
brackets, and ellipses omitted).  "A judge who ceases
participating because of due-process concerns 'recuses' him or
herself."  Id. (citation omitted).
Here, Namauu argues that Judge Bissen cannot administer
his duties as a trial judge without appearing improper to a
reasonable person.  He submits that he has a due process right to
be convicted of the Felon-in-Possession Counts only when the
State proves every element, including the element that may be
proved by the prior judgment of conviction entered by Judge
Bissen.  While this may be true,  we reject the proposition that6
6As the Circuit Court pointed out, Namauu may avoid having the
judgment submitted into evidence by stipulating to the fact that he has a
prior felony conviction.  Although defense attorneys generally advise their
clients to do so, it is the client's right to have the State meet its
evidentiary burden (see State v. Ui, 142 Hawai#i 287, 297, 418 P.3d 628, 638
(2018)), and our decision assumes that the judgment itself may be offered into 
(continued...)
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Judge Bissen's presiding over a prior conviction would cause a
reasonable person, who is apprised of these facts, to question
Judge Bissen's impartiality in this case.  See State v. Lioen,
106 Hawai#i 123, 128-30, 102 P.3d 367, 372-74 (2004) (rejecting a
similar argument on plain error review).  Although the defendant
in Lioen argued that the trial judge should have recused sua
sponte, and here Namauu moved for Judge Bissen's recusal, the
underlying principle is the same – by itself, the fact that Judge
Bissen entered a previous judgment against Namauu that may be
used as evidence in this case does not create an appearance of
impropriety and require his recusal.  As noted above, Namauu
points to no court or other authority that has reached the
conclusion that such circumstances mandate recusal and we decline
to adopt that position here.
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 15, 2019
Order Denying Recusal is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 11, 2019.
On the briefs:
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6(...continued)
evidence in this case.  In that circumstance, the parties can consider steps
to address any concerns about admission of the prior judgment.
6