NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000002
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LOWELL S. D. KIM,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HENRY SOON TAI KIM; ALICE H. S. KIM, HEIRS OF LYDIA OK SOON KIM;
KATHERINE SOONIE KIM MINN; MARC K. KOGA TRUST;
ARNEE L. KOGA TRUST; CLIFFORD T. SASANO;
ALISON M. SASANO TRUST; CLIFFORD Y. SASANO TRUST;
JODI-ANN Y. ITO; WAYNE B. KATO TRUST; SACHIKO MURAKAWA TRUST
& SACHIKO MURANAKA, ISHIDA FAMILY TRUST,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
ALL OTHER PERSONS OR CORPORATIONS UNKNOWN CLAIMING ANY RIGHT,
TITLE, ESTATE LIEN OR INTEREST IN THE REAL PROPERTY
DESCRIBED HEREIN, ADVERSE TO PLAINTIFF'S OWNERSHIP AND
TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0460)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
 
In this appeal arising from a quiet title action to
 
confirm title by way of adverse possession, Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Lowell S. D. Kim (Lowell), appeals from the November 17, 2015
 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants Henry and
 Alice Kim's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed September 18, 2015"
 (MSJ Order) and the December 4, 2015 "Final Judgment" (Judgment),
 entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
court).1 Judgment was entered in favor of Lowell's parents,
 
Defendants-Appellees Henry Soon Tai Kim and Alice H. S. Kim
 
(Henry and Alice).
 
Henry and Alice have owned the subject property located
 
at 925 9th Avenue, Honolulu, Hawaii, 96816 since 1969. The
 
parcel of land includes the main house, which is occupied by
 Henry and Alice, and four rental units, three of which have
 separate structures. Based on the declarations of Henry and
 Alice, in 1982, they agreed to allow their son, Lowell, to occupy
 one of the units, 925C, at which time Lowell began making monthly
 payments of $200.00 and later $400.00. Lowell continued to make
 monthly payments until his motorcycle accident in 2011, after
 which Henry and Alice have allowed Lowell to continue to live in
 unit 925C without payment. In his deposition, Lowell testified
 that he started living in the unit in 1986 and made monthly
 payments of $400.00.
 
In 1989, Lowell obtained a loan to renovate unit 925C
 
to a two-story dwelling with an additional bedroom. During this
 year, Lowell claims that he had mentioned to his father, Henry,
 that "I will file a claim for the property for the interest of my
 children."
 
On March 18, 1999, Henry and Alice executed a document
 
(1999 Document), signed and notarized by both, acknowledging that
 the structure at 925C, but not the underlying land, was owned by
 Lowell.
 
The 1999 Document states:
 
We, Henry S.T. Kim and Alice Y. Kim are the owners of the
real property located at 925 9th Avenue, Honolulu, State of
Hawaii (TMK: 1/3-2-018-022).
 
This parcel is approximately 15,000 square feet in area upon
which there are three separate dwelling units. The units
 are designated at 925, 925 A & B and 925C 9
th Avenue.
 
The dwelling designated as 925C is located at the rear of
the parcel and consists of a 30'X44' two story structure.
The exterior of the first floor is made of hollow tile with
 exterior of the second floor made out of wood. There is a
 carport and an outside patio to this structure.
 
The structure at 925C is about ten years old and well
maintained. It was built and financed by our third son
 
1
 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Lowell Sun Duk Kim and we agree that he is the owner now of
this structure. We confirm and consider the structure and
 it's [sic] equity belongs to Lowell but we still own the
land upon which the structure rests. We have not conveyed
the land to him.
 
It is our agreement with Lowell that he may transfer the
ownership of the building to his two biological children
Heather Kanoe Kim and Lyle Ikaika Kim. Lowell or his
 children may not sell the building to any one [sic] outside
the family and without our consent. If it is to be sold,
the building must be sold to us at the fair market value.
 
Lowell testified in his deposition that he received the
 
1999 Document and understood that the document was giving himself
 
ownership rights to the structure and not the land beneath the
 structure.
 
On October 28, 2015, the circuit court orally granted
 
Henry and Alice's motion for summary judgment finding that there
 was no genuine issue of material fact and that the elements of
 adverse possession had not been met. On November 17, 2015, the
 circuit court filed its MSJ Order thereby dismissing with
 prejudice Lowell's Complaint to Quiet Title and for Partition.
 
On appeal, Lowell contends that the circuit court
 
erred: (1) when it granted Henry and Alice's motion for summary
 judgment, concluding that Lowell did not satisfy the elements of
 adverse possession and (2) when it asserted the Sham Affidavit
 Rule thereby excluding certain evidence offered by Lowell in
 opposition to Henry and Alice's motion for summary judgment.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Lowell's
 points of errors as follows, and affirm.
 
Lowell contends that the circuit court incorrectly
 
concluded that Lowell did not raise a genuine issue of fact
 regarding the element of "hostile" possession necessary to
 establish his claim of adverse possession, and therefore erred in
 granting Henry and Alice's motion for summary judgment.
 
The party moving for summary judgment bears the burden
 
of proof to show the absence of genuine issues of material fact
 entitling the moving party to judgment as a matter of law.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006). However, "[w]here . . . the 
moving party is the defendant and does not bear the burden of proof at trial, he may prevail on a motion for summary judgment by demonstrating that the plaintiff 'fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial.'" Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai
'i 125, 130, 267 
P.3d 1230, 1235 (2011) (citations omitted). 
The circuit court held that Lowell failed to show that
 
he could meet his burden of proving the elements required for
 adverse possession and that Henry and Alice had provided
 "convincing evidence to the contrary regarding hostility and
 permissive use." We agree and conclude that Lowell failed to
 demonstrate that a genuine issue of material fact existed as to
 the element of hostile possession and therefore, his claim for
 adverse possession fails.
 
"It is well established that one claiming title to real 
property by adverse possession must bear the burden of proving by clear and positive proof each element of actual, open, notorious, hostile, continuous and exclusive possession for the statutory period." Mauna Kea Agribusiness Co., Inc. v. Nauka, 105 Hawai
'i 
252, 255, 96 P.3d 581, 584 (2004) (quoting Morinoue v. Roy, 86 Hawai
'i 76, 81, 947 P.2d 944, 949 (1997) (brackets omitted). 
"The element of hostility is satisfied by showing possession for oneself under a claim of right[,]" and "[s]uch possession must import a denial of the owner's title." 
It is, of course of the essence of adverse possession that
it should be hostile and that the circumstances of the
 holding be such as to give the true owner notice, at least
if he paid attention to his rights, that the possession is
under claim as owner, and if the possessor so conducts
himself towards the true owner as to lead him to believe
 that the possession is in subordination to his title, the
elements of hostility and openness are lacking and the
possession is not adverse. 
Smith v. Hamakua Mill Co., 15 Haw. 648, 656 (Haw. Terr. 1904).
 
For the duration of Lowell's occupation in unit 925C,
 
Lowell did not conduct himself in a manner that led or should
 
have led Henry and Alice to believe that he was asserting an
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
ownership interest in the land.
 
Lowell testified that he originally moved into unit
 
925C because his parents wanted him to live there and that he was
 
never forced to move into the unit. Further, Henry and Alice
 testified that "they have at all time let Lowell know that he was
 living in 925C with [their] consent and approval." "Possession
 once shown to have been at its inception permissive or in
 subordination to the true owner's title, is presumed, in the
 absence of any showing to the contrary, to continue of the same
 character, — in other words, the burden is on the possessor to
 show that it thereafter became hostile." Hamakua Mill Co., 15
 
Haw. at 657. The record is devoid of any evidence that would
 reasonably indicate to Henry and Alice that Lowell's occupation
 was hostile rather than permissive.
 
Additionally, Henry and Alice attest that "Lowell . . .
 
has rented one of the units located on the Parcel since 1982 and
 has paid rent . . . each month since that time up and until he
 was injured in a serious motorcycle accident which occurred in
 July 2011." Henry and Alice both attest that after Lowell's
 accident in 2011, they agreed and consented to allow Lowell to
 temporarily stop paying rent until he was able to regain
 employment. Lowell testified that the monthly payments were for
 property taxes and not rent, and argues that this somehow defeats
 permissive use. However, there is no dispute that Lowell was
 making monthly payments to his parents from 1982 until 2011 and
 regardless of whether his payments were for property taxes or for
 rent, Lowell's undisputed actions, even taken in the light most
 favorable to him, show that his possession of unit 925C was in
 subordination to the title held by his parents.
 
The 1999 Document executed by Henry and Alice only
 
acknowledged Lowell's ownership of the structure, but not the
 underlying land, which Henry and Alice stated they still owned.
 Although Lowell maintains he did not agree with the 1999
 Document, after receiving the document, he did not send his
 parents anything in writing objecting to it and could not recall
 whether he ever told his parents orally that he did not agree
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the document.
 
Furthermore, Lowell has been divorced twice, in 1995
 
and 2012, both occurring after the renovation work performed on
 
unit 925C in 1989. As part of the 1995 and 2012 divorce
 proceedings, Lowell submitted a signed Asset and Debt Statement
 both of which attested that Lowell declared under penalty of
 perjury that he had no real property, no major assets, and no
 property held in trust for or by third persons. These court
 documents including both divorce decrees further establish that
 Lowell was not asserting an ownership interest in the subject
 property.
 
Even considering the declaration Lowell submitted in
 
opposition to Henry and Alice's motion for summary judgment, the
 record establishes that there is no genuine issue of material
 fact that Lowell cannot meet his burden of proof required for
 adverse possession. We conclude that Lowell's occupancy of unit
 925C was not hostile and therefore his claim for adverse
 possession fails. Because we conclude that summary judgment was
 appropriate with the consideration of Lowell's declaration, we
 need not address whether the circuit court erred in applying the
 Sham Affidavit Rule.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit
 
court's Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants
 Henry and Alice Kim's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed 
September 18, 2015 and Final Judgment filed on December 4, 2015.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 13, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Keoni K. Agard,
(Agard Law LLC),
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Bert T. Kobayashi, Jr.,
Jonathan S. Moore,
Charles D. Hunter,
Caycie K. Gusman,
(Kobayashi, Sugita & Goda LLP),
for Defendants-Appellees.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 