NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000480
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SIAKI FALETA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 10-1-0015)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Siaki Faleta (Faleta) appeals from
 
the April 11, 2012 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered
 
1
in the Family Court of the First Circuit  (family court)
convicting Faleta on two counts of Sexual Assault in the Third
 
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ยง 707-732(1)(b)
 
(Supp. 2009).
 
On appeal, Faleta contends the family court erroneously
 
(1)
 admitted statements Faleta had made, and (2) excluded
 
evidence.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On March 17, 2010, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) charged Faleta with two counts of sexual assault in the third degree. On July 13, 2011, Faleta filed a motion to 
1
 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2suppress self-incriminating statements he had made to a detective
during a custodial interrogation at the Honolulu Police
Department (HPD).  Faleta argued he was unable to voluntarily,
knowingly, and intelligently waive his right to remain silent and
his right to counsel.
The family court conducted a hearing on Faleta's motion
on December 7 and December 9, 2011.  The parties presented
testimony from Faleta, Faleta's first and second wives, and the
detective who had interviewed Faleta and had advised Faleta of
his rights.  The family court denied Faleta's motion, finding
Faleta had a sufficient understanding of the English language and
had validly waived his rights.
On January 11, 2012, Faleta filed a notice of intent
indicating he intended to introduce evidence that the complaining
witness's sister (Sister) had falsified sexual assault
allegations against Faleta (not the allegations in the instant
case.)  The State filed a motion in limine on January 17, 2012,
seeking to exclude "any evidence relating to any prior bad acts
of any of the State's witnesses or to the sexual history of the
complaining witness[.]"  The family court granted the State's
motion in limine on January 23, 2012, stating it was "exclud[ing]
any evidence concerning any sexual molestation investigation
involving [Sister][.]"
On January 30, 2012, after trial and deliberations, the
jury found Faleta guilty as charged.  On May 10, 2012, Faleta
filed a timely notice of appeal from the judgment entered against
him.
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW
I. Waiver of Rights
Discussing the constitutional protections afforded
defendants by the United States Supreme Court's decision in
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d
694 (1966), the Hawai #i Supreme Court has stated that,
the protections which the United States Supreme Court
enumerated in Miranda have an independent source in theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Hawai#i Constitution's privilege against self-incrimination. 
In determining the admissibility of custodial statements,
the prosecutor must show that each accused was warned that
he had a right to remain silent, that anything said could be
used against him, that he had a right to the presence of an
attorney, and that if he could not afford an attorney one
would be appointed for him.  If these minimal safeguards are
not satisfied, then statements made by the accused may not
be used either as direct evidence or to impeach the
defendant's credibility.
Assuming, however, that the minimal safeguards are
observed, the accused may waive the right to counsel,
provided that such waiver is voluntarily and intelligently
undertaken.  Moreover, once warned of his Miranda
protections, the suspect is free to exercise his own
volition in deciding whether or not to make a statement to
the authorities.
In determining whether a valid waiver of the right to
counsel and the right to silence occurred, we review
whether the purported waiver was knowing and
intelligent and found to be so under the totality of
the circumstances[.]  
An explicit statement of waiver is not invariably necessary
to support a finding that the defendant waived the right to
remain silent or the right to counsel guaranteed by the
Miranda case.
State v. Henderson, 80 Hawai# i 439, 441-42, 911 P.2d 74, 76-77
(1996) (internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and
ellipsis omitted). 
II. Motion in Limine
Because "the granting or denying of a motion in limine
is within the trial court's inherent power to exclude or admit
evidence, we review the court's ruling for the abuse of
discretion standard."  State v. Kealoha , 95 Hawai #i 365, 379, 22
P.3d 1012, 1026 (App. 2000) (internal quotation marks, citations,
and brackets omitted).
However, when the trial court's order granting a motion
in limine is an evidentiary decision based upon relevance, the
standard of review is the right/wrong standard.  Ass'n of Apt.
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai #i 97,
110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002).
As the Hawai# i Supreme Court has noted:
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to trial
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of
evidence at issue.  When application of a particularNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard.  However, the traditional abuse of discretion
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of
evidence that require a "judgment call" on the part of the
trial court.
Walsh v. Chan,  80 Hawai #i 212, 215, 908 P.2d 1198, 1201 (1995) 
(quoting Craft v. Peebles,  78 Hawai# i 287, 293-94, 893 P.2d 138,
144-45 (1995)).
III.  DISCUSSION
I. Faleta's Motion to Suppress
Faleta contends the family court erred in denying his
motion to suppress statements he made during a custodial
interrogation by an HPD detective.  Faleta argues his waiver of
his right to remain silent and his right to counsel was invalid
because he was advised of his rights without the aid of an
interpreter.
"After a defendant has been adequately apprised of his
Miranda rights, he may waive effectuation of these rights
provided the waiver is made voluntarily, knowingly, and
intelligently."  State v. Luton,  83 Hawai #i 443, 454, 927 P.2d
844, 855 (1996) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
To determine whether a valid waiver was given, this court must
examine the entire record and make an independent determination
of the ultimate issue of voluntariness based on the totality of
circumstances.  Id.
The totality of the record demonstrated that Faleta
sufficiently understood English and voluntarily, knowingly, and
intelligently waived his rights.  Faleta testified that he was
born and raised in Tonga but has lived in the United States since
1986.  His children attended English-speaking schools, and he
communicated with his first wife primarily in English.  Faleta
also testified he ran his own business and engaged in "basic
communications" with English-speaking customers.  The detective
who warned Faleta of his rights testified that Faleta stated he
could understand basic English, and that at all times Faleta
appeared to understand and appropriately answered questions inNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5English.  The family court found Faleta had understood the
detective and had knowingly initialed the written warning and
waiver form informing him of his constitutional rights.  We
conclude the family court did not err in denying Faleta's motion
to suppress his statements.
II. State's Motion in Limine
We reject Faleta's argument that the family court's
exclusion of evidence violated his constitutional rights.  In
granting the State's motion in limine, the family court only
excluded evidence that the complaining witness's Sister had
recanted sexual assault allegations she had made against Faleta. 
The family court did not preclude Sister from giving testimony
indicating the complaining witness had lied about her allegations
against Faleta, and the court allowed Faleta to cross-examine the
complaining witness about possible biases, interest, or motive to
testify against Faleta.  There is no indication that Sister's
recanted allegations had any bearing on the charges at issue, and
admission of such allegations would have led to confusion of the
issues.  Therefore, the family court did not abuse its discretion
when it granted the State's motion in limine.
IV.  CONCLUSION
The April 11, 2012 "Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence" entered in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai
#i, May 23, 2013.
On the briefs:
Walter J. Rodby
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge