  ยง711-1106 Harassment. (1) A person commits the offense
of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any
other person, that person:
 
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000012
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
THEODORE ROBERT BRISTOW, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION

 
(Case No. 3DCW-14-0001486)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Theodore Robert Bristow (Bristow)
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order,
 
entered on December 12, 2014 in the District Court of the Third
 Circuit, Kona Division (District Court).
1
 
Bristow was convicted of Harassment, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106 (2014).2
 
On appeal, Bristow contends (1) there was insufficient
 
evidence to convict him of Harassment and (2) there was
 insufficient evidence his statements were not protected free
 
1
 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 711-1106(f) states:
 
. . . .
 (f) Makes a communication using offensively coarse
language that would cause the recipient to reasonably
believe that the actor intends to cause bodily injury to the
recipient or another or damage to the property of the
recipient or another.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
speech under the United States Constitution and Hawaii
 
Constitution.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Bristow's points of error as follows:
 
(1) When the evidence adduced at trial is considered in 
the strongest light for the prosecution, State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007), there was 
sufficient evidence to support Bristow's conviction. 
Complaining Witness (CW) testified that Bristow had
 
been his neighbor for ten to twelve years and that their houses
 were about twenty-four feet apart. On April 25, 2014, the date
 of the incident, he was awakened at about 11:30 p.m., by Bristow
 swearing at him and playing loud music. Bristow then turned the
 music louder and yelled over the music "Fuck you, [CW], I'm going
 to take care of you" and "How do you like that, fucking [CW]." 
He and his wife were alarmed by Bristow's actions. CW felt that
 Bristow was harassing him because he and his wife went to sleep
 at 10 o'clock and the house was dark. Although there had been
 loud music from parties at Bristow's house in the past, CW felt
 this was different because the music was louder and this was
 Bristow alone making comments that seemed to be directed at CW. 
CW was alarmed because he "couldn't understand where he's comin'
 from." CW did not feel that Bristow was going to cause bodily
 injury to him, but felt that Bristow was a threat to his property
 or dogs. After the police arrived, Bristow continued to yell,
 "Fuck you, [CW], I'm going to get you. Fuck you [CW's wife],"
 and Bristow "started all over again." The music played until the
 police entered Bristow's house.
 
CW's wife testified that, shortly after eleven in the
 
evening, she awoke to what sounded like an argument, with Bristow
 yelling obscenities using CW's first name. Bristow's comments
 initially only involved CW's first name, but then she heard
 Bristow say "Fuck you, [CW's wife]" and she became certain
 Bristow was yelling at them. She then heard loud music with
 Bristow yelling over the music, "How do you like that, fucking
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[CW]." The music was so loud that it almost made the windows
 
rattle. She asked CW if he had had "any conversation" with
 Bristow; CW denied that he had spoken to Bristow. When Bristow
 stated that he would "get" CW, and seemed to be fixated on CW,
 she felt scared and called the police. CW's wife felt she and CW
 were in danger.
 
Bristow argues that the State failed to adduce
 
sufficient evidence that CW reasonably believed that Bristow
 intended to cause bodily injury to CW or CW's wife or intended to
 cause damage to the CW's property. Bristow also contends the
 State failed to prove that he acted with the requisite mens rea
 to harass, annoy or alarm the CW. Bristow claims that he only
 acted recklessly because he was intoxicated. Bristow does not
 argue that his statements were not communications using
 offensively coarse language. 
There was substantial evidence as to every material
 
element of the offense of Harassment of sufficient quality and
 probative value to enable the trier of fact to reasonably
 conclude that Bristow was guilty of Harassment. Id.
 
It is undisputed Bristow repeatedly used "offensively 
coarse language" during this incident. The time of day, the proximity of the houses, the extended length of the shouting and blaring of very loud music, the offensive language and the content of the comments all support the intentional nature of Bristow's actions. "[T]he mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai
'i 85, 92, 976 
P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (citation omitted). Finally, this conduct, taken in the light most favorable to the prosecution, would support the finding that Bristow's comments would cause CW to reasonably believe that Bristow intended to cause bodily injury to CW's wife or his property. "And as trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992). Bristow's comments could have reasonably led CW to believe that Bristow intended to cause bodily injury to his wife after the CW 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
threatened "to take care of" and "to get" CW and then made
 
offensive comments to CW's wife.
 
(2) Bristow has failed to establish that he preserved 
his argument that his comments were protected free speech under the United States Constitution or the Hawaii Constitution. A review of the record on appeal does not indicate that Bristow raised this issue below. Therefore, the point of error is waived. Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4); 
Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 35, 856 P.2d 1207, 1224 (1993). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order, entered on December 12, 2014 by the
 District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 8, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa,

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Jason R. Kwiat,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai 'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
4
 