         
  
      
        
         
         
           
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000528 30-DEC-2025 07:55 AM Dkt. 101 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000528 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
CENTURY  21  PARADISE  INTERNATIONAL,  managing  agent, 
Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
SUSAN  KURATA;  WILLIE  KURATA,  Defendants-Appellants,  and 
CINDY  KURATA,   Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT   COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU   DIVISION 
(CIVIL  NO.  1DRC-23-0000224) 
SUMMARY   DISPOSITION   ORDER 
(By:
 Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants  Susan  Kurata  (Susan),  Willie 
Kurata,   and  Cindy  Kurata  (Kuratas )  appeal  from  the  September   12, 
2023  Judgment   for  Possession   (Judgment )  and  the  September  12, 
2023  Writ  of  Possession  (Writ)  entered  in  favor  of  Plaintiff-
Appellee  Century  21  Paradise  International,  managing  agent 
(Century  21),  in  the  District  Court  of  the  First  Circuit, 
Honolulu  Division  (District  Court). 1
The Kuratas raise two points of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred in: (1) entering 
1 The Honorable Shellie K. Park-Hoapili entered the Judgment and the 
Writ; the Honorable William M. Domingo presided over the Kuratas' Motion for 
Stay Pending Appeal and Century 21's Motion for Summary Judgment.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
       
         
         
     
          
           
         
          
          
         
       
        
            
         
         
           
        
      
         
           
          
           
         
           
           
           summary  judgment  in favor of Century 21; and (2)  denying  the
Kuratas'  motion  for  stay  pending  appeal.            
Upon
 careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve the 
Kuratas' points of error as follows: 
(1) The Kuratas argue that the District Court erred in 
entering summary judgment in favor of Century 21 on two grounds. 
First, the Kuratas' main argument is that no admissible evidence 
was presented to establish the existence of a written or oral 
lease. Second, the Kuratas argue that the District Court erred 
in denying their request for a continuance pursuant to District 
Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 56(f). 
While the Kuratas couch their first argument in terms 
of "no lease," the gravamen of their argument is that there is no 
tenancy here because their occupancy of the property located on 
Rooke Avenue in Honolulu (Property ), and the payments made by 
them from 2001 to 2022, arise out of an oral repurchase agreement 
between Susan and Jean S. Nagao (Nagao). 
In the Declaration of Susan Kurata (Kurata 
Declaration ), Susan avers, inter alia, the following. Nagao is 
her hanai mother who raised her and lives next door to the 
Property. In 2001, when Susan was facing foreclosure on the 
Property, Jean and Susan agreed that Jean would acquire a loan to 
pay off Susan's mortgage, Susan would transfer title to the 
Property to Jean and make the payments due on that loan until 
paid in full, at which time Jean would transfer title back to 
Susan. Jean obtained the loan and Susan conveyed title to Jean's 
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
           
           
         
        
        
 
         
          
        
           
           
          
         
            
         
       
          
 
      
         
           
             
           
            
          
            
            
             
          
           
             
            
            
             
  irrevocable trust. Susan avers, and it is undisputed, that Susan 
and her family continued to reside at the Property. Susan avers 
that she made all of the necessary payments until the loan was 
satisfied. Both parties assert that payments were made, but 
Century 21 characterizes those payments as rent2 and Susan 
characterizes them as payments made pursuant to the repurchase 
agreement. 
This is an action for the summary possession of real 
property, and in asserting that they had an interest in the 
Property pursuant to a repurchase agreement, the Kuratas have 
attempted to raise a defense which involves title to real estate. 
See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Century Ctr., Inc. v. An, 139 
Hawai i 278, 286, 389 P.3d 115,  123 (2016) (holding that an 
equitable interest created by an agreement of sale is sufficient 
to put title at issue for the purposes of DCRCP Rule 12.1). 
Century 21 argues that the Kuratas are clearly disputing the 
District Court's jurisdiction in accordance with Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 604-5(d) (2016)3 and did not comply with DCRCP 
Rule 12.1. 
2 The Kuratas make well-founded arguments concerning the 
admissibility of certain evidence offered by Century 21 concerning these 
payments, namely paragraph 2 of the Declaration of Kevin Uyeda (Uyeda) and 
Exhibit 2 thereto. Uyeda does not purport to have any personal knowledge of 
the payments or records of the payments, and Uyeda makes hearsay statements 
based on what he was "informed and believe[s]" without so much as identifying 
who "informed him" of events that indisputably occurred before he was 
purportedly hired in September 2022 to manage the Property. Uyeda did not, 
for example, identify who created Exhibit 2, but vaguely asserted it was the 
Defendants. On appeal, Century 21 admits that Exhibit 2 was not created by 
the Kuratas, notwithstanding Uyeda's sworn statement to the contrary. The 
Kuratas objected below, and on appeal, we conclude that the District Court 
erred in relying on paragraph 2 of the Uyeda declaration and Exhibit 2 to 
conclude that Century 21 was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
3 HRS § 604-5(d) provides in part: "The district courts shall not 
have cognizance of real action, nor actions in which the title to real estate 
comes in question[.]" 
3          
   
         
  
        
        
        
       
      
       
            
         
          
        
        
          
           
           
          
         
            
         
          
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DCRCP Rule 12.1 states: 
Rule  12.1.   DEFENSE  OF  TITLE  IN  DISTRICT  COURTS.   
Pleadings.   Whenever,  in  the  district  court,  in 
defense  of  an  action  in  the  nature  of  an  action  for  trespass 
or  for  the  summary  possession  of  land,  or  any  other  action, 
the  defendant  shall  seek  to  interpose  a  defense  to  the 
jurisdiction  to  the  effect  that  the  action  is  a  real  action, 
or  one  in  which  the  title  to  real  estate  is  involved,  such 
defense  shall  be  asserted  by  a  written  answer  or  written 
motion,  which  shall  not  be  received  by  the  court  unless 
accompanied  by  an  affidavit  of  the  defendant,  setting  forth 
the  source,  nature  and  extent  of  the  title  claimed  by 
defendant  to  the  land  in  question,  and  such  further 
particulars  as  shall  fully  apprise  the  court  of  the  nature 
of  defendant's  claim. 
The Kuratas did not raise this issue in a written 
answer or written motion; rather, they raised it in a written 
memorandum in opposition to Century 21's summary judgment motion, 
which opposition was accompanied by the Kurata Declaration. 
Although not presented in full compliance with DCRCP's 
requirements, we nevertheless consider whether the Kurata 
Declaration set forth with sufficient particularity the source, 
nature, and extent of Susan's claim of a right to title in the 
Property. Here, the Kurata Declaration asserted that the source 
and nature of her interest in the Property was the oral 
repurchase agreement with Nagao, and included details of the 
timing and specific circumstances of that agreement and her 
performance under that agreement. The extent of Susan's claim to 
title was stated as arising only if she completed all payment on 
the Nagao loan. However, Susan averred that she had in fact 
fully satisfied the conditions for her right to a transfer of 
title to the Property, namely the full satisfaction of the 
payments due on the 2001 loan that Nagao took out to stop the 
foreclosure on the Property when it was previously owned by 
Susan. Century 21 alleged only an oral rental agreement and 
offered no declaration or other evidence supporting even the most 
4
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
        
        
          
          
   
      
         
          
        
         
         
          
         
          
          
            
       
          
          
          
          
           
          
            
          
         basic terms supporting the existence of a rental agreement, 
offering only a hearsay declaration of a self-described managing 
agent for an unidentified principal based on "information and 
belief" that did not even identify the alleged parties to the 
oral rental agreement, the monthly rents, or any other term of 
the alleged rental agreement. 
We conclude that the Kurata Declaration sufficiently 
established that the District Court does not have jurisdiction to 
determine whether or not Susan has an enforceable right to title 
in the Property based on the alleged repurchase agreement, 
notwithstanding that it was attached to an opposition to a 
motion, rather than a written motion or written answer, thereby 
creating a genuine issue of material fact as to Century 21's 
right to summary possession of the Property. Accordingly, and 
based on the entire record before us, we further conclude that 
the District Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of 
Century 21. In light of this conclusion, we need not reach the 
Kuratas' other arguments concerning the entry of summary 
judgment. 
(2) The Kuratas argue that the District Court erred in 
granting their motion for a stay pending appeal. We conclude 
that the issues raised are moot because on September 13, 2023, 
this court entered a temporary stay; on February 8, 2024, this 
court entered an Order Granting in Part Motion for Stay; and on 
February 16, 2024, this court entered an Order Granting in Part 
Motion to Modify Terms of Stay on Appeal. An issue is moot 
"where events subsequent to the judgment of the trial court have 
so affected the relations between the parties that the two 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
   
           
        
        
           
          
           
        
      conditions  for  justiciability  relevant  on  appeal–adverse  interest 
and  effective  remedy-have  been  compromised."   Lathrop  v. 
Sakatani,  111  Hawai i  307,  313,  141  P.3d  480,  486  (2006).   There 
is  no  effective  remedy  for  the  issues  raised  by  the  Kuratas 
concerning  a  supersedeas  bond  and  stay  pending  appeal  as  the 
relief  sought  has  already  been  granted  by  this  court.  
For the
 foregoing reasons, the District Court's 
September 12, 2023 Judgment and Writ are vacated. This case is 
remanded to the District Court for further proceedings consistent 
with this Summary Disposition Order, e.g., a voluntary dismissal, 
a written motion to dismiss based on the lack of subject matter 
jurisdiction, or a sua sponte dismissal by the District Court. 
See Captain Andy's Sailing, Inc. v. Dep't of Land and Nat. Res.,
 
113 Hawai i 184, 194, 150 P.3d 833, 843 (2006). 
DATED:
 Honolulu, Hawai i, December  30, 2025. 
On  the  briefs: 
Frederick  J.  Arensmeyer, 
for  Defendants-Appellants. 
Allison  A.  Ito, 
Michel  A.  Okazaki, 
(Choi  &  Ito,  AAL),  and 
Richard  A.  Yanagi, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Kimberly  T.  Guidry 
Associate  Judge 
6
 