 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000932
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STEVEN KALANI PALAMA, SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE OF THE
PHILIP K. PALAMA, JR. REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST
DATED JULY 19, 1994, et al.,
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
v.
 
GILBERT MEDEIROS, SR., et al.,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 99-0050)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
This appeal arises from a long running dispute 
regarding property rights between members of the Palama family 
and members of the Medeiros family. A prior quiet title action brought by members of the Palama family against members of the Medeiros family culminated in a 1968 decision of the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court in Palama v. Sheehan, 50 Haw. 298, 440 P.2d 95 (1968). 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Antone "Max"
 
Medeiros (Max Medeiros) appeals from and Plaintiffs­Appellees/Cross-Appellants Steven Kalani Palama, Patricia M.
 Palama, Violet K. Ihara, and Iris P. Hornstine (collectively, the
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
Palamas)  cross-appeal from the Revised Final Judgment of the
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).2 The Revised
 
Final Judgment entered judgment in favor of the Palamas and
 
against Max Medeiros, Gilbert Medeiros, Jr., and Mary K. Adviento
 (collectively, the Medeiros Trial Defendants) on Counts 1, 3, and
 4 of the Palamas' First Amended Verified Complaint (Amended
 Complaint).
 
The Revised Final Judgment was entered pursuant to the 
Circuit Court's Decision and Order which, among other things: (1) enjoined the Medeiros Trial Defendants from trespassing on the Palamas' property, other than to participate in the exercise of customary and traditional native Hawaiian gathering rights and cultural practices, as determined by the Circuit Court or other court of competent jurisdiction, or to gain access via an established right-of-way to their kuleanas or to the beach reserve owned by the State of Hawai
'i (State); (2) issued a 
mandatory injunction against the Medeiros Trial Defendants which required them to remove structures built on the Palamas' property as determined by a Shoreline Certification Survey ordered by the Circuit Court; (3) declared that the Medeiros Trial Defendants were entitled to access areas in which salt flats and a heiau
3 
were located to exercise customary and traditional native Hawaiian gathering rights and cultural practices, but were not entitled to access or use Nomilo Pond; (4) ordered the Palamas 
1In this case, Steven Kalani Palama appears as Successor Trustee of the
Philip K. Palama, Jr., Revocable Living Trust dated July 19, 1984, Violet K.
Ihara appears as Trustee of the Violet K. Ihara Trust dated January 23, 1992,
and Iris P. Hornstine appears as Trustee under that Certain Trust Agreement
dated August 4, 1994. Steven Kalani Palama, as Successor Trustee of the
Philip K. Palama, Jr., Revocable Living Trust dated July 19, 1984, was
substituted as a plaintiff for Philip K. Palama, Jr., after Philip K. Palama,
Jr., passed away.
 
2The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 
3
 A "heiau" is defined as a "[p]re-Christian place of worship, shrine;
some heiau were elaborately constructed stone platforms, others were simple
earth terraces. Many are preserved today." Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H.
Ebert, Hawaiian Dictionary 64 (rev. ed. 1986). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the Medeiros Trial Defendants to hire a surveyor to locate
 
the right-of-way easement as determined in the prior Palama v.
 Sheehan litigation and imposed certain limitations on the scope
 of the right-of-way; (5) identified the location of Parcel 9, the
 "House Lot" parcel owned by members of the Medeiros family, and
 ordered the installation of boundary markers for Parcel 9, but
 declined to identify the location of Parcel 8, the "Salt Pond"
 parcel owned by members of the Medeiros family; and (6) ordered
 the Palamas and the Medeiros Trial Defendants to agree on a
 private surveyor to conduct a Shoreline Certification Survey and
 to determine the boundaries of property owned by the Palamas,
 Parcel 9 owned by members of the Medeiros family, and the beach
 reserve owned by the State.
 
In his pro se appeal, Max Medeiros argues that the
 
Circuit Court erred in: (1) failing to dismiss the claims against
 Max Medeiros once his father, Defendant Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.,
 passed away and was dismissed from the case; (2) failing to
 dismiss the case based on the doctrines of res judicata,
 collateral estoppel, judicial estoppel, or collateral attack; (3)
 granting an injunction and ordering a survey without all of the
 parties affected participating in the trial; (4) failing to
 dismiss the case for failure to prosecute; and (5) awarding costs
 to the Palamas.
 
In their cross-appeal, the Palamas argue that the
 
Circuit Court erred in finding that the Medeiros Trial Defendants
 were entitled to access the Palamas' property to engage in
 traditional and customary native Hawaiian gathering rights and
 cultural practices with respect to (1) making salt in the area
 described as the "Salt Pans" or the "Salt Flats" and (2) visiting
 
4
a heiau in the area adjacent to the mauka  end of Nomilo Pond. 
As to the making of salt, the Palamas acknowledge that the
 Medeiros Trial Defendants presented some evidence to support
 
4
"Mauka" means "[i]nland, upland, towards the mountain[.]" Pukui &
 
Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 242, 365.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their claim, but contend that the evidence presented was
 
insufficient. As to visits to the heiau, the Palamas assert that
 "there is little evidence in the record to support even the
 existence of a heiau on the Palamas' property, let alone the
 existence of any traditional and customary native Hawaiian right
 held by the Medeiros [Trial] Defendants to be exercised at such a
 heiau."
 
As explained below, we conclude that Max Medeiros'
 
claims of error in his appeal are without merit. In the Palamas'
 cross-appeal, we affirm the Circuit Court's ruling with respect
 to the making of salt, and we vacate and remand for further
 proceedings the Circuit Court's ruling relating to visits to the
 heiau. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The dispute in this case involves property owned by the 
Palamas (Palama Property), property owned by members of the Medeiros family (Medeiros Property), and a 100 foot beach reserve (Beach Reserve) owned by the State. The Palama Property consists of 59.4 acres of land, located on the island of Kaua
'i in the 
ahupua 'a5 of Kalaheo, and includes an approximately 18 acre fish 
pond known as Nomilo Pond. The Palama Property is designated Tax Map Key (TMK) No. (4)2-3-010-002. 
At the time this action was filed, there were four
 
'6
apanas of two different kuleanas  in the ahupua 'a of Kal aheo that 
were excluded from the Palama Property. These four 'apanas were: 
(1) Parcel 8, designated TMK No. (4)2-3-010-008, consisting of
 
5
"Ahupua' a" is defined as a "[l]and division usually extending from the
uplands to the sea[.]" Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 9. 
6"Kuleana" means "a small area of land such as were awarded in fee by
the Hawaiian monarch, about the year 1850, to all Hawaiians who made
application therefor[,]" Palama v. Sheehan, 50 Haw. 298, 299 n.1, 440 P.2d 95,96 n.1 (1968) (quotation marks and citation omitted), and it is also defined,in relevant part, as a "small piece of property, as within an ahupua' a[.]"
Pukui & Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 179. An "' apana" is defined, in relevant
part, as a "land parcel [or] lot[.]" Id. at 28. "A kuleana, land division,may consist of several ' apana." Id. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
0.0317722 acre (1,384 square feet); (2) Parcel 9, designated TMK
 
No. (4)2-3-010-009, consisting of 0.1154729 acre (5,030 square
 feet); (3) Parcel 3, designated TMK No. (4)2-3-010-003,
 consisting of 0.08 acre; and (4) Parcel 7, designated TMK No.
 (4)2-3-010-007, consisting of 0.14 acre.
7 The Medeiros Property
 
consists of Parcels 8 and 9. Parcels 3 and 7 were owned by other
 individuals.
 
The Palamas and members of the Medeiros family disputed
 
the precise location of the Medeiros Property. The Palamas and
 members of the Medeiros family also disputed the extent to which
 members of the Medeiros family were entitled to enter the Palama
 Property to gain access to the Medeiros Property and to engage in
 various activities on the Palama Property.
 
II.
 
Several decades prior to this case, Philip K. Palama,
 
Sr., and Hisako Komaki Palama (collectively, the Senior Palamas),
 the Palamas' predecessors in interest, filed an action in 1964 to
 quiet title to the Palama Property in the Circuit Court in Civil
 No. 589 against numerous defendants, including Rebecca P.
 Medeiros, Elizabeth P. Medeiros, Nancy K.P. Swanson, Alice K.P.
 Kealoha, Lani Keliiaa, and Thomas Pratt, Jr. (collectively, the
 Senior Medeiroses), the predecessors in interest to members of
 the Medeiros family. In that case, the Senior Medeiroses claimed
 an ancient Hawaiian right-of-way or right-of-way by necessity
 through the Palama Property and also claimed ancient Hawaiian
 fishing rights in Nomilo Pond. 
The Circuit Court entered a judgment in 1966 which
 
quieted title to the Palama Property (excluding Parcels 8, 9, 3,
 and 7) in favor of the Senior Palamas and against the defendants,
 including the Senior Medeiroses; established the boundaries for
 the Palama Property; granted the defendants the "reasonable use"
 
7
Parcels 8 and 9 were ' apanas of Land Commission Award (LC Aw.) 3395B
and were subsequently memorialized in Royal Patent 7627. Parcels 3 and 7 were 
'apanas of LC Aw. 6647. The size of Parcels 8, 9, 3, and 7 were taken from
the Amended Complaint. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the existing right-of-way through the Palama Property to gain
 
access to their respective parcels and the right to pass over the
 Palama Property to gain access to the public beach at Nomilo; and
 determined that Nomilo Pond, which was located within the Palama
 Property, was owned exclusively by the Senior Palamas and that
 the defendants had "no rights to fish in it or use boat for
 fishing upon its waters." Although excluding Parcels 8, 9, 3,
 and 7 from the Palama Property, the Circuit Court did not
 determine the precise location of these parcels, but instead left
 the boundaries of these parcels to be "proved by subsequent
 surveys."
 
The Senior Palamas appealed the Circuit Court's 
judgment in Civil No. 589 to the Hawai
'i Supreme Court, 
challenging the Circuit Court's grant to defendants of the right­of-way through the Palama Property and its refusal to clarify or impose limits on the use of the right-of-way. Palama, 50 Haw. at 
299, 440 P.2d at 97. The defendants, including the Senior Medeiroses, did not appeal. The supreme court affirmed the judgment of the Circuit Court, holding that the defendants, by reason of necessity, were entitled to a right-of-way through the Palama Property as a means of ingress and egress. Id. at 301, 
440 P.2d at 98. The supreme court further held that the Circuit Court's decision that the right-of-way was subject to "reasonable use" was sufficient and that the Circuit Court was not required to establish the precise width for the right-of-way or limit it to pedestrian and equestrian use. Id. at 302-03, 440 P.2d at 98­
99. 
III.
 
The Palamas commenced the instant case by filing a
 
Verified Complaint on February 26, 1999. The defendants were
 Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., Anthony K. Medeiros, Bernice K. Gordon,
 Mary K. Adviento, Michael B. Medeiros, Timothy M. Medeiros,
 William K. Medeiros, Florence L. Loebl, Charles D. Vallero,
 Thomas Pratt, Jr., Alice N. Kealoha, Sally Tanigawa, David K.
 Kealoha, Douglas K. Kealoha, Daniel K. Kealoha, Karin Steck,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gilbert Medeiros, Jr., and Max Medeiros (collectively, the
 
8
Medeiros Family Defendants)  ; Jeannette Komae, Harry M. Sasaki,
Richard Asato, and Elaine Kauahi (collectively, the "Komae

 
Defendants"); and the State. 
In the Verified Complaint, the Palamas alleged that
 
without the consent of the Palamas, the Medeiros Family
 
Defendants have entered the Palama Property and:
 
(1) placed rocks in Nomilo Pond; (2) entered Nomilo Pond and
removed various items therefrom; (3) boated, fished and
gathered clams in Nomilo Pond; (4) used a bulldozer and/or
other heavy equipment to remove soil and plant growth from
the shore of Nomilo Pond; (5) filled a fresh water spring
with dirt; (6) driven onto and parked in areas other than as
necessary for ingress and egress; (7) erected a cement
structure approximately four feet square and one foot high;
(8) erected an outhouse and water containment/catchment
structure; (9) established a permanent camp, including the
construction of an illegal, non-permitted house; (10)
allowed dogs and/or other animals to run loose; (11) made
various unauthorized plantings; (12) constructed an
unauthorized salt pan and well; (13) left copious quantity
of trash upon the [Palama] Property; (14) destroyed various
endangered and/or protected plants; and (15) generally
desecrated what was heretofore a sacred place.
 
The Palamas sought injunctive relief against the Medeiros Family
 
Defendants to prevent them from entering the Palama Property for
 any reason other than reasonable use of the right-of-way, to
 prevent them from engaging in activity on Nomilo Pond, and to
 require them to remove all unauthorized structures (Count 1);
 damages against the Medeiros Family Defendants for trespass
 (Count 2); determination and fencing of boundaries around Parcels
 8, 9, 3, and 7, and the Beach Reserve (Count 3); and declaratory
 judgment to establish the scope and meaning of "reasonable use"
 of the right-of-way through the Palama Property as granted by the
 Circuit Court's 1966 judgment that was affirmed by the supreme
 court in 
Palama v. Sheehan (Count 4).
 
The Palamas subsequently filed the Amended Complaint
 
which added counts for quieting title to the Palama Property
 
8Gilbert Medeiros, Jr., and Max Medeiros were not originally named as
defendants in the Verified Complaint, but they were identified as Doe
Defendants and added as defendants shortly after the Verified Complaint was
filed. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against the State, the Medeiros Family Defendants, and the Komae
 
Defendants (Count 5); damages for alleged harassment by the
 Medeiros Family Defendants and their associates (Count 6); and
 punitive damages against the Medeiros Family Defendants (Count
 7).
 
During the course of the litigation and prior to the
 
evidentiary portion of trial, all the defendants except the three
 Medeiros Trial Defendants (Max Medeiros, Gilbert Medeiros, Jr.,
 and Mary K. Adviento) were dismissed from the case or settled
 with the Palamas. The Palamas purchased Parcels 3 and 7, which
 were owned by the Komae Defendants, and the Komae Defendants were
 dismissed from the case with prejudice. The Palamas entered into
 a settlement with the State. With respect to the Medeiros Family
 Defendants, (1) the Palamas entered into a settlement with
 Michael B. Medeiros, Timothy M. Medeiros, William K. Medeiros,
 Florence L. Loebl, and Charles D. Vallero, and those defendants
 were dismissed with prejudice; (2) defaults were entered against
 Anthony K. Medeiros, Bernice K. Gordon, Thomas Pratt, Jr., Alice
 N. Kealoha, Sally Tanigawa, David K. Kealoha, Douglas K. Kealoha,
 Daniel K. Kealoha, and Karin Steck; and (3) Gilbert Medeiros,
 Sr., who had passed away, was dismissed for failure to substitute
 a party for him after a suggestion of death had been filed. 
Prior to trial, the Circuit Court also granted the
 
Palamas' motion to dismiss Counts 2, 5, 6, and 7 of the Amended
 Complaint against the Medeiros Trial Defendants. 
IV.
 
The case proceeded to trial on Counts 1, 3, and 4 of
 
the Palamas' Amended Complaint against the three Medeiros Trial
 Defendants. The Medeiros Trial Defendants, who are siblings and
 the biological children of Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., represented
 themselves without an attorney at trial. At the conclusion of
 trial, the Circuit Court issued a written Decision and Order. 
In its Decision and Order, the Circuit Court first
 
ruled on Count 3, which sought a determination and fencing of
 boundaries. The Circuit Court accepted the testimony of two
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
experts who testified at trial as to the location of Parcel 9,
 
and it ordered the Palamas and the Medeiros Trial Defendants to
 hire a surveyor to identify and install boundary markers for
 Parcel 9. The Circuit Court found there was insufficient
 evidence to locate Parcel 8 and declined to identify the location
 of Parcel 8. As to the State's Beach Reserve, the Circuit Court
 ruled that although the width of the Beach Reserve remained fixed
 at 100 feet from the shoreline, the boundary of the Beach Reserve
 may have shifted through changes in the shoreline since the last
 survey in 1938. The Circuit Court ordered the Palamas and the
 Medeiros Trial Defendants to agree on a surveyor to conduct a
 Shoreline Certification Survey and to determine the boundaries of
 the Beach Reserve, the Palama Property, and Parcel 9. The
 Circuit Court noted that this determination was not for the sake
 of the Palamas' quiet title claim, which had been dismissed, but
 rather to establish whether any of the structures constructed by
 the Medeiros Trial Defendants, which the Circuit Court identified
 as a memorial, a pavilion, several water tanks, a shower, and an
 outhouse (the Medeiros Structures), were on the Palama Property. 
With respect to the Palamas' request for declaratory
 
relief in Count 4 on the meaning and scope of the reasonable use
 of the right-of-way through the Palama Property, the Circuit
 Court ruled that: (1) the Medeiros Trial Defendants had
 established their entitlement to access the area described at
 trial as the "Salt Flats" or "Salt Pans" to exercise customary
 and traditional native Hawaiian gathering rights of making and
 harvesting salt; (2) they had established their entitlement to
 access a heiau, which the Circuit Court described as being
 adjacent to the mauka end of the Nomilo Pond, to conduct
 traditional Native Hawaiian practices; but (3) they had failed to
 establish their entitlement to access or engage in traditional or
 customary native Hawaiian activities or practices in Nomilo Pond.
 The Circuit Court also reaffirmed the right-of-way established in
 the prior Palama v. Sheehan case, and it ordered the Palamas and
 the Medeiros Trial Defendants to jointly hire a surveyor and bear
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the costs of a survey to specifically delineate and mark the
 
boundaries of the right-of-way. The Circuit Court also placed
 restrictions on the types of vehicular access permitted on the
 right-of-way and where vehicles may be parked.
 
With respect to the Palamas' request for injunctive
 
relief in Count 1, the Circuit Court issued an injunction
 prohibiting the Medeiros Trial Defendants from trespassing on the
 Palama Property, other than to participate in the exercise of
 customary and traditional native Hawaiian gathering rights and
 cultural practices, as determined by the Circuit Court or other
 court of competent jurisdiction, or to gain access via the 
established right-of-way to the Medeiros Property or to the Beach
 Reserve. The Circuit Court also found that the Medeiros
 Structures had been built without authorization, and it issued a
 mandatory injunction against the Medeiros Trial Defendants
 requiring them to remove any of the Medeiros Structures that were
 built on the Palama Property as determined by the Shoreline
 Certification Survey.
 
The Palamas filed a motion to reconsider and alter and
 
amend the Decision and Order. The Circuit Court entered its
 Final Judgment and denied the Palamas' motion. 
Max Medeiros appealed, and the Palamas cross-appealed 
from the Final Judgment. This court dismissed that appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction because the Final Judgment did not specifically resolve all claims or contain the finding necessary for certification under Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 54(b), as required for an appealable judgment. See Jenkins 
v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai 'i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 
1334, 1338 (1994). 
V.
 
After this court dismissed the appeal from the Final
 
Judgment, the Palamas moved for appointment of a surveyor to
 conduct the Shoreline Certification Survey required by the
 Circuit Court's Decision and Order. The Circuit Court granted
 this motion. Max Medeiros filed a motion to dismiss the case for
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
failure to prosecute. In his supporting memorandum, Max Medeiros
 
argued that the Palamas had failed to take meaningful action to
 correct the defective Final Judgment, which prevented him from
 appealing, while the Palamas were pursuing a survey. The Palamas
 subsequently filed a motion to revise the Final Judgment to
 render it appealable. The Circuit Court denied Max Medeiros'
 motion to dismiss and granted the Palamas' motion to revise the
 Final Judgment. The Circuit Court issued its Revised Final
 Judgment on October 2, 2012, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
We first address the claims of error raised by Max
 
Medeiros in his appeal. As explained below, we conclude that he
 has failed to show that the Circuit Court erred with respect to
 his claims of error. 
A. 
On the day the trial was scheduled to begin, Max
 
Medeiros filed a motion to dismiss the case for failure to name
 indispensable parties, pursuant to HRCP Rule 19 (2000). In
 particular, Max Medeiros argued that his father, Defendant
 Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., had passed away during the pendency of the
 lawsuit, but no attempt was made to include Gilbert Medeiros,
 Sr.'s estate as a party. He further argued that other interested
 parties with claims to the Medeiros Property had not been named 
as defendants. Prior to the start of the evidentiary portion of
 trial, the Circuit Court dismissed Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., from
 the case because no attempt had been made to substitute his
 estate as a party for several years after his suggestion of death
 had been filed. The Circuit Court denied Max Medeiros's motion
 to dismiss the case for failure to join an indispensable party.
 
On appeal, Max Medeiros asserts that of the four
 
defendants who remained just prior to the beginning of trial, 
Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., was the only defendant who had any
 ownership interest in the Medeiros Property. Max Medeiros
 contends that the Circuit Court erred in failing to dismiss the
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
claims against him once Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., was dismissed from
 
the case without Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s estate being substituted
 as a party. We disagree.
 
We conclude that Max Medeiros' argument turns on
 
whether under HRCP Rule 19, the Circuit Court erred in proceeding
 to trial without Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s estate as a party. If 
the Circuit Court did not err in proceeding to trial, then the
 dismissal of Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., and the failure to substitute
 his estate as a party would not require the dismissal of the
 claims against Max Medeiros. 
We review the Circuit Court's decisions regarding 
indispensable parties under HRCP Rule 19 for abuse of discretion.
 
Marvin v. Pflueger , 127 Hawai 'i 490, 495, 280 P.3d 88, 93 (2012). 
The Circuit Court abuses its discretion when "it bases its ruling
 on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous
 assessment of the evidence." Id. (quotation marks and citation
 
omitted). 
HRCP Rule 19 provides:

 
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible. A person who is
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in
the action if (1) in the person's absence complete relief
cannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) the
person claims an interest relating to the subject of the
action and is so situated that the disposition of the action
in the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter impair
or impede the person's ability to protect that interest or
(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to a
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest.
If the person has not been so joined, the court shall order
that the person be made a party. If the person should join
as a plaintiff but refuses to do so, the person may be made
a defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary plaintiff.
 
(b) Determination by court whenever joinder not
feasible. If a person as described in subdivision (a)(1)-(2)
hereof cannot be made a party, the court shall determine
whether in equity and good conscience the action should
proceed among the parties before it, or should be dismissed,
the absent person being thus regarded as indispensable. The
 factors to be considered by the court include: first, to
what extent a judgment rendered in the person's absence
might be prejudicial to the person or those already parties;
second, the extent to which, by protective provisions in the
judgment, by the shaping of relief, or other measures, the
prejudice can be lessened or avoided; third, whether a
judgment rendered in the person's absence will be adequate;
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fourth, whether the plaintiff will have an adequate remedy
if the action is dismissed for nonjoinder.
 
The analysis under HRCP Rule 19 typically follows two
 
steps: 
First, the court must determine whether an absent party
should be joined if feasible according to the factors listed
in subsection (a). Second, if the party meets the
requirements under subsection (a) but it is not feasible to
join the party to the lawsuit, the court must proceed to
Rule 19(b) to determine whether it may decide the case
without the nonparty.
 
Marvin, 127 Hawai 'i at 499, 280 P.3d at 97 (footnote and 
citations omitted). 
The Palamas argue that Max Medeiros did not establish
 
that Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s estate was an absent party to be
 
joined if feasible under the standards set forth in HRCP Rule
 19(a). We do not need to address this argument because even if
 Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s estate met the requirements under HRCP
 Rule 19(a) of an absent party to be joined if feasible, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 denying Max Medeiros' HRCP Rule 19 motion to dismiss and
 proceeding to trial without Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s estate as a
 party pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(b). 
HRCP Rule 19(b) provides four factors to consider in
 
determining whether "in equity and good conscience" an action may
 proceed without a person as a party:
 
[F]irst, to what extent a judgment rendered in the person's
absence might be prejudicial to the person or those already
parties; second, the extent to which, by protective
provisions in the judgment, by the shaping of relief, or
other measures, the prejudice can be lessened or avoided;
third, whether a judgment rendered in the person's absence
will be adequate; fourth, whether the plaintiff will have an
adequate remedy if the action is dismissed for nonjoinder.
 
These four factors are not exclusive, and HRCP Rule 19(b)'s 
"equity and good conscience" language gives the trial court considerable flexibility to consider the particular circumstances of each case in determining whether a non-party will be regarded as indispensable. Marvin, 127 Hawai
'i at 504, 280 P.3d at 102. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As noted, the Revised Final Judgment entered by the 
Circuit Court granted relief as between the Palamas and the 
Medeiros Trial Defendants. In particular, the injunctive relief granted by the Circuit Court did not bind anyone other than the Medeiros Trial Defendants.
9 The Circuit Court's Revised Final 
Judgment also did not purport to impose obligations on non-parties to the litigation. Although Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., died several years before the trial held in this case, his estate did not seek to intervene, and Max Medeiros waited until the day of trial to file his motion to dismiss under HRCP Rule 19. See 
Marvin, 127 Hawai
'i at 504-12, 280 P.3d at 102-10 (citing the 
non-binding effect of the court-imposed injunction on the non-party, the non-party's failure to file a motion to intervene, and the defendant's long delay in raising the indispensable party claim as factors supporting the trial court's determination that the non-party was not an indispensable party). 
In addition, the Circuit Court's Revised Final Judgment
 
was able to adequately resolve the question of the Palamas'
 entitlement to injunctive relief against the Medeiros Trial
 Defendants and provide the Palamas with a remedy in a long
 running dispute over property rights. As the supreme court
 observed in Marvin: "We understand the benefits of having all
 desirable parties before the court in every case. However, we
 also know that, as a practical matter, this is not always
 possible and, at some point, cases must come to trial." Id. at
 512, 280 P.3d at 110 (emphasis added). The Circuit Court
 referenced such considerations in orally denying Max Medeiros'
 motion to dismiss, noting that this case initially began in 1999
 and that it was necessary to move forward with the case to
 resolve the dispute between the existing parties. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit
 
Court did not abuse its discretion in determining that Gilbert
 
9The Palamas acknowledged that they would not be able to obtain an
injunction against "someone who is not in the lawsuit," but only against the
three Medeiros Trial Defendants. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Medeiros, Sr.'s estate was not an indispensable party and in
 
denying Max Medeiros' HRCP Rule 19 motion to dismiss. The
 absence of Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s estate as a party did not
 prevent the Circuit Court from determining and providing
 effective relief regarding the claims between the Palamas and the
 Medeiros Trial Defendants. Contrary to Max Medeiros' contention,
 we conclude that the Circuit Court was not required to dismiss
 the claims against Max Medeiros after Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.'s
 estate was not substituted as a party and Gilbert Medeiros, Sr.
 was dismissed from the case. 
B.
 
Max Medeiros challenges the Circuit Court's Revised
 
Final Judgment based on the doctrines of res judicata, collateral
 estoppel, judicial estoppel, and collateral attack. In
 particular, Max Medeiros appears to contend that decisions
 rendered by the Circuit Court in Civil No. 589 and the supreme
 court in Palama v. Sheehan, 50 Haw. 298, 440 P.2d 95, 
(collectively, the "Prior Litigation") precluded the Circuit
 Court from establishing the boundary for Parcel 9 or providing
 declaratory relief regarding the scope of the right-of-way. The
 premise of Max Medeiros' argument is that the Prior Litigation
 had already decided these issues. However, it is clear that the
 Prior Litigation did not decide these issues, but left them open
 to future determination. Accordingly, the premise of Max
 Medeiros' argument is erroneous, and we conclude that his
 challenge to the Circuit Court's Revised Final Judgment based on
 the various preclusion doctrines he raises is without merit.
 
With respect to the boundary for Parcel 9, the Circuit
 
Court in the Prior Litigation did not determine the precise
 location of Parcel 8 or Parcel 9, but instead left the boundaries
 of these parcels to be "proved by subsequent surveys[.]" The
 Circuit Court's ruling on this issue in the Prior Litigation was
 not appealed to the supreme court. Accordingly, the Prior
 Litigation did not establish the location and boundary of Parcel
 9, and the Circuit Court in this case was not precluded from
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entering an order identifying the location of Parcel 9 and
 
requiring the parties to hire a surveyor to identify and install
 boundary markers for Parcel 9.
 
With respect to the scope of the right-of-way, the
 
supreme court in the Prior Litigation upheld the Circuit Court's
 ruling that the right-of-way was subject to "reasonable use" and
 declined to require clarification of the precise width for the
 right-of-way or to impose specific limits on what constituted
 "reasonable use." Palama, 50 Haw. at 302-03, 440 P.2d at 98-99. 
Accordingly, the Prior Litigation did not bar the Circuit Court
 in this case from providing declaratory relief on the scope of
 the right-of-way and the uses that would be deemed to be
 reasonable. Because the Prior Litigation did not decide the
 boundary or right-of-way issues addressed by the Circuit Court in
 this case, we conclude that the Circuit Court was not barred from
 deciding these issues by the doctrines of res judicata,
 collateral estoppel, judicial estoppel, or collateral attack. 
C.
 
Max Medeiros argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting an injunction and ordering a survey without all of the
 parties affected participating in the trial. We disagree. 
As noted, the Circuit Court's injunction was only
 
issued against the Medeiros Trial Defendants. Indeed, HRCP Rule
 65(d) (2000) provides that an injunction "is binding only upon
 the parties to the action, their officers, agents, servants,
 employees, and attorneys, and upon those persons in active
 concert or participation with them who receive actual notice of
 the order[.]" The Shoreline Certification Survey ordered by the
 Circuit Court was necessary to implement the Circuit Court's
 injunction, which only required the Medeiros Trial Defendants to
 remove the Medeiros Structures if they were located on the Palama
 Property. Moreover, as previously discussed, the Circuit Court
 did not abuse its discretion in proceeding to trial after the
 dismissal of Gilbert Medeiros, Sr., and without the substitution
 of his estate as a party. Contrary to Max Medeiros' claim, we
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not "overstep[] its
 
authority" in granting the injunction and ordering the survey. 
D.
 
Max Medeiros contends that the Circuit Court erred when 
it denied his motion to dismiss for failure to prosecute under HRCP Rule 41(b) (2012). The motion was filed twenty-seven months after this court's order dismissing the prior appeal due to defects in the original Final Judgment. In the motion, Max Medeiros argued that the Palamas had failed to take action to obtain a valid revised final judgment from the Circuit Court. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying the motion. See Wilson v. Freitas, 121 Hawai
'i 120, 133, 
214 P.3d 1110, 1123 (App. 2009). (stating that "[a]n order granting a motion to dismiss for failure to prosecute is reviewed for abuse of discretion"). 
Here, the case had already proceeded to trial and the
 
Circuit Court had issued a decision on the merits before Max
 Medeiros filed his motion to dismiss under HRCP Rule 41(b). 
After the case was returned to the Circuit Court, the Palamas
 filed a motion to substitute Steven Kalani Palama, Successor
 Trustee of the Philip K. Palama, Jr., Revocable Living Trust
 dated July 19, 1994, for Plaintiff Philip K. Palama, Jr., who had
 passed away. The Palamas also filed a motion to appoint a
 surveyor to conduct the Shoreline Certification Survey ordered by
 the Circuit Court in its Decision and Order. As noted, Max
 Medeiros did not file his motion to dismiss for failure to
 prosecute until over two years after this court's order
 dismissing the prior appeal. The Palamas' filed their motion to
 revise the Final Judgment within two months of Max Medeiros'
 motion to dismiss. The Circuit Court filed its Revised Final
 Judgment three months after the Palamas' motion, and it also
 ruled on other matters in the interim. 
"[D]ismissal of a complaint is such a severe sanction,
 
that it is to be used only in extreme circumstances when there is
 a clear record of delay or contumacious conduct[.]" Bagalay v.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lahaina Restoration Foundation, 60 Haw. 125, 132, 588 P.2d 416,
 
422 (1978) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We
 conclude that the Circuit Court acted within its discretion in
 denying Max Medeiros' motion to dismiss under the circumstances
 of this case.
 
E.
 
Max Medeiros contends that he, and not the Palamas, was
 
the prevailing party, and therefore, the Circuit Court erred in
 awarding costs to the Palamas. The Circuit Court's Revised Final
 Judgment states that "[c]osts are hereby awarded to [the Palamas]
 as the prevailing party upon submission of an appropriate Bill of
 Costs." 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
determining that the Palamas were the prevailing party in this
 case and were entitled to the award of costs. The record,
 however, does not contain any order awarding costs to the
 Palamas.
10 Thus, there is no order awarding costs for this court
 
to review in this appeal.11
 
II. 
We now turn to address the claims raised by the Palamas
 
in their cross-appeal. The Palamas argue that the Circuit Court
 erred in finding that the Medeiros Trial Defendants met their
 burden of establishing their entitlement to access the Palama
 
10The Palamas filed a Bill of Costs after the Circuit Court entered its
 
original Final Judgment, but the record does not contain any decision on this
Bill of Costs. The record does not show a Bill of Costs filed by the Palamas
after the entry of the Revised Final Judgment. The Palamas, in their
answering brief, assert that the award of costs in this case is moot because
they "did not file a Bill of Costs of the trial as it was not worth the
candle." 
11We note that in his answering brief in the Palamas' cross-appeal, Max
Medeiros contends that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that he had no rightto use Nomilo Pond. However, Max Medeiros did not raise this claim as a pointof error in his appeal, and therefore, he has waived this claim. See Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented inaccordance with this section will be disregarded[.]"). In any event, MaxMedeiros fails to provide a basis to overturn the judgment entered by theCircuit Court in the Prior Litigation which determined that Nomilo Pond wasowned exclusively by the Senior Palamas and that the Senior Medeiroses (whowere Max Medeiros' ancestors) had "no rights to fish in it or use boat forfishing upon its waters." 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Property to engage in traditional and customary native Hawaiian
 
gathering rights and cultural practices (hereinafter, "PASH
 
12
rights")  with respect to (1) making salt in the area described
as the "Salt Pans" or the "Salt Flats" and (2) visiting a heiau
 in the area adjacent to the mauka end of Nomilo Pond. The
 Palamas do not contend that the Medeiros Trial Defendants cannot
 prove their entitlement to exercise PASH rights, but rather that
 the Medeiros Family Defendants failed to present sufficient
 evidence to prove their entitlement to exercise PASH rights in
 the areas authorized by the Circuit Court in this case. The
 Palamas argue that if we agree with their assertion that the
 Medeiros Defendants failed to present sufficient evidence, we
 should either: (1) preclude the Medeiros Trial Defendants from
 exercising the PASH rights recognized by the Circuit Court in its
 Decision and Order until they prove the existence of these rights
 in a future case; or (2) remand the case for a trial on the issue
 of the existence of these rights.
 
We conclude that the Medeiros Trial Defendants
 
introduced sufficient evidence to support the Circuit Court's
 finding that they were entitled to exercise PASH rights with
 respect to the making and harvesting of salt in the area
 described as the "Salt Pans" or the "Salt Flats" on the Palama
 Property, and we affirm this ruling of the Circuit Court. 
However, the basis for Circuit Court's ruling regarding the
 Medeiros Trial Defendant's exercise of PASH rights at a heiau in
 the area adjacent to the mauka end of Nomilo Pond is unclear as 
12
In Public Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai' i County Planning
Commission, 79 Hawai' i 425, 903 P.2d 1246 (1995) (PASH), the Hawai' i Supreme
Court recognized that "the reasonable exercise of ancient Hawaiian usage is
entitled to protection under article XII, section 7 [of the Hawai' i 
Constitution]," PASH, 79 Hawai' i at 442, 903 P.2d at 1263, and held that
"those persons who are 'descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the islands prior to 1778,' and who assert otherwise valid customary andtraditional Hawaiian rights under HRS § 1–1, are entitled to protectionregardless of their blood quantum." PASH, 79 Hawai' i at 449, 903 P.2d at 1270
(citing Haw. Const., art. XII, § 7). In this appeal, we will refer totraditional and customary native Hawaiian gathering rights and cultural andreligious practices that are protected under article XII, section 7 as "PASHrights." 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the specific references at trial to the heiau were sparse and
 
ambiguous. We therefore vacate the Circuit Court's ruling as to
 the heiau and remand the case for more detailed findings and
 further evidence on the Medeiros Trial Defendants' PASH rights
 regarding the heiau. 
A.
 
In State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai
'i 177, 970 P.2d 485 
(1998), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court identified a three-part test 
that a person must satisfy, at minimum, to establish that his or her conduct is constitutionally protected as a native Hawaiian right. Hanapi, 89 Hawai
'i at 185-86, 970 P.2d at 493-94. First, 
the person "must qualify as a 'native Hawaiian' within the guidelines set out in PASH." Id. at 186, 970 P.2d at 494. 
Second the person must establish that "his or her claimed right is constitutionally protected as a customary or traditional native Hawaiian practice." Id. Third, the person "must also 
prove that the exercise of the right occurred on undeveloped or 'less than fully developed property.'" Id. 
On appeal, the Palamas do not dispute that the Medeiros
 
Trial Defendants satisfied the first and third factors. The
 Palamas' challenge to the Circuit Court's finding of PASH rights
 is limited to their claim that the Medeiros Trial Defendants did
 not present sufficient evidence at trial to satisfy the second
 factor with respect to their entitlement to exercise PASH rights
 at the particular areas on the Palama Property identified by the
 Circuit Court. The supreme court has stated that for a person to
 meet his or her burden of satisfying the second factor, "there
 must be an adequate foundation in the record connecting the
 claimed right to a firmly rooted traditional or customary native
 Hawaiian practice." Id. at 187, 970 P.2d at 495 (internal
 
footnote omitted).
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court ruled that the Medeiros Trial
 
Defendants had established their entitlement to exercise PASH
 rights to make and harvest salt in the area of the "Salt Pans" or
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Salt Flats" (hereinafter, the "Salt Flats"), and it described
 
the location of the Salt Flats through references to markings on
 a survey that had been admitted in evidence. The Circuit Court
 emphasized that the Medeiros Trial Defendants could only access
 the Salt Flats, which were near Nomilo Pond, when they were
 actually making or harvesting salt, limited the routes they could
 take to access the Salt Flats, and did not permit access by
 others outside their immediate families. 
The Palamas argue that there was insufficient evidence
 
to support the Circuit Court's ruling that the Medeiros Trial
 Defendants were entitled to exercise PASH rights to make and
 harvest salt at the Salt Flats. We disagree.
 
At trial, the Medeiros Trial Defendants provided
 
extensive testimony about their ancestors, including their great
 grandfather, grandmother, grandfather, and father making salt in
 the vicinity of the Nomilo Pond; their being taught by family
 members how to make salt; their identification of the location of
 salt pans in the vicinity of Nomilo Pond that were used for salt-
making activities; and their personal participation in salt
 making. The Medeiros Trial Defendants also introduced evidence
 relating to LC Aw. 3395B and the corresponding Royal Patent 7627
 (issued in 1882) with respect to the Medeiros Property which
 referred to the practice of making salt.
13 We conclude that
 
there was sufficient evidence to support the Circuit Court's
 finding that the Medeiros Trial Defendants had established their
 entitlement to exercise PASH rights with respect to making and
 harvesting salt at the Salt Flats. 
C.
 
The Palamas argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
finding that the Medeiros Trial Defendants were entitled to
 
13A study of the archaeology of Kauai published by the Bishop Museum in
1931 described the methods used to make salt from salt pans located on the sea
side of Nomilo Pond and stated that "[t]he salt from these [salt] pans was
famous." Wendell Clark Bennett, Archaeology of Kauai, Bernice P. Bishop
Museum Bulletin 80, at 24, 116 (1931). 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
exercise PASH rights with respect to a heiau in the area adjacent
 
to the mauka end of Nomilo Pond. As the Palamas point out,
 specific evidence related to a heiau was sparse. The Palamas
 assert, and Max Medeiros does not dispute, that the word heiau
 was only mentioned three times during the course of the trial. 
The testimony relating to the heiau was brief and lacking in
 detail. It did not describe the heiau, its precise location,
 specific details regarding the Medeiros Trial Defendants'
 connection to the heiau, the practices that the Medeiros Trial
 Defendants or their ancestors had engaged in at the heiau, or
 what activities the Medeiros Trial Defendants sought to engage in
 at the heiau. Accordingly, the basis for the Circuit Court's
 ruling that the Medeiros Trial Defendants are entitled to
 exercise PASH rights at a heiau in the area adjacent to the mauka
 end of Nomilo Pond is unclear, and we agree with the Palamas that
 the present record is insufficient to support this ruling. We
 vacate the Circuit Court's ruling on this issue, and we remand
 the case for more detailed findings and further evidence
 regarding whether the Medeiros Trial Defendants are entitled to
 exercise PASH rights at a heiau on the Palama Property. 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate in
 
part the Circuit Court's Revised Final Judgment, and we remand
 the case for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum
 Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Antone Max Medeiros 
Defendant Pro Se Appellant/Cross-Appellee 
Chief Judge 
David W. Proudfoot Max W.J. Graham, Jr.(Belles Graham Proudfoot
Wilson & Chun, LLP)
for Plaintiffs-Appellees/
Plaintiffs-Cross-Appellants Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
22

 