 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000189 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
PARADISE ON THE BEACH, LLC, a Hawaii limited liability company,
Plaintiff-Appellant v. DAVE A. YESTER; ROBERT NORTON MORAN;
JUDITH A. MORAN; HAWAIIAN ELECTRIC COMPANY, INC., a Hawaii
corporation; HAWAIIAN TELCOM, INC., a Hawaii corporation;
PAUKAUILA STREAM CONDOMINIUM; BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.; MANITHAY
THAMMATHINO ESPINOSA; JOE THAMMATHINO; KHAMMANH
THAMMATHINO; KHANTHAVY THAMMATHINO; and DOES 1-20,
Defendants-Appellees, and VICTORIAN ISLAND PROPERTIES, LLC,
Intervenor-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0331-02) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Nakasone and Chan, JJ.) 
This case arises from a dispute between the parties 
regarding the interpretation of a "Perpetual Easement" recorded 
on March 22, 1991, in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of 
Hawai# i (Bureau of Conveyances) as document No. 91-037344 (1991 
Easement) which concerns four parcels, Parcels 6, 7, 11, and 30 
located in Waialua, Hawai# i. The parcels relevant to this appeal 
are the servient parcels, Parcel 6 and Parcel 30 owned by 
Plaintiff-Appellant Paradise on the Beach, LLC (Paradise), and 
one of the dominant parcels, Parcel 11 on which Defendant-
Appellee Paukauila Stream Condominium (Paukauila)is located. This 
appeal does not concern Parcel 7. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Paradise appeals from the "Final Judgment" entered on 
December 29, 2016, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(Circuit Court) entering judgment pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP
) Rule 54(b) in favor of Intervenor-Appellee 
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae)1 and against 
Paradise on all claims asserted against Fannie Mae's interests in Parcel 11. The Final Judgment determined that the 1991 Easement in favor of the dominant property Parcel 11, and burdening the servient properties Parcels 6 and 30, is a valid and enforceable easement.
2 In this appeal, Paradise challenges the Final 
Judgment and the "Order Granting Intervenor Federal National Mortgage Association's Motion for Summary Judgement" (Order 
Granting MSJ) entered on December 29, 2016. 
On appeal, Paradise contends the Circuit Court erred 
in: (1) recognizing Parcel 30 as being a servient tenement to the 
easement in favor of Parcel 11; (2) failing to specifically identify that the easement in favor of Paukauila and Fannie Mae is "Roadway A"; (3) refusing to clarify that the easement in favor of Paukauila and Fannie Mae does not include the "Undesignated Roadway" located on Parcel 30; and (4) attaching a map as Exhibit A to the Order Granting MSJ without referring to the exhibit or explaining the contents therein.
3 
1 After Paradise filed this appeal and after the briefing on appeal was
completed, Fannie Mae filed a "Motion for Substitution of Real Party in
Interest" requesting that Victorian Island Properties, LLC ( Victorian Island )
be substituted in as a party for Fannie Mae. On October 21, 2022, this courtentered an "Order Granting Motion for Substitution of Real Party in Interest,"substituting Victorian Island in place of Fannie Mae in this case. Because Fannie Mae was the intervening party in the Circuit Court proceedings andthroughout briefing in this appeal, we refer to Fannie Mae when discussing theCircuit Court proceedings and the briefs filed on appeal. 
2 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided. 
3 Paradise's opening brief does not comply with Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28 in that it does not contain a table of
authorities, and does not contain a statement of related cases or append acopy of the judgment, order, or decision relevant to any point on appeal.Fannie Mae, citing Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai #i 225, 909 P.2d 553
(1995), argues that Paradise's failure to conform to HRAP Rule 28 is asufficient basis to affirm the judgment of the Circuit Court. 
However, as the
(continued...) 
2 3(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We resolve Paradise's points as follows and affirm.
I. Background 
In 1991, then owners of Parcels 6 and 30, Isaac V. 
Cerezo, Celeste P. Cerezo, Pete D. Lacuesta and Jaine B. 
Lacuesta, as Grantors, executed the 1991 Easement with then owners of Parcels 7 and 11, Defendants-Appellees Robert N. Moran (Moran) and Dave A. Yester (Yester), as Grantees. The 1991 
Easement, provided, in pertinent part: 
WHEREAS, Grantor is the fee owner of that certain contiguous
lands situate at Paalaa-Kai, Waialua, Oahu, Hawaii, beingLand Commission Award 8422:2 to Kahananui, Land CommissionAward 2746 to Namakaohao, portion of Land Commission Award7713:34 to V. Kamamalu [Parcel 6],
[]4 and Land Commission 
Award 8826:1 to Kalalealea, comprising all of Tax Map Key1-6-6-18: Parcel 30, as outlined in red color on the mapattached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit "A"; and, 
WHEREAS, Grantee is the fee owner of Land Commission Award
8825:2 to Kalawaia, Tax Map Key 1-6-6-18: Parcel 11, andLand Commission Award 10728:2 to Paakai for Kuikekala, TaxMap Key 1-6-6-18: Parcel 7, as outlined in green color onsaid Exhibit "A"; and, 
WHEREAS, Grantee desires to obtain a perpetual easement for
road and utility purposes over and under the existing gravelroad identified as Roadway A shaded yellow on said Exhibit"A" for the benefit and use of Grantee's said Land Commission Award 8825:2 [Parcel 11], and also a perpetualeasement for road and utility purposes over and under saidRoadway A and the existing dirt road identified as Roadway Band shaded blue on said Exhibit "A" for the benefit and use 
Hawai #i Supreme Court explained, "noncompliance with [HRAP] Rule 28 does not
always result in dismissal of the claims, and this court has consistentlyadhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity to have theircases heard on the merits, where possible." Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai #i 
490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012) (internal quotation marks, brackets, ellipsisand citation omitted). 
Therefore, we address the merits of Paradise's
arguments where possible. 
To the extent that Paradise fails to provide any discernable argument
regarding its fourth point of error, that the Circuit Court erred in attachingthe Exhibit A map to the Order Granting MSJ without referring to it orexplaining the contents, the point is deemed waived. See
 HRAP Rule 28(b)(7)
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
4 In support of its summary judgment motion, Fannie Mae attached the
Deed conveying Parcel 6 to Paradise, as Grantee, recorded in the Bureau ofConveyances on October 31, 2005, which described that Parcel 6, is comprised
of, inter alia , Land Commission Award 8422, apana 2 to Kahanonui, Land
Commission Award 2746 to Namakaohao, and Land commission Award 7713, apana 34
to V. Kamamalu. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Grantee's said Land Commission Award 10728:2 [Parcel
7][.] 
. . . . 
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and othervaluable consideration paid to the Grantor, the receipt ofwhich is hereby acknowledged, the Grantor does hereby grant,bargain, sell and convey unto the Grantee as Tenants inCommon: 
FIRST: A perpetual nonexclusive easement for road ingress
and egress and utility purposes 
over, across and under said
Roadway A, twelve (12) feet wide, providing access toWaialua Beach Road, a public road, appurtenant to and forthe benefit and use of said Land Commission Award 8825:2 [Parcel 11] shown on said Exhibit "A". 
. . . . 
(Emphases added.)  The map attached as Exhibit A to the 1991 
Easement shows "Roadway A" is labeled within Parcel 6, and a 
connected road marked as "Roadway" is labeled within Parcel 30.  5
In 2005, then owners of Parcels 6 and 30 conveyed both 
parcels to Paradise via two deeds recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances. 
In 2006, Parcel 11 was converted into a condominium 
property regime as Paukauila Stream Condominium, which consists of nine (9) units. Fannie Mae was allowed to intervene in this case based on its ownership interest in one of the units. 
On February 14, 2011, Paradise initiated this action by 
filing a "Complaint: (1) to Quiet Title, (2) for Declaratory Relief, and (3) for Injunctive Relief" (Complaint), against, 
inter alia, Paukauila and owners of Paukauila units.   Paradise 
5 Although the 1991 Easement indicates that the attached map was color
coded, Paradise represented to the Circuit Court that "[t]he original version
of the Easement on file with the Bureau [of Conveyances] was microfilmed andthen destroyed, and as the microfilm is in black and white, it is impossibleto identify the physical location of either 'Roadway A' or 'Roadway B,'because none of the color-coding designated in the Easement Map isidentifiable." 
In support of its summary judgment motion, Fannie Mae submitted the 1991
Easement and the Easement map attached thereto as Exhibit A, as well as anExhibit 1-A, which was the Easement map with a transparent overlay identifyingthe land commission awards and which outlined in different colors Parcels 6,11 and 30. Paradise did not object or contest any of these exhibits. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged three counts relevant to Parcel 11 and the interests of 
Paukauila and Paukauila unit owners. Specifically, Paradise asserted a quiet title claim, alleging the "Declaration of Condominium Property Regime" for Paukauila recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on May 18, 2006, as Document No. 2006-094092 (Paukauila Declaration), and the First Amendment to the Paukauila 
Declaration are defective because they "purport to grant access 
to Roadway A, located within Parcel 6, where there is no legal right to do so" and expands the usage of Roadway A beyond the scope of the 1991 Easement to include multiple future owners of the condominium units. 
Paradise also requested declaratory relief that the 
1991 Easement be amended to correctly reflect the easement rights because "[t]here is currently no useage of any part of Parcel 30 pursuant to the [1991] Easement, for the benefit of Parcel 11" and "Roadway A is located entirely within Parcel 6, but the [1991] Easement erroneously identifies the servient tenement as Parcel 30[.]" Finally, Paradise requested injunctive relief that Yester, or any subsequent owner(s) of any part of Parcel 11, be ordered to reasonably maintain Roadway A or to share in the costs thereof, and cease using Roadway A outside the scope of the original agreement, including, the "regular traversing of large construction vehicles and the use of Roadway A for access to all of the multiple future owners of the nine (9) condominium units located on Parcel 11[.]" 
On December 10, 2015, Fannie Mae moved to intervene in 
the proceedings asserting that it was the owner of one of the condominiums in Paukauila. On February 19, 2016, the Circuit Court entered the "Order Granting [Fannie Mae's] Motion to Intervene". 
On May 11, 2016, Fannie Mae filed a motion for summary 
judgment (Fannie Mae's MSJ) asserting that the 1991 Easement, in 
favor of dominant property Parcel 11, burdens the servient 
properties Parcels 6 and 30, and is valid as a matter of law. Fannie Mae further asserted that the map attached to the 1991 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  Easement shows the easement "as a horseshoe and marked as 
'Roadway' and 'Roadway A'". In support of its motion, Fannie Mae attached, inter alia, the 1991 Easement (which included the Easement map), an Easement map with "a transparency overlay identifying the [1991 Easement's] land commission awards," deeds for Parcel 6 and Parcel 30, and the Paukauila Declaration. 
On September 16, 2016, Fannie Mae filed a "Reply 
Memorandum in Support of its Motion for Summary Judgment" stating, "[i]n spite of two courtesy calls made on September 14 and 15, 2016 inquiring of Plaintiff [Paradise's] memorandum in opposition to Fannie Mae's Motion which was due on September 13, 2016, none was filed." On September 16, 2016, instead of an opposition to Fannie Mae's MSJ, Paradise filed a "Statement of Position Re: [Fannie Mae's MSJ]" (Statement of Position). In the 
Statement of Position, Paradise indicated that the additional 
relief sought in its Complaint had not been addressed by Fannie Mae's MSJ and thus could not be resolved and that there were unresolved issues with the Paukauila Declaration because it did not describe "Roadway C", incorrectly asserts a connection between Parcel 11 and Roadway B, and expands the easement over Roadway A to nine parties instead of just one, without notice to or permission from the owner of the servient tenement and without the reciprocal obligation to maintain the easement. Paradise concluded in the Statement of Position that it 
"is again clarifying that (i) the location of said access
way [to Parcel 11] (i.e., over Roadway A alone), (ii) theextent of said access (whether only one or more of the unitowners may be permitted to use Roadway A and for whatpurposes), and (iii) the duties associated with saideasement, require clarification and reformation of the [1991Easement]. However, because the [Fannie Mae] MSJ does notappear to seek a determination on these issues, [Paradise]
does not oppose it." 
Paradise did not file any declarations or attach any exhibits 
with its Statement of Position. 
II. Discussion 
Paradise focuses its appeal on challenging the Circuit 
Court's ruling that Parcel 30 is a servient property to Parcel 11 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and in asserting the Circuit Court should have clarified that the 
easement in favor of Parcel 11 does not include what Paradise refers to as the "undesignated roadway" located on Parcel 30.  
6 
We review a circuit court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo. Anastasi v. Fid. Nat'l Title Ins. Co., 137 
Hawai# i 104, 112, 366 P.3d 160, 168 (2016). It is well settled 
that: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions onfile, together, with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue as to any material fact and that themoving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Afact is material if proof of that fact would have the effectof establishing or refuting one of the essential elements ofa cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. Theevidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to thenon-moving party. In other words, we must view all of theevidence and the inferences drawn therefrom, in the lightmost favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Id. (brackets and citations omitted). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has explained the burden 
shifting paradigm for summary judgment where the non-movant bears 
the burden of proof at trial as follows: 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue asto all material facts, which, under applicable principles ofsubstantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as amatter of law. This burden has two components. 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material factexists with respect to the essential elements of the claimor defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, itis entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Onlywhen the moving party satisfies its initial burden ofproduction does the burden shift to the nonmoving party torespond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstratespecific facts, as opposed to general allegations, thatpresent a genuine issue worthy of trial. 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving partyand requires the moving party to convince the court that nogenuine issue of material fact exists and that the movingparty is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. 
6 There is no dispute that Parcel 6 is a servient parcel for the
benefit of Parcel 11 and that, under the 1991 Easement, Roadway A located onParcel 6 is an easement that benefits Parcel 11. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai# i 46, 56-57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286-87 
(2013) (quoting French v. Hawai# i Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai# i 
462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)). Moreover, "a summary 
judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial burden of production by either (1) presenting evidence negating an element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the nonmovant will be unable to carry his or her burden of proof at trial." Id. at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290 (citation omitted). 
Here, in support of its Motion for Summary Judgment, 
Fannie Mae attached, inter alia, the 1991 Easement, the deed to Parcel 30 recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on October 31, 2005, as Document No. 2005-221621, and the Paukauila Declaration. 
The 1991 Easement states in pertinent part, 
WHEREAS, Grantor is the fee owner of that certain contiguous
lands situate at Paalaa-Kai, Waialua, Oahu, Hawaii, being .. . Land Commission Award 8826:1 to Kalalealea, comprisingall of Tax Map Key 1-6-6-18: Parcel 30, as outlined in redcolor on the map attached hereto and made a part hereof asExhibit "A"; 
Contrary to Paradise's argument on appeal that the 1991 
Easement "does not reflect any intent or actual grant of an 
easement over the Undesignated Roadway or Parcel 30, in favor of Parcel 11[,]" the 1991 Easement specifically identifies Parcel 30. 
Moreover, the deed to Parcel 30 also reflects that an 
easement encumbers the property and states, in pertinent part, 
SUBJECT, HOWEVER, TO THE FOLLOWING: 
. . . . 
4.
 A Grant of Easement for road and utility purposes
over and under the existing gravel road identified as
roadway A, and the existing dirt road identified asRoadway B, as shown on the map attached thereto, infavor of Land Commission Award 8825:2, [Parcel 11] asto both Roadways A and B, and in favor of LandCommission Award 10728:2, as to Roadway B only,recorded March 22, 1991 as Regular System Document No.
91-037344 of Official Records. 
(Emphasis added.) 
As noted above, Fannie Mae asserted in its summary 
judgment motion that the easement in favor of Parcel 11 was shown 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on the Easement map as "a horseshoe and marked as 'Roadway' and 
'Roadway A'". In essence, this argument asserts that the "Roadway" designated within Parcel 30 is part of "Roadway A". Through the exhibits submitted in conjunction with the summary judgment motion, including our reading of the 1991 Easement as a whole, Fannie Mae satisfied its initial burden as the movant to show that there were no genuine issues of material fact that the 1991 Easement established a perpetual easement over Parcel 30 in favor of Parcel 11. 
The burden thus shifted to Paradise as the non-movant 
to show that there were genuine issues of material fact on this issue. See Ralston, 129 Hawai# i at 56-57, 292 P.3d at 1286-87. 
However, Paradise did not submit an opposition to the summary judgment motion and did not submit any evidence. 
Rather, as noted above, it filed an untimely Statement 
of Position. In the Statement of Position, Paradise stated that, 
It is Plaintiffs understanding that [Fannie Mae]'s MSJ seeks
a determination that an "express" easement exists in favorof Parcel 11 ("Parcel 11" or the "Paukauila StreamCondominium Parcel") along "Roadway A" only (see [FannieMae]'s MSJ at 11), over Plaintiffs properties (i.e., Parcels6 and 30 ) for ingress, egress, and utility access based on
the Perpetual Roadway Easement instrument attached asExhibit 1 to [Fannie Mae]'s MSJ (the "Easement Instrument").See [Fannie Mae]'s MSJ at 6. Plaintiff does not dispute thatbasic assertion; i.e., that an easement in favor of Parcel11 (and its owner(s)) exists over the Roadway A identifiedin the recorded Easement Instrument. In fact, Plaintiff hasnever disputed that, at a minimum, a prescriptive easementin favor of Parcel 11 exists over Roadway A. Therefore, andto that extent, Plaintiff does not oppose [Fannie Mae]'s MSJseeking that the court make such a determination . 
(Emphases omitted) (emphases added). 
Inexplicably, despite acknowledging that Fannie Mae's 
MSJ asserted an express easement in favor of Parcel 11 over 
Parcel 6 and Parcel 30, Paradise did not refute or otherwise address Fannie Mae's argument that an easement exists over both parcels based on the 1991 Easement and was reflected on the deeds for Parcels 6 and 30. Paradise also did not refute Fannie Mae's assertion that Roadway A as indicated in the 1991 Easement should 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be considered a continuous "horseshoe" shaped road which includes 
the road marked "Roadway" on Parcel 30. 
Instead, at the hearing on Fannie Mae's MSJ, Paradise's 
counsel conceded Fannie Mae established that "all of the servient parcels were included as grantors under the easement" through the documents it submitted in support of its motion. Additionally, although Paradise claims on appeal that it believed Fannie Mae's MSJ mistakenly asserted that Parcel 30 is also burdened by the 1991 Easement in favor of Parcel 11, Paradise failed to timely raise this issue before the Circuit Court. 
Rather, the transcript from the summary judgment 
hearing shows that Paradise's counsel conceded multiple times that the 1991 Easement burdened both Parcels 6 and 30 in favor of Parcel 11, and that Paradise did not object to Fannie Mae's MSJ and agreed with the relief that Fannie Mae sought. For example, at the September 21, 2016 hearing on Fannie Mae's MSJ, Paradise's counsel reiterated that there were other concerns with the 1991 Easement but nonetheless stated that Paradise did not oppose Fannie Mae's MSJ and the Circuit Court granted Fannie Mae's MSJ as follows: 
MR. ROSEN: But as to -- there's a lot of other things going
on here, Your Honor. And we have gone over some of that inour position statement. This motion doesn't address those.Those issues may be questions of law that the Court canaddress. 
THE COURT: Nobody's asking me to address those as questions
of law, Mr. Rosen. 
MR. ROSEN: Your Honor --THE COURT: I'm being asked to rule on a motion for summary
judgment --
MR. ROSEN: Right. THE COURT: -- that's in writing, that you had ample notice
of. And so are you opposing what -- the relief that they'rerequesting, or not? Because it's in their conclusionspecifically as to what they're requesting judgment in theirfavor on, page 11. 
MR. ROSEN: That the -- well, the perpetual easement -- what
we think we're talking about is Roadway A, Your Honor, andthat it's -- it grants an easement to Parcel 11 over Parcel
6 and 30, through Roadway A. Yes, we do not dispute that. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
It's specifically said there, through Roadway A. We don't
dispute that. 
. . . . 
MR. ROSEN: Your Honor, I apologize, because I thought thatthe position statement was very clear, and I even put it inbold. 
But on page 11, what is being sought by Fannie Mae's motion
is the existence of a valid and enforceable perpetualeasement for road and utility purposes from Waialua BeachRoad to Parcel 11, 
over Parcel 6 and 30, through Roadway A.
And it also says Roadway A encumbers these land commissionawards and is also located over Parcel 6 and 30. We're not disputing that, Your Honor. We agree. 
We agree that Ms. Ching has proven, through what she
submitted, that, in fact, all of the servient parcels wereincluded as grantors under the easement. We appreciate thatthey've done that work. 
And we don't dispute -- I mean, even if this didn't -- even
if she hadn't proved that, there would still be an easementby prescription over my client's parcels to Parcel 11. We'venever disputed that, Your Honor. 
What we're saying is that there are other defects in the
easement that need to be addressed. We're not saying thatthey shouldn't have access to their property. We agree withthat. And we do not oppose the Court granting that reliefthat's set forth in the conclusion. 
Now, just as an aside, Your Honor, Roadway B doesn't exist.
It -- it's not accessible. It's not a dirt road or -- it doesn't exist. It's not being used by anyone, including theThammathinos right now. It doesn't exist. And for 20 years,nobody's used that. That's an issue for another day. 
THE COURT: Then why are you bringing it up? MR. ROSEN: I'm not, except --THE COURT: You are, because you just did. MR. ROSEN: Well, Your Honor, Ms. Ching just raised that,
that this also includes Roadway B. But it can't. It simplycan't because Roadway B isn't -- isn't giving access toParcel 11. It gives access to nothing. That's a question offact, Your Honor. But it wasn't addressed in the motion, andso we haven't introduced any declaration. 
Your Honor, we're agreeing with the relief they're seeking.
I'm not sure why there's any dissidence to that. 
THE COURT: Well, I think it's because you submitted a
position statement that appears to have some argument inopposition to what they were asking. And whether you wantedclarity or what have you, but as I read your positionstatement, which was filed on Friday, it did appear to havesome argument in opposition or you were parsing somethingout. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
But to the extent you're opposing any portion of the motion,
then there should have been some sort of affidavit or -- youknow. You know the standard on a motion for summaryjudgment. It can be denied if there's general [sic] issuesof material fact. You're not disputing any of the factualissues that have been raised by Fannie Mae. So then,therefore, the motion for summary judgment should begranted. 
MR. ROSEN: I -- I agree that it should be granted. 
THE COURT: All right. MR. ROSEN: What we were seeking to do was just clarify what
it doesn't seek, the issues it doesn't resolve. 
THE COURT: Relating to Roadway B –-MR. ROSEN: Well –-THE COURT: -- and whatever other defects you think exist.
But you didn't put any admissible evidence before the Courtas to any defects you think exist in the perpetual easement. 
MR. ROSEN: Because we're not opposing the motion, Your
Honor. 
THE COURT: All right. MR. ROSEN: And as the relief is set forth as to Roadway A
being an easement over Parcel 6 and 30, again, Your Honor,we -- we agree. We now agree. We don't dispute that. 
THE COURT: Okay. So there's no objection to the Court
granting summary judgment in Fannie Mae's favor, confirmingthat the validity and enforceability of the easement as itrelates to Parcel 6, 30, and 11, as there's no general [sic]issue of material fact that the perpetual easement is validand enforceable, expressly granting a perpetual easement forroad and utility purposes from Waialua Beach Road to Parcel11 over Parcel 6 and 30 through Roadway A? 
MR. ROSEN: That's correct. THE COURT: All right. Your motion for summary judgment,
therefore, is granted, as requested in your motion. 
(Emphases added.) 
Therefore, not only did Paradise fail to oppose Fannie 
Mae's MSJ, Paradise agreed with Fannie Mae that it was entitled 
to summary judgment and that the 1991 Easement was valid and enforceable as to Parcels 6 and 30 in favor of Parcel 11.  
On appeal, Paradise does not point to any evidence 
raising genuine issues of material fact. As discussed above, Fannie Mae met its burden under the summary judgment standard, 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and further, Paradise conceded in the Circuit Court that Fannie 
Mae's summary judgment motion should be granted. Therefore, the Circuit Court properly granted summary judgment in favor of Fannie Mae. 
III. Conclusion 
Based on the forgoing, we affirm the "Order Granting 
Intervenor Federal National Mortgage Association's Motion for Summary Judgment" and the "Final Judgment," both entered on December 29, 2016, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 14, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge
13 David B. Rosen,for Plaintiff-AppellantParadise on the Beach, LLC 
Stanford M.J. Manuia,
for Defendants-AppelleesManithay Thammathino Espinosa,Joe Thammathino, KhammanhThammathino and KhanthavyThammathino 
Steven M. Nagata,
for Defendant-AppelleeHawaiian Electric Company,Inc. 
Jade Lynne Ching,
Kanoelani S. Kane,for Intervenor-AppelleeVICTORIAN ISLAND PROPERTIES,LLC 