NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000596 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
LOLENESE K. AGASIVA, Claimant-Appellee-Appellee,
v. 
REALTY LAUA, LLC, Employer-Appellant-Appellee,
and 
HAWAII EMPLOYERS' MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
Insurance Carrier-Appellant-Appellee,
and 
SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND, Appellee-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
(CASE NO. AB 2014-310; (DCD NO. 
2-10-08551))  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Nakasone, JJ.)
 
Appellee-Appellant Special Compensation Fund, 
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, State of Hawai# i 
(
SCF) appeals from the July 11, 2017 Decision and Order (Decision 
and Order) of the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board 
(Board), that awarded permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits 
under the Hawai# i Workers Compensation Law, Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 386, to Claimant-Appellee-Apellee Lolenese 
K. Agasiva (Claimant) and apportioned liability for pre-existing 
PPD benefits to the SCF pursuant to HRS § 386-33.  1
1 HRS § 386-33 (2000), entitled "Subsequent injuries that would
increase disability," provides in pertinent part: 
(continued...) 1(...continued)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, the SCF contends  that the Board: 
(1) erroneously found in FOF 84 that "'a determination of the 
extent of pre-existing PPD is a legal question to be determined by the Director or Board,'" and (2) erroneously held the SCF 2
(a) Where prior to any injury an employee suffers from a
previous permanent partial disability already existing priorto the injury for which compensation is claimed, and thedisability resulting from the injury combines with theprevious disability, whether the previous permanent partialdisability was incurred during past or present periods ofemployment, to result in a greater permanent partialdisability or in permanent total disability
 or in death,
then weekly benefits shall be paid as follows: 
(1) In cases where the disability resulting from the injury
combines with the previous disability to result in greaterpermanent partial disability the employer shall pay theemployee compensation for the employee's actual permanentpartial disability but for not more than one hundred fourweeks; the balance if any of compensation payable to theemployee for the employee's actual permanent partialdisability shall thereafter be paid out of the specialcompensation fund; provided that in successive injury caseswhere the claimant's entire permanent partial disability isdue to more than one compensable injury, the amount of theaward for the subsequent injury shall be offset by theamount awarded for the prior compensable injury; 
. . . . (b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), where the director or
the appellate board determines that the previous permanentpartial disability amounted to less than that necessary tosupport an award of thirty-two weeks of compensation forpermanent partial disability, there shall be no liability onthe special compensation fund and the employer shall pay theemployee or the employee's dependents full compensation forthe employee's permanent partial or total disability ordeath. 
(Emphases added). This court recently explained that HRS § 386-33 istriggered if, "when the work accident happened, the injured employee alreadyhad a loss or impairment of a physical function that, combined with additionalloss or impairment of the same physical . . . function caused by the workaccident, resulted in a greater post-work-accident loss or impairment" of thephysical function. Pave v. Prod. Processing, Inc., 152 Hawai #i 164, 170, 524
P.3d 355, 361 (App. 2022) (citation omitted), reconsideration denied, CAAP-17-0000600, CAAP-17-0000925, 2023 WL 127865 (App. 2023). 
2 While the SCF lists numerous findings of fact ( FOFs ) and
conclusions of law ( COLs ) in its eleven points of error ( POEs ) that it
purportedly challenges, no specific argument pertinent to each challenged FOFand COL is presented, with the exception of FOF 84 in POE 8, COL 1 in POE 10,and COL 2 in POE 11, which we address. See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate
Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28(b)(7) (requiring argument "containing the contentions
of the appellant on the points presented and the reasons therefor, withcitations to the authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on)".These POEs are waived. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 liable in COL 1, because a pre-existing condition must be a 
"quantifiable ratable impairment" for SCF contribution under HRS § 386-33. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve the SCF's points of error as follows, and affirm in part and vacate in part. 
The underlying case arises from an appeal to the Board 
from the Director of Labor and Industrial Relations' (Director) 
award of PPD to Claimant, and the determination that the SCF was 
not liable for any portion of the award.  On appeal to the Board, 
the parties agreed that the issues to be determined were as 
follows: 
a. Whether any permanent disability should be
apportioned between Employer/Insurance Carrierand the [SCF]. 
b. If so, how much of Claimant's [PPD] should be
paid by the [SCF]. 
At the October 6, 2015 trial before the Board, Drs. 
Peter E. Diamond, M.D. (Dr. Diamond), Christopher R. Brigham, 
M.D. (Dr. Brigham), and Lorne K. Direnfeld, M.D. (Dr. Direnfeld) 
testified about Claimant's pre-existing conditions; and their 
medical evaluation reports of Claimant were entered into evidence.  The Board found that Claimant had a pre-existing PPD 
that supported an award of 32 weeks of compensation, which 
resulted in a greater work injury, and that PPD payments must be apportioned between Employer-Appellant-Appellee Realty Laua, LLC, and Insurance Carrier-Appellant-Appellee Hawai# i Employers' 
Mutual Insurance Company (collectively, Employer/Carrier), and 
the SCF.  In its Decision and Order, the Board found in pertinent 
part: 
73. Based on the opinions of Drs. Direnfeld, Diamond,
and Brigham, Claimant had permanent conditions of his right
and left shoulder and right hip that pre-existed his August12, 2010 work injury. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
74. Dr. Demeter also stated that the Claimant had a 
pre-existing degenerative disease in his left shoulder,
which the Board finds to be a permanent pre-existing [sic]Claimant's August 12, 2010 work injury. 
75. The Board finds that no evaluation for rating
permanent impairment was conducted before Claimant's August12, 2010 work injury. 
76. Based on the explanations by Drs. Direnfeld,
Diamond, and Brigham, the Board finds that on a medicalbasis, a person's pre-existing permanent impairment could bedetermined either by application of the AMA Guides or from aclinical/pathological perspective. 
77. Based on the testimony and opinions of Drs.
Direnfeld, Diamond, and Brigham, the Board finds that theclinical judgment method of apportionment to be reasonablefor determining the extent of Claimant's pre-existingpermanent impairment. 
. . . . 
80.
 Applying Dr. Diamond's 50% and 75% clinical
judgment apportionment to Claimant's shoulders and righthip, respectively, would result in the following pre-existing impairment.
15.6 weeks right upper extremity (5% x 312 weeks)9.36 weeks left upper extremity (3% x 312 weeks)64.8 weeks right lower extremity (22.5% x 288 weeks) 
. . . . 
82.
 The Board finds that despite the unanimous
opinions that Claimant had significant pre-existingconditions, a rating of pre-existing impairment was notpossible, because of the information contained in themedical records, or lack thereof. 
83. The Board finds that under the AMA Guides' stated 
method of apportionment, no pre-existing impairment could bedetermined, because the medical records before the accidentlacked specificity as to Claimant's pre-injury ranges ofmotion [( ROM)], which in this case, was the appropriate
method of permanent rating according the AMA Guides. 
84. The Board finds that a determination of the extent 
of pre-existing PPD is a legal question to be determined bythe Director or Board, upon consideration of the relevantevidence. 
85. In this case, based upon the opinions of Drs.
Direnfeld, Diamond, and Brigham that Claimant hadsignificant pre-existing factors or conditions thatcontributed to his post-injury PPD, the Board credits theclinical judgment method of apportionment over the AMAGuides method of apportionment for determining Claimant'sprevious PPD. 
86. The Board finds that in this case, the application
of the clinical judgment method is more consistent than theAMA Guides' method to meet the letter and intent of the workers' compensation statute regarding apportionment. 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
87. Based on Dr. Diamond's clinical judgment
apportionment, the Board finds that the Employer met its
burden of proving that Claimant had a pre-existing PPD inexcess of 32 weeks. 
In COL 1's twelve-page discussion, the Board considered 
the parties' positions, examined the legislative history of HRS 
§ 386-33, Hawai# i case law precedent, precedent from the Board's 
prior decisions, the "Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent Impairment by the American Medical Association" (AMA Guides),
 
and the limitations of the AMA Guides.  COL 1 states in pertinent 
part: 3
1. It is undisputed that Claimant had conditions or
factors in his right and left shoulder and right hip prior
to his August 12, 2010 work injury. The pivotaldisagreement in this case is whether such factors orconditions must be quantifiable as a ratable permanentimpairments pursuant to the AMA Guides for purposes ofapportionment with the SCF. 
. . . . 
To conclude that an opinion regarding pre-existing
permanent disability can only be credited if it meets therequirement of some guide, whether it be the AMA Guides oranother, would lead to some level of arbitrariness,depending on the body part or system affected. 
That is,
pre-existing impairment might be ratable because a diagnosisexists in one instance, but not ratable in another instance.For example, in this case, the prior medical records do notcontain enough information to meet the requirements of AMAGuides because the specific pre-accident hip and shoulderranges of motion document were not documented. Therefore,the pre-existing permanent disability is not be [sic]ratable, despite Claimant's significant pre-existingconditions or factors. 
However, if another body part were
injured, such as the spine, pre-existing permanentdisability would be ratable based on the existence of adiagnosis. 
As noted in Section 387-1, HRS, 
"Guide" or "guidelines" means anindication of suggested criteria, course,or means to a particular end, and not anauthoritative or exclusive prescriptionwhich limits the exercise of independentjudgment, expertise, or care. 
Further, as the Hawaii Supreme Court stated in Duque 
v. Hilton Hawaiian Village , 105 Hawai #i 433 (2004), ". . . 
3 The AMA Guides include various editions and are used by medical
experts as a reference or guide in measuring disability. Pave, 152 Hawai #i at 
172-73, 524 P.3d at 363-64 (citations omitted). 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
physicians must be allowed to draw on their medical
expertise and judgment to evaluate the numerous factorsrelating to an individual's impairment rating and todetermine which Guides would be most appropriate to apply." 
Further, Section 12-10-21(a), Hawaii Administrative
Rules states as follows: 
Impairment rating guides issued by the AmericanMedical Association, American Academy ofOrthopedic Surgeons, and any other such guideswhich the director deems appropriate and propermay be used as a reference or guide in measuringa disability. 
Thus, while the AMA Guides are a helpful tool in
determining disability, the Board is not bound by them.
Cabatbat v. County of Hawaii, Department of Water Supply ,
2013 Hawai #i, 1, 6 (2003). 
Given the foregoing, the Board concludes that
permanent disability should be apportioned between
Employer/Insurance Carrier and the [SCF]. 
(Emphases added). This timely appeal followed. 
"Appellate review of a LIRAB [(Board)] decision is 
governed by the provisions of the Hawai# i Administrative 
Procedure Act relating to judicial review of agency action." 
Ihara v. State of Hawai# i Dep't. of Land and Nat. Resources, 
141 Hawai# i 36, 41, 404 P.3d 302, 307 (2017) (citing HRS 
§ 91-14(g) (1993)) (additional citation omitted).4 
4 HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2021) provides: 
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case withinstructions for further proceedings; or it mayreverse or modify the decision and order if thesubstantial rights of the petitioners may have beenprejudiced because the administrative findings,conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; (4) Affected by other error of law; (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the wholerecord; or 
(continued...) 
6 4(...continued)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
To be reversed as clearly erroneous, the agency's findings,
conclusions, decisions or orders must be clearly erroneousin view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidenceon the whole record. As to conclusions of law, the[Board]'s conclusions will be reviewed de novo, under theright/wrong standard. 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
FOF 84, a legal conclusion, was not erroneous. 
The SCF contends that the Board erred in concluding in 
FOF 84, which is more accurately a COL, that the "extent of pre-
existing PPD is a legal question to be determined by the Director or Board, upon consideration of the relevant evidence." See 
Pave, 152 Hawai# i at 171-72, 524 P.3d at 362-63 (explaining that 
"the accuracy of the label affixed by the agency is freely reviewable by reviewing courts") (citation and quotation marks omitted). The SCF made this same argument in 
Pave,5 which we 
rejected, holding that the statement — — "the extent of preexisting PPD is a legal question to be determined by the Director of the Labor and Industrial Relations or the Board, upon consideration of all the evidence, including the medical records and testimony in the record" — — was "actually a conclusion of law; [and] it is not wrong." Id. at 176, 524 P.3d at 367 
(brackets omitted). We explained that "it is ultimately the director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations through the [Disability Compensation Division] or the Board, and not the physician, that decides the final PPD rating." Id.
(quoting Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 43, 404 P.3d at 309 (brackets and 
(6)
 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion. 
5 The SCF in Pave challenged FOF 39, which stated: 
39. The Board finds that a determination 
of the extent of preexisting PPD is alegal question to be determined by theDirector [of Labor and IndustrialRelations] or the Board, uponconsideration of all the evidence,including the medical records andtestimony in the record. 
152 Hawai #i at 176, 524 P.3d at 367. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  ellipsis omitted). We conclude the legal conclusion in FOF 84 
was not wrong. See Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 41, 404 P.3d at 307. 
COL 1's reasoning, that pre-existing PPD does not have
to be a "ratable impairment" under the AMA Guides, wasnot erroneous. 
The SCF contends that "quantifiable ratable impairment" 
pursuant to the AMA Guides is required in order to obtain 
contribution from the SCF under HRS § 386-33.  The SCF argues 
that pre-existing PPD must be a "ratable impairment," based on 
"objective medical criteria to a guide." The SCF claims that in this case, "[t]here is no evidence that Claimant had a ratable pre-existing disability based on the AMA Guides to his shoulders or right hip prior to his industrial accident" sufficient to 
support contribution from the SCF under HRS § 386-33. (Emphasis 
in original). The SCF's arguments lack merit. 
COL 1 quoted Hawai# i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
12-10-21, entitled "Disabilities," which states in relevant part that: "[i]mpairment rating guides issued by the American Medical Association, American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, and any other such guides which the director deems appropriate and proper may be used as a reference or guide in measuring a disability." (Emphasis added). "HAR § 12-10-21, by its terms, provides that the AMA Guides may be used to determine impairment ratings." Cabatbat v. Cnty. of Hawaii, Dep't of Water Supply, 103 Hawai# i 
1, 6, 78 P.3d 756, 761 (2003). 
HAR § 12-10-21 "permits reliance 
on the AMA Guides, but does not mandate their use to the exclusion of other appropriate guides." Id.
The Hawai# i Supreme Court subsequently explained in 
Ihara that "where the 
AMA Guides and the physician's assessment 
do not give an accurate portrayal of the total loss of [sic] impairment, the director or Board shall take other factors into account to reach an accurate disability determination." 141 Hawai# i at 44, 404 P.3d at 310 (citation omitted). The Ihara 
court noted that such "other factors affecting a PPD assessment include 'skills, education, job history, adaptability, age, and environment ...." Id. (quoting Duque v. Hilton Hawaiian Vill., 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
  105 Hawai# i 433, 439, 98 P.3d 640, 646 (2004)). "Where a 
physician's estimate of the permanent impairment under the AMA 
Guides is zero, the Board nonetheless has the discretion to find a determinate degree of impairment using standards not encompassed by the AMA Guides." Id. at 45, 404 P.3d at 311. 
Here, the Board was not wrong in its legal conclusion 
in COL 1 that "while the AMA Guides are a helpful tool in determining disability," the Board is "not bound by them[;]" and that a pre-existing PPD does not have to be a "ratable" impairment pursuant to a guide such as the AMA Guides. See
HAR § 12-10-21; Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 41, 44-45, 404 P.3d at 307, 
310-11; Cabatbat, 103 Hawai# i at 6, 78 P.3d at 761. 
COL 1 incorrectly equated Claimant's pre-existing
"conditions or factors" with pre-existingimpairment. 
COL 1 stated: "It is undisputed that Claimant had 
conditions or factors in his right and left shoulder and right 
hip prior to his August 12, 2010 work injury. . . ." (Emphasis added). The Board then explained how it would evaluate pre-
existing PPD in the remainder of COL 1, treating the "conditions 
or factors" as the equivalent of a disability. 
The SCF contends that "a condition or factor is not an 
impairment[,]" and the fact that Claimant had "pre-existing condition[s]," does not mean that Claimant had a pre-existing PPD. This contention has merit, per our recent decision in Pave. 
In Pave, a consolidated appeal, we noted that in one of 
the appeals, the Board "incorrectly equated a pre-existing 'condition' with a pre-existing 'disability.'" 152 Hawai# i at 
181, 524 P.3d at 372. 
The issue in each of the two appeals in 
Pave was whether there was evidence that the injured claimant's asymptomatic pre-existing physical condition had caused any "loss or impairment" of physical function before the work accident. Id.
 at 185, 524 P.3d at 376. We noted that "the plain statutory 
language" of HRS § 386-33(b) "requires that a 'disability' supporting an award of thirty-two weeks of PPD benefits must involve 'loss or impairment of a physical or mental function.'" 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 180, 524 P.3d at 370 (quoting HRS § 386-1)6 (other 
citations omitted). In reversing the Board's decision and orders 
in both appeals, we stated: 
[w]e hold that SCF is not liable for PPD benefits if an
employee's preexisting "condition" did not cause a"disability" — that is, "loss or impairment of a physical ormental function" — before the employee's work accident. The record in each case contains no evidence that the injuredemployee was physically impaired before their work accident.In each case, at least one doctor apportioned causation ofpost-work-accident disability to a preexisting condition;but in neither case was there evidence that the preexistingcondition had caused a pre-work-accident loss or impairmentof physical or mental function. 
Id. at 169, 524 P.3d at 360. 
Here, in COL 1, the Board concluded that because of 
Claimant's pre-existing "conditions or factors" in his right and 
left shoulder and right hip, Claimant had pre-existing PPD under HRS § 386-33, and Claimant's PPD benefits should be apportioned between Employer/Carrier and the SCF. Employer/Carrier does not 
address the SCF's contention that a pre-existing "condition or 
factor is not an impairment," or point to any other language in the Board's Decision and Order that suggests the Board concluded that Claimant's pre-existing conditions or factors constituted a "loss or impairment of a physical or mental function" under HRS § 386-1. 
We hold that COL 1's conclusion that equated Claimant's 
pre-existing "conditions or factors" with pre-existing impairment of Claimant's physical function was erroneous. We do not reach or express any opinion on whether the record contains evidence of pre-existing impairment of a physical or mental function, but narrowly hold that the Board made an error of law in its analysis when it applied HRS § 386-33 based on pre-existing "conditions or factors," rather than pre-existing impairment of a physical or mental function. See Pave, 152 Hawai# i at 169, 524 P.3d at 360; 
HRS § 386-1 (defining "disability"). 
Accordingly, COL 1 was 
erroneous in this regard. See Ihara, 141 Hawai# i at 41, 404 P.3d 
6 HRS § 386-1 (2013) defines "disability" as "loss or impairment of
a physical or mental function." 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 307. For the same reason, COL 2, which concluded that "104 
weeks of PPD payable to Claimant" should be apportioned and "paid by the SCF" under HRS § 386-33(a) was also erroneous. See id.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and vacate 
in part the July 11, 2017 Decision and Order filed by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 14, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeLi-Ann Yamashiro,Deputy Attorney General,for Appellee-Appellant. 
Robert E. McKee, Jr.,(Law Office of Robert E.McKee, Jr.),for Employer-Appellant-Appellee Realty Laua, LLC andInsurance Carrier-Appellant-Appellee Hawai# i Employers'
Mutual Insurance Company. 
11 