NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000117
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JAMES J. PAPPAS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHAD DURAN and JONNAVEN MONALIM, Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
MILES KIMHAN, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1606)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendants-Appellants Chad Duran and Jonnaven Monalim
 
(collectively Appellants) appeal from an Amended Final Judgment
 
filed on January 27, 2012 by the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit  (circuit court) in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee James J.
Pappas (Pappas). 
The judgment was based on the circuit court's
 
July 6, 2011 order granting summary judgment in favor of Pappas.
 On appeal, Appellants argue that the circuit court

 
erred in granting summary judgment to Pappas because there remain
 genuine issues of material fact. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm in part and
 
vacate in part.
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Background
 
This appeal arises out of an action to recover amounts 
allegedly owed under two promissory notes. In October 2007, 
Appellants joined with Miles Kimhan (Kimhan) to form NEX Generation Kapolei, LLC (NEX Kapolei) for the specific purpose of developing a parcel of land located at 1019 Lauia Street, Kapolei, Hawai
'i 96707 (subject property). NEX Kapolei began to 
develop the subject property from vacant land to an "industrial warehouse condominium project" with ten separate bays or units. 
Appellants and Kimhan borrowed $300,000 from Pappas for
 
the purpose of developing the subject property. In return, they
 signed a promissory note dated May 23, 2008 (May Note) in which
 they agreed to pay Pappas a total of $330,000, which "shall be
 payable on the 30th day of September, 2008, and a Lump sum
 payable on or As [sic] soon as the First Units close escrow from
 our Kapolei Warehouse Development, on which date the entire
 unpaid balance with accrued interest shall be due and payable." 
In the event of default, the May Note also provided that "the
 entire amount of principal and interest owing hereon shall
 immediately become due and payable at the election of the holder
 hereof, notice of such election is hereby waived, and this note
 shall thereafter bear interest at $5,000 per month[.]" As to
 extending due dates, the May Note provided that:
 
No extension of the time for payment of this note or any
installment hereof made by agreement with any person now or
hereafter liable for the payment of this note shall operate
to release, discharge, modify, change, or affect the
original liability under this note, either in whole or in
part, of the undersigned.
 
In June 2008, Appellants and Kimhan borrowed an
 
additional $550,000 from Pappas. Appellants and Kimhan signed a
 
promissory note dated June 16, 2008 (June Note) in which they
 agreed to pay Pappas the principal sum of $550,000, together with
 interest payment of $55,000 "at the closing of the first
 transaction for NEX Generation LLC Warehouse in Kapolei Business
 Park or February 18, 2009, whichever comes first." In the event
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of default, the June Note would bear interest at 15% per annum
 
until fully paid. 
Pursuant to both Notes, Appellants and Kimhan agreed to
 
pay all costs of collection, including reasonable attorneys'
 fees, and that they would "perform and comply with each" of the
 "conditions, provisions, and agreements of the undersigned
 contained in this note." 
On November 20, 2008, NEX Kapolei sold unit #10 at the
 
subject property for $552,000 to SJT Lauia LLC (SJT Lauia), which
 executed a purchase money real property mortgage agreement and a
 promissory note in the amount of $552,000.
2 Appellants did not
 
make any payments to Pappas. 
Appellants claim that they, along with Kimhan, met with
 
Pappas on March 20, 2009 to discuss repayment of the loans. The
 parties do not dispute that, on that same day, Appellants and
 Kimhan signed the back of a copy of the SJT Lauia promissory note
 with the following notation: "This note is assigned to Waikii
 Ventures Inc. by our endorsement signed below: NEX Generation
 Kapolei, LLC . . . Effective Date 3-20-09."
3 The parties
 
dispute, however, the effect of the assignment of the SJT Lauia
 note on Appellants' obligations under the May and June Notes. In
 his declaration submitted in support of his summary judgment
 motion, Pappas asserts that he accepted the assignment as a
 partial credit for the amounts then owing to him. To the
 contrary, the Appellants submitted counter declarations in which
 they contend that Pappas told them to make the assignment and he
 would let them "out of" the June Note "and have that resolved." 
2
 The promissory note provided that SJT Lauia would make monthly
payments to NEX Kapolei, which were to begin on January 1, 2009, with all
principal, interest, and other charges to become due on December 1, 2011.
3
 Appellants claim that Pappas told them Waikii Ventures, Inc. was one
of Pappas' companies. That same day, SJT Lauia acknowledged that the
promissory note was transferred to Waikii Ventures in a written and signed
document. The official mortgage assignment was signed over to Keeau Business
Park, LLC, not Waikii Ventures, a fact that both parties fail to explain. In
 any event, SJT Lauia began making monthly payments to Pappas in April 2009. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On July 13, 2009, Pappas initiated this action against
Appellants and Kimhan for failure to make repayment on the May
 
and June Notes. After Pappas filed a motion for summary
 judgment, Kimhan negotiated a settlement with Pappas and was
 dismissed from the action. The circuit court subsequently
 granted Pappas's motion for summary judgment against Appellants.
 
 
Apparently taking into account outstanding principal,
 
interest on the Notes, and various offsets of amounts paid to
 
4
Pappas,  the circuit court entered its Amended Judgment against
Appellants in "the principal amount of $338,829.25, together with
 interest thereon from April 30, 2011 at the per diem rate of
 $166.66 through July 6, 2011 and statutory judgment interest
 thereafter; and for attorneys fees of $44,769.40 and costs of
 $2,357.64 and statutory judgment interest thereon[.]"
II. Discussion
 
Appellants argue that the circuit court committed
 
reversible error when it granted summary judgment to Pappas

 
despite numerous genuine issues of material fact. "We review the
 
circuit court's grant or denial of summary judgment de novo." 
Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai
'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 
(2005). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
4
 The circuit court approved Pappas' good faith settlement with Kimhan,
which entitled Appellants to a credit of $110,000. Between the filing of
Pappas' motion for summary judgment and the circuit court's judgment, two more
units at the subject property were sold, and a total of $55,000 of the
proceeds went to Pappas as repayment. These credits, along with the $552,000
SJT Lauia assignment, appear to have been taken into account in the circuit
court's Amended Judgment.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. (citation and brackets omitted).
 
As the party seeking summary judgment, Pappas had the 
initial burden of establishing that summary judgment was 
appropriate. Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 
Hawai'i 286, 295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006). Pappas 
submitted his declaration and attached exhibits, including the May Note, the June Note, and documents related to the assignment of the SJT Lauia promissory note. This evidence supported Pappas's position that Appellants were liable to him for the remaining debt on the May and June Notes. The burden thus shifted to Appellants to respond to the motion and demonstrate why summary judgment was not appropriate. Id. at 296, 141 P.3d 
at 469. 
In their opposition memorandum, Appellants submitted
 
their respective declarations and exhibits, and asserted that
 they were not liable under theories of "oral modification," 
"waiver," "implied contract," and "accord and satisfaction." 
Appellants argued that they had not waived the defenses of oral
 modification, implied contract, and accord and satisfaction by
 not pleading these defenses in their answers. Although the
 circuit court did not make an explicit ruling in this regard, it
 did question whether these defenses had been waived. The circuit
 court concluded that there were no genuine issues of material
 fact and that Pappas had established his entitlement to summary
 judgment.
A. Affirmative Defenses
 
Affirmative defenses must be pleaded under Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 8(c) and the failure to do 
so may result in their waiver.5 See Touche Ross Ltd. v. Filipek, 
5
 HRCP Rule 8(c) provides in pertinent part:
 
(c) Affirmative Defenses. In pleading to a preceding
pleading, a party shall set forth affirmatively accord and
satisfaction, arbitration and award, assumption of risk,
contributory negligence, discharge in bankruptcy, duress,
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7 Haw. App. 473, 487, 778 P.2d 721, 730 (1989). ("[A]ny matter
 
that does not tend to controvert the opposing party's prima facie
 case as determined by applicable substantive law should be
 pleaded[.]" (citation, internal quotation mark and brackets
 omitted)).
 
Based on our review of Appellants' answers, there is 
nothing therein to indicate that Appellants would be relying on defenses based on "oral modification" or "implied contract." Because Pappas appears to have timely objected to the assertion of these defenses, and Appellants do not contend otherwise, these defenses were waived. Cf. Hawaii Broadcasting Co. v. Hawaii 
Radio, Inc., 82 Hawai
'i 106, 112-13, 919 P.2d 1018, 1024-25 (App. 
1996). 
As to Appellants' other theories of defense, they
 
clearly asserted "waiver" as a defense in their answers. Thus,
 this defense was no doubt preserved.
 
Moreover, although a closer call, we will consider 
Appellants' arguments based on "accord and satisfaction." In their answers, Appellants asserted a defense based on "satisfaction and release," which Pappas correctly argues is somewhat distinct from an "accord and satisfaction."
6 However, 
given that Hawai 'i has embraced notice pleading, we think 
sufficient notice was given and that we should consider the merits of the defense. 
We believe that the mandate of H.R.C.P. Rule 8(f) that "all
pleadings shall be so construed as to do substantial
justice" epitomizes the general principle underlying all
 
(...continued)
estoppel, failure of consideration, fraud, illegality,
injury by fellow servant, laches, license, payment, release,
res judicata, statute of frauds, statute of limitations,
waiver, and any other matter constituting an avoidance or
affirmative defense.
6
 Pappas argues that a "release" is a formal relinquishment of the
right to enforce the original obligations and not necessarily a compromise, as
in an accord and satisfaction. Indeed, accord and satisfaction is "an
agreement, followed by an execution, to discharge a demand by the giving and
acceptance of something different from that to which the creditor is
entitled." 1 Am. Jur. 2d Accord and Satisfaction § 3 (2005).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rules of H.R.C.P. governing pleadings, and by the adoption
of H.R.C.P. we have rejected "the approach that pleading is
a game of skill in which one misstep by counsel may be
decisive to the outcome" and in turn accepted "the principle
that the purpose of pleading is to facilitate a proper
decision on the merits."
 
Hall v. Kim, 53 Haw. 215, 221, 491 P.2d 541, 545 (1971) (citation
 
omitted).
 
Therefore, we evaluate below whether Appellants raised
 
genuine issues of material fact sufficient to preclude summary
 judgment based on defense theories of "waiver" and "accord and
 satisfaction."
 
B. Evidence Adduced By Appellants 
Based on our de novo review of the record, we conclude
 
that Appellants have not raised any genuine issues of material
 
fact as to the May Note, but that genuine issues of material fact
 were raised as to the June Note.
 
1. Waiver
 
"Waiver is the intentional relinquishment of a known
 
right, or such conduct as warrants an inference of such
 
surrender[.]" Wilart Assoc. v. Kapiolani Plaza, Ltd., 7 Haw.
 
App. 354, 359, 766 P.2d 1207, 1210 (1988) (citation and internal
 quotation marks omitted) (block quote format altered). A waiver
 "may be expressed or implied, and it may be established by
 express statement or agreement, or by acts and conduct from which
 an intention to waive may reasonably be inferred." Id. at 359­
60, 766 P.2d at 1210-11 (citations, internal quotation marks, and
 brackets omitted).
 
By its terms, the May Note required Appellants to pay
 
Pappas $330,000 by September 30, 2008, and any unpaid balance and
 interest "[a]s soon as the First Units close escrow[.]" The May
 Note also provided that no extension would modify the original
 liability. In their declarations, the Appellants claim –- at
 most -- that at the time the agreement was made, they "told
 Mr. Pappas that we would be paying back the loan when the units
 at the subject property were sold" and that he "understood and
 agreed to this." First, it is doubtful that Appellants' reliance
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on parole evidence is appropriate, because the May Note sets a 
due date of September 30, 2008, and provides that even if there are any extensions, the original liability remains. "The parole evidence rule precludes the use of extrinsic evidence to vary or contradict the terms of an unambiguous and integrated contract." Hawaiian Ass'n of Seventh-Day Adventists v. Wong, 130 Hawai
'i 36, 
45, 305 P.3d 452, 461 (2013) (citation and quotation marks omitted) Second, even if the Appellants' declarations are considered, it appears Appellants were in default on the May Note. That is, it is undisputed that unit #10 was sold and yet Appellants made no payment to Pappas. Thus, we conclude that given the evidence adduced by Appellants in opposition to the summary judgment motion, they failed to show that there is any genuine issue of material fact and Pappas did not waive his rights under the May Note. 
As to the June Note, however, Appellants' declarations
 
do raise genuine issues of material fact as to whether Pappas
 waived his rights. Appellants attest that:
 
On or about March 20, 2009, [Appellants and Kimhan]
met with Mr. James Pappas at Sizzler's Waipahu to discuss
repayment on the loans. At said meeting, Mr. Pappas said to
sign over bay ten RIGHT NOW and he will let us out of the
June 2008 $500,000.00 note and have that resolved.
[Appellants and Kimhan] all agreed to Mr. Pappas' demand.
 
(Emphasis added.) It is undisputed that Appellants and Kimhan
 
then assigned the SJT Lauia promissory note to Pappas pursuant to
 a handwritten note. 
Pappas disputes that he took the assignment as full

 
payment of the June Note, attesting instead that: 
Effective April 1, 2009, I accepted an assignment of a
note and mortgage from the defendants as a partial credit  of
$
552,000.00 against the then balance due on both Notes. No
 
other payments have been received with respect to either
Note and both the May Note and the June Note remain unpaid
and in default. 
. . . This assignment was not a full final payment on
either of the two Notes. The assignment doesn't expressly
reference either of the Notes, much less have a specific agreement
that the assignment is final payment in full.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Given the evidence adduced by Pappas and the contrary
 
evidence submitted by Appellants, there are genuine issues of
 
material fact whether Pappas waived his rights under the June
 Note.
 
2. Accord and Satisfaction
 
This court has previously utilized the following
 
prerequisites for an effective accord and satisfaction:
 
(1) existence of a "bona fide dispute" between the parties
involved, (2) tender by the obligor which gives the obligee
adequate notice that a compromise is being proposed, and (3)
effective acceptance of the compromise offer in order to
discharge the original obligation.
 
Rosa v. Johnston, 3 Haw. App. 420, 423, 651 P.2d 1228, 1232
 
(1982). "[A]n accord and satisfaction is a new contract" and
 "the essential elements of 'accord and satisfaction' are an
 agreement to settle a dispute and consideration which supports
 the agreement." 1 Am. Jur. 2d Accord and Satisfaction § 4
 (2005). "Any new consideration, though insignificant or
 technical, is generally regarded as sufficient to support a
 contract of accord and satisfaction[,]" and "[i]f a creditor
 accepts payment of a liquidated demand in a different medium from
 that called for by the contract between the parties, in full
 discharge of the demand, there is a sufficient new or additional
 consideration to support the transaction as an accord and
 satisfaction." Id. at §§ 28, 33.
 
Appellants do not adduce any evidence that there was an
 
accord and satisfaction as to the May Note. However, given the
 assertions in Appellants' declarations surrounding the March 20,
 2009 meeting, that Pappas indicated the June Note would be
 "resolved" if Appellants and Kimhan signed over unit #10, and
 that the SJT Lauia note was assigned to Pappas, it appears that
 there are genuine issues of material fact whether Appellants and
 Pappas came to an accord and satisfaction, i.e. new agreement, as
 to repayment of the June Note.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the January 27, 2012 Amended
 
Judgment and the July 6, 2011 order granting summary judgment in
 
favor of Pappas, entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit, are hereby: (a) affirmed to the extent that judgment was
 entered in favor of Pappas on the May Note; and (b) vacated to
 the extent that judgment was entered in favor of Pappas on the
 June Note. The case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 5, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Frederick J. Arensmeyer(Dubin Law Offices)for Defendants-Appellants Chief Judge 
Gary G. Grimmer(Gary G. Grimmer & Associates)for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 