  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000801 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JONATHAN NUEZCA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(S.P.P. NO. 16-1-0008(2); CR. NO. 15-1-0285(2)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Jonathan Nuezca (N
uezca) appeals 
from the "Court's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody Filed on June 7, 2016" (
FOF/COL/Order), entered on October 3, 2017, in the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1/ Following an 
evidentiary hearing, the Circuit Court concluded that Nuezca had failed to present sufficient evidence to establish his claims of ineffective assistance of counsel and prosecutorial misconduct, and denied Nuezca's Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody (Petition). 
On appeal, Nuezca challenges the Circuit Court's 
Findings of Fact (FOF) Nos. 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 36, 38, 39, 40, 
and 41 and Conclusions of Law (COL) Nos. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 
13. Nuezca contends that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that 
he failed to establish his ineffective assistance claim, because 
he was not accurately advised by his trial counsel that pleading 
1/ The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
no contest to an aggravated felony would subject him to 
"mandatory and certain" deportation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Nuezca'scontentions as follows.  
I. RELEVANT BACKGROUND 
The following FOFs, among others, are undisputed: 
1. On May 1, 2015, in Cr. No. 15-1-0285(2), the Grand
Jury of the Second Circuit indicted Nuezca on the following
counts: 
Count One: Sexual Assault in the Third Degree
[(Sex Assault 3 )], in violation of Hawai[]i Revised
Statutes ("HRS") § 707-732(1)(b);2/ 
Count Two: [Sex Assault 3], in violation of HRS
§ 707-732(1)(c); 
Count Three: [Sex Assault 3], in violation of
HRS § 707-732(1)(c); 
Count Four: [Sex Assault 3], in violation of HRS
§ 707-732(1)(c); and 
Count Five: [Sex Assault 3], in violation of HRS
§ 707-732(1)(c). 
2. On March 11, 2015, Defendant Nuezca pled not
guilty to all five counts against him at his Arraignment and
Plea. 
3. In the Arraignment and Plea hearing, the Court
gave the immigration advisement required by HRS § 802E-4 toNuezca. 
2/ HRS § 707-732(1)(b)(2014) provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in
the third degree if: 
. . . . 
(b) The person knowingly subjects to sexual contactanother person who is less than fourteen yearsold or causes such a person to have sexualcontact with the person[.] 
At the time of the indictment, HRS § 707-700 (2014) defined
"sexual contact" as "any touching, other than acts of 'sexual penetration', ofthe sexual or other intimate parts of a person not married to the actor, or ofthe sexual or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whetherdirectly or through the clothing or other material intended to cover thesexual or other intimate parts." 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. [Trial counsel] represented Defendant Nuezca
. . . . 
5. On August 11, 2015, Nuezca changed his plea from
not guilty to no contest to Count One . . . . 
6. In the Change of Plea hearing, the Court gave
Nuezca an immigration warning as required by HRS § 802E-2. 
7. The Court advised Nuezca of the potential
immigration issues that may arise if he is not a citizen of
the United States, including detention and removal, bychanging his plea to no contest. 
8. During the hearing, Nuezca acknowledged that he
had certain rights, including a speedy and public trial andthe right to appeal anything that occurred up to the changeof plea date, and that he gave up those rights. 
9. Nuezca also acknowledged that he faced a possible
five-year term of imprisonment and $10,000 in fines, anextended term of imprisonment of ten-years and a term ofprobation of four-years with up to one year in jail. 
A 
conviction in the offense to which [Nuezca] entered a NoContest Plea also required him to register as a sex offenderfor life. 
10. Nuezca acknowledged that he discussed all of the
foregoing with his attorney and that he had no complaintsabout his attorney. 
11. Nuezca also signed a No Contest Plea form in open
Court acknowledging the items contained in these [FOFs]. 
12. As a result of his plea deal, Nuezca pled no
contest to Count One . . . . After sentencing pursuant tothe plea deal, the Court dismissed Counts Two through Five. . . with prejudice. 
13. The Court found that Nuezca intelligently,
knowingly, and voluntarily changed his plea of not guiltyand entered a plea of no contest. 
14. On October 20, 2015, the Court sentenced Nuezca
to five years' probation. As a term and condition of probation the Court sentenced [Nuezca] to one year jail. 
15. [O]n June 7, 2016, Nuezca file[d the Petition] in
the instant case. 
16. Nuezca raised three grounds for relief in his
Petition: 
Ineffective assistance of counsel for being
misinformed about the deportation consequences of his nocontest plea, leading him to not believe the Court'simmigration advisement, and not being advised about going totrial. 
17. [Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai #i (State )]
filed a Response to the Petition on August 22, 2016, andNuezca filed a Reply on February 13, 2017. 
18. On October 31, 2016, the U.S. Board of
Immigration Appeals issued a decision to vacate animmigration judge's decision to remove Nuezca from theUnited States. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
19. This court held an evidentiary hearing on
Nuezca's . . . Petition on February 22, 2017. Nuezca 
participated via Polycom as he remained in federal custodypending possible removal from the United States. A Court certified interpreter assisted in the case to provideEnglish-Ilokano translation. 
(Footnote added and original footnote omitted.) 
At the hearing on the Petition, Nuezca's trial counsel 
testified that in his practice, it is routine for him to 
determine if his client is a United States citizen, and he did so in Nuezca's case. On June 4, 2015, within days of coming on the case, trial counsel learned that Nuezca had a permanent resident card. "Right away, [trial counsel] told [Nuezca] that what he's charged with, five counts of sexual assault three, is a deportable offense." Trial counsel informed Nuezca "[m]any times" that "there was a possibility that he would be deported"; he advised Nuezca "[m]any times" that "if he pled no contest, he would be -- could be deported"; and that "[Sex Assault 3] was a deportable offense." Trial counsel also mentioned to Nuezca that because he had a permanent resident card, if Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) put a hold on him, he should qualify 
for assistance from a federal public defender. Trial counsel 
told Nuezca he "couldn't give him assurances that he would not be deported[,]" but also "tried to give him some hope, because there ha[d] been some cases where . . . people were not deported when they had their permanent residence card." Trial counsel "told [Nuezca] many times, yes, this is a deportable offense, because he asked [trial counsel] every single time [trial counsel] visited him or talked to him on the phone. And [trial counsel] said [he] hoped it didn't happen, but [Nuezca] certainly was aware of it." "[P]ortions of this continuing discussion took place before the change of plea hearing . . . many, many times." 
Trial counsel further testified: 
And what happened was, over the course of talking with
the prosecutor's office, [the prosecutor] agreed finally to
dismiss four of the Class C felonies. . . . [S]he dismissedfour of the Class C felonies if [Nuezca] would plead to oneClass C felony. She was going to ask for five years ofprobation and a year in jail. 
. . . . 
. . . And when we came to sentencing, Judge Cahill
granted the probation request but gave him a year, which was 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the agreement. 
And we talked about this issue going into it, and he
was fully aware of it. 
In fact, he decided to gamble on the
consequences of whether he might get an ICE hold or, you
know, spare himself from going to possibly a state prison. 
Trial counsel explained, "It was a gamble because he wanted to go 
home, so he chose to enter the plea of no contest to one count involving his stepdaughter and basically rolled the dice on whether ICE would ever catch up with him." 
When asked if he ever told Nuezca that "he would be 
deported," trial counsel testified: "I did not know to a hundred percent that he would be, no. There was a possibility that he would not be. In fact, my understanding was the immigration judge sided with him over in Honolulu recently." 
When asked if he felt he "had an obligation to tell Mr. 
Nuezca that he would be deported," trial counsel responded: 
Well, that assumes that I knew what the immigration
courts would do, and I did not at the time. I did tell him 
it was a deportable offense and if he got caught up in thesystem, he would need an immigration -- he would need thehelp. But having a residence card, he should be able to geta federal public defender to help with that. I definitelytold him it was deportable. 
Following testimony and argument, the Circuit Court 
orally denied the Petition. In the FOF/COL/Order, the Circuit 
Court further found and concluded, in relevant part: 
20. Defendant Nuezca, his wife . . ., and [trial
counsel] testified at the hearing. 
21. The court finds [trial counsel] to be a credible
witness and accepts his testimony.
 . . . . 
27. The Court finds credible [trial counsel's]
testimony that he advised Nuezca on numerous occasions that
he faced the possibility of deportation. 
28.
 [Trial counsel] also told Nuezca that because he
had a permanent resident card, if Immigration and CustomsEnforcement put a hold on Nuezca, he would qualify forassistance from a federal public defender. 
29. [Trial counsel] told Nuezca that he could not give
Nuezca assurances that he would not be deported, but alsotried to give him some hope by telling him that some peoplewere not deported when they had their permanent residentcard. 
. . . . 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
31. [Trial counsel] requested an interpreter for the
Change of Plea hearing just in case words were spoken too
quickly or complex terms were used, and the Court furnishedone for [Nuezca]. 
. . . . 
33. Although [Nuezca] faced possible deportation,
[trial counsel] testified that Nuezca accepted the plea dealbecause he wanted to return to his family and his job andsought to receive probation in a plea agreement. 
34.
 [Trial counsel] further testified that he made
efforts for a "better" deal, but the deputy prosecutorassigned to Nuezca's case would not enter into a pleaagreement unless Nuezca pled to one of the class C felonycounts, and in return, she agreed to a dismissal of theremaining four counts. 
35. The Court followed the plea agreement and
sentenced Nuezca to five years probation, including one yearof prison. 
36. Nuezca faced possible lengthy prison time if he
chose to go to trial and the jury convicted him of allcharged offenses. The Court finds credible the testimony of[trial counsel] that Nuezca decided to risk deportation witha shorter prison term or probation because of his family. 
. . . . 
38. The Court does not find credible either Mr. or 
Mrs. Nuezca's testimony that [Nuezca] had not been warned oradvised by his lawyers that he would likely face removal. 
39. The Court further finds that based on all the 
credible evidence, [Nuezca] had been advised and warned thatif convicted he could face removal. 
40. The Court further finds that Nuezca as a "green
card" holder of recent arrival and facing actual removal nowseeks to undo the benefits of the plea deal he knowingly,intelligently, and voluntarily entered into with the fulladvice of counsel. 
The Court further finds that based upon
all credible evidence that [Nuezca] is motivated by currentevents and the desire to remain in the United States and not out of actual innocence. 
41. The Court further finds that Nuezca failed to 
present any credible evidence that his [trial counsel's]representation was ineffective. 
. . . . 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
. . . . 
8.
 . . . Nuezca failed to establish factually and
legally that his conviction under Hawaii law for [SexAssault 3] make it practically certain that he shall beremoved or deported. 
9. [Trial counsel's] advice to Nuezca that [Sex
Assault 3] made him subject to deportation or removal wasnot objectively unreasonable and within the standardrequired of a competent attorney, and thus Nuezca failed to 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 meet the first prong of the Strickland[ v. Washington, 466
U.S. 668, 687, reh. denied, 467 U.S. 1267 (1984) test]. 
10. . . . Nuezca did not suffer prejudice as required
by the second prong of the Strickland test, because Nuezcafaced a possible 25-year prison term, so he made theconscious decision to take his chances with deportation andenter into a plea agreement. 
11. . . . [Trial counsel's] assistance to Nuezca was
within the range of competence demanded of attorneys incriminal cases under [State v. ]Richie[, 88 Hawai #i 19, 960
P.2d 1227 (1998)]. 
12. . . . [Trial counsel] did not commit specific
errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill,judgment, or diligence under the first prong of the Richietest. 
13. Because [trial counsel] did not commit any errors
or omissions, there is no need to conduct the second prongof the Richie test. 
14. . . . Nuezca failed to present sufficient
evidence to establish his claims of ineffective assistance of counsel in his first and second grounds for relief. 
15. . . . Nuezca failed to present any evidence to
establish his claim of prosecutorial misconduct in his thirdground for relief. 
. . . . 
ORDER 
The Court, having made the foregoing [FOFs] and
[COLs], and concluding that Nuezca failed to presentsufficient evidence to meet [h]is burden of proof toestablish his claims of ineffective assistance of counsel and prosecutorial misconduct[,] 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the
[Petition] is DENIED. 
II. DISCUSSION 
Nuezca argues that his trial counsel was ineffective 
for failing to advise him that "he was facing mandatory and 
certain deportation from being convicted of an aggravated felony." Nuezca challenges numerous findings by the Circuit Court as to what Nuezca's trial counsel advised him regarding the immigration consequences of pleading no contest to one count of Sex Assault 3. Ultimately, the Circuit Court found that trial counsel's testimony was credible, and that trial counsel had advised Nuezca that he "could face removal" for a Sex Assault 3 conviction, and "[Sex Assault 3] made him subject to deportation or removal." 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"A trial court's [findings of fact] are reviewed under 
the clearly erroneous standard. A finding of fact is clearly 
erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai# i 423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994) 
(citing and quoting Hawai# i Thousand Friends v. City and County 
of Honolulu, 75 Haw. 237, 248, 858 P. 2d 726, 732, (1993)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, there is evidence in the record to support the 
Circuit Court's findings of fact that are challenged by Nuezca, and based on our review of the record, we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that the Circuit Court made mistakes in these findings. To the extent that Nuezca challenges the Circuit Court's findings regarding credibility, "it is within the province of the trial court to determine the credibility of a witness[.]" Matter of Ishida-Waiakamilo Legacy Trust, 140 
Hawai# i 69, 74, 398 P.3d 658, 663 (2017) (quoting In re Ishida-
Waiakamilo Legacy Trust, 138 Hawai# i 98, 107, 377 P.3d 39, 48 
(App. 2016)) (internal quotation marks omitted); see also State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i 87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000) (quoting 
State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai# i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 
(1999)). 
We therefore conclude that the challenged findings were 
not clearly erroneous, and the evidence supports that trial counsel advised Nuezca that pleading no contest to Sex Assault 3 would subject him to deportation. Nuezca argues that even if the Circuit Court's findings are upheld, his trial counsel's advice was deficient and constituted ineffective assistance. He relies primarily on Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010), to support his claim. 
In Padilla, the Supreme Court held that 
constitutionally competent counsel would have advised a defendant that his conviction for drug distribution made him subject to automatic deportation. Id. at 360. The Court stated: 
In the instant case, the terms of the relevant
immigration statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in
defining the removal consequence for [the defendant's]conviction. See 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(B)(i) ("Any alien who 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
at any time after admission has been convicted of a
violation of (or a conspiracy or attempt to violate) any lawor regulation of a State, the United States or a foreigncountry relating to a controlled substance . . ., other thana single offense involving possession for one's own use of30 grams or less of marijuana, is deportable"). [Thedefendant's] counsel could have easily determined that hisplea would make him eligible for deportation simply fromreading the text of the statute, which addresses not somebroad classification of crimes but specifically commandsremoval for all controlled substances convictions except forthe most trivial of marijuana possession offenses. Instead,[the defendant's] counsel provided him false assurance thathis conviction would not result in his removal from this country. This is not a hard case in which to find deficiency: The consequences of [the defendant's] pleacould easily be determined from reading the removal statute,his deportation was presumptively mandatory, and hiscounsel's advice was incorrect. 
Id. at 368-69. In sum, the defendant's counsel erred in not 
recognizing that the defendant's plea would subject him to "presumptively mandatory" deportation, and advising him to the contrary "that his conviction would not result in his removal." Id. 
The Court recognized that "[i]mmigration law can be 
complex, and it is a legal specialty of its own." Id. at 369.The Court observed:  
There will, therefore, undoubtedly be numerous situations in
which the deportation consequences of a particular plea areunclear or uncertain. . . . When the law is not succinct 
and straightforward . . ., a criminal defense attorney needdo no more than advise a noncitizen client that pendingcriminal charges may carry a risk of adverse immigrationconsequences. But when the deportation consequence is truly
clear, as it was in this case, the duty to give correctadvice is equally clear. 
Id. (emphasis added) (footnote omitted). The Court concluded by 
stating: "[W]e now hold that counsel must inform her client whether his plea carries a risk of deportation." Id. at 374. 
This case differs from Padilla in important respects. 
Here, Nuezca argues that Sex Assault 3 constitutes "sexual abuse of a minor," which he asserts "is clearly an aggravated felony" that triggered "mandatory" deportation under federal immigration law.  However, he failed to establish that at the time of his 
no-contest plea, it was "truly clear" that Sex Assault 3 
3/
3/ 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii) (2008) provides: "Any alien who is
convicted of an aggravated felony at any time after admission is deportable."
An "aggravated felony" includes "sexual abuse of a minor." 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(A). 
9  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
constituted "sexual abuse of a minor," such that his removal was 
"presumptively mandatory" and his counsel was required to so advise him. Id. at 369. 
Indeed, in Nuezca's subsequent removal proceedings, the 
Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) ruled that the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) had not established that Nuezca's 
conviction for Sex Assault 3 constituted a conviction for sexual 
abuse of a minor. In re Nuezca, 2016 WL 8188641, at *2 (BIA 
Oct. 31, 2016) (unpublished) ("Given that Hawaii's definition of 'sexual contact' includes offenses which were committed 'through the clothing,' the respondent has . . . not been convicted of a categorical sexual abuse of a minor aggravated felony . . . ." (citing United States v. Martinez, 786 F.3d 1227, 1232 (9th Cir. 2015) (holding that, under Washington state law, third-degree child molestation did not categorically constitute "sexual abuse of a minor" because it "criminalize[d] touching over clothing as opposed to the generic offense's requirement of skin-to-skin contact"); and United States v. Castro, 607 F.3d 566, 570 (9th Cir. 2010) (holding that a California statute prohibiting lewd and lascivious acts on a child was categorically broader than the generic definition for sexual abuse of a minor because "[l]ewd touching [under the state statute] can occur through a victim's clothing and can involve any part of the victim's body"))). The BIA further ruled that the DHS had not established that Nuezca's Sex Assault 3 conviction constituted a conviction for a crime involving "moral turpitude."
4/ Id. Accordingly, the BIA: (1) 
sustained Nuezca's appeal and vacated "the Immigration Judge's decision to sustain the charges of removability"; and (2) 
4/ 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(i) (2008) provides: 
Any alien who--
(I) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude
committed within five years (or 10 years in the caseof an alien provided lawful permanent resident statusunder section 1255(j) of this title) after the date ofadmission, and 
(II) is convicted of a crime for which a sentence of
one year or longer may be imposed, 
is deportable. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"remand[ed] the record to the Immigration Judge for further 
proceedings," including "a renewed opportunity [for the DHS] to lodge additional charges of removability." Id. at *2-*3 (citing 
8 C.F.R. § 1240.10(e) (2015)). 
Nuezca points out that at the hearing on the Petition, 
trial counsel testified: "It looked to me like it was an aggravated felony. . . . It's a crime of moral turpitude as well." Regardless, whether a conviction for Sex Assault 3 would trigger "mandatory" deportation at the time of Nuezca's plea was primarily a legal issue, and Nuezca failed to establish that such a consequence was "truly clear" as a matter of federal immigration law. Padilla, 559 U.S. at 369. In citing the BIA's 
2016 decision in Nuezca's removal proceedings, we neither adopt nor reject its legal analysis, which is dependent in part on its reading of Hawai# i law. We also recognize that the decision came 
after Nuezca's plea, and was thus not available when his trial counsel advised him regarding immigration consequences. Nevertheless, the decision relies on pre-existing authorities, which, at the very least, undermine Nuezca's argument that Sex Assault 3 was "clearly an aggravated felony" that triggered "mandatory" deportation under federal immigration law. Accordingly, on this record, we conclude that Nuezca failed to establish that pleading no-contest to Sex Assault 3 would subject him to presumptively mandatory deportation, such that his trial counsel was required to so advise him. 
Under these circumstances, we also conclude that trial 
counsel was not ineffective in advising Nuezca regarding the immigration consequences of his plea. "When the law is not succinct and straightforward . . ., a criminal defense attorney need do no more than advise a noncitizen client that pending criminal charges may carry a risk of adverse immigration consequences." Padilla, 559 U.S. at 369. Here, trial counsel 
advised Nuezca that pleading no contest to Sex Assault 3 would subject him to deportation, which was sufficient to warn Nuezca that the plea "carr[ied] a risk of adverse immigration consequences." Id. Thus, trial counsel satisfied Padilla, and 
on this record, Nuezca has not established "specific errors or 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment or 
diligence."5/ Richie, 88 Hawai# i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 (quoting 
State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai# i 462, 480, 946 P.2d 32, 50 (1997)). 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err in ruling that Nuezca failed to establish his ineffective assistance claim. 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the reasons stated above, we affirm the "Court's 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody Filed on June 7, 2016," entered on October 3, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 28, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Matthew S. Kohm for Petitioner-Appellant. 
Richard K. Minatoya,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Respondent-Appellee. 
5/ It appears that the Circuit Court analyzed Nuezca's ineffective
assistance claim under both the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution, applying the federal standard announced in Strickland, 466 U.S.at 687, and Article I, section 14 of the Hawai #i Constitution, applying the
state standard followed in Richie , 88 Hawai #i at 39, 960 P.2d 1227 at 1247.
To the extent that COLs 3, 4, 7, 9, or 10 can be read as imposing theStrickland standard on the ineffective assistance claim brought under theHawai #i Constitution, that conclusion is incorrect, but harmless, because the
Circuit Court concluded that Nuezca's claim also failed the applicable Richiestandard. 
12 