 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000647
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ROBERT F. ALBERT, aka William Albert, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-1291)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert F. Albert, aka William
 
Albert (Albert) appeals from the July 27, 2011 "Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence" for assault in the second degree, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-711 (Supp.
 
2011), entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
court).1
 
On appeal, Albert contends that the circuit court
 
committed plain error by failing to provide a cautionary
 
instruction stating the factors to be considered in assessing the
 
accuracy of eyewitness identification.2
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo Jr. presided.
 
2
 Although the notice of appeal was untimely, an exception to timely
appeals has been recognized in similar circumstances in criminal cases. See 
State v. Irvine, 88 Hawai' i 404, 407, 967 P.2d 236, 239 (1998). NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Albert's point
 
of error and affirm the judgment.
 
Albert acknowledges that "the Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
repeatedly held that the giving of special instructions on 
eyewitness identification is within the discretion of the trial 
judge." See State v. Vinge, 81 Hawai' i 309, 316, 916 P.2d 1210, 
1217 (1996); State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 383, 404, 894 P.2d 80, 
101 (1995); State v. Pahio, 58 Haw. 323, 331-332, 568 P.2d 1200, 
1206 (1977); and State v. Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 162, 552 P.2d 
357, 365 (1976). Albert asserts, however, that "a cautionary 
jury instruction regarding eyewitness identification should be 
required in any case in which eyewitness identification is a 
critical issue." This is the same argument made by the defendant 
in State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i 302, 309, 277 P.3d 1027, 1034 
(2012), which was recently decided while the instant case was on appeal. 
In Cabagbag, the Hawai' i Supreme Court agreed with 
Cabagbag's argument when the defense requests the instruction, 
but gave its ruling prospective effect. The supreme court first 
held that "in criminal cases, the circuit courts must give the 
jury a specific eyewitness identification instruction whenever 
identification evidence is a central issue in the case, and it is 
requested by the defendant[.]" Cabagbag, 127 Hawai' i at 304, 277 
P.3d at 1029. In so holding, the supreme court abrogated Padilla, Pahio, Okumura, and Vinge, the cases that guided the 
circuit court in issuing its jury instructions in this case. 
However, the supreme court also held in Cabagbag that 
"this rule should be given prospective effect." Cabagbag, 127 
Hawai'i at 317, 277 P.3d at 1042. Specifically, the court held 
that "as to [Cabagbag] and other cases that are currently pending 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on direct appeal, this court will apply the rule then in effect
 
when the cases were tried." Id. 
Albert's trial began on May 19, 2011; he was sentenced 
on July 27, 2011; and he filed his notice of appeal on August 29, 
2011. The supreme court decided Cabagbag on May 17, 2012. When 
the supreme court issued its opinion in Cabagbag, briefing in 
this case had not been completed; it was "pending on direct 
appeal" in this court. Therefore, we do not review this case 
under the new rule decided in Cabagbag, but instead, under the 
rule in effect at the time of Albert's trial. That is, similar 
to the analysis applied to the defendant in Cabagbag, "we must 
examine all aspects of the trial, including the opening 
statements, the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses, the 
arguments to the jury, and the general instructions given by the 
court, to determine whether the jury's attention was adequately 
drawn to the identification evidence." 127 Hawai' i at 317, 277 
P.3d at 1042 (citation omitted). Moreover, under the rule applicable when Albert was tried, the giving of special 
instructions on identification was within the discretion of the 
trial court. Padilla, 57 Haw. at 162, 552 P.2d at 365. In this 
case, however, we consider whether the circuit court committed plain error, because Albert did not request a more specific jury 
instruction on identification during trial. 
Here, the record shows that the jury's attention was
 
adequately drawn to the issue of eyewitness identification and
 
the evidence related thereto. First, opening statements by the
 
prosecution and the defense drew attention to the issue of
 
eyewitness identification. The prosecuting attorney emphasized
 
that the complaining witness, Kevin Costello (Costello), had seen
 
Albert twice the night of the assault and had a clear memory of
 
Albert's face. The defense counsel, in turn, acknowledged that
 
there was no dispute that Costello had been injured and beaten on
 
the night in question, but asserted that "the evidence will show
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it was not [Albert]." The defense counsel told the jury
 
that Albert was not in the vicinity of the assault when it took
 
place and that, after all the evidence was in, the jury would
 
"find that this was a case of mistaken identity[.]" 
Second, on cross-examination of Costello, the defense
 
counsel emphasized Costello's testimony that he had seen Albert
 
less than ten minutes during the first encounter, and less than a
 
minute during the second encounter. On further cross-
examination, defense counsel asked several questions about
 
Costello's description of Albert made to the police, such as
 
Albert's skin and hair color, his weight and height, and the
 
clothes he was wearing, suggesting that Costello's description
 
did not match Albert's appearance. 
Michaele Mahelona (Mahelona), a resident at the
 
apartment where the assault took place, was cross-examined about
 
what she saw. She testified that she heard, but did not see, the
 
fight. When she stepped outside, she saw an older male about ten
 
feet away, taking off on a bicycle. She described him as being
 
of medium build, maybe about 5'8," but that she "couldn't see
 
that well. You know, it was getting dark and there was only
 
lights." She said she only saw him from the back and heard him
 
yelling.
 
When defense counsel questioned police detective Ronald
 
Lopes, counsel suggested inconsistencies between Costello's
 
description of Albert and the photos used in the photo lineup. 
Defense counsel raised the issue that there was only one photo
 
lineup and that it was not presented to Costello until nearly a
 
month after the incident. Defense counsel also questioned the
 
fact that the detective did not interview the woman who had
 
witnessed the initial altercation. Defense counsel also asked
 
questions that revealed that the bicycle used by the assailant on
 
the night of the attack, and the white hat Costello said Albert
 
was wearing, were never found. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third, the issue of eyewitness identification was also
 
addressed during the parties' closing arguments. The prosecuting
 
attorney emphasized that the State had the burden to prove beyond
 
a reasonable doubt that it was Albert, and not someone else, who
 
caused Costello's injuries. She pointed out that Costello had
 
identified Albert twice, once in the photo lineup and then in
 
court. She argued that Costello's testimony was credible, but
 
that the defense witness and Albert's testimonies were not
 
credible. 
In defense counsel's closing argument, he emphasized
 
the issue of eyewitness identification, arguing: "But what the
 
State hasn't proven and what they have to prove in order for you
 
to find him guilty is that [Albert] was the one who inflicted
 
those injuries." Defense counsel then pointed out possible
 
inconsistencies in the testimony of the State's witnesses and
 
questioned their credibility. Defense counsel also argued the
 
alibi defense, suggesting that Albert had been elsewhere that
 
night. 
In addition to the above, the circuit court's
 
instructions also drew the jury's attention to the identification
 
issue and related evidence. In Jury Instruction No. 6, the
 
circuit court instructed:
 
It is your exclusive right to determine whether and to
what extent a witness should be believed and to give weight
to his or her testimony accordingly. In evaluating the
weight and credibility of a witness's testimony, you may
consider the witness's appearance and demeanor; the
witness's manner of testifying; the witness's intelligence;
the witness's candor or frankness, or lack thereof; the
witness's interest, if any, in the result of this case; the
witness's relation, if any, to a party; the witness's
temper, feeling, or bias, if any has been shown; the
witness's means and opportunity of acquiring information;
the probability or improbability of the witness's testimony;
the extent to which the witness is supported or contradicted
by other evidence; the extent to which the witness has made
contradictory statements, whether in trial or at other
times; and all other circumstances surrounding the witness
and bearing upon his or her credibility.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Inconsistencies or discrepancies in the testimony of a
witness, or between the testimony of different witnesses,
may or may not cause you to discredit such testimony. In
 weighing the effect of inconsistencies or discrepancies,
whether they occur within one witness's testimony or as
between different witnesses, consider whether they concern
matters of importance or only matters of unimportant detail,
and whether they result from innocent error or deliberate
falsehood.
 
These general instructions on witness credibility are 
similar to the instructions given in Cabagbag. In Cabagbag, 
given the opening and closing statements of counsel, the cross-
examination of prosecution witnesses, and the general 
instructions given by the trial court, the supreme court held 
that, under the rule existing when Cabagbag was tried, the jury's 
attention was adequately drawn to the identification issue. 127 
Hawai'i at 317-18, 277 P.3d at 1042-43; see also Okumura, 78 
Hawai'i at 405, 894 P.2d at 102. 
Jury Instruction No. 20, originally identified as
 
"Supplemental Instruction No.1, Misidentification," instructed
 the jury:
 
The burden of proof is on the prosecution with
reference to every element of a crime charged, and this
burden includes the burden of proving beyond a reasonable
doubt the identity of the defendant as the person
responsible for the crimes charged.
 
(Emphasis added.) This instruction follows the instruction 
considered in Vinge. 81 Hawai' i at 317, 916 P.2d at 1218. Given 
such an instruction, as well as the cross-examination and arguments of defense counsel regarding the identification issue, 
the supreme court held in Vinge that the jury's attention was 
adequately drawn to the issue of identification. Id. 
In this case, the opening statements and closing
 
arguments of counsel, the cross-examination of the prosecution
 
eyewitnesses, and the jury instructions given by the circuit
 
court drew adequate attention to the identification issue and the
 
related evidence. Under these circumstances and the rule
 
applicable at the time Albert was tried, the circuit court was
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not required to give a more specific instruction. Padilla, 57
 
Haw. at 161-62, 552 P.2d at 364-65. We thus conclude that it was
 
not plain error for the circuit court not to give a more specific
 
jury instruction on eyewitness identification.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence" entered on July 27, 2011 in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 11, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
William Domingo
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7
 