NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000478 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
KUMULIPO IWA COYOTE SYLVA, Defendant-Appellant 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 2CPC-18-0000240)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Kumulipo Iwa Coyote Sylva appeals 
from the "Judgment; Conviction and Sentence" entered by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit on January 24, 2020.  For 
the reasons explained below, we affirm. 1
On March 18, 2018, Sylva caused the death of another 
person. Sylva was indicted for Murder in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5.  He did 
not deny that he intentionally caused the death of the victim. 2
1 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided. 
2 When Sylva was indicted, HRS § 707-701.5 (2014) provided, in
relevant part: 
(1) Except as provided in section 707-701 [("Murder in the
first degree")], a person commits the offense of murder in
the second degree if the person intentionally or knowinglycauses the death of another person. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
He asserted the insanity defense to criminal responsibility,  and 
the mitigating defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance 
(EMED).  A jury found Sylva guilty of manslaughter based upon 
EMED. 43
In this direct appeal, Sylva contends that the circuit 
court erred by: (1) sustaining the State's objections and instructing the jury to disregard testimony from Sylva's expert witness; and (2) failing to instruct the jury that if it found Sylva guilty of manslaughter based upon EMED, it must then consider the insanity defense.
(1) "Generally, the decision whether to admit expert 
testimony rests in the discretion of the trial court. To the extent that the trial court's decision is dependant upon interpretation of court rules, such interpretation is a question of law, which this court reviews de novo." Barcai v. Betwee, 98 
Hawai# i 470, 479, 50 P.3d 946, 955 (2002) (cleaned up). 
3 HRS § 704-400 (2014) provides: 
Physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding
penal responsibility . (1) A person is not responsible,
under this Code, for conduct if at the time of the conductas a result of physical or mental disease, disorder, ordefect the person lacks substantial capacity either toappreciate the wrongfulness of the person's conduct or toconform the person's conduct to the requirements of law. 
(2) As used in this chapter, the terms "physical or
mental disease, disorder, or defect" do not include anabnormality manifested only by repeated penal or otherwiseanti-social conduct. 
This defense is sometimes referred to as the "'insanity' defense." State v. 
Uyesugi, 100 Hawai #i 442, 465 n.1, 60 P.3d 843, 866 n.1 (2002) (Acoba, J.,
concurring). 
4 HRS § 707-702 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
(2) In a prosecution for murder . . . in the . . . second
degree[] it is an affirmative defense, which reduces the
offense to . . . manslaughter, that the defendant was, atthe time the defendant caused the death of the other person,under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable explanation.The reasonableness of the explanation shall be determinedfrom the viewpoint of a reasonable person in thecircumstances as the defendant believed them to be[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) At trial, Sylva called psychiatrist Martin Blinder
to support his insanity defense. Dr. Blinder opined that Sylva 
was suffering from a mental disorder — "[h]e was psychotic" — when he caused the victim's death. This exchange then took place:  
Q. Is it your opinion that the disorder resulted in
a lack of capacity to control conduct under the law or
appreciate wrongfulness? 
A. That's my opinion. 
Q. And could you help us explain why that is your
opinion. 
A. Let me tell you how I go about making these
judgments. The first thing that I look at when there's a
homicide is whether or not there's a reasonable reason for the defendant to have done what he did . I'm not saying a
good reason. There's never a good reason to kill someone.But maybe a drug bust -- a drug deal that went bad, guy issupposed to give him drugs, he pays him and doesn't get themoney, he takes his life, or he's insulted on a racial basisor something that we wouldn't approve of but we canunderstand, that there's been a longstanding conflictbetween the killer and the person that he kills, and it'sunforgivable but understandable. 
I look for that. If I find that, then it's
pretty well the end of my participation. So even if he's 
got a mental illness, I don't care. 
We've got a rational
reason for doing it . A doubt -- being paranoid is not
therapeutic, but that's irrelevant. I'm done. As far as 
I'm concerned, he does not meet that standard that you justheard . 
In the case of Mr. Sylva, there is no rational 
reason . There's a very superficial reason, but the basic
reason is he's got a mission, he's got a mission to rid theworld of demons, and he was just getting started. This was obviously, in his delusional mind, a dangerous demon, andfor some reason, he -- he's been anointed by what he readsin the Bible to take care of this problem. 
And that's nutty and it's crazy, and absent for
that nutty, crazy thing, he wouldn't have hurt anybody.He's not, you know, a bad man who goes around hurtingpeople.  But when he --
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: Your Honor, I'm sorry,
I'm going to object to the last phrase  and ask that it be 
stricken. 
THE COURT: Any objection? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: What are the grounds? This is his 
opinion. 
3  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Well, that's not -- that wasn't the
question that was asked. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: The question was why he formed that
opinion. I think he was providing --
THE COURT: Approach the bench, then. 
(Emphasis added.) 
After hearing counsels' arguments at sidebar, the court 
ruled: "I mean, saying he's not a bad man, that's not the issue. 
So I'll sustain the objection[.]" (Emphasis added.) The circuit 
court was not wrong to sustain the objection to Dr. Blinder's testimony that Sylva was "not, you know, a bad man who goes around hurting people." See Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 404 
("Character evidence not admissible to prove conduct"). 
The circuit court then instructed the jury: 
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I'll ask you to
disregard the last response made by the witness  and order 
that it be stricken. 
(Emphasis added.) Sylva argues that the circuit court instructed the jury to disregard Dr. Blinder's entire answer to the question: "And could you help us explain why that is your opinion[?]" The argument is without merit. The State did not object to Sylva's question. The State objected only after Dr. Blinder stated — after answering the question at length — that Sylva was "not, you know, a bad man who goes around hurting people." The deputy prosecuting attorney stated (in the jury's presence): "I'm going to object to the last phrase and ask that 
it be stricken." (Emphasis added.) The circuit court instructed 
the jury to disregard "the last response made by the witness[.]"
5 
Under these circumstances, no reasonable juror could have 
understood the circuit court to have instructed them to disregard Dr. Blinder's entire explanation for his opinion. 
5 The State argues that Sylva waived this issue on appeal by failing
to object to the circuit court's post-sidebar instruction to the jury. In 
light of our resolution of the issue we need not address the State's waiverargument. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) Immediately thereafter, the following exchange 
took place during Dr. Blinder's direct examination: 
Q. Your opinion is based in part on the fact that
there is no rational explanation, correct? 
A. Yes. Based -- to a reasonable degree of medical
probability, there does not appear to be a rational basis
for his action, and that but for his psychotic illness, he
would not have taken the life of this man . 
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: Your Honor, I'm going
to object, move to strike that. It's speculative. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, it is his opinion and
he's explaining why. 
THE COURT: It's his opinion that he suffers from --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:[6] It's the second part. 
THE COURT: I know. I heard. He's -- it's his opinion
that he suffers from a mental disease, and he's giving a
conclusion -- or, excuse me, the word opinion about that.He's adding on to that at the end of the answer . I ordered 
it stricken earlier. 
I'll order it stricken again. 
Ladies and gentlemen, when the Court orders
something stricken, you're not to consider it in yourdeliberations in any way. I'll give you an instruction onthat later. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Sylva argues that the circuit court struck 
Dr. Blinder's entire answer: there did not appear to be a 
rational basis for Sylva's actions, and but for Sylva's psychotic illness he would not have taken the victim's life. The State contends that only the second part of the answer was stricken. We need not decide which side is correct, or what a reasonable juror could have understood the circuit court's ruling to have been, because any error was harmless. The jury heard, and was allowed to consider, Dr. Blinder's opinion that criminal responsibility was "utterly lacking in Mr. Sylva's case at the time of the homicide." The jury heard, and was allowed to consider, Dr. Blinder's explanation for his opinion that Sylva 
6 The transcript indicates this statement was made by defense
counsel, but it appears that it may actually have been the deputy prosecuting
attorney explaining the objection. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was psychotic, and why Sylva's running away from the scene and 
hiding the weapon and his jacket were not inconsistent with a lack of criminal responsibility due to psychosis. The jury heard, and was allowed to consider, Dr. Blinder's defense of his opinion during vigorous cross-examination by the State. The one sentence of testimony at issue was cumulative, and striking it — even if erroneous — was harmless. See Wakabayashi v. Hertz 
Corp., 66 Haw. 265, 272, 660 P.2d 1309, 1314 (1983) (noting that "where essentially the same evidence is given by other witnesses or other means, the trial court's exclusion of relevant evidence constitutes harmless error") (citation omitted). 
(2) Sylva claims instructional error. He argues: 
In the instant case, the trial court failed to
instruct the jury that if they found Sylva guilty of
manslaughter based on EMED, they must consider theaffirmative defense of physical or mental disease, disorderor defect excluding criminal responsibility. 
Sylva concedes that he did not request such a jury instruction, 
nor did he object to the instructions actually given to the jury. There is "a presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct[.]" State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai# i 327, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d 
974, 984 n.6 (2006); accord State v. Eberly, 107 Hawai# i 239, 
250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005). 
Sylva does not contend that any of the instructions 
actually given to the jury incorrectly stated the law; rather, Sylva takes issue with the order in which the jury was instructed to decide the issues. Instruction no. 19 contained the elements of Murder in the Second Degree. Instruction no. 22 contained the elements of the included offense of Manslaughter. Instruction no. 25 described the insanity defense; it stated, in relevant part: 
Before you may consider [the insanity] defense, you must
first determine whether the prosecution has proven all ofthe elements of Murder in the Second Degree or the includedoffense of Manslaughter beyond a reasonable doubt. If youunanimously find that the prosecution has not proven all ofthe elements of Murder in the Second Degree or the included 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense of Manslaughter beyond a reasonable doubt, then you
must find the defendant not guilty of that offense withoutconsidering the [insanity] defense. If you unanimously findthat the prosecution has proven all of the elements ofMurder in the Second Degree or the included offense ofManslaughter beyond a reasonable doubt, then you mustconsider the [insanity] defense. 
. . . . 
If you unanimously find that the defendant has proven
both elements of the [insanity] defense by a preponderanceof the evidence, then you must find the defendant not guiltyof Murder in the Second Degree or the included offense ofManslaughter by reason of [insanity]. If you unanimously
find that the defendant has not proven both elements of the[insanity] defense by a preponderance of the evidence, thenyou must then consider the affirmative defense of ExtremeMental or Emotional Disturbance . (See instruction No. 26) 
(Emphasis added.) 
Instruction no. 26 stated, in relevant part: 
If and only if you unanimously find that all of the
material elements of Murder in the Second Degree have beenproven by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, or youunanimously find that all of the material elements of theincluded offense of Manslaughter have been proven by theprosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, and you unanimouslyfind that the defendant has not proven the elements of theaffirmative defense of physical or mental disease, disorderor defect excluding criminal responsibility by apreponderance of the evidence, then you must consider theaffirmative defense of Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance. 
In other words, the jury was instructed to decide 
whether the State proved, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Sylva 
intentionally or knowingly caused the death of another person (murder), or recklessly caused the death of another person (manslaughter). If the jury found the State did not sustain its burden, it was instructed to find Sylva not guilty; if the State sustained its burden, the jury was instructed to consider whether Sylva proved, by a preponderance of the evidence, the affirmative defense of insanity.  If so, the jury was instructed to acquit 
7
7 See HRS § 701-115(2)(b) (2014) ("If the defense is an affirmative
defense, the defendant is entitled to an acquittal if the trier of fact finds
. . . by a preponderance of the evidence the specified fact or facts whichnegative penal liability."). 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sylva; if not, the jury was instructed to consider the mitigating 
defense of manslaughter based upon EMED.8 
It made sense for the jury to consider the affirmative 
defense (insanity) before the mitigating defense (EMED); if the jury found Sylva insane, there would be no need to consider whether he was also under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance. See State v. Miyashiro, 90 Hawai# i 489, 
499, 500 n.13, 979 P.2d 85, 95, 96 n.13 (App. 1999) (discussing fundamental principles to be followed in instructing the jury in a criminal case); Adviento, 132 Hawai# i at 137-38, 319 P.3d at 
1145-46. We conclude there was no instructional error as argued by Sylva. 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Judgment; Conviction 
and Sentence" entered on January 24, 2020, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 1, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeWilliam H. Jameson, Jr., Deputy Public Defender,State of 
Hawai# i, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Richard B. Rost, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
8 See HRS § 707-702(2), supra note 4; State v. Adviento, 132 Hawai #i 
123, 137-38, 319 P.3d 1131, 1145-46 (2014) ("[A]lthough HRS § 707–702(2)refers to the mental state of a defendant as a defense, it is really amitigating factor. 
Intentionally killing while under the influence of extreme
emotional disturbance does not present a true 'defense,' for the punishment ismerely reduced through the mechanism of denominating the crime as'manslaughter' rather than 'murder[.]'") (citation omitted). 
8 