 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI R EPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000289 13-FEB-2026 07:49 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000289 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAII ‘ 
In the Matter of the Request for Payment of,
CHRISTOPHER LAWINSKI, M.D., as Provider for Sean Tilton,
Appellant-Provider-Appellant,
vs. 
SCOTT SAIKI, INSURANCE COMMISSIONER, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, STATE OF HAWAI ‘I
,   
Appellee-Appellee,
and 
UNITED SERVICES AUTOMOBILE ASSOCIATION,
Appellee-Respondent-Appellee. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 3CCV-22-0000250) 1
1 Pursuant to Hawai ‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule
43(c)(1), Scott Saiki, the current Insurance Commissioner, Department of
Commerce and Consumer Affairs, is automatically substituted as Appellee-Appellee herein in place of Colin M. Hayashida.  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Leonard and McCullen, JJ.) 
This secondary appeal involves Appellant-Provider-
Appellant Christopher Lawinski, M.D.'s ( Dr. Lawinski ) challenge 
to Appellee-Respondent-Appellee United Services Automobile 
Association's ( Insurer) denial of personal injury protection 
(PIP) benefit reimbursement on grounds that the treatment 
provided to the patient was not "substantially comparable to the 
requirements for prepaid health care plans" under the PIP statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 431:10C-103.5(a).  We 
affirm. 2
Dr. Lawinski appeals from the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit's ( Circuit Court ) March 20, 2023 "Findings of Fact 
[(FOFs)] and Conclusions of Law [( COLs
)]; Order" ( Circuit Court 
Order), and December 19, 2023 Final Judgment.  The Circuit Court 
Order affirmed the July 26, 2022 Final Order of Appellee-3
2 HRS § 431:10C-103.5 (2019), entitled "Personal injury protection
benefits; defined; limits," defines PIP benefits as follows: 
(a) Personal injury protection benefits, with respect to
any accidental harm, means all appropriate and reasonabletreatment and expenses necessarily incurred as a result ofthe accidental harm and which are substantially comparableto the requirements for prepaid health care plans,
including medical, hospital, surgical, professional,
nursing, advanced practice nursing licensed pursuant tochapter 457, dental, optometric, naturopathic medicine,chiropractic, ambulance, prosthetic services, medicalequipment and supplies, products and accommodations
furnished, x-ray, psychiatric, physical therapy pursuant to
prescription by a medical doctor, occupational therapy,rehabilitation, and therapeutic massage by a licensedmassage therapist when prescribed by a medical doctor. 
(Emphasis added.) 
3 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. 
2  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
   Appellee Scott Saiki, Insurance Commissioner, Department of 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs, State of Hawai ʻi (Commissioner ) 
that adopted the June 15, 2022 "Hearings Officer's [FOFs], 
[COLs], and Recommended Order" ( Hearings Officer's Order ), which 
concluded that Dr. Lawinski did not establish that "the claims 
for [Erchonia Low Level Laser Therapy ( LLLT)] treatment charged 
under [billing] code 97039 are compensable [PIP] benefit [sic] as defined under HRS § 431:10C-103.5(a)." 
On appeal, Dr. Lawinski contends that the Circuit 
Court erred by: (1) holding LLLT treatments were not PIP 
benefits under HRS § 431:10C-103.5(a), concluding the PIP statute was "unambiguous," failing to confirm the legislative intent of HRS § 431:10C-103.5(a) was "to provide generous PIP benefits," and giving "deference" to the Hearings Officer's Order; (2) entering FOFs and COLs "based upon [Insurer's] 
Exhibits F to L, which had been erroneously received into 
evidence over [Dr. Lawinski]'s objections"; and (3) denying Dr. 
Lawinski's request for attorney's fees, costs, and expenses.
4 
Upon review of the record on appeal and relevant legal 
authorities, giving due consideration to the issues raised and 
arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve the contentions as follows. 
"Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon 
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal." 
4 Dr. Lawinski's points of error ( POEs), which we have consolidated
and condensed for clarity, do not comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). The POEs 
are not numbered and do not contain where in the record the alleged error
occurred and was preserved before the lower court or agency. See
 HRAP Rule 
28(b)(4). Despite the noncompliance, we address Dr. Lawinski's arguments.
See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawaiʻi 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012)
(addressing case on the merits despite noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28 "where
the remaining sections of the brief provide the necessary information toidentify the party's argument" and to "afford[] litigants the opportunity tohave their cases heard on the merits, where possible" (citation modified)).
3  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 Allstate Ins. Co. v. Schmidt, 104 Hawai ʻi 261, 264, 88 P.3d 196, 
199 (2004) (citation omitted). We apply "the standards set 
forth in HRS § 91–14(g)" to determine whether the Circuit 
Court's decision was "right or wrong." 
Id. (citation omitted). 
  The Hearings Officer's Order contained the following 
analysis supporting the determination that Dr. Lawinski failed to establish that the LLLT treatment in this case was "substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans," which is required for reimbursement as a PIP benefit: 
In determining whether [Dr. Lawinski] is entitled to
reimbursement of [PIP] benefits for the LLLT treatment. . . , the Hearings Officer must consider not only whether
the treatment was appropriate and reasonable, but also
whether the treatment is substantially comparable to therequirements for prepaid health care plans. 
 [Dr. Lawinski] submitted little, if any, evidence
that the LLLT treatment provided to [the patient] issubstantially comparable to the requirements for prepaidhealth care plans. In support of his position that the LLLTtreatments provided are compensable [PIP] benefits, [Dr.
Lawinski] submitted exhibits of payment for claims of LLLT
treatment charged under code 97039 from DTRIC/Corvel, StateFarm, Allstate and GEICO. See Exhibits 36-43. However, [Dr.Lawinski] admitted those claims were initially denied andpayments made only after [Dr. Lawinski] requested
administrative review of the claim denials. Further, [Dr.
Lawinski] acknowledged that the disputes were all settledand the matters were dismissed. The Hearings Officer doesnot consider these exhibits relevant and assigns no weightto [Dr. Lawinski]'s exhibits of payments made by
DTRIC/Corvel, State Farm, Allstate and GEICO. 
 The Hearings Officer notes exhibits submitted by both
parties indicate Aetna, Cigna, and HMSA do not consider
LLLT treatment reimbursable. [Dr. Lawinski] objected to
acceptance of [Insurer] Exhibits "F" through "L" consisting
of documents from Aetna, Cigna, HMSA, Medicare, and Kaiseron the basis the authors of the documents were unavailable for cross-examination. The Hearings Officerreceived the documents into evidence over [Dr. Lawinski]'s
objection. However, the Hearings Officer notes [Dr.
Lawinski]'s Exhibits "48" – "50" and "59" are similar to[Insurer]'s documents from Aetna, Cigna, and HMSA that [Dr. 
4  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 Lawinski] objected to. Based on the evidence submitted, the
Hearings Officer concludes Aetna, Cigna, and HMSA do not
cover LLLT. The record further establishes Medicare,
arguable [sic] the larges [sic] prepaid health plan, doesnot consider LLLT reasonable and necessary and considersLLLT procedures non-covered billed under any [currentprocedural terminology ( CPT)] code, including procedure
code 97039. The Hearings Officer notes [Dr. Lawinski]'switness Steven Shanks [( Shanks)]
[5] testified he did not know 
if LLLT treatment was covered by prepaid health care plansin Hawaii. The Hearings Officer also notes [Dr. Lawinski]'stestimony that his practice does not contract with prepaid
health care plans. [Dr. Lawinski] further testified he has
never billed or been reimbursed by a prepaid health careplan for claims of LLLT treatment. 
In determining whether the LLLT treatment [Dr.
Lawinski] administered to [the patient] is substantiallycomparable to the requirements for prepaid health careplans, the Hearings Officer considers the evidence thatAetna, Cigna, HMSA, Medicare do not cover LLLT treatment.The Hearings Officer does not consider [Insurer]'s Exhibit
"K", a document from Kaiser Foundation Health Plan. The
Hearings Officer considers Steven Shanks [sic] testimonythat he did not know if LLLT treatment was covered byprepaid health care plans in Hawaii. The Hearings Officeralso considers [Dr. Lawinski]'s testimony that [Dr.
Lawinski] has never been reimbursed charges for LLLT
treatment by a prepaid health care plan. The HearingsOfficer notes [Dr. Lawinski] did not submit any evidencethat LLLT treatment is reimbursed by prepaid health careplans. Based on the record, the Hearings Officer concludes
[Dr. Lawinski] has failed to establish the LLLT treatment
provided to [the patient] is substantially comparable tothe requirements for prepaid health care plans. 
(Footnote and emphases added.) 
The Circuit Court Order affirmed the Hearings 
Officer's Order and concluded that LLLT treatment was not a PIP 
benefit under HRS § 431:10C-103.5(a), as follows: 
5. The primary issue on appeal is "whether the Commissioner
and Hearings Officer correctly concluded that the []LLLT
treatments administered by [Dr. Lawinski] were NOT [PIP]benefits" under [HRS] § 431:10C-103.5(a).  
. . . . 
5 Shanks is the president of Erchonia Corporation, the manufacturer
of the LLLT treatment laser. 
5  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  8. Hearings Officer Hikida rightfully held that HRS §
431:10C-103.5(a) is unambiguous, and statutory
interpretation is unnecessary. 
9. [HRS] § 43l:10C-103.6(a) provides in pertinent part:  
The benefits provided under section 431:10C-103 shall
be substantially comparable to the requirements forprepaid health care plans, as provided in chapter 393. . . [sic] 
10. [HRS] Chapter 393, the Prepaid Health Care Act, sets forth the requirements for prepaid health care plans. Towit, to qualify as a prepaid health care plan under HRS 
Chapter 393, a health care plan must provide "health-carebenefits equal to, or medically reasonably substitutable
for, the benefits provided by prepaid health plans of the
same type. [sic] . . which have the largest number ofsubscribers in the State. . . ." See HRS §393-7(a). 
11. [Dr. Lawinski] failed to present any evidence
establishing that LLLT therapy are [sic] substantially
comparable to the requirement for prepaid health careplans. 
12. The [Certified Record on Appeal] supports that LLLT
treatment has not been approved by Hawaii prepaid
healthcare plans or Medicare that consider it experimentaland investigational. Among the major prepaid health care carriers that have deemed LLLT treatment experimental andinvestigational are Aetna, Cigna, Blue Cross and Blue
Shield, HMSA and Kaiser. 
13. The Commissioner and Hearings Officer correctly
concluded that []LLLT treatments administered by [Dr.Lawinski] were NOT [PIP] benefits. 
(Internal CROA citations omitted and first ellipses added.) 
(1) Dr. Lawinski argues that the clause "substantially 
comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans" in 
HRS § 431:10C-103.5(a) is ambiguous and requires statutory interpretation.   Dr. Lawinski asserts that the statute provides 
no "method or procedure or objective criteria by which one could go about measuring the substantial comparability of Erchonia 
LLLT . . . to the long list of general types of required health 
care benefits listed in HRS [§] 393-7."  
6  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 Commissioner and Insurer contend that the phrase, 
"substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health 
care plans," is not ambiguous, and statutory interpretation is not necessary. They point to a related statute, HRS § 431:10C-
103.6 as providing the explanation for the language at issue in 
the PIP statute.  Dr. Lawinski does not address HRS § 431:10C-
103.6 in his briefs. 6
"The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
which this court reviews de novo." Rosehill Tr. of Linda K.
Rosehill Revocable Tr. Dated Aug. 29, 1989 v. State, 155 Hawai ʻi 
41, 49, 556 P.3d 387, 395 (2024) (citation omitted). We are 
guided by the following statutory interpretation principles: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task ofstatutory construction is our foremost obligation toascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, whenthere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctivenessor uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, anambiguity exists. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
6 HRS § 431:10C-103.6 (2019), entitled "Personal injury protection
benefits tied to prepaid health care plan for description of coverage only,"provides in pertinent part: 
(a) The benefits provided under section 431:10C-103.5 shallbe substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid
health care plans, as provided in chapter 393 and rules of
the department of labor and industrial relations,pertaining to the Prepaid Health Care Act. The reference tothe Prepaid Health Care Act is only for purposes ofdescribing the coverages and exclusions, without regard to
any specific insurer or plan, and shall not be construed to
transfer coverage to the prepaid health care plans. 
(Emphasis added.) 
7  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 The plain language of the PIP statute, HRS § 431:10C-
103.5(a), does not define or explain the phrase "substantially 
comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans." No definition of this phrase is provided in the applicable 
definitions section, HRS § 431:10C-103. Contrary to the Circuit 
Court's and the Hearings Officer's rulings that the PIP statute is unambiguous, we conclude there is doubt and uncertainty on the meaning of "substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans." This ambiguity, however, is readily resolved by looking to the immediately following statute, HRS § 
431-10C-103.6, which specifically cross-references HRS § 
431:10C-103.5 and provides explanation for the "substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans" language. See HRS § 1-16 (2009) ("Laws in pari materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each other" and that "[w]hat is clear in one statute may be called in aid to explain what is doubtful in another."). 
HRS § 431:10C-103.6 expressly applies to "[t]he 
benefits provided under section 431:10C-103.5." Its title states that "[PIP] benefits" are "tied to prepaid health care plan for description of coverage only," and the statutory text states that PIP benefits "shall be substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans, as provided in 
chapter 393 and rules of the department of labor and industrial 
relations [( DLIR)], pertaining to the Prepaid Health Care Act." 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 431:10C-103.6 further explains that "[t]he reference to the Prepaid Health Care Act is only for the purposes of describing the coverages and exclusions[.]" (Emphasis added.) Thus, the reference in both HRS §§ 431:10C-
103.5 and 431:10C-103.6 to the prepaid health care plans under 
8
  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
   the Prepaid Health Care Act is "for purposes of describing the 
coverages," i.e., what benefits are covered. Construing HRS §§ 431:10C-103.5 and 431:10C-103.6 in pari materia, PIP benefits must be "substantially comparable" to benefits that are required 
to be covered under prepaid health care plans "as provided in 
chapter 393"
7 and DLIR Rules. 
Here, the Hearings Officer concluded that LLLT 
treatments were not "substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans" based on the following evidence: exhibits that showed that other prepaid 
healthcare plans, such as "Aetna, Cigna, HMSA, Medicare," did 
"not cover LLLT treatment"; Shanks's testimony "that he did not know if LLLT treatment was covered by prepaid health care plans in Hawaii"; and Dr. Lawinski's testimony that he "has never been reimbursed charges for LLLT treatment by a prepaid health care plan." The Hearings Officer determined that Dr. Lawinski "did not submit any evidence that LLLT treatment is reimbursed by 
prepaid health care plans" and therefore "failed to establish" 
that the LLLT treatments in this case were "substantially comparable to the requirements for prepaid health care plans." The Hearings Officer's mixed finding and conclusion in this regard was supported by the record and not clearly erroneous. 
See Kilakila ʻO Haleakala v. Bd. of Land, 138 Hawai ʻi 383, 396, 
382 P.3d 195, 208 (2016) ("A conclusion of law that 
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent 
7 HRS § 393-7(a) (2015) explains the "requirements for prepaid
health care plans" shall include "health care benefits equal to, or medically
reasonably substitutable for, the benefits provided by prepaid health plans
of the same type, . . . which have the largest numbers of subscribers in theState." This qualification requirement "applies to the types and quantity ofbenefits as well as to limitations on reimbursability[.]" Id.
9  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
 upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." 
(citation omitted)). Further, where mixed questions of fact and law are presented, we defer to the agency's expertise and experience in the particular field and will not substitute our 
judgment for that of the agency. Dole Haw. Div.-Castle & Cooke, 
Inc. v. Ramil, 71 Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990). 
We conclude the Circuit Court was not wrong in COLs 11 
and 13 to affirm the Commissioner's and Hearings Officer's determination that the LLLT treatments were not PIP benefits under HRS §431:10C-103.5(a) based on a lack of evidence that 
LLLT treatment was substantially comparable to the requirements 
for prepaid health care plans. See Schmidt, 104 Hawai ʻi at 264-
65, 88 P.3d at 199-200. The Circuit Court was not wrong to 
apply the principle of agency deference in COL 4.
8 See id.
(2) Dr. Lawinski challenges COL 12 on grounds that it 
relies on Insurer's Exhibits "F" through "L," which should not 
have been admitted because the "documents contained hearsay," 
the documents "were not authenticated," and "the authors of the documents were not available for cross examination." 
Commissioner responds that the Hearings Officer was 
"permitted to receive the documents into evidence[,]" where Insurer's Exhibits "F" through "L" consisted of "documents 
8 COL 4 in the Circuit Court Order stated: 
4.
 While courts are "free to reverse the agency's decision
if affected by an error of law," the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court
has said that "[w]here both mixed questions of fact and law
are presented, deference will be given to the agency'sexpertise and experience in the particular field and thecourt should not substitute its own judgment for that of
the agency." Camara v. Agalsud, 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d
794, 797 (1984); Dole Hawaii division-Castle & Cooke, Inc. 
v.
 Ramil, 71 Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990). 
10  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 relating to whether LLLT is reimbursable by Aetna, Cigna, 
Medicare, HMSA, and Kaiser[,]" which all "go directly to the requirements for prepaid health care plans[.]" Commissioner also points out that Dr. Lawinski admitted evidence "similar" to 
the challenged evidence.  Insurer argues that  the challenged 
exhibits were admissible under Hawai ʻi Administrative Rules ( HAR) 
Rule § 16-201-21(a),
9 and the exhibits do not change the fact 
that Dr. Lawinski nevertheless "failed to present any evidence 
that []LLLT treatments were 'reimbursed by prepaid care plans[.]'"  
The record reflects that Insurer's Exhibits "F" 
through "L" consisted of documents from Aetna, Cigna, HSMA, Medicare, and Kaiser.  The Hearings Officer's Order pertinently 
noted that Dr. Lawinski's Exhibits 48, 49, 50, and 59 were "similar to [Insurer]'s documents from Aetna, Cigna, and HMSA" that Dr. Lawinski had "objected to."  
Based on Insurer's 10
9 HAR Rule § 16-201-21(a) (1990) provides that "[t]he admissibility
of evidence at the hearing shall not be governed by the laws of evidence and
all relevant oral or documentary evidence shall be admitted if it is the sortof evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conductof serious affairs." 
10 Exhibit F was Aetna's 2017 policy stating that Aetna considered
LLLT to be "experimental and investigational" ; Exhibit G was Cigna's 2017
policy stating that LLLT was considered "experimental, investigational orunproven" for "any indication" ; Exhibit H was a document that discussed 
"infrared therapy devices" and stated that such devices had no "NationallyCovered Indications" ; Exhibit I was a document that stated LLLT therapy was
"considered not reasonable and necessary" and "not payable by Medicare" ;
Exhibit J was a 2018 HMSA document that discussed "chiropractic services" andstated "laser therapy . . . d[id] not meet payment determination criteria as
there [wa]s no evidence from published, controlled clinical studies which
demonstrate[d] their efficacy" ; Exhibit K was Kaiser Permanente's 2014 
"Clinical Review Criteria" for LLLT "for pain," which stated that LLLT did"not meet the Kaiser Permanente Medical Technology Assessment Criteria ";
Exhibit L was a 2017 HMSA document that discussed "physical therapy" and
stated that "laser therapy . . . d[id] not meet payment determination
criteria as there [wa]s no evidence based on published, controlled clinicalstudies which demonstrate[d] their efficacy." 
11  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
  
  Exhibits "F" through "L," the Hearings Officer found that: 
"Aetna, Cigna, and HMSA do not cover LLLT"; and that "Medicare, arguable [sic] the larges [sic] prepaid health plan, d[id] not consider LLLT reasonable and necessary and consider[ed] LLLT 
procedures non-covered billed under any CPT code[.]" The 
Circuit Court concluded in COL 12 that the Hearings Officer's findings were supported by the record, stating, "The CROA supports that LLLT treatment has not been approved by Hawaii prepaid healthcare plans or Medicare that consider it experimental and investigational. " 
Dr. Lawinski's arguments tether the challenged 
admission of Insurer's Exhibits "F" through "L" as the basis for the "clearly erroneous" conclusion in COL 12 that LLLT treatment is "experimental and investigational." Dr. Lawinski points to the testimony of Shanks and himself that "LLLT is not experimental or investigational" because it had "FDA clearances," and that he was denied the opportunity to cross-
examine "the false factual conclusions that LLLT is experimental 
and investigational" that were later adopted by the Hearings Officer and Circuit Court. 
"[R]ules of evidence in administrative 
hearings, unlike those applicable to judicial proceedings, allow admission of hearsay evidence." 
Price v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals 
of City & County of Honolulu, 77 Hawaiʻi 168, 176, 883 P.2d 629, 
637 (1994) (citation omitted). 
Here, Insurer's Exhibits "F" through "L" consisted of 
copies of various prepaid health care plans' coverage policies regarding LLLT. 
Hearsay evidence is permissible in 
administrative hearings. See id. The policies in the 
challenged exhibits were relevant because the disputed issue was 
12  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  whether LLLT treatments were "substantially comparable to the 
requirements of prepaid healthcare plans," i.e., whether LLLT treatment was a covered benefit under prepaid health care plans. The Hearings Officer did not err in admitting them. See HAR 
Rule § 16-201-21(a). 
Even assuming arguendo the "experimental or 
investigational" language in the Circuit Court's COL 12 was error, Dr. Lawinski has not shown prejudice resulting from the exhibits' admission, where Dr. Lawinski admitted similar exhibits into evidence, and where the Hearings Officer 
determined that Dr. Lawinski "did not submit any evidence that 
LLLT treatment is reimbursed by prepaid health care plans." 
See
S. Foods Grp., L.P. v. State, Dep't of Educ., 89 Hawai ʻi 443, 
453, 974 P.2d 1033, 1043 (1999) (to reverse or modify an agency decision under HRS § 91-14(g), "the appellate court must conclude that an appellant's substantial rights were prejudiced 
by the agency" (citation omitted)). 
The Circuit Court's 
conclusion in COL 11, that Dr. Lawinski "failed to present any 
evidence establishing that LLLT therapy are [sic] substantially comparable to the requirement for prepaid health care plans" was 
dispositive and correct. See Schmidt, 104 Hawai ʻi at 264-65, 88 
P.3d at 199-200. 
(3) Dr. Lawinski argues that he should be awarded 
attorney's fees, costs, and expenses "for his successful 
prosecution of this matter" because "the statute is clear that [Dr. Lawinski] will be entitled to all of the costs and fees which he has incurred in this matter," "[w]hen this Court rules that Erchonia LLLT is a reimbursable PIP benefit[.]" 
While the Circuit Court Order did not expressly 
address attorney's fees and costs, the Commissioner's Final 
13
  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
 
  
   
  Order ordered the parties to bear their own attorney's fees and costs. In light of our resolution, Dr. Lawinski's contention lacks merit. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the March 20, 
2023 Circuit Court Order and December 19, 2023 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, February 13, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Leslie K. Iczkovitz, 
for Appellant-Provider-
Appellant. 
 
Andrew I. Kim,
Deputy Attorney General 
for Appellee-Appellee Scott 
Saiki, Insurance Commissioner,
Department of Commerce and
Consumer Affairs, State of
Hawai ‘i. 
 
Keith K. Kato,
for Appellee-Respondent-
Appellee United Services
Automobile Association. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge
14
 