NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-14-0001379, 14-0001381, & 14-0001384
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAAP-14-0001379
 
RONALD BROWN,
Administrator of the Estate of DON BROWN,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEN BRENT, Individually and in his
Capacity as the President and Member of the
Board of Directors of the Association of
 
Apartment Owners of Kuhio Shores at Poipu;
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KUHIO SHORES AT POIPU,
by and through its Board of Directors,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
CAAP-14-0001381
 
RONALD BROWN,
Administrator of the Estate of DON BROWN,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEN BRENT, Individually and in his
Capacity as the President and Member of the
Board of Directors of the Association of
 
Apartment Owners of Kuhio Shores at Poipu;
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KUHIO SHORES AT POIPU,
by and through its Board of Directors,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
CAAP-14-0001384
 
RONALD BROWN,
Administrator of the Estate of DON BROWN,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
KEN BRENT, Individually and in his
Capacity as the President and Member of the
Board of Directors of the Association of
 
Apartment Owners of Kuhio Shores at Poipu;
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KUHIO SHORES AT POIPU,
by and through its Board of Directors,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CV NO. 11-1-0194)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

 
These consolidated appeals1
 arise out of a dispute
2
between Plaintiff Don Brown (Brown),  the owner of an apartment
unit in the Kuhio Shores at Poipu (Kuhio Shores) condominium
 
project, and Defendants Association of Apartment Owners of Kuhio
 Shores (AOAO) and Ken Brent (Brent), the former president of the
 AOAO's Board of Directors. Brent and the AOAO will be referred
 to collectively as the "Board." In the underlying lawsuit, Brown
 
1By order of this court, Appeal Numbers CAAP-14-0001379, CAAP-14­
0001381, and CAAP-14-0001384 were consolidated under CAAP-14-0001379.
 
2Don Brown died during the pendency of the consolidated appeals, and
Ronald Brown, as administrator of the estate of Don Brown, was substituted as
a party for Don Brown. In this Summary Disposition Order, we will refer to
both Don Brown and Ronald Brown, as administrator of the estate of Don Brown,
as "Brown."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenges the decisions of the Board: (1) to repaint the
 
exterior walls of the Kuhio Shores condominium project a
 different color without owner approval; (2) to paint or replace
 exterior louvered doors, including two exterior doors installed
 in front of the main doors to Brown's apartment, without the
 approval of Brown and the other affected owners; and (3) not to
 purchase teak doors from Bali that a majority of owners had
 approved.
 
Brown filled a complaint against the Board,
3
 alleging
various claims relating to the foregoing decisions of the Board. 
The Board filed its answer and also a counterclaim seeking, among
 other things, declaratory relief that it had acted properly in
 making the decisions challenged by Brown. 
Brown filed a motion for summary judgment on certain
 
claims in his complaint and on the Board's counterclaim. The
 
4
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)  partially
granted Brown's motion "as to any issues in connection with the
 painting of the exterior louvered doors[,]" and it denied Brown's
 motion as to all other issues.
5
  
The Board filed three motions for partial summary
 
judgment. The Circuit Court partially granted the Board's
 motions as to any issues in connection with the Board's non­
3Brown sued: (1) Brent, individually and in his capacity as President
and Member of the Board of Directors of the AOAO; and (2) the AOAO, by and
through its Board of Directors.
 
4The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided over the proceeding
relevant to these consolidated appeals.
 
5On August 6, 2014, the Circuit Court filed its "Order Granting in Part
and Denying in Part Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Dated May 9, 2014"
(Order on Brown's Motion for Summary Judgment). Based on its grant of summary
judgment in favor of Brown on any issues in connection with the painting of
the exterior louvered doors, the Circuit Court entered its "Final Judgment As
To Count II of Counterclaim" on November 21, 2014.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purchase of the Bali teak doors. The Circuit Court denied the
 
Board's motions with respect to all other issues.6
 
I. 
In its appeals, the Board contends that the Circuit
 
Court erred in: (1) denying its motion for summary judgment on
 its counterclaim for declaratory relief regarding its decision to 
repaint the exterior walls of the Kuhio Shores condominium
 project a different color without owner approval; and (2)
 granting summary judgment in favor of Brown regarding the Board's
 decision to paint or replace the exterior louvered doors without
 obtaining owner approval.
7 In his appeal, Brown contends that
 
the Circuit Court erred in granting the Board's motion for
 summary judgment on the claims relating to the Board's decision
 not to purchase the Bali teak doors.
8 As explained below, we
 
affirm Circuit Court's denial of summary judgment with respect to
 the issue concerning the repainting of the exterior walls of the
 condominium project. We vacate the Circuit Court's grant of
 summary judgment on the issues connected with the painting of the
 exterior louvered doors and the non-purchase of the Bali teak
 doors.
 
6On July 22, 2014, the Circuit Court entered its "Order Denying in Part
and Granting in Part Defendants'[:] (1) Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
Regarding Count I of Defendants' Counterclaim and Plaintiff's Corresponding
Claims; (2) Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Business Judgment of
the Board Re: The Teak Louver Doors; and (3) Motion for Summary Judgment Re:
Plaintiff's Claim for Relief (Tortious Interference With Prospective Economic
Advantage)" (Order on the Board's Summary Judgment Motions). 
7The Board appeals from the "Final Judgment on Count II of the
Counterclaim." This appeal was docketed as Appeal No. CAAP-14-0001379. The
 Board also appeals from Section A of the Order on the Board's Summary Judgment
Motions pursuant to the Circuit Court's order granting the Board's motion for
an interlocutory appeal as to Section A. This appeal was docketed as Appeal
No. CAAP-14-0001381.
 
8 Brown appeals from Sections B and C of the Order on the Board's
Summary Judgment Motions pursuant to the Circuit Court's order granting
Brown's motion for an interlocutory appeal as to Sections B and C. Brown's
 appeal was docketed as Appeal No. CAAP-14-0001384.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We resolve the issues raised by the parties on appeal
 
as follows:
 
A.
 
The Board argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying its motion for summary judgment with respect to its
 
decision to repaint the exterior walls of the condominium project
 a different color without owner approval. In support of its
 motion for summary judgment, the Board argued that pursuant to
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 514B-140(c) (2006), only Board
 approval, and not owner approval, was required for nonmaterial
 alterations to the common elements.
 
HRS § 514B-140(c) provides, in relevant part:
 
Subject to the provisions of the declaration,
nonmaterial additions to or alterations of the common
 
elements or units, including, without limitation, additions
to or alterations of a unit made within the unit or within a
 limited common element appurtenant to and for the exclusive
use of the unit, shall require approval only by the board,
which shall not unreasonably withhold the approval, and such
percentage, number or group of unit owners as may be
required by the declaration or bylaws. . . . 
(Emphases added.) For purposes of HRS § 514B-140(c), a 
"nonmaterial" addition or alteration means:
 
an addition to or alteration of the common elements or a
 
unit that does not jeopardize the soundness or safety of the
property, reduce the value thereof, impair any easement,
detract from the appearance of the project, interfere with
or deprive any nonconsenting owner of the use or enjoyment
of any part of property, or directly affect any
nonconsenting owner.
 
HRS § 514B-140(c).
 
The Board presented evidence from a real estate broker 
that the change in the exterior paint color had no adverse effect
 
on the value of the Kuhio Shores condominium project or Brown's
 unit. Based on this evidence, which the Board asserts was
 uncontroverted, the Board argued to the Circuit Court that
 repainting the exterior walls of the condominium project a
 different color was a nonmaterial alteration for which only Board
 approval was required under HRS § 514B-140(c). The Circuit Court
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ruled that whether the change in the exterior paint color was a
 
"material" or "nonmaterial" alteration presented a genuine issue
 of fact and therefore denied the Board's motion for summary
 judgment.
 
On appeal, the Board argues that the Circuit Court
 
erred in concluding that whether the change in the paint color
 was a material or nonmaterial alteration presented a genuine
 issue of fact in denying the Board's motion for summary judgment. 
We disagree with the Board's argument. 
Although the Board presented evidence that the change
 
in the exterior paint color did not adversely affect the value of
 the condominium project, the definition of a "nonmaterial"
 alteration under HRS § 514B-140(c) encompasses factors that go
 beyond valuation. The Board did not present evidence on other
 aspects of the definition of a "nonmaterial" alteration, such as
 whether the change in paint color detracted from the appearance
 of the project or directly affected any nonconsenting owner, that
 was sufficient to show the absence of any genuine issue of fact
 on whether the change in paint color was a nonmaterial
 alteration. We therefore reject the Board's contention that the
 Circuit Court erred in concluding that whether the change in
 paint color was a material or nonmaterial alteration presented a
 genuine issue of fact.
9
 
B.
 
The Board argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Brown regarding the issue
 of the painting or replacement of the exterior louvered doors. 
Critical to the Circuit Court's ruling was its plain-language
 interpretation of Section A.1.(l) of the Kuhio Shores'
 
9We note that in his answering brief, Brown contends that without
reference to the issue of materiality, the Circuit Court committed plain error
in failing to grant summary judgment in his favor on the issue of the Board's
repainting of the exterior walls. However, Brown did not obtain authorization
to file an interlocutory appeal from the Circuit Court's denial of his motion
for summary judgment on this issue, and we decline to address his argument in
this appeal. 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Declaration of Horizontal Property Regime (Declaration) to mean
 
that the exterior doors were part of an owner's apartment. The
 Board indicates that it does not dispute that if the exterior
 doors were part of the apartment, then owner approval (which it
 did not obtain) was necessary to paint or replace the exterior
 doors. However, the Board contends that the exterior doors were
 not part of the apartment.
 
Section A.1.(l) of the Declaration provides:
 
The respective apartments shall not be deemed to
include the undecorated or unfinished surfaces of the
 
perimeter or party walls or interior load-bearing walls, the
floor and ceiling surrounding each apartment, or any pipes,
wires, conduits, or other utility or service lines running
through such apartments which are utilized for or serve more
than one apartment, the same being deemed common elements as
hereinafter provided. Each apartment shall be deemed to
include all fixtures originally installed therein, the lanai
air space, all the walls and partitions which are not load
bearing within its perimeter or party walls, the inner
decorated or finished surfaces
 of all walls, floors and
ceilings, doors and door frames , windows and window frames
and lanais.
 
(Emphases added).10
 
The Board argues that the phrase "the inner decorated
 
or finished surfaces" as used in Section A.1.(l) modifies "doors
 
and door frames," and therefore, the exterior doors which were
 installed outside of the main doors to an apartment were not part
 of the apartment. The Circuit Court, however, rejected the
 Board's reading and found that Section A.1.(l) provides that
 doors and door frames are part of the apartment.
 
We conclude that both the Board's reading and the 
Circuit Court's reading of Section A.1.(l) are reasonable and therefore the provision is ambiguous. See Hawaiian Ass'n of 
Seventh-Day Adventists v. Wong, 130 Hawai
'i 36, 45, 305 P.3d 452, 
461 (2013) ("A contract is ambiguous when its terms are 
10The Declaration further provides that the common elements of the
project are all of the remaining portions of the project that are not part of
the apartments.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonably susceptible to more than one meaning.")11 We further
 
conclude that whether the exterior doors were part of an
 
apartment presents an issue of material fact and that the Circuit
 Court erred in determining that the exterior doors were part of
 an apartment as a matter of law. See id. at 45-46, 305 P.3d 462­
63 (noting that where the terms of a contract are ambiguous, the
 court may consider extrinsic evidence to determine the meaning of
 the contract language). Moreover, even if the exterior doors
 were considered part of an apartment, there is a question of
 whether Brown's installation of his exterior doors violated the
 provision of the AOAO's Amended Bylaws which requires an owner to
 obtain Board consent before making changes to the exterior of his
 or her apartment.
12 We therefore vacate the Circuit Court's
 
grant of summary judgment regarding the issue of the painting or
 replacement of the exterior louvered doors.
 
C.
 
Brown argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 
summary judgment in favor of the Board on the issue relating to
 the Board's decision not to purchase the Bali teak doors. The
 Circuit Court granted summary judgment on this issue based on its
 ruling that "both the Board and the Owners had to approve the
 
11There are impediments to accepting either of the competing
interpretations of Section A.1.(l). If the phrase "the inner decorated or
finished surfaces" modifies "doors and door frames," there should be an "and"
inserted before the phrase "the inner decorated or finished surfaces." On the
 other hand, if the phrase "the inner decorated or finished surfaces" does not
modify "doors and door frames," then Section A.1.(l) is internally
inconsistent in that it both provides (1) that an apartment shall not be
deemed to include "the floor and ceiling surrounding each apartment" and (2)
that an apartment shall be deemed to include "floors and ceilings[.]"
 
12Section 9.3(a) of the AOAO's Amended Bylaws provides, in relevant
part:
 
It is the intent of the owners that the apartments have a
uniform exterior appearance and that no changes be made to
apartments which are visible from the exterior of the Project
without permission of the board. Therefore, . . . an owner of an
apartment shall not, without the prior written consent of the
board, . . . make any alterations in or additions to the exterior
of his apartment . . . . 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[purchase of] the Bali Teak Louvered Doors and the Board never
 
approved [the purchase] of the Bali Teak Louvered Doors." 
The Circuit Court's conclusion that the Board never
 
approved the purchase of the Bali teak doors was based on its
 reading of a letter sent by the Board to apartment owners, which
 sought the owners' approval for the purchase of the Bali teak
 doors. In letter stated, in relevant part:
 
Enclosed you will find a written consent form regarding a
proposal to replace the entry louver doors. The Board of
 Directors has not taken a position on this proposal but is
going to submit the issue to a vote of the owners. After
 conferring with our attorney we have determined that a
50.01% majority, based on the ownership percentage, will
decide this issue. Please return the written consent form
 in the enclosed envelope. As the consent forms are
 returned, the management company will keep a running total.
Once this total represents a 50+% majority either in favor
or against, the issue will be deemed decided. . . .
 
A majority of owners submitted consent forms approving the
 
purchase of the Bali teak doors. 
Brown argues that the Circuit Court erred in relying on
 
the Board's letter to conclude that the Board had never approved
 the purchase of the Bali teak doors. Brown contends that when
 the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to him as the
 non-movant, it can be inferred based on the letter that the Board
 had approved the purchase of the Bali teak doors by agreeing to
 be bound by the vote of the majority of owners on the proposal
 ("Once this total represents a 50+% majority either in favor or
 against, the issue will be deemed decided[.]"). Brown also cites
 evidence that after the owners' vote, the Board began collecting
 assessments from owners to pay for the Bali teak doors, which
 Brown claims shows that the Board had approved or ratified the
 owners' decision to purchase the doors.
 
We agree with Brown that the letter did not provide
 
definitive evidence that the Board had never approved the
 purchase of the Bali teak doors and that there were genuine
 issues of fact regarding whether the Board had approved the
 purchase. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred
 in granting summary judgment based on its determination that the
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Board had never approved the purchase of the Bali teak doors, and
 
we vacate the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment regarding
 the non-purchase of the Bali teak doors.
13
 
IV.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we: (1) affirm the portion
 
of the Order on the Board's Summary Judgment Motions that the
 Board challenges on appeal; (2) vacate the "Final Judgment As To 
Count II of Counterclaim"; (3) vacate the portions of the Order
 on the Board's Summary Judgment Motions that Brown challenges on
 appeal; and (4) remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 17, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
R. Laree McGuire
 
Linda E. Ichiyama Jennifer M. Porter
 (Porter McGuire Kiakona
& Chow, LLP)
for Defendants-Appellants/ Cross-Appellees
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate JudgeTerrance M. Revere 
Leina
'ala L. Ley 
(Revere & AssociatesA Limited Liability LawCompany)for Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
13It is clear from the Circuit Court's order that in granting summary
judgment, the Circuit Court did not rely on the Board's argument that the
Board's decision not to purchase the Bali teak doors was a valid exercise ofits business judgment. We decline to reach on appeal the issue of whether theBoard was entitled to summary judgment based on its argument pertaining to thebusiness judgment rule, which we leave for the Circuit Court to decide in thefirst instance on remand. See C. Brewer & Co. v. Marine Indem. Ins. Co. of 
Am., 135 Hawai' i 190, 200, 374 P.3d 163, 173 (2015); Blake v. County of Kaua' i 
Planning Commission, 131 Hawaii 123, 130 n.7, 315 P.3d 749, 756 n.7 (2013). 
10
 