  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000875
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF D.K.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 11-00117)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother (Mother) and Cross-Appellant Father
 
(Father) appeal from the Order Terminating Parental Rights, filed
 
on October 18, 2012 in the Family Court of the First Circuit
 
(Family Court).1
 
On appeal, Mother challenges Findings of Fact 29, 47,
 
50, 51, 52, 57, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 70, 72, 77, and 78 and
 
Conclusions of Law 3, 4, 5, and 6. Mother points to conflicting
 
testimony of several witnesses but provides no specific argument
 
as to why each challenged Finding of Fact is clearly erroneous
 
and/or each Conclusion of Law is wrong. Instead, Mother contends
 
that there was no clear and convincing evidence that Mother was
 
not presently willing and able to provide her child, D.K., with a
 
safe family home and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that
 
Mother would become willing and able to provide D.K. with a safe
 
family home within a reasonable period of time. 
1
 The Honorable Matthew J. Viola presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On cross-appeal, Father challenges Findings of Fact 22,
 
29, 31, 98, 99, 101, 102, 103, 112, 113, 115, 116, 120, and 122,
 
and Conclusions of Law 1, 2, and 3. Father does not provide any
 
specific argument as to why each challenged Finding of Fact is
 
clearly erroneous and/or each Conclusion of Law is wrong. 
Instead, Father contends that (1) Petitioner-Appellee State of
 
Hawaii, Department of Human Services (DHS), failed to provide
 
Father with a reasonable opportunity to reunify with D.K. by
 
filing a motion to terminate his parental rights less than seven
 
months after D.K.'s entry into foster custody, (2) the Family
 
Court erred by allowing Dr. Brenda Wong (Dr. Wong) to testify
 
about the risk of potential exposure to abuse and neglect upon
 
D.K., and (3) the Family Court erred by finding that Father was
 
not presently willing and able to provide D.K. with a safe family
 
home and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Father would
 
become willing and able to provide D.K. with a safe family home
 
within a reasonable period of time.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's and Father's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Contrary to Mother's claim, there was clear and
 
convincing evidence that Mother was not presently willing and
 
able to provide D.K. with a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan and that it was not reasonably
 
foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide
 
D.K. with a safe family home within a reasonable period of time. 
Mother's therapist, Dr. Armsby, stated that when he
 
last saw Mother, she had made minimal progress in her individual
 
therapy, her prognosis was poor, and she was not motivated, and
 
she did not have a grasp on her mental health issues. Dr. Armsby
 
also stated that if Mother resumed using "Ice" then it would
 
affect her parenting ability. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Wong is a clinical psychologist that conducted a
 
psychological evaluation of Mother. She testified that Mother
 
presented contradictory information, minimized her actions, and
 
used substances as a coping mechanism. Dr. Wong stated that
 
there were concerns about an abusive relationship with Father,
 
Mother did not feel that she needed to learn new skills, which is
 
contrary to her history of inability and neglect of her
 
children's needs, Mother felt that there was little impact of
 
domestic violence on the children, which showed a lack of good
 
perception of a child's emotional health needs, her prognosis
 
would be poor unless Mother changed her poor insight or
 
minimization, and Mother's motivation to be open was missing,
 
which would be a requirement before any progress could be made.
 
Mother admitted that she used methamphetamine in August
 
2012, she did not finish the Queen's Medical Center Dual
 
Diagnosis substance abuse treatment program, she missed visiting
 
D.K. the entire month of September because her friend was giving
 
birth and there were things that she had to do at the shelter,
 
she did not believe she has a substance abuse problem, she did
 
not believe she has any parenting problems, and she did not
 
believe she needs to address any mental health issues. 
Mother further testified that she did not want her
 
children returned to her at that time because she would rather do
 
her services first to better herself, she did not know why DHS
 
took away her children, DHS thought she had a drug problem but
 
she did not think she had a drug problem, she used drugs in 2009,
 
2011, and 2012, but did not do it everyday, it was not a concern
 
that she had not yet completed substance abuse treatment because
 
she went to class every Thursday, she did not feel that she could
 
currently provide a safe family home because she was in a
 
shelter, she did not believe it was in D.K.'s best interest to
 
wait 2 years for her to complete services and it had already been
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
one year, "Ice" did not affect her judgment, and she was an
 
addict but not a serious addict.
 
A DHS social worker, Wendell Omura (Omura) testified
 
that in 2009, DHS believed that Mother had no insight into the
 concerns DHS had and at the time of the termination of parental
 
rights hearing, Mother had not resolved any issues.
 
Another DHS social worker, Clarissa Noelani Realin
 
(Realin) testified that Mother was given numerous referrals for
 
substance abuse counseling but did not complete a treatment
 
program to date, Mother completed a psychological evaluation
 
which recommended individual therapy, but she had not attended
 
appointments since the beginning of 2012, it was not foreseeable
 
that Mother would become able to provide a safe home because
 
Mother's mental health issues and substance abuse were
 
unaddressed and Mother has parenting ability issues, and Mother
 
tested positive for drugs on March 16, 2012 and May 10, 2012.
 
(2) DHS did not fail to provide Father with a
 
reasonable opportunity to reunify with D.K. by filing a Motion to
 
Terminate Parental Rights less than 7 months after D.K. entered
 
foster custody. Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง
 
587A-31(g), DHS must file a motion to terminate parental rights
 
if a child has been in foster care for a total of 12 consecutive
 
months from the date of entry into foster care. However,
 
"Nothing in this section shall prevent the department from filing
 
a motion to terminate parental rights if the department
 
determines that the criteria for terminating parental rights are
 
present." HRS ยง 587A-31(h). Thus, DHS was not prohibited from
 
filing a motion to terminate Father's parental rights less than
 
12 months after D.K. entered foster care. When DHS moved to
 
terminate Father's parental rights on March 19, 2012, Father had
 
dropped out of all court ordered services and had not shown up
 
for drug testing since January 2012.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father's challenge to the testimony of Dr. Wong is
 
without merit. Dr. Wong was allowed to testify about child abuse
 
and neglect over Father's objection. However, Dr. Wong's
 
testimony only pertained to Mother. Therefore, even if the
 
family court erred by allowing Dr. Wong's testimony about Mother,
 
it was harmless as to Father. 
There was clear and convincing evidence that Father was
 
not presently willing and able to provide D.K. with a safe family
 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, and that it was
 
not reasonably foreseeable that Father would become willing and
 
able to provide D.K. with a safe family home within a reasonable
 
period of time. Father admitted that he had not completed
 
substance abuse counseling, he tested positive or failed to show
 
up for testing and understood that those are considered positive,
 
he did not complete a psychological evaluation because he has not
 
been clean for 60 days, he understood that he did not complete
 
his services so the concerns that DHS had still existed, it was a
 
year and a half before he decided to attempt to complete
 
services, and he used meth once on March 5, 2012. 
Omura stated that Father had unresolved mental health
 
and anger issues and untreated substance abuse and that Father
 
was not able to provide a safe family home because he had not
 
undergone individual therapy and could not sustain services.
 
Realin testified that it was not foreseeable that
 
Father would become able to provide a safe home because Father
 
had a substance abuse issue, Father should not be given more time
 
to reunify with D.K. because of his relationship with Mother and
 
he did not understand that her deficiencies caused her to be
 
unsafe and Father felt that both of them together could provide a
 
safe home, after Father finished domestic violence class he was
 
referred to drug treatment but did not follow through, in order
 
for Father to provide a safe family home, he would need to
 
participate in treatment, maintain a regular sponsor, attend
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regular AA/NA meetings, reside in a clean and sober house, and
 
regularly attend treatment with a therapist, and a reasonable
 
period of time would be 24 months, or only 9 more months at the
 
time of the termination of parental rights hearing and it did not
 
appear that Father could accomplish all of that given his
 
history.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's October 18, 2012
 
Order Terminating Parental Rights is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 22, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Tae Chin Kim 
for Father/Cross-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Randal I. Shintani 
for Mother-Appellant 
Mary Anne Magnier
Jonathan M. FujiyamaDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-Appellee 
6
 