 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I    REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER   
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000524 22-FEB-2024 07:52 AM Dkt. 79 SO 
NO.  CAAP-22-0000524  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I   
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
JASON W. LANGEVIEN, Defendant-Appellant.  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1CPC-20-0000976)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER   
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Jason Langevien ( Langevien ) 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment ), 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( circuit 
court) on August 1, 2022,1 for Unauthorized Entry into Motor 
Vehicle in the First Degree.2 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. 
2 Hawaii Revised Statutes § 708-836.5 (2014) states, in pertinent 
part, 
(continued . . .)   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Langevien raises two points of error on appeal. He 
contends: (1) the circuit court erred in denying his Motion in 
Limine to exclude the DNA expert's testimony, and (2) the State 
committed prosecutorial misconduct during the hearing on 
Langevien's Motion in Limine (motion in limine ), closing 
statement, and rebuttal closing statement. Upon careful review 
of the record and the briefs submitted by the parties, and 
having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the 
issues raised by the parties, we conclude that the circuit court 
erred in admitting the DNA evidence. We thus vacate the 
Judgment, and rem and this case for a new trial. 
Langevien specifically contends that the circuit court 
erred when it denied his motion in limine to exclude: (1) the 
DNA chart that the State's DNA expert Adam Orimoto ( Orimoto) had 
"prepared which compared the numbers from several loci from the 
DNA profiles of the samples obtained from the flashlight and the 
knife, with the numbers from the same loci obtained from 
Defendant's full DNA profile"; and (2) "Orimoto's testimony 
about the comparisons because the correspondences between the 
numbers from the samples and the numbers from Defendant's DNA 
(continued . . .) 
Unauthorized entry into motor vehicle in the first degree. 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized entry into motor   
vehicle in the first degree if the person intentionally or 
knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a motor vehicle, 
without being invited, licensed, or otherwise authorized to enter 
or remain within the vehicle, with the intent to commit a crime 
against a person or against property rights.   
2   
 
        
         
          
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
profile created the impression that the samples incriminated 
Defendant[.]" Langevien contends that the evidence had a 
"confusing nature" and "[gave] the jury the false impression 
that the DNA on the samples incriminated" him. Langevien 's 
contentions have merit. 
"The admissibility of evidence requires different 
standards of review depending on the particular rule of evidence
at issue." State v. Cordeiro,  99  Hawaiʻi 390, 403-04, 56 P.3d 
692, 705-06 (2002) (citation omitted). Here, Langevien moved in
limine to exclude expert testimony on the basis that it lacked 
probative value pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE) 
Rule  403, and we thus review the circuit court's ruling for 
abuse of discretion. State v. Pulse, 83 Hawaiʻi 229, 247, 
925  P.2d 797, 815 (1996) ("Evidentiary decisions based on 
HRE  403, which require a 'judgment call' by the trial court, are
reviewed for an abuse of discretion.") (citation omitted).   
 
 
The circuit court abused its discretion in permitting 
Orimoto, utilizing the chart as a "demonstrative aid," to 
testify extensively at trial on the clearly inconclusive DNA 
evidence. This testimony lacked probative value, given that it 
neither inculpated nor exculpated Langevien. Moreover, its 
introduction prejudiced Langevien by suggesting that, however 
inconclusive, Langevien's DNA could not be excluded from the DNA 
3   
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
samples collected at the crime scene.3 This opened the door for 
the prosecution to reference the DNA evidence during closing 
argument, as one of "[e]leven pieces of evidence" of Langevien's 
guilt.4 We conclude, on this record, that the circuit court 
abused its discretion in admitting the inconclusive DNA 
evidence. 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court's 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence , filed on August 1, 2022, is 
vacated, and this case is remanded for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 22 , 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
William H. Jameson, Jr., Presiding Judge 
Deputy Public Defender, 
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Associate Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry City and County of Honolulu Associate Judge for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
3 The circuit court, in ruling on the motion in limine, noted that 
"Mr. Langevien cannot be included, cannot be excluded[,]" because "[t]here is 
no DNA match[.] " Orimoto testified at trial that the DNA testimony presented 
"essentially no conclusions" because it was "inconclusive." 
4 Defendant contends that this statement, inter alia , constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct. Given our conclusion that the circuit court erred 
in admitting the inconclusive DNA evidence, we do not reach Langevien's 
contention of prosecutorial misconduct. 
4 