NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000081
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PHILIP HOWARD ZIMMERMAN, also known as Howard Philip Zimmerman,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-172K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Philip Howard Zimmerman (Zimmerman)
 
pleaded guilty to one count of Murder in the Second Degree in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5(1) (1993),
 one count of Kidnapping in violation of HRS § 707-720(1)(d) and
 (e) (Supp. 2012), and one count of Criminal Property Damage in
 the Second Degree in violation of HRS § 708-821(1)(b) (Supp.
 2012).
1 On December 11, 2012, the Circuit Court of the Third
 
Circuit (Circuit Court)2 sentenced Zimmerman to make
 
restitution, pay court fees, and serve the following terms of
 incarceration: Life with the possibility of parole for Murder in
 the Second Degree, twenty years for Kidnapping, and five years
 for Criminal Property Damage, with the sentence for Kidnapping to
 be served consecutively to the Murder and Criminal Property
 Damage sentences.
 
1
 Zimmerman was also charged with one count of Terroristic
Threatening in the First Degree in violation of HRS § 707-716 (Supp. 2010). 
2
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided at the December 11, 2012
sentencing proceeding. The Judgment was entered on December 26, 2012.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Zimmerman argues a single main point: that
 
the Circuit Court "abused its discretion in sentencing [him] to
 
consecutive terms of imprisonment when it relied on the uncharged
 crimes contained in [his] e-mails to [the victim]." After a
 careful review of the record, the issues raised and arguments
 made by the parties as well as the applicable legal authorities,
 we resolve Zimmerman's point on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
The sentence imposed by the trial court is reviewed for
 
plain and manifest abuse of its broad discretion. State v.
 
Pecpec, 127 Hawai
'i 20, 32, 276 P.3d 589, 601 (2012). HRS § 706­
606 (1993)3
 lists factors that "[t]he court, in determining the
particular sentence to be imposed, shall consider[.]" The
 Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that "the legislative sentencing 
philosophy permeating HRS ch. 706 in general and HRS § 706–606 in
 particular dictates that consecutive prison sentences, pursuant
 to HRS § 706–668.5 [(1993 and Supp. 2012)],[ 
4
] may properly be
3 §706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence. The court, in determining the particular
sentence to be imposed, shall consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
4
 §706-668.5 Multiple sentence of imprisonment.
(1) If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a
defendant, whether at the same time or at different
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imposed only to achieve retributive, incapacitative, and
 
deterrent objectives." State v. Gaylord , 78 Hawai 'i 127, 154, 
890 P.2d 1167, 1194 (1995). It is also well-settled that "a
 sentencing court may consider any and all accurate information
 that reasonably might bear on the proper sentence for the
 particular defendant, given the crime committed." Keawe v.
 
State, 79 Hawai
'i 281, 286, 901 P.2d 481, 486 (1995). 
Furthermore, "the scope of a sentencing judge's inquiry into a
 defendant's background is very broad and limitations on the kind
 and/or source of information the court may consider are not
 lightly imposed." Id. (citation and emphasis omitted). We
 
conclude that Zimmerman has failed to demonstrate that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in imposing consecutive
 sentences.
 
Zimmerman specifically objects to the consideration of
 
a November 17, 2010 email to the victim and others.5 In that
 
4(...continued)
times, or if a term of imprisonment is imposed on a
defendant who is already subject to an unexpired term
of imprisonment, the terms may run concurrently or
consecutively. Multiple terms of imprisonment run
concurrently unless the court orders or the statute
mandates that the terms run consecutively.
 
(2)
 The court, in determining whether the terms
imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or
consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in
section 706-606.
 
5 On August 31, 2012, Zimmerman filed a Motion to Exclude Records
from Consideration at Sentencing. The subject records, Exhibits A-L, weresealed by stipulation and included, as pertinent to this appeal, thethreatening emails sent by Zimmerman to the victim. The Circuit Court denied the motion with regard to "Exhibit G, Exhibit K, pp. 002864-002914, andExhibit L," granted it with regard to all other exhibits, and ordered that theprosecution provide the unexcluded exhibits to "Probation." Portions of the email were included in Zimmerman's pre-sentence report (PSI). Exhibit G appears to be part of the Hawai' i Police Department's application for a search
warrant in its investigation of this case, "Exhibit K pp. 002864-002914"appears to be a petition for a protective order filed by the victim in thiscase against Zimmerman dated November 17, 2010, and Exhibit L appears to be aprotective order against Zimmerman and in favor of Zimmerman's ex-wife, AmyZimmerman, and issued on December 10, 2009. Although Zimmerman repeatedlyrefers to "emails," he quotes from only one, which was one of many included inthe supporting documentation for the petition for protective order. As Zimmerman provides no arguments with respect to the rest of these exhibits, weconclude he has waived them. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure,
Rule 28(b)(7). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6The Circuit Court mentions the email in the following underscored
passages.
Applying the factors in 706-606, the Court finds as
follows:
The nature and circumstances of the offense and the
history and characteristics of the defendant:  The
characteristics of the defendant as between the victim in
this case might be termed horrendous.  The defendant's
actions prior to the incident itself indicated the state of
mind under which he acted. This is evidenced by the emails,
the name callings.  So as to the relationship between the
defendant and the victim, the Court has considered the
circumstances and the history.
Number two, the seriousness of the offense, to promote
respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the
offense:  As stated, there's nothing that can minimize how
horrific this crime is.  Even the defense stated all murders
are heinous and horrible.  But in this particular case, what
makes this case stand out from the general murders -- and as
I said, all murders are heinous and horrible.  But this is
especially heinous, cold-hearted, especially when the
defendant continued to beat the victim to death while the
victim was pleading for help and that others outside were
knocking on the door.  He continued to beat her.
Number three, adequate deterrence to commit criminal
conduct:  As the prosecutor stated and the record reflects,
basically the defendant, although he expressed remorse after
the incident, he said, "They overserved me.  She hit me
first."  And certainly the punishment should be adequate to
deter this type of criminal act regarding relationships, and
there is no excuse.  And I've heard the defendant's argument
that basically he was under medication.  But frankly, as the
Court stated, the relationship before the incident occurred
is also critical in how the defendant viewed the victim.
To protect the public from further crimes of the
defendant:  Again his relationship with the victim, his
emails, it seems as if the defendant was building up to this
incident of murder by his prior emails, by calling the
victim names.  And also the emails that he sent appears to
show no respect for the law.
Number five, to provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training, medical care, or other
correctional treatment in the most effective manner:  He is
a computer technician.  He's educated.  He was in therapy.
He had a job.  He had a place to live.  Whatever treatment
he needs, he can get in a correctional facility.
(continued...)
4email, which he sent to nineteen other email addresses, he
demeans and threatens to kill the victim ("I will rip your throat
out") and also attached explicit photographs of the victim to
humiliate her.  It is undisputed that the Circuit Court
considered the email in making its sentencing decision.6  At the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
same time, taking the Circuit Court's remarks in context, it is
 
clear that the email was considered in determining "[t]he nature
 and circumstances of the offense and the history and
 characteristics of the defendant" under HRS § 706-606(1) and the
 need "[t]o protect the public from further crimes of the
 defendant" under HRS § 706-606(2)(c). The Circuit Court noted
 that the email reflected on the relationship between Zimmerman
 and the victim, that the situation between them seemed to be
 escalating, and that the threats and other content of the email
 
6(...continued)
Number six, the kinds of sentences available:
Regarding whether the defendant should be sentenced to
concurrent or consecutive prison, the Court has examined
706-606(1) and (2)(a) through (d).
 
Number seven, the need to avoid unwarranted sentence
disparities among defendants with similar records who have
been found guilty of similar conduct: The state cites State
 v. Smith, State v. Loa. And while these cases do not
 pertain to murder, nevertheless the principles of the
consecutive sentence applies, and that is the need for
protection of the public, the seriousness of the offense,
and all of the factors in 706-606.
 
As stated then by the defense counsel, distinguishing
these cases from this case, the Court would agree. This case
is much more heinous, much more cold-blooded, much more
heartless, callous. Even one of the responders, the hotel
workers, as stated in the PSI, is still suffering from
distress having witnessed this incident at least through the
sounds, having seen the victim call for help and die.
 
So as to the charge of Murder in the Second Degree,
the Court has considered the factors in 706-606,
706-668.5(2), the case law. It is the judgment and sentence
of this Court that you be committed to the custody of the
director of the Department of Public Safety for life with
the possibility of parole for the offense of Murder in the
Second Degree.
 
As to Kidnapping, it is the judgment and sentence of
this Court that you be committed to the custody of the
director of the Department of Public Safety for an
indeterminate period of twenty years to run consecutive to
Murder in the Second Degree.
 
As to Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree,
it is the judgment and sentence of this Court that you be
committed to the custody of the director of the Department
of Public Safety for an indeterminate period of five years
to run concurrent with the Kidnapping and the Murder, for a
total years of imprisonment of life with the possibility of
parole plus twenty years.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showed Zimmerman's lack of respect for the law. These topics
 
were relevant to the factors the Circuit Court was required to
 consider under HRS § 707-606 and therefore were properly
 considered during sentencing.
 
We also note that the Circuit Court identified a number
 
of other factors justifying the consecutive sentences, including
 that Zimmerman's conduct was "especially heinous, cold-hearted,
 especially when [Zimmerman] continued to beat the victim to death
 while the victim was pleading for help and that others outside
 were knocking on the door[;]" and that Zimmerman tried to blame
 others and his medication for his conduct.
 
Zimmerman argues that the acts reflected in the email
 
constituted an "uncharged crime" and analogizes to State v.
 Nunes, 72 Haw. 521, 525, 824 P.2d 837, 840 (1992).
7 Zimmerman's
 
contention is that because he "was never charged with those
 crimes, the trial court abused its discretion when it relied on
 those crimes in fashioning its sentence." 
Zimmerman's argument is without merit. Zimmerman does 
not dispute that he wrote and sent the email to the victim and others, distinguishing this case from those where the uncharged misconduct was in question. See State v. Vellina, 106 Hawai
'i 
441, 449-50, 106 P.3d 364, 372-73 (2005) (imposition of consecutive terms of imprisonment based on an unsubstantiated allegation that the defendant sold the stolen firearm to a drug dealer for drugs was error); State v. Koch, 107 Hawai
'i 215, 225, 
112 P.3d 69, 79 (2005) (mandatory minimum sentence based on the circuit court's assumption that defendant had engaged in unlawful conduct of which he had been expressly acquitted was error). 
More importantly, the Circuit Court's comments make
 
clear that it was not the criminality of Zimmerman's conduct that
 it focused on, but how his conduct illuminated the abusive nature
 
7
 Zimmerman describes the email as satisfying the definition of
terroristic threatening under HRS § 707-715(1) (1993) and extortion under HRS
§ 707-764(2) (Supp. 2012).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the relationship between Zimmerman and his victim well before
 
the murder was committed. 
Therefore, the Judgment of the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit entered on December 26, 2012, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 11, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Linda L. Walton,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
7
 