 
           
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACI FIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000133 28-AUG-2026 07:51 AM Dkt. 76 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000133  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I  
STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
MICHAEL AKAU, also known as   
MICHAEL JACOB AKAU, Defendant-Appellant.  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CPC-22-0001558)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Leonard and Gluck, JJ.)     
Defendant-Appellant Michael Akau, also known as 
Michael Jacob Akau (Akau
), appeals from the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit's (Circuit Court)1 December 12, 2023 "Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment), in which Akau was found 
guilty of Robbery in the Second Degree following a jury trial.2 
On appeal, Akau challenges the Circuit Court's jury 
instructions, alleges prosecutorial misconduct, and contends 
1 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided. 
2 The Circuit Court entered a "Free Standing Order of Restitution" 
on January 21, 2025, and Akau filed a timely notice of appeal thereafter.           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
    
  
 
  that the Circuit Court erred by waiving his presence at a 
restitution hearing. 
Upon careful review of the record on appeal and the 
briefs submitted, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we vacate and remand 
due to erroneous jury instructions. 
The relevant background facts are these. A jury trial 
was held on August 24-25, 2023. Steven Andrews (Andrews) 
testified that on November 23, 2022, he was sitting outside of 
7-Eleven with a blue Walmart bag that contained a library book, 
cigarettes, and some change, when Akau walked by, bent over, and 
"grabbed [his] things." Andrews "grabbed the bag back," Akau gripped the bag tighter, and the two struggled for around 30 
seconds. Andrews attempted to hit Akau to make him let go of 
the bag, at which point the two began fighting. Andrews 
testified that he then punched Akau in the face, after which 
Akau punched Andrews twice and kneed him in the back. Andrews 
left the scene to return to his residence at Weinberg Hale, and 
observed Akau with the bag in his (Akau's) hand. Andrews later received his belongings back from responding officers, but 
testified that "a little bit of money [was] missing" and he 
could not recall if he got the cigarettes back. 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Daniel Wolf 
(Officer Wolf) testified that on November 23, 2022, he was 
dispatched to an "assault or a robbery type case" at Weinberg 
2
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 Hale. Andrews reported to Officer Wolf that his property was 
taken at 7-Eleven down the road. Officer Wolf found Andrews's 
Walmart bag "tucked away into a corner" at the 7-Eleven. Officer Wolf reviewed the surveillance footage from 7-Eleven, 
but testified that he could not determine whether Akau took 
Andrews's belongings.
3 
Akau testified that on November 23, 2022, he was 
"panhandling" at 7-Eleven. Akau saw Andrews, whom he seen 
previously at Weinberg Hale and 7-Eleven, and he asked Andrews 
for a cigarette. Akau testified that Andrews then punched him 
in the mouth, and they began fighting. When the fighting 
stopped, Andrews left, and Akau sat in the corner where Andrews was initially sitting. Akau observed a blue tote bag "off in 
the corner[,]" but denied grabbing the bag from Andrews at any 
point while fighting and denied taking any items from the bag. 
Akau testified that his friend then came over and gave him a 
cigarette. 
The Circuit Court instructed the jury on Robbery in 
the Second Degree, use of force, as follows: 
Robbery in the Second Degree, use of force.  As to 
the first alternative, a person commits the offense of 
Robbery in the Second Degree, use of force, if in the 
course of committing theft  he uses force against the person 
of anyone present with the --
 with intent to overcome the 
person's physical  resistance, or physical power of 
resistance.   
  
 There are two material elements to the offense of 
Robbery in the Second Degree, use of force, each of which 
3 Although the surveillance video is listed in the record on 
appeal, the video itself was not available for this court to review. 
3           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. The 
two elements are: 
1. That on or about November 23rd, 2022, in the City 
and County of Honolulu, state -- the defendant, Michael 
Akau, was in the course of committing theft; and 
2. That while doing so the defendant, Michael Akau, 
used force against the person of Steven Kermit Andrews, a 
person who was present, with intent to overcome Steven 
Kermit Andrews's physical resistance or physical power of 
resistance. 
(Emphases added.)  The Circuit Court did not provide the jury 
with the statutory definition of "theft" (from Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 708-830) when instructing the jury on Robbery   
in the Second Degree.   4
4 The Circuit Court did, however, define the following terms: 
 Control over the property means exercise of the -- 
the  exercise of dominion over the property, and includes 
but is not limited to taking, carrying away, or possessing 
the property, or selling, conveying, or transferring title 
to or an interest in the property.  
  Deprive means A, to withhold property or  cause it to 
be withheld from a person permanently, or  for so extended a 
period, or under such circumstance,  that a significant 
portion of its economic value or the  use -- or the use and 
benefit thereof is lost to him; or  
  B, to dispose of the property, so as to make it 
unlikely the owner will recover it; or   
 C, to retain the property with the intent to restore 
it to the owner only if the owner purchases or leases it 
back, or pays a reward or other compensation for its 
return; or  
  
 D, to sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer any 
interest in the property; or  
 
 E, to subject the property to a claim of a person 
other than the owner.  
 
 Obtain means, when used in relation to property, to 
bring about a transfer of possession or other interest, 
whether to the obtainer or to another.  
 . . . . 
Unauthorized control over property means control over 
property of another which is not authorized by the owner. 
4           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 Thereafter, the Circuit Court instructed the jury that if it 
found Akau not guilty of Robbery in the Second Degree, it would 
determine whether Akau was guilty of Theft in the Fourth Degree, as follows:  
A person commits the offense of Theft in the Fourth 
Degree if he obtains or exerts unauthorized  control over 
the property of another, the value of which  does not exceed 
250 dollars, with intent to deprive the  person of the 
property.  
 
 There are four material elements of the  
offense of Theft in the Fourth Degree, each of which the  
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.  
  These four elements are:  
1. That on or about November 23rd, 2022, in the City 
and County of Honolulu, the State of Hawaiʻ i, the defendant, 
Michael Akau, obtained or exerted unauthorized control over 
the property of Steven Kermit Andrews; and 
2. That the defendant, Michael Akau, did so with the 
intent to deprive Steven Kermit Andrews of the property; 
and 
3. That the defendant, Michael Akau, was aware or 
believed the property had value; and 
4. The property had value. 
In closing argument, the State reiterated the 
"depriving" definition, as follows: 
You've learned about what depriving is. Depriving is 
to withhold the property, permanently or for so extended a 
period that a significant portion of it, or its value, is 
lost.  You've also learned that deprived can mean to 
dispose of it, to make it unlikely that the person, Mr. Andrews, could recover it.  
 
 You've learned that it means to retain the property, 
with the intent to restore it only if the owner purchases it or leases it back. Depriving also means to sell or 
otherwise transfer the interest of the property to someone else.  
 It's not yours.  To subject the property to the 
claim of a person other than the  owner, in this case Mr. 
Andrews.  
The State argued that Akau approached Andrews with the goal "to 
take whatever it was that Mr. Andrews had[,]" and that Akau then 
5           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 punched and kneed Andrews in the back causing Andrews to flee 
the 7-Eleven parking lot and leave his belongings behind. The 
State argued that Andrews observed Akau with the "blue tote in his hand" while fleeing. After Andrews left, the State 
contended, the surveillance video showed Akau smoking a 
cigarette, which was from Andrews's bag. 
In its rebuttal argument to the jury, the State argued 
that "[i]t didn't have to be the defendant who took anything 
from the wallet, or took any cigarettes from the bag, under the 
law." The State contended that because of Akau's actions, 
"Andrews was forced to abandon his belongings," and it did not 
matter "if the defendant took the cigarettes, or the book, . . . or the cash[.]" Defense counsel objected for "misstate[ment of] 
the law." The Circuit Court overruled the objection. 
The jury found Akau guilty as charged of Robbery in the 
Second Degree, use of force. Akau was sentenced to ten years of 
imprisonment. Akau timely appealed. 
Standard of review. 
When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at 
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when 
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively 
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it 
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the 
error was not prejudicial. However, error is not to be 
viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract. 
It must be examined in the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be 
entitled. In that context, the real question becomes 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that error might have contributed to conviction. If there is such a 
reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment of 
conviction on which it may have been based must be set aside. 
6           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 State v. Nichols, 111 Hawaiʻ i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) 
(quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai‘ i 289, 292–93, 119 P.3d 
597, 600–01 (2005)) (brackets omitted). "Jury instructions to 
which no objection was made at trial will be reviewed for plain 
error."  State v. Brown, 157 
Hawaiʻi 354, 367, 577 P.3d 1045, 
1058 (2025). 
Akau argues that the Circuit Court erred by 
"failing to define theft under HRS § 708-830(1)" as including 
the “mens rea for element 1 of Robbery.” Akau contends that 
“[w]ithout being informed that element 1 requires an intent 
to 
deprive another of property, a mens rea, the jury could have believed that the State was not required to prove a mens rea at 
all for that first element.” The State, on the other hand, argues that because the Circuit Court “gave an instruction on 
Theft in the Fourth Degree as a lesser included offense of 
Robbery in the Second Degree[,]” “the jury was in fact provided 
with a definition of ‘theft’ and the mental state associated 
with ‘theft.’” 
HRS § 701-114 (2014), entitled "Proof beyond a 
reasonable doubt," provides: 
(1) Except as otherwise provided in section 701- 115, 
no person may be convicted of an offense unless the 
following are proved beyond a reasonable doubt: 
(a) Each element of the offense; 
(b) The state of mind required to establish each 
element of the offense; 
 . . . . 
7           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (2) In the absence of the proof required by 
subsection (1), the innocence of the defendant is presumed. 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 702-204 (2014), entitled "State of mind 
required," provides: "Except as provided in section 702-212, a 
person is not guilty of an offense unless the person acted 
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently, as the law 
specifies, with respect to each element of the offense."  
(Emphasis added.) 
Akau was found guilty of HRS § 708-841(1)(a) (2014), 
which provides that a person commits Robbery in the Second Degree if: 
in the course of committing theft . . . : 
(a) The person uses force against the person of 
anyone present with the intent to overcome that 
person's physical resistance or physical power of 
resistance; 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 708-830 (2014) provides, inter alia, 
that a person commits theft if the person "obtains or exerts 
unauthorized control over the property of another with intent to 
deprive the other of the property."  (Emphasis added.) Thus, to 
find Akau guilty of Robbery in the Second Degree, the jury was 
required to find that, in addition to force, Akau acted "with 
intent" to "deprive" Andrews of his property. See id.; HRS §§ 
701-114 and 702-204; see also State v. Cordeiro
, 99 Hawaiʻi 390, 
407, 56 P.3d 692, 709 (2002) (noting that the Circuit Court 
instructed the jury on the "statutory definition[]" of "theft" in a Robbery in the First Degree case). 
8           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
  
 
  
 Here, the Circuit Court instructed the jury as to 
Robbery in the Second Degree without providing the definition of 
"theft." The Circuit Court then provided the definitions of "Control over the property," "Deprive," "Obtain," and 
"Unauthorized control over property," all terms derived from the 
statutory definition of "theft." As Akau argues, without the 
"theft" definition, the jury could have been misled "that if 
Akau somehow caused the property to be withheld from the owner 
without any intent to do so, . . . then he could still be guilty 
of robbery." Without the proper instruction of "theft," a jury 
could have found that Akau's fight with Andrews caused Andrews 
to abandon his property. Therefore, it is unclear whether the jury understood that Akau had to have the "intent to deprive" 
Andrews of his property during the fight. HRS § 708-830.  Thus, 
the Circuit Court's jury instructions were erroneous. See 
Nichols, 111 Hawai‘ i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981. 
The Circuit Court's erroneous jury instructions were 
presumptively harmful. Id. Based on the record, there is a 
reasonable possibility that the erroneous instruction 
contributed to Akau's conviction, and this error was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we vacate and 
remand, and we need not address Akau's remaining arguments.  
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit's December 12, 2023 "Judgment of Conviction 
9           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 and Sentence," and remand for proceedings consistent with this 
Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, August 28, 2026. 
On the briefs:  
 
Audrey Stanley,  
for Defendant-Appellant.  
 
Robert T. Nakatsuji,  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,  
City and County of Honolulu  
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Chief Judge  
 /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
Associate Judge   
 /s/ Daniel M. Gluck  
Associate Judge  
10
 