 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000823 22-SEP-2026 07:51 AM Dkt. 48 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000823 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
TOMAS ALDAY-MORALES, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-24-0000251) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Hiraoka, Guidry, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Tomas Alday-Morales ( Alday-
Morales) challenges the sufficiency of the record justifying the 
imposition of a fifteen-year consecutive sentence rather than a 
five-year concurrent sentence, for three counts of first-degree Violation of Privacy offenses under Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 711-1110.9(1)(a).  We vacate and remand for 
resentencing. 
1
1 Under HRS § 711-1110.9(1)(a) (2014 & Supp. 2024), Violation of
Privacy in the First Degree ( Violation of Privacy First Degree ) is committed
when a person "intentionally or knowingly installs or uses, or both, in any
private place, without consent of the person or persons entitled to privacy
therein, any device for observing, recording, amplifying, or broadcastinganother person in a stage of undress or sexual activity in that place[.]"  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  Alday-Morales appeals from the October 23, 2025 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" ( Judgment ) entered by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ( Circuit Court ).2 After 
pleading guilty to three counts of Violation of Privacy First 
Degree pursuant to a plea agreement, he was sentenced to a five-
year term of imprisonment on each count, with each term to run consecutively. On appeal, Alday-Morales raises a single point of error, contending that the Circuit Court erred by "failing to properly consider and place on record the HRS § 706-606 factors and rationale for imposing multiple consecutive terms of 
imprisonment." 
Upon review of the record on appeal and relevant legal 
authorities, giving due consideration to the issues raised and 
arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve the contention as follows. 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai ʻi's (State ) August 
12, 2024 Indictment alleged that between January 1, 2021 and November 25, 2023, Alday-Morales placed two hidden video cameras in the bedroom of adult stepdaughter M.W., and one hidden video camera in the bedroom of adult stepson B.W., recording both stepchildren nude and engaged in sexual activity with their respective partners. The State also alleged that K.W., a minor 
stepdaughter, sometimes used M.W.'s bedroom, and nude pictures 
of K.W. were recorded as well. After being recorded, the videos 
and pictures were allegedly "uploaded to [Alday-Morales's] various other devices." 
On July 31, 2025, Alday-Morales entered 
into a plea agreement with the State in which Alday-Morales agreed to plead guilty to the three counts of Violation of 
Violation of Privacy First Degree is a Class C felony, with a five-year
maximum term of imprisonment. HRS § 711-1110.9(4). 
2 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. 
2  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  Privacy First Degree in exchange for the dismissal of the two 
counts of first-degree Promotion of Child Abuse and two counts of third-degree Promotion of Child Abuse.  
At the sentencing hearing on October 23, 2025, the 
Circuit Court explained why it was rejecting a probation sentence in favor of imprisonment, as follows: 
[THE COURT]: I did review the presentence report. 
I don't always put a lot of stock into these reports. But 
these reports were pretty traumatic in this case. Mainly because
they're just documenting what's on the videos.[3] You know,
there's really nothing to discuss here. 
. . . . 
The sentencing factors do, as [Defense Counsel]
describe[s], say that [Alday-Morales] is likely to respond
affirmatively. I (Inaudible ) disagreeing with that. But what hedid is just legally indefensible. In my judgment, inexcusable. 
. . . . 
But I read the victims' letters. 
And they just speak so
loudly. And they were very well written, including the
minor['s]. 
. . . . 
And in considering the sentencing factors of 706-606, this
is an extraordinarily serious offense. It was done deliberately,
intent --
. . . . 
There's got to be a message sent that in order to -- it's
not promoting respect just for the law. It's promoting respect
for human beings. 
For your own family. 
. . . . 
In this case, probation is not an option to protect the
public from further crimes of [Alday-Morales]. This is 
notoriously a type of activity that is subject to reoccurrence. 
3 The Circuit Court appears to reference the videos and photos that
Alday-Morales allegedly recorded, descriptions of which were included in the
Presentence Diagnosis and Report. 
3  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I can't say that that would occur. I don't know. I can't 
predict it. But if that's a factor -- and I think it could be --
it's something that has to militate in favor of a severe
sentence. 
 
One of the things that almost never comes up in my mind in
sentencing is educational or vocational training, medical care or
other correctional treatment. Because I don't believe that jail
is -- or prison is necessarily a place to provide effectivetreatment. 
It typically is not, with the exception of sexual offenses. 
. . . . 
But the statute says I must consider that and is it
available in a prison sentence. 
 
Well, it is. 
Because until [Alday-Morales] does that
treatment, he will not be getting paroled. It's quite different
in sexual offenses. They don't parole you until you've actuallycompleted the treatment. 
. . . . 
In this particular case –- [HRS § 706-606] says to avoid
unwarranted sentencing disparities. 
. . . . [B]ut there are cases where a warranted sentencing
disparity is appropriate. 
 
And this is one of those cases. It just is. The facts are 
horrific. 
 
I'm not going to go into the details, which I normally do.
They're all part of the PSI. But it's -- they're just so
horrible that -- and with the family here. 
 
Bottom line is it's all documented. 
(Footnote added.) The Circuit Court then sentenced Alday-
Morales to five-year terms of imprisonment for each count, to 
run consecutively, as follows: 
On the sentence, the Court finds that [Alday-Morales] must
serve five years -- and you're remanded to the custody to [sic]
the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation -- on Count One,Two and Three, for five years on each term. 
. . . . 
4  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  Based upon my review of the sentencing factors -- which I
reviewed in detail, not only on the record, but in consideration
of this sentence and the sentencing -- presentence report in itsentirety, listening to the victims, and considering [Alday-Morales's] own statements and statements of counsel, [Alday-Morales's] sentences are to run consecutive to one another, for a
total of 15 years. 
Alday-Morales argues the Circuit Court "failed to 
recite the specific circumstances leading it [to] impose 
consecutive sentences." While Alday-Morales concedes the Circuit Court conducted "some" analysis of the HRS § 706-606 factors, he claims the Circuit Court never "articulate[d] any 
reason why a concurrent sentence was insufficient or that a 
consecutive sentence was required." Alday-Morales further argues that "[t]he [C]ircuit [C]ourt did not 'articulate a rational basis' to distinguish the consecutive sentence for Count 1 and Count 2 from the consecutive sentence for Count 2 and Count 3[.]" Finally, Alday-Morales requests that this court "vacate the judgment and sentence imposed, and remand the case 
for resentencing before a different judge." 
The State counters that the Circuit Court's "rationale 
of the significant harm, intentional conduct, need for 
deterrence and severe punishment was sufficient . . . justification" for the consecutive sentence. The State argues that if remanded, a different judge is not required. 
"Absent clear evidence to the contrary, it is presumed 
that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under 
HRS § 706-606." State v. Kong, 131 Hawai ʻi
 94, 102, 315 P.3d 
720, 728 (2013) (citation and brackets omitted). Nonetheless, the 
Hawaiʻi Supreme Court recently held that this presumption 
"does not excuse the court from articulating its reasoning, 
especially for consecutive sentencing. . . . The focus must be 
5  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   on how the factors support a sentence beyond the concurrent 
default." State v. Bunag, 158 Hawai ʻi 122, 128, 587 P.3d 697, 
703 (2026). To impose a consecutive sentence, a sentencing 
court "must consider the HRS § 706-606 factors" and "adequately 
distinguish between the need for consecutive sentences and the sentence a defendant would have received under the presumption of concurrent sentencing." Id. at 127, 587 P.3d at 702 (citing 
State v. Bautista, 153 Hawaiʻi
 284, 290, 535 P.3d 1029, 1035 
(2023) (internal quotation marks omitted)). "[A] sentencing 
court should explain its rationale for each consecutive sentence 
in order to inform the defendant and appellate courts of the specific factors underlying each sentence." State v. Barrios, 
139 Hawaiʻ i 321, 337, 389 P.3d 916, 932 (2016) (emphasis added). 
Here, the Circuit Court did not specifically explain 
its rationale for imposing multiple consecutive sentences for 
three Class C felonies, totaling fifteen years. Though the 
Circuit Court analyzed pertinent HRS § 706-606(1) factors, it did not "articulat[e] a clear and comprehensive rationale for each consecutive sentence" and treated the three felonies "as 
one offense." See Bautista
, 153 Hawaiʻi at 290-91, 535 P.3d at 
1035-36. The record does not reflect the requisite "substantial 
and pointed reasons to justify" each consecutive sentence. See
id.
 at 291, 535 P.3d at 1036. The Circuit Court's 
characterization of the facts as "horrific" and declaration that 
a sentencing disparity "just is" appropriate does not meet the supreme court's exhortation that sentencing courts "should explain [their] rationale for each consecutive sentence." See
Barrios
, 139 Hawaiʻi at 337, 389 P.3d at 932. The Circuit Court 
was required to "specify [the] basis . . . for determining how many consecutive sentences to impose," which it must do "[e]ven if a court uses identical factors to support multiple 
6  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
   consecutive sentences[.]" See Bautista, 153 Hawai ʻi at 290, 535 
P.3d at 1035 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
On this record, we conclude that the Circuit Court did 
not adequately justify its imposition of multiple consecutive 
sentences on Alday-Morales, as 
Hawaiʻi precedent requires, and 
accordingly, the sentence was outside the scope of its discretion. See Kong, 131 Hawai ʻi at 101, 315 P.3d at 727 
(reviewing sentencing matters for abuse of discretion). 
Finally, Alday-Morales's requested "resentencing 
before a different judge" is not supported by any argument or authority, and we do not address it. See
 Hawaiʻi Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
For the foregoing reasons, the October 23, 2025 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit is vacated with respect to the sentence 
imposed, and we remand for resentencing. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, September 22, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Paige Medinger, 
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Arlene Y. Watanabe,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
County of Maui for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge
 
7
 