 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000470 21-JUN-2024 08:16 AM Dkt. 116 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000470 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
MOLOAA FARMS LLC, a Hawaiʻi limited liability company, 
Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
GREEN ENERGY TEAM LLC, a Hawaiʻ i limited liability company, 
Defendant-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CC141000188)  
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Moloaa Farms LLC (
Moloaa) appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's1 June 24, 2019 
amended final judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee Green 
Energy Team LLC (Green Energy). On appeal, Moloaa contends the 
circuit court erred in granting Green Energy's Hawai‘i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 52(c)2 motion for judgment on partial 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
2 HRCP Rule 52(c) provides: 
If during a trial without a jury a party has been fully 
heard on an issue and the court finds against the party on 
(continued . . .)   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
findings, which the parties and the circuit court referred to as 
a motion for directed verdict.3 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve 
Moloaa's arguments as discussed below. 
Conclusions of law in an HRCP Rule 52(c) directed 
verdict bench trial are reviewed de novo. Furuya v. Ass'n of
Apartment Owners of Pac. Monarch, Inc., 137 
Hawai‘i 371, 383, 375 
P.3d 150, 162 (2016). And, "[a]s a general rule, the 
construction and legal effect to be given a contract is a 
(. . . continued) 
that issue, the court may enter judgment as a matter of law  
against that party with respect to a claim or defense that 
cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated 
without a favorable finding on that issue, or the court may 
decline to render any judgment until the close of all the 
evidence.  Such a judgment shall be supported by findings 
of fact and conclusions of law as required by subdivision 
(a) of this rule.  
3 Moloaa raises 100 points of error challenging certain findings and 
conclusions in the circuit court's March 5, 2019 "Final Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting [Green Energy's] Motion for Directed 
Verdict Against [Moloaa] After Jury- Waived Trial." Moloaa does not provide 
corresponding arguments in the argument section of its opening brief for each of the 100 points of error, but instead addresses these findings and 
conclusions in the context of its arguments on appeal. See Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b). We address the challenged findings and 
conclusions in the same manner. 
Moloaa also argues the circuit court erred in concluding it acted in 
bad faith, failed to mitigate its damages, breached the Option Agreement, and 
was estopped from enforcing the lease. However, based on our decision below, 
we need not reach these arguments. 
We do not consider Appendix B of the a nswering brief because it was not 
included in the record on appeal and there was no request for judicial 
notice. 
2   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
question of law" reviewed de novo. Kahawaiolaa v. Hawaiian Sun
Invs., Inc., 146 Hawai‘ i 424, 432, 463 P.3d 1081, 1089 (2020) 
(citation omitted); see generally, Clarabal v. Dep't of Educ., 
145 Hawai‘ i 69, 79, 446 P.3d 986, 996 (2019) (noting questions of 
law are reviewed de novo). 
The "OPTION TO LEASE AGREEMENT" (Option Agreement) 
gave Green Energy an option to lease almost 600 acres (the 
Property) from Moloaa. Attached to the Option Agreement was the 
"LEASE" (Proposed Lease) that would take effect if Green Energy 
exercised its option to lease the Property. 
(1)  Moloaa argues the "essential terms were agreed 
upon as set forth in the [Option Agreement] and the Companion 
Recorded Documents." The parties agree the Proposed Lease did 
not contain an effective date or set the Biomass prices for the Percentage Rent provisions. 
(a)  Effective date. Section (2)(c) of the Option 
Agreement determined the effective date. Once the option to 
lease is timely exercised, "Optionor agrees to lease the 
Property to Optionee, on or before the date that is (30) days 
after Optionor's receipt of the Exercise Notice, and the Parties 
shall thereupon execute the Lease, which shall enter into effect 
on the effective date stated in the Lease." Thus, the Proposed 
Lease would become effective on the thirtieth day after Moloaa received the notice to exercise the option to lease, or earlier 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if Moloaa signed the Proposed Lease sooner than thirty days 
after it received Green Energy's notice. Because the effective 
date was set without further negotiation, the missing date did 
not render the Proposed Lease unenforceable. See generally, In
re Sing Chong Co., 1 Haw. App. 236, 239-40, 617 P.2d 578, 581 (1980). 
(b)  Biomass prices. The Proposed Lease did not 
contain Biomass prices to be applied to bone dry tons harvested to calculate Percentage Rent. It is ambiguous whether that 
meant no percentage rent was to be paid, or the Biomass prices 
were subject to negotiation. Parol evidence is admissible to 
resolve that ambiguity. See generally, Hawaiian Ass'n of
Seventh-Day Adventists v. Wong, 130 
Hawai‘i 36, 45-46, 305 P.3d 
452, 461-62 (2013). Moloaa's sole owner and manager, Jeffrey 
Lindner (Lindner), testified he did not negotiate for Percentage 
Rent and did not expect to be paid Percentage Rent: 
•
 "[t]here was absolutely no discussion ever about 
percentage rents"; 
• "I never had any expectation of percentage rent. We never talked about it. I never included it in my negotiation"; 
• "I never expected any percentage rent, but yes, it is blank. In my mind, you know, Green Energy Team gets off not having to pay me. That's all it is"; 
• "That's why I never negotiated anything. I expected nothing, and, . . . if other people didn't fill it 
in . . . I would think the interpretation would be 
4   
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it would be -- it would be zero. If there's 
nothing in there, it would be zero and . . . I 
didn't expect it and I don't expect it now"; and 
• the percentage rent section was "superfluous". 
Exhibit J-6 is consistent with Lindner's testimony. 
It shows the Percentage Rent provision was a remnant from a 
lease Green Energy's attorney had prepared for Green Energy and 
Hawaiian Mahogany Inc., and was used as a form for the Proposed 
Lease. It also shows Lindner negotiated only the amounts he 
wanted Moloaa to be paid for the option and for Annual Base 
Rent. 
Thus, the blanks in the Percentage Rent provision do 
not support a finding or conclusion that further negotiation 
over the essential terms of the Proposed Lease was required, or that the Proposed Lease was unenforceable once Green Energy gave 
timely notice it was exercising its option to lease. 
(2) Next, Moloaa argues the circuit court erred in 
concluding "the parties did not intend to be bound by the 
Proposed Lease attached to the" Option Agreement. (Formatting 
altered.) 
The parties' subjective intent is irrelevant because 
the Option Agreement contained an integration provision stating it "shall not be amended, modified or discharged, nor may any of 
its terms be waived, except by an instrument in writing signed 
by the Parties." It clearly stated the attached Proposed Lease 
5   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will take effect "on or before the date that is (30) days after 
[Moloaa]'s receipt of the Exercise Notice, and the Parties shall 
thereupon execute the Lease[.]" The Option Agreement did not 
allow modification of the Proposed Lease (which also contained 
an integration provision). Whatever the parties' subjective 
intent may have been before the Option Agreement was executed, 
once it was executed the parties were bound by its unambiguous 
terms. Parol evidence of the parties' subjective intent is not admissible to contradict these unambiguous terms. See, e.g., 
Trs. of Est. of Bishop v. Au
, 141 Hawai‘i 248, 407 P.3d 1284, 
CAAP-15-0000466, 2017 WL 6614566, at *2 (App. Dec. 22, 2017) (SDO) (noting the integration clause in a settlement agreement precluded admissibility of parol evidence to contradict its 
express terms). 
We hold the circuit court erred in finding and 
concluding the Proposed Lease lacked sufficiently definite terms 
and Moloaa and Green Energy did not intend to be bound by the 
Proposed Lease should the option to lease be invoked. 
We need 
not address Moloaa's other arguments. We do not decide whether 
Exhibit J-21 (which the circuit court referred to as the 
"Purported Lease") is valid or binding, or any other legal issue 
not specifically addressed in this summary disposition order. 
The circuit court erred in granting Green Energy's 
HRCP Rule 52(c) motion for judgment on partial findings. We 
6   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore vacate the March 5, 2019 "Final Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Motion for 
Directed Verdict Against Plaintiff After Jury-Waived Trial," the 
May 30, 2019 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part 
Defendant Green Energy Team LLC's Motion for Award of Attorneys' 
Fees and Costs re Granting of Defendant's Motion for Directed 
Verdict Against Plaintiff After Jury-Waived Trial on January 25, 
2019, Filed March 19, 2019," and the June 24, 2019 "Amended Final Judgment in Favor of Defendant Green Energy Team LLC and 
Against Plaintiff Moloaa Farms LLC," and remand for resumption 
of trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, June 21, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
 Presiding Judge 
George W. Van Buren,  
John B. Shimizu, /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Robert H. Shimizu, Associate Judge 
(Van Buren & Shimizu),  
for Plaintiff-Appellant. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
 Associate Judge 
William M. Harstad, 
Lindsay N. McAneeley, 
Derek B. Simon, (Carlsmith Ball), for Defendant-Appellee. 
7 