NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000022
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MICHELE A. QUITEVIS, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
LARRY L.J. QUITEVIS, Defendant-Appellee, v.
STATE OF HAWAI' I, CHILD SUPPORT
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, Intervenor
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 93-215)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Michele A. Quitevis (Mother)appeals
 
from the Family Court of the Third Circuit's (Family Court's)
 
1
December 17, 2010 Final Judgment  and challenges three Family
2
Court orders,  which resolved Mother's and Defendant-Appellee
Larry L.J. Quitevis's (Father) motions for post-decree relief
 
from a divorce decree that had terminated Mother and Father's
 
marriage.
 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 
On July 27, 1993, Mother filed a Complaint for Divorce.
 
Mother and Father had two children, Robert M.L.M.C.J. Quitevis
 (
Robert) and Malia J.K.K. Quitevis (Malia), both of whom are now
 
1
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided.
 
2
 The Family Court's post-decree orders include: (1) a June 2, 2010
Order After Hearing; (2) an August 11, 2010 Order After Hearing; and (3) an
October 29, 2010 Order After Hearing.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adults. On October 29, 1993, the Family Court entered a decree
 
of divorce (Divorce Decree), which awarded custody of the
 
parties' then-minor children to Mother, with the right of
 
reasonable visitation to Father, and disposed of the parties'
 property and debts. The Divorce Decree further provided, in
 relevant part:
 
4. In consideration of labor and expenses incurred Michele
A. Quitevis agrees to give the sum of $30,000.00 to Larry
L.J. Quitevis. Larry L.J. Quitevis agrees to deposit
$15,000.00 of this money in a Trust account for Malia and
Robert Quitevis. Trustee for this account to be an agreed
upon third party. This money will be paid to Larry L.J.
Quiteves [sic] 10 years after the death of Lucille
Braun.[ 
3
]
On February 8, 2010, Father filed a Motion and
 
Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief, requesting that the Family
 
Court, inter alia, compel Mother to "immediately remit to
 [Father] the sum of $30,000.00 pursuant to Divorce Decree."
 Attached to Father's motion as "Exhibit B" was a certified
 "Verification of Death", evidencing the death of Lucille Braun,
 and noting a date of death of February 3, 1996.
 
On March 31, 2010, Mother filed "Motion to Dismiss
 
[Father's] Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief," (Motion
 
to Dismiss), and a "Cross-Motion for Judgment for Unpaid Child
 
Support and for Sanctions" (Cross-Motion). Mother moved to
 
dismiss Father's motion on the ground that "it is barred by the
 
Hawaii statute of limitations of actions on domestic judgments
 and decrees, HRS § 657-5."
 
On April 27, 2010, the Family Court held a hearing on
 
Father's motion for post-decree relief and Mother's Motion to
 Dismiss and Cross-Motion, after which the Family Court issued its
 June 2, 2010 Order After Hearing denying Mother's Motion to
 Dismiss and continuing the hearing on Father's motion for post-
decree relief and Mother's Cross-Motion. After further briefing 
3
 Lucille Braun was Michele A. Quitevis' mother.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the parties, the Family Court held a second hearing on June
 
29, 2010 at which a representative from CSEA was present to
 clarify that Father owed $7,601.78 in child support arrears to
 the State, and owed $6,094.89 in unpaid child support to Mother.
 Father acknowledged that the child support obligation owed to
 Mother could be offset against the amount Mother owed to him.
 Father also indicated that he would be willing to stipulate to
 $15,000 of the money Mother owed to him to be distributed
 directly from Mother to Robert and Malia. The Family Court noted
 that there was no dispute about the fact that, pursuant to the
 terms of the Divorce Decree, Father was to receive $15,000 for
 his benefit, and an additional $15,000 to be placed in trust for
 Robert and Malia. Because Robert and Malia had reached the age
 of majority, the Family Court found that their interests would be
 "equally protected by simply . . . issuing judgments . . . on
 their behalf," and "what they choose to do with those judgments
 . . . is, uh, for them to determine." The Family Court then
 orally granted Father's motion for post-decree relief, granting
 relief in Father's favor for "$15,000 less the offset that is . .
 . owed to [Mother] for child support arrearages," and ordering
 that a judgment would be entered in favor of Robert and Malia, as
 against Mother, in the amount of $7,500 each. The Family Court's
 Order After Hearing, filed on August 11, 2010, entered judgment,
 in relevant part, as follows:
 
a. Judgement shall enter in favor of [Father] against
[Mother] in the amount of $8,905.11. 
b. Judgment shall enter in favor of [Malia] against[Mother] in the amount of $7,500.00. 
c. Judgment shall enter in favor of [Robert] against[Mother] in the amount of $7,500.00. 
On July 20, 2010, Mother filed a "Motion to Designate
 
Malia Quitevis and Robert Quitevis as Third Party Defendants,"
 
(Motion to Designate), requesting that the Family Court designate
 
the parties' adult children as third party defendants pursuant to
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4
Hawai'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 14.  A hearing was held 
on August 30, 2010. At the hearing, Robert and Malia confirmed 
that they were aware of the judgment issued in their favor and Mother's intent to seek an appeal of the Family Court's authority to issue that order. Both Robert and Malia further indicated that they had no position with regard to Mother's Motion to Designate. Accordingly, the Family Court held that although it "seems clear enough . . . that both . . . Robert and . . . Malia Quitevis, certainly would be considered . . . third-party beneficiaries of the agreement that their parents reached in . . . their divorce . . . settlement," the Family Court did not consider them "necessary parties." The Family Court recognized that it was the intent of the parties that a portion of the funds to be placed in trust was for the benefit of the children, both of which, "by the time this matter has come directly to the court's attention," have reached the age of majority, and accordingly, as "the best way of ensuring that that benefit . . . was realized," the Family Court issued judgments in their favor. The Family Court further noted that Father "has an interest which is . . . congruent with theirs with regard to . . . the legal argument that will be raised on appeal," and while neither of the 
4
 HFCR Rule 14(a) provides:
 
(a) When parties may bring in third-party. A party to the
action may cause a third-party to be brought in only in the
event that property rights of such third-party may be
affected or such third-party has or may have an interest in
the custody or visitation of a minor child of a party to the
action. The party seeking to bring in a third-party
defendant shall file a motion for leave to file a
 third-party complaint together with an affidavit and notice
in accordance with Rule 7(b)(1). The person served with the
summons and third-party complaint, hereinafter called the
third-party defendant, shall make any defenses to the
third-party complaint as provided in Rule 12. The
 third-party defendant may also assert any claim against the
plaintiff or defendant arising out of the transaction or
occurrence that is the subject matter of the complaint.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adult children appeared in court as a movant in his or her own
 
right, both adult children would be free to seek involvement in
 the appeal upon an appropriate motion in the appellate court. On
 October 29, 2010, the Family Court issued its Order After Hearing
 denying Mother's Motion to Designate.
 
On December 17, 2010, the Family Court filed its Final
 
Judgment. On January 13, 2011, Mother timely filed a notice of
 appeal.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
Mother raises four points of error on appeal, arguing
 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) denying Mother's Motion to
 Dismiss; (2) entering orders against Mother in favor of Robert
 and Malia, "who were not noticed, made no appearance, and were
 not seeking judgments"; (3) denying Mother's Motion to Designate
 Robert and Malia as Third Party Defendants; and (4) entering
 Final Judgment, filed December 17, 2010, based upon the June 2,
 2010, August 11, 2010, and October 29, 2010 orders.
 III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
In construing the terms of a divorce decree, the
determinative factor is the intent of the court as gathered
from the decree and other evidence. A judgment or decree
like any other written instrument is to be construed
reasonably and as a whole, and effect must be given not only
to that which is expressed, but also to that which is
unavoidably and necessarily implied in the judgment or
decree.
 
Anderson v. Anderson, 59 Haw. 575, 584-85, 585 P.2d 938, 944 
(1978) (citations omitted).
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in
making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
[an appellate court] will not disturb the family court's
decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)). "Furthermore, the burden of establishing abuse of 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion is on appellant, and a strong showing is required to 
establish it." Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai' i 289, 294-95, 75 P.3d 
1180, 1185-86 (2003) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo. The court must accept plaintiff's
allegations as true and view them in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff; dismissal is proper only if it
appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of
facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him
or her to relief. However, . . . a motion seeking dismissal
of a complaint is transformed into a Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56 motion for summary judgment when
the circuit court considers matters outside the pleadings. 
Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Motion to Dismiss
 Mother contends that Father's claim to the $30,000
 
provided for under the terms of the Divorce Decree is barred by
 the statute of limitations under HRS § 657-5 (Supp. 2012), which
 provides, in relevant part: 
Unless an extension is granted, every judgment and decree of
any court of the State shall be presumed to be paid and
discharged at the expiration of ten years after the judgment
or decree was rendered. No action shall be commenced after
 the expiration of ten years from the date a judgment or
decree was rendered or extended. No extension of a judgment
or decree shall be granted unless the extension is sought
within ten years of the date the original judgment or decree
was rendered.
 
Mother maintains that under the terms of the Divorce
 
Decree, filed October 29, 1993, her obligation to pay $30,000 to
 
Father was contingent upon the death of her mother, Lucille
 Braun, and that contingency occurred on February 3, 1996. Mother
 argues, "an extension of the Decree must have been sought within
 ten years of the date of the original decree," and therefore,
 upon the death of Lucille Braun, Father "had the duty to seek an
 extension of the Divorce Decree to preserve his claim beyond ten
 years from the date of the original Decree." 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 657-5 is a statute of limitations "that applies
 
to actions seeking enforcement of domestic judgments and
 
decrees." Brooks v. Minn, 73 Haw. 566, 575, 836 P.2d 1081, 1086
 
(1992). The central issue in this case is when the statute of
 limitations period began. 
Father contends that, pursuant to Segelken v. Hawaiian
 
Trust Co., 20 Haw. 225 (1910), the limitation period is tolled
 until any and all conditions precedent to the enforcement of the
 judgment have occurred. Father claims that his right to maintain
 any suit to enforce this provision of the Divorce Decree did not
 arise at the time the decree was entered, but only upon the
 occurrence of a condition precedent, i.e., the death of Lucille
 Braun plus ten years.
 
In Segelken, the Supreme Court of the Territory of 
Hawai'i reviewed whether the complainant's claim against the 
respondent's trust was barred by the statute of limitations. 20 Haw. at 226. Respondent was the owner of a one-eighth interest in a parcel of land, subject to the dower right of Mrs. Anne Long in the entire land. Id. Respondent mortgaged her interest to 
complainant. Id. Thereafter, a partition suit was brought by 
other parties interested in the land, and an order was entered directing that the land be sold and the proceeds divided among the parties according to their respective interests. Id. As a 
result, a decree was entered on August 16, 1882, directing, inter alia, that one third of the proceeds of the sale be invested by a trustee and the income paid to Mrs. Anne Long as dower during her life, and upon her death, the proceeds would be distributed amongst the parties to the partition suit. Id. at 226-27. 
Respondent's share of the trust proceeds would be charged, in the amount of $1,141.83 plus interest, and paid to complainant as the balance due to him on the mortgage. Id. at 227. Mrs. Anne Long 
died June 17, 1908, and at that time, the sum of $1,141.83 from respondent's share was due to complainant. Id. Complainant 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sought an accounting and "general relief"; however, respondent
 
argued that complainant's claim was barred by the applicable
 statute of limitations, which required that a claim be brought
 within ten years from the entry of the decree.
5 Id. The
 
respondent also argued that pursuant to section 1975 of the
 Revised Laws of Hawai' i, the decree must be presumed to have been 
satisfied, as more than twenty years have elapsed since it was
 entered. Id. The Segelken court found that pursuant to the
 
decree, "which alone declares and fixes the rights and
 obligations of the respective parties," the claim against the
 trustee "was not enforceable during the life of Mrs. Long, but
 only after her death." Id. at 227-28. Further, the court
 
observed,
 
The duties of the trustee and the rights of the complainant,
as between themselves, were, as we observe, fixed and
determined by the decree. The payment of the claim out of
the trust fund was made to depend upon the right of the
complainant to make demand therefor and upon the duty of the
trustee to comply with such demand. This right on the part
of the complainant as well as the duty on the part of the
trustee were brought into existence only by the happening of
the event expressly provided for by the decree, namely, the
death of Mrs. Long.
 
. . . The complainant is not proceeding upon the decree in
the sense of seeking to have it satisfied. He is proceeding
against the trustee seeking to have him required by order of
court to perform his duties in the premises as prescribed by
the decree. However, be that as it may, complainant's claim,
so far as the trustee is concerned, was not enforceable at
the time the decree was entered, nor at any time thereafter
prior to the death of Mrs. Long. His right to demand payment
and the corresponding duty of the trustee to comply therewith
did not accrue until the death of Mrs. Long on June 17, 1908,
the happening of which event, as provided for in the decree
itself, was a condition precedent to his right to maintain
any suit on the claim. Neither had the trustee any right or
authority to pay the complainant's claim before it accrued,
i.e., before the death of Mrs. Long.
 
5
 See note 6, infra. Notwithstanding the Segelken Court's
 
application of a statute which differed from the statute currently in force,
the legal underpinnings remain the same - when payment of a claim is made
dependent upon the performance of any condition precedent, a cause of action
does not accrue, or the statutory limitation period being to run, until the
performance of such condition. Segelken remains good law.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Id. at 228 (emphasis added). In concluding that the
 
complainant's claim against the trustee was not barred by lapse
 of time, the court further noted that
 
when the payment of a claim or the liability of a party is
made dependent upon the performance of any condition
precedent or the happening of any contingency, a right of
action does not accrue, or the statute begin to run, until
the performance of such condition or the happening of such
contingency.
 
Id. at 229 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted;
 
emphasis added).
 
In the instant case, as in Segelken, Father was not
 
seeking to have the divorce judgment satisfied, but to compel
 Mother to perform her duties as prescribed by the Divorce Decree. 
Mother's duty to pay Father the sum of $30,000 did not arise
 until "10 years after the death of Lucille Braun." Because the
 death of Lucille Braun occurred on February 3, 1996, Father's
 right of action to enforce payment arose on February 3, 2006. 
Father filed his Motion for Post-Decree Relief requesting an
 order compelling Mother to comply with the terms of the Divorce
 Decree on February 8, 2010. Accordingly, Father was within the
 period prescribed by HRS § 657-5.
 
Mother contends that Segelken does not apply because it
 
interpreted and applied a statute that does not "read as it does
 today." Mother reasons that the current statute imposes an
 affirmative duty on Father to extend the life of the Divorce
 Decree within the initial ten-year limitation period in order to
 extend the life of the decree and thereby avoid the statutory
 presumption that the decree has been paid, discharged, and
 extinguished. Because Father failed to "monitor both the
 contingent event and the time by which a motion to extend the
 judgment for an additional ten years must be filed," Mother
 contends her obligation should be "deemed satisfied, discharged,
 and extinguished as a matter of law." In support of her
 contention, Mother relies on Estate of Roxas, which she alleges, 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provides that the statutory restriction on the life of judgments
 
or decrees, under HRS § 657-5, "is absolute."6
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court in Estate of Roxas v. Marcos, 
121 Hawai' i 59, 214 P.3d 598 (2009), noted that the term 
"judgment," as used throughout HRS § 657-5, "must refer to a
 valid and enforceable judgment." Id. at 67, 214 P.3d at 606. 
Using extrinsic aids to assist in the interpretation of "original
 judgment" as it is used in HRS § 657-5, the Roxas Court noted:
 
Other statutes of limitations in HRS Chapter 657 begin when
the "cause of action accrued." See HRS § 657–1(1) (1993)
(relating to, among other things, actions to recover debt"founded upon any contract, obligation, or liability"); HRS§ 657–4 (1993) (relating to libel or slander); HRS § 657–6(1993) (relating to causes arising in foreignjurisdictions); HRS § 657–7 (1993) (relating to recoveringfor damage to persons or property); see also Kaho' ohanohano 
v. Dep't of Human Servs., 117 Hawai' i 262, 315, 178 P.3d 538,
591 (2008) ("In a negligence action, the claim for reliefdoes not accrue until plaintiff knew or should have known ofdefendant's negligence."). Black's Law Dictionary 22 (8thed.2004) defines "accrue" as "[t]o come into existence as anenforceable claim or right." In construing "original
judgment" of HRS § 657–5, in pari materia within theframework of the entire statutory scheme governinglimitations of actions, the statute of limitations forextending a judgment begins to run when the cause of action— the judgment that creates the enforceable claim or right —"come[s] into existence as an enforceable claim or right." 
6
 Mother contends that in 1992, the Hawai' i State Legislature amended
HRS § 657-5 by inserting the extension provisions at issue, prohibiting an
extension of a judgment or decree where (1) extension was not sought within tenyears of the date the original judgment was rendered, (2) it is beyond twentyyears from the date of the original judgment or decree, and (3) there was nonotice and the filing of a motion to extend the life of the judgment or decree.Mother contends that the 1992 Amendment "can be reasonably construed to be in theinterest of promoting finality of judgments or decrees, certainty of parties'rights and expectations, and to establish a clear public record of the term ofthe continuing jurisdiction of the court to enforce the original judgment ordecree." Such a reading of the statute would produce an absurd result in thiscase. The Divorce Decree, filed on October 29, 1993, provides that payment isnot due until "10 years after the death of Lucille Braun." If this Court were to accept Mother's argument, the limitations period provided under HRS § 657-5 wouldexpire on October 29, 2003. Because the sum is not payable until "10 years afterthe death of Lucille Braun," Father would be unable to compel payment untilFebruary 3, 2006; however, his right to compel payment would have expired onOctober 29, 2003. Therefore, under Mother's construction, that provision of theDivorce Decree would be rendered a nullity. Because "the legislature is presumednot to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, ifpossible, inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality," Flores v. RawlingsCo., LLC, 117 Hawai' i 153, 164, 177 P.3d 341, 352 (2008) (citation omitted), we
reject Mother's construction. Instead, the limitations period does not begin torun until a party's claim or right becomes enforceable. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
All judgments, even those that are modified or amended,
become "enforceable claim[s] or right[s]" only when the
judgments creating those rights are entered. It is only at
the time that the judgment is rendered when the parties are
(1) aware of their rights and responsibilities created by
the judgment and (2) able to enforce these rights.
Accordingly, the statute of limitations for extending a
judgment begins to run at the creation of the judgment that
creates the rights and responsibilities that the party is
seeking to extend.
 
Id. at 69, 214 P.3d at 608. Accordingly, the Roxas Court held
 
that "original judgment" of HRS § 657-5 "pertains to the judgment
 that creates the rights and responsibilities that the moving
 party is seeking to enforce and extend." Id. at 71, 214 P.3d at
 
610. Although the Roxas Court was addressing an issue different 
from that presented in the instant case, i.e., which of a series of orders creating the same rights that a party is seeking to extend is the "original judgment" under HRS § 657-5, the legal underpinnings remain the same: "the statute of limitations for extending a judgment begins to run when the cause of action - the judgment that creates the enforceable claim or right - 'comes into existence as an enforceable claim or right.'" Roxas, 121 
Hawai'i at 69, 214 P.3d at 608 (brackets omitted); see also Mun 
Seek Pai v. First Hawaiian Bank, 57 Haw. 429, 435, 558 P.2d 479, 483 (1977) ("[The Hawai' i Supreme Court] has further held that if 
a promise to pay is conditional, the cause of action on the promise does not accrue until the condition is performed."). 
In the instant case, the Divorce Decree provided that
 
Mother is to pay Father the sum of $30,000 10 years after the
 death of Lucille Braun. Accordingly, Father's claim to the
 $30,000 did not accrue until February 3, 2006. Father's motion
 was timely filed. Therefore, the Family Court did not err in
 denying Mother's Motion to Dismiss. 
B. Judgments in Favor of Robert and Malia
 Mother argues that Father's motion for post-decree
 
relief inappropriately sought judgment against Mother in the
 amount of $30,000, because Robert and Malia, who had, at the time
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Father filed his motion, reached the age of majority, "did not at
 
any time ask for judgments to be entered in their favor".
 
Mother fails to cite any legal authority for her 
contention that the Family Court clearly erred in "sua sponte" entering judgments in favor of Robert and Malia under the circumstances of this case. HRS § 571-8.5(6) (2006) specifically grants the family courts the power to, inter alia, "[e]nforce decrees and judgments[.]" Indeed, HRS § 571–8.5 is merely a legislative restatement of the court's inherent powers, In re Doe, 96 Hawai' i 73, 80, 26 P.3d 562, 569 (2001) (citation 
omitted), which include the power to enforce its own decrees. See Bonner v. Bonner, 6 Haw. App. 610, 613, 735 P.2d 508, 510 (1987) (citations omitted). 
In the present case, the Divorce Decree provided that
 
Mother agreed to pay father $30,000, payable "10 years after the
 death of Lucille Braun", with half of that sum, or $15,000, to be
 held "in a Trust account for Malia and Robert Quitevis." At the
 
June 29, 2010 hearing, Father stipulated that "the monies can be
 
distributed directly to the children . . . as long as we have
 confirmation this is being done." As the Family Court noted, a
 judgment in favor of Robert and Malia would ensure that their
 interests were protected. It appears that the Family Court
 exercised its discretion in shaping the judgment in a manner
 calculated to eliminate an unnecessary step, by directing the
 judgment debt to the now-adult children who were indisputably the
 intended beneficiaries of the original Divorce Decree term. 
Mother fails to identify prejudice to her and/or any authority
 supporting her assertion that this was an improper exercise of
 the court's discretion and we find none. The Family Court did
 not err in granting Father's requested post-decree relief to
 enforce the terms of the October 29, 1993 Divorce Decree.
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. Motion to Designate Third Party Defendants
 
Mother argues on appeal that the Family Court erred as
 
a matter of law in denying her Motion to Designate Robert and
 
Malia as third party defendants because "they have a pecuniary
 interest in [Mother's] appeal and are necessary parties to the
 action to be afforded an opportunity to respond to [Mother's]
 appeal."
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 19, which 
governs bringing a non-party into a legal action, provides that a person shall be joined as a party in the action if 
(1) in the person's absence complete relief cannot be
accorded among those already parties, or (2) the person
claims an interest relating to the subject of the action and
is so situated that the disposition of the action in the
person's absence may (A) as a practical matter impair or
impede the person's ability to protect that interest or (B)
leave any of the persons already parties subject to a
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest.
If the person has not been so joined, the court shall order
that the person be made a party.
 
HRCP Rule 19 is divided into two sections, and as the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court explained in UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, the analysis 
typically follows two steps. 109 Hawai' i 137, 142, 123 P.3d 1232, 
1237 (2005) (citing Kescoli v. Babbitt, 101 F.3d 1304, 1309 (9th Cir. 1996) (applying HRCP Rule 19's federal counterpart, Federal 
7
)).  First, "the court must Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 19 determine whether an absent party should be joined if feasible according to the factors listed in subsection (a)." Marvin v. 
Pflueger, 127 Hawai
'i 490, 499, 280 P.3d 88, 97 (2012). Second, 
"if the party meets the requirements under subsection (a) but it is not feasible to join the party to the lawsuit, the court must proceed to Rule 19(b) to determine whether it may decide the case without the nonparty." Id. (citations omitted). If the court 
7
 Because HRCP Rule 19 is, in all relevant aspects, substantively
identical to the federal rules, we may look to federal cases interpreting their
rules for persuasive guidance. See Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 20
n.15, 143 P.3d 1205, 1222 n.15 (2006) (citations omitted). 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
must dismiss the lawsuit rather than moving forward without the
 
absent party, "the nonparty is labeled 'indispensable.'" Id.
 (citation omitted).
 
Here, the Family Court found that because Robert and
 
Malia were no longer minors, and in recognition of the fact that
 it was the intent of the parties that their children were to
 benefit, the best way of ensuring that benefit was realized would
 be to issue judgments in their children's favor. In doing so,
 the Family Court found that while Robert and Malia may have an
 interest which would warrant their being named as parties, "I
 don't consider them necessary parties." It appears that Robert
 and Malia were not considered necessary parties because. inter
 alia: (1) the parties' children were no longer minors; (2) Father
 had an interest which was "congruent with theirs" with regard to
 the legal argument that would be raised on appeal; (3) both
 Robert and Malia had indicated that they were aware of the
 situation and had no position on Mother's Motion to Designate;
 and (4) notwithstanding their actual knowledge of the matter,
 neither Robert and Malia had "come to the court as a movant in
 his or her own right".
 
Although the Family Court did not cite HRCP Rule 19(a),
 
we conclude that the Family Court correctly determined, in
 effect, that Malia and Robert were not indispensable parties to
 be joined pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(a). First, it appears that
 "complete relief" could be accorded to Mother and Father without
 their adult children being joined as a party. The Family Court
 fully adjudicated the issues raised by Father's motion for post-
decree relief, i.e., an order compelling Mother to comply with
 the Divorce Decree terms, and Mother's Cross-Motion for unpaid
 child support. The non-participation of Robert and Malia in
 those proceedings did not prevent the Family Court from affording
 the parties complete relief. Second, although Robert and Malia
 arguably "claim an interest relating to the subject of the 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action," it cannot be said that a disposition of the action in
 
their absence may either impair or impede their ability to
 protect that interest. Both Robert and Malia were awarded a
 judgment in their favor, which they may enforce upon their own
 accord. Moreover, both adult children indicated at the August
 30, 2010 hearing that they (1) were aware of the judgment in
 their favor, (2) were aware of Mother's intent to appeal the
 Family Court's jurisdiction to issue an award in their favor, and
 (3) had no position on being designated as a party in the action. 
Third, it does not appear that the Family Court's refusal to join
 Robert and Malia poses any risk to Mother of incurring double,
 multiple, or inconsistent obligations by reason of their claimed
 interest, nor does Mother allege this to be the case. 
Accordingly, Mother fails to satisfy the requirements of HRCP
 Rule 19, and therefore, she is unable to demonstrate that Robert
 and Malia are indispensable parties to the post-decree
 proceeding.
 
D. Final Judgment
 Lastly, Mother argues on appeal that the "entry of the
 
Final Judgment on December 17, 2010 in reliance [upon the Family
 Court's earlier orders] was also error as a matter of law." Based
 on the analysis above, the Family Court did not err in entering
 its December 17, 2010 Final Judgment based upon its earlier
 orders.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's December 17, 2010
 
Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 27, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Michael S. Zola 
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Gerald W. Scatena
 for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
16
 