NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000044 29-AUG-2024 08:33 AM Dkt. 185 SO 
CAAP-20-0000044 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
SUSAN H. KITSU, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, STATE OF HAWAII #,
Defendant-Appellee,
and 
JOHN AND MARY DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, AND OTHER DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NOS. 15-1-1824-09 and 16-1-1076-06) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, McCullen, J.; and
Circuit Judge Tonaki, in place of Hiraoka,
Wadsworth, Nakasone, and Guidry, JJ., all recused) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Susan H. Kitsu (Kitsu) appeals from 
the January 15, 2020 Final Judgment (Judgment) entered in favor 
of Defendant-Appellee Department of Education, State of Hawai#i 
(DOE), in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Kitsu also challenges the Circuit Court's July 30, 2019 
Findings of Fact [(FOFs)], Conclusions of Law [(COLs)], and Order (FOFs, COLs, and Order). 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kitsu raises five points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) not entering default or an 
adequate remedy against DOE for its bad faith destruction of documents, devices, and electronically-stored information (ESI) 
that resulted in actual and substantial prejudice to Kitsu; (2) 
disregarding its October 29, 2018 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Kitsu's] Motion for Entry of Default (Order 
Imposing Discovery Sanctions); (3) entering the FOFs, COLs, and Order and the Judgment; (4) failing to apply the correct 
statement of law in a "mixed-motive" employment termination case; and (5) concluding that Kitsu did not place DOE or the court on notice that a mixed motive standard applied in this action. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Kitsu's points of error as follows: 
(1) Kitsu argues that DOE's destruction of evidence 
was deliberate and in bad faith, and resulted in Kitsu suffering actual prejudice. Kitsu contends that the Circuit Court therefore erred in not entering default against DOE. 
The Circuit Court agreed with Kitsu that DOE was "on 
notice" of, inter alia, the investigation related to Kitsu and that DOE was culpable in destroying the requested documents (including emails); the court stated as much in its detailed findings in the Order Imposing Discovery Sanctions. The Circuit Court thoroughly examined and recognized the resulting prejudice to Kitsu in the context of the burdens of proof in this 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
litigation. Yet, the Circuit Court also considered that it found 
carelessness, rather than nefarious intent, which was nevertheless inexcusable and sufficient to constitute bad faith to justify imposition of discovery sanctions. The Circuit Court balanced these considerations in its review of Kitsu's request for sanctions. 
The Circuit Court examined and considered "[o]ne of the 
most severe forms of discovery sanctions," i.e., the entry of default, and determined that it was too harsh a sanction in light of the nature and circumstances of DOE's actions. The Circuit Court fashioned a remedy that it determined was "a fair sanction," weighing the equities of the circumstances of the 
case. Upon review, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not 
abuse its discretion in imposing an evidentiary presumption (as detailed in the Order Imposing Discovery Sanctions), instead of entering default against DOE. See, e.g., Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawai# i 68, 71, 75-78, 229 P.3d 1133, 1136, 1140-43 
(2010) (sanctions are reviewed for abuse of discretion). 
(2) Kitsu argues that the Circuit Court failed to 
follow its own remedial order because it did not, in its FOFs, COLs, and Order, indicate that the presumptions were considered, rebutted, or simply ignored. 
The remedy imposed by the Circuit 
Court in the Order Imposing Discovery Sanctions was to 
impose a presumption that imposes upon [DOE] the burden to
produce evidence in accordance with Rule 303 of the HawaiiRules of Evidence on any contested material issue of fact.If [Kitsu] introduces evidence of a fact or facts that giverise to an inference that a presumed fact also exists, then[DOE] has the burden to produce admissible evidence tosupport the nonexistence of the presumed fact. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If [DOE] fail[s] to produce such evidence, then the
trier of fact may infer that the presumed fact does exist.
A bald testimonial denial of the existence of the presumedfact, without more indicia of its veracity, shall not, inand of itself, be sufficient to discharge [DOE's] duty toproduce evidence. 
If [DOE] does produce  evidence that would support a
finding that the presumed fact does not exist, then there isno presumption or inference that applies to the contestedmaterial fact and the trier of fact must make a determination of the existence or nonexistence of that fact without regard to any presumption or inference. 
If [Kitsu] intends to avail herself of this
presumption, she shall give [DOE] and the court advance,
written notice  of: (1) the fact or facts that give rise to
an inference that a presumed fact exists, and (2) specifythe presumed fact or facts that is or are to be inferred toexist. Said advance notice may be given any time before[Kitsu] seeks to introduce the fact or facts that give rise
to the presumed fact. [Kitsu] need not identify the witness
or exhibit through which the fact or facts will beintroduced into evidence. 
Kitsu's argument makes the unsupported assertion that 
the Circuit Court did not follow its own order simply because the 
court did not refer to presumed facts as such in the FOFs, COLs, and Order. First, when pointing to where in the record she objected to this alleged error, Kitsu points to her March 13, 2019 objections (Objections) to the FOFs, COLs, and Order (and 
her own form of order; we note that Kitsu pointed to no presumed 
facts as such in her own proposed form of order). Kitsu does not provide any page number reference within the 96-page Objections document, and we are unable to identify any objection therein based on the failure to refer specifically to presumed facts as such in the FOFs, COLs, and Order. Second, the FOFs, COLs, and Order contain 206 FOFs, not including subparts, and Kitsu fails to specifically point to which of them are impacted by this alleged error. Finally, it is well-established in 
Hawai#i law 
that a jury, as trier-of-fact, is presumed to follow a court's instructions. See, e.g., State v. Feliciano, 149 
Hawai#i 365, 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
377, 489 P.3d 1277, 1289 (2021). This principle applies here to 
support the presumption that the Circuit Court followed its own order; Kitsu cites no authority for a contrary proposition of law. 
In sum, we conclude that this argument is waived, and 
even if it were not waived, it is without merit. 
(3) Kitsu argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
entered the FOFs, COLs, and Order and the Judgment, specifically that the court erred by modifying its previous (unsigned, unfiled) Court's Notes Re: Iniclination [sic] Kitsu vs. Dept of Education 11-27-18 @ 2:00 p.m. (Inclination).  
On December 3, 2018, Kitsu filed a motion "in 
opposition" to the Inclination, which primarily raised the issue of a defendant's burden of proof in a mixed-motive case of whistleblower liability under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
Chapter 378 and argued that DOE had not met its burden of proof. 
On January 25, 2019, after a hearing, the Circuit Court entered an order denying Kitsu's motion, stating, inter alia, Kitsu failed to give any notice that she was raising a mixed-motive claim (Order re Inclination), but even if she had, the evidence 
at trial did not support the claim. The court then explained the 
purpose for the Inclination and its instructions for the preparation of the FOFs, COLs, and Order. Kitsu's highly selective quotation does not fairly convey the Circuit Court's rulings and instructions as stated in the Order re Inclination, which includes: 
The court disclosed its inclination to the parties
informally to afford the parties an opportunity to explore 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an amicable resolution of this case. However, it appears
that such an amicable end to this case is beyond the reachof the parties. 
Therefore, the court hereby advises all parties that
the court's written notes of its inclinations are herebyformally adopted by the court as an indication of thecourt's decision herein. Therefore, [DOE] is instructed to
prepare detailed, formal written findings of fact and
conclusions of law and order that is patterned after thecourt's inclination.
 The findings and conclusions should follow the
analysis of the traditional McDonnell Douglas framework withregard to the shifting burdens of proof of the parties.However, the court requests that [DOE] prepare a substantialfootnote that sets forth this court's findings andconclusions that apply to a mixed-motive framework as analternative analysis that leads to the same result. The purpose for such a footnote is so that, in the event that anappellate court disagrees with this court's conclusion that
[Kitsu] failed to give notice to the court and the defense
of her intention to prosecute the instant case as a mixed-motive case instead of a pretext case, then the appellatecourt will have the footnote to rely upon to gauge what thiscourt's findings and conclusions would have been if the caseat bar were, in fact, prosecuted as a mixed-motive case. 
Alternatively, as the defense is drafting the findings
and conclusions, if it is stylistically more desirable forthe decision to read as an alternative analysis instead of afootnote, the court will allow the defense to make thatinitial determination, subject to the court's ultimatedecision with regard to the final form of the court'sfindings and conclusions and order. 
As the court indicated, the written notes of the
[Inclination] were neither complete nor comprehensive.  
[DOE] is asked to prepare the complete, correct, andcomprehensive findings and conclusions and order toimplement the court's inclination. There are many findingsand conclusions that were not detailed in the Court's notes of its Inclination.   The [Inclination] was essentially a
summary of the bases for the court's inclination. However,the court shall expect that the findings and conclusions andorder to be prepared by [DOE] shall be complete, correct,and comprehensive . 
[DOE] shall afford [Kitsu] her right to approve the
form of the final findings of fact and conclusions of lawand order in accordance with Rule 23 of the Rules of the 
Circuit Court Rules of the State of Hawaii. [DOE] is
reminded that the findings must be thorough, complete,
correct, and comprehensive as to all findings andconclusions that are necessary and prudent, given thecourt's inclination, to arrive at a judgment in favor of[DOE] and against [Kitsu]. 
(Emphasis added). 
The Order re Inclination is unchallenged on appeal and 
clearly directed that the Inclination was, in effect, a starting 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
place for the drafting of proposed FOFs, COLS, and Order that 
would be "thorough, complete, correct, and comprehensive." Kitsu's argument that the Circuit Court erred because it modified the Inclination is wholly without merit. 
(4) Kitsu argues that she met her prima facie case 
under HRS ยง 378-62 (2015), and that the Circuit Court failed to require that DOE meet its shifted burden of proof. However, Kitsu does not challenge or otherwise point to a single one of the Circuit Court's 206 FOFs as clearly erroneous. "[U]nchallenged factual findings are deemed to be binding on appeal, which is to say no more than that an appellate court cannot, under the auspices of plain error, sua sponte  revisit a 
finding of fact that neither party has challenged on appeal." 
Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawaii #450, 459, 
40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). Nor does Kitsu point to findings establishing that she met her prima facie case, or in the absence of such findings, evidence at trial, including any evidence giving rise to a presumed fact. Although a trial court's conclusions of law are not similarly binding, in this case, Kitsu has simply alleged that they are wrong without pointing to any particular COL or COLs and instead recited legal authorities without reference to the Circuit Court's analysis in this case. Kitsu's argument is wholly unsupported by any citation to the record and rulings in this case and, accordingly, is without merit. 
(5) Kitsu argues that the Circuit Court and DOE were 
"on actual notice" that this case involved a mixed-motive 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
analysis. Kitsu again provides this court no citation to the 
rather voluminous record before this court other than to direct us to a "simple reading of the Complaints and Pleadings", with no docket numbers or dates or the like. Moreover, this argument disregards and fails to address that when Kitsu raised the mixed-motive analysis post trial, in the Objections, the Circuit Court procedurally and substantively addressed the mixed-motive analysis in the unchallenged Order re Inclination and in paragraphs a through aa of footnote 4 at pages 78-81 of the FOFs, COLs, and Order. Kitsu did not challenge any of the findings and/or conclusions set forth in footnote 4. Kitsu's argument provides no cogent basis for appellate relief. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 15, 2020 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii #, August 29, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Leighton K. Lee,(Law Offices of Leighton K. Lee), /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
and Associate Judge
Gary Y. Okuda,(Leu Okuda & Doi), /s/ John M. Tonaki
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Circuit Judge 
James E. Halvorson,Henry S. Kim,Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-Appellee. 
8 