NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000027
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ERIC DOTTERER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-15-01167)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Ginoza, J.,
with Fujise, J., dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Eric Dotterer (Dotterer) appeals
 
from the Judgment entered by the District Court of the Second
 
Circuit (District Court) on December 17, 2015. On appeal,
 Dotterer argues that the District Court erred in denying his
 motion to withdraw his no contest plea.
1/ We agree with
 
Dotterer, vacate the Judgment, and remand for further
 proceedings.
 
I.
 
On September 27, 2015, Dotterer was arrested for 
driving under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII). Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) filed a complaint charging 
1/ The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided over Dotterer's entry of
his no contest plea and ruled on his motion to withdraw his no contest plea. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dotterer with OVUII, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and/or HRS § 291E-61(a)(4) (Supp. 2016).2/
  
On the day after his arrest, Dotterer appeared in District Court
 and entered a plea of no contest to the OVUII charge. 

On November 5, 2015, prior to sentencing, Dotterer
 
orally moved to withdraw his no contest plea because the defense
 "just got discovery yesterday." The District Court continued the
 case to permit Dotterer to file a written motion.
3/ In support
 
of Dotterer's written motion, Dotterer's counsel filed a
 declaration which asserted that discovery materials not available
 to Dotterer when he pleaded no contest revealed, among other
 things, that Dotterer was arrested after colliding with a horse
 in the middle of Hana Highway; that it was dark and raining very
 heavily; that as a result of the collision, Dotterer was
 "seriously injured," complained of pain to his legs and arms, and
 believed he may have swallowed glass from his shattered
 windshield and that glass shards may have contacted his eyes; and
 that field sobriety tests were administered to him while he had a
 bleeding eye, had "glass [s]hards in his insides," and was
 recovering from a traumatic collision with a horse. Defense
 counsel's declaration stated that the discovery materials also
 revealed that an analysis of Dotterer's blood draw showed that 
2/ HRS § 291E-61(a) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty; [or]
 
. . . 
(4)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per one hundred
milliliters or cubic centimeters of blood.
 
3/ The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided over the November 5,
2015, hearing.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his blood alcohol content was 0.070 grams per 100 milliliters of
 
blood -- below the legal limit. Defense counsel noted that
 Dotterer's no contest plea was taken directly following the
 traumatic accident in which he was injured and while he remained
 in custody, and defense counsel asked the District Court "to
 consider the exceptional circumstances in the events leading up
 to [Dotterer] entering the 'no contest' plea, as a basis for
 allowing the withdrawal of his plea."
 
II.
 
A defendant who seeks to withdraw a plea of no contest 
after sentence is imposed must make a showing of "manifest necessity" in order to obtain relief. State v. Nguyen, 81 
Hawai
'i 279, 286, 916 P.2d 689, 697 (1996). However, if (as in 
this case) the defendant moves to withdraw the plea before sentencing, a more liberal standard applies. The court should grant a motion to withdraw a no contest or guilty plea before sentencing if the defendant can show: (1) a fair and just reason for the request; and (2) the prosecution has not relied upon the plea to its substantial prejudice. Id. 
There are two fundamental bases for showing a "fair and 
just reason" for withdrawing a plea: (1) the defendant's plea was not entered knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily; or (2) changed circumstances or new information justify withdrawal of the plea. State v. Gomes, 79 Hawai
'i 32, 37, 897 P.2d 959, 964 
(1995). With respect to the second basis, 
a defendant is entitled to withdraw his or her nolo
 
contendere plea before imposition of sentence where: (1) the
defendant has never expressly admitted guilt; (2) the
defendant advances a claim of new information or changed
circumstances with factual support that, if believed by a
reasonable juror, would exculpate the defendant; (3) there
has been no undue delay in moving to withdraw the plea; and
(4) the prosecution has not otherwise met its burden of
establishing that it relied on the plea to its substantial
prejudice.
 
Id. at 39, 897 P.2d at 966.
 
III.
 
Here, it is undisputed that after pleading no contest,
 
Dotterer and his counsel received new information regarding his 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
blood analysis that showed that Dotterer's blood alcohol content
 
was below the legal limit. This evidence provided a complete
 defense to the HRS § 291E-61(a)(4) portion of the OVUII charge
 and also provided evidence of an exculpatory nature with respect
 to the HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) portion of the charge. This evidence,
 if available, would have been material and significant to
 Dotterer's decision regarding whether to enter a no contest plea. 
The post-plea discovery relating to the injuries sustained by
 Dotterer and his complaints to the arresting officer also
 provided evidence that could have served to support a defense to
 the HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) portion of the charge. The State does
 not contend on appeal that it would have been substantially
 prejudiced if the District Court had permitted Dotterer to
 withdraw his plea. In addition, Dotterer did not expressly admit
 guilt, and he expeditiously moved to withdraw his no contest plea
 after receiving the post-plea discovery material. Under these
 circumstances, we conclude that Dotterer presented fair and just
 reasons for the withdrawal of his no contest plea and that the
 District Court abused its discretion in denying Dotterer's motion
 to withdraw the plea.
 
We disagree with the State's contention that Dotterer
 
waived his claim that the new exculpatory evidence in the post-
plea discovery justified the withdrawal of his plea. Although
 Dotterer's primary argument was that his plea was not entered
 knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily, the pleadings filed in
 connection with Dotterer's motion to withdraw his plea provided
 the District Court with sufficient notice that Dotterer was also
 relying on his receipt of the new discovery information. Indeed,
 the District Court noted that based on its review of Dotterer's
 motion, "one of the main reasons" why Dotterer wanted to withdraw
 his plea was the information received by his counsel after he
 entered his plea.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the District Court's
 
Judgment, and we remand the case for further proceedings
 
consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Charles M. Cryan
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Artemio C. Baxa Special Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
5

 