NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000509
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANGELA DAVIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(Case No. 1DTC-10-092143)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Angela Davis (Davis) appeals from 
the May 31, 2011 adverse judgment entered in favor of the State 
of Hawai 'i (State) on the citation for the traffic infraction of 
leaving the scene of an accident involving damage to a vehicle or property in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291C-13 (Supp. 2013) by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).
1 
On appeal, Davis argues that the District Court erred
 
because: (1) there was insufficient evidence to support the
 verdict; (2) there was a lack of probable cause supporting the
 issuance of the citation; and (3) that the "acts of the
 Prosecutor resulted in an unfair and prejudicial result at
 trial."
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Marr presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
After a careful review of the issues raised,  the
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable

 
authority, we resolve Davis's issues as follows and affirm.
 
1. There was substantial evidence to support the 
judgment. 
On appeal, the evidence is reviewed in the light most 
favorable to the prosecution. State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i 
149, 157, 166 P.3d 322, 330 (2007). "The test on appeal is not 
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Id. at 157-58, 166 P.3d at 330-31 "[A]s 
trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." Id. at 158, 166 P.3d at 331. "An 
appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge." Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai
'i 42, 60, 169 P.3d 994, 1012 (App. 2007) 
(quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 
(1996)). 
The statute in question, HRS ยง 291C-13, required, in

 
pertinent part, that:
 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting
only in damage to a vehicle or other property that is driven
or attended by any person shall immediately stop such
vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as
 possible, but shall forthwith return to, and in every event
shall remain at, the scene of the accident until the driver
has fulfilled the requirements of section 291C-14. 
The District Court relied on the testimony of the
 
complaining witness (CW), who testified that she was in her gray
 
Acura TL waiting for the car in front of her to move forward when
 she was struck from behind by a black Chrysler van, driven by
 
2
 We note that Davis's "statement of points in error" do not comply
with the requirements of Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4),
and on this basis alone we could disregard them. Id. However, we address
Davis's points on the merits in keeping with our policy to address appeals on
the merits, where possible. Counsel is warned that future noncompliance withour rules could result in sanctions. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Davis. After she heard and felt the impact, CW testified that
 
she observed the van "trying to reverse and try[ing] to maneuver
 around[]" to the left of her vehicle. CW then got out of her car
 and "waved [at Davis] to roll down her window." Davis responded
 by making hand gestures back at CW, but departed the scene
 without stopping, getting out of her vehicle, or talking to CW. 
The CW testified that she observed a scratch on her rear bumper
 after the collision. Based on this testimony, there was
 substantial evidence supporting the judgment in favor of the
 State.
 
2. Davis's argument, brought for the first time on 
appeal, that there was no probable cause to issue the citation in this case, is moot. Davis did not move to dismiss the citation prior to trial and the District Court entered judgment against Davis based on its determination that the State proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt. "[A]bsent unusual circumstances, any defects in a pretrial determination of probable cause are rendered moot, or are without any effective remedy, . . . by a subsequent conviction." In re Doe, 102 Hawai
'i 75, 78, 73 P.3d 
29, 32 (2003) (challenging the family court's determination of probable cause to support detention of the subject minors). 
3. Davis's argument that the judgment against her
 
should be reversed for misconduct by the prosecutors office,
 claiming that the issuance of the citation and the subsequent
 events leading up to the trial were "prejudicial, unfair, and
 grounds for reversal" is without merit. Davis does not provide
 citations to the record where substantiation or preservation of
 these complaints can be found, describe how she was prejudiced by
 the described conduct, nor point to authority for her apparent
 position that the complained-of conduct is a basis for reversal. 
Ala Moana Boat Owners' Ass'n v. State, 50 Haw. 156, 158, 434 P.2d
 516, 518 (1967) ("the burden of showing error is on the
 plaintiffs in error. We necessarily approach a case with the
 assumption that no error has been committed upon the trial and
 until this assumption has been overcome by a positive showing the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prevailing party is entitled to an affirmance." (citations and
 
internal quotation marks omitted)).
 
Therefore, the May 31, 2011 Judgment entered by the
 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 17, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
P. Adam Davis,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge

 
4
 