NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000156
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
IOSEFA MEAFUA PASENE, Defendant-Appellant,
and ZORRO R. RYE, also known as Zorro Ramon Rye, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0472)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Early in the morning, in front of numerous witnesses,
 
two men in a blue Buick sedan, drove up to Joseph Peneueta
 
(Peneueta), got out of the car, and shot Peneueta to death. The
 passenger of the car, who shot Peneueta with a shotgun, covered
 his face to conceal his identity. The driver of the car, who
 shot Peneueta with a rifle, did not cover his face. 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) alleged 
that Defendant-Appellant Iosefa Meafua Pasene (Pasene) was the driver/shooter and that Zorro R. Rye (Rye) was the passenger/shooter. After two hung juries, Pasene was found guilty in his third trial of the second-degree murder of Peneueta and using a firearm in the commission of a felony.
1 During the 
third trial, the State presented eyewitness testimony that Pasene was the driver who shot Peneueta and evidence that Pasene had been in an argument with Peneueta a short time before the shooting. The State also introduced cell phone site records that 
1
 After one hung jury, Rye was acquitted in the second trial and
thus was not involved in the third trial.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identified the cell phone and associated cell towers Pasene had
 
communicated with during the time period surrounding the
 shooting. The State argued that these records supported its
 contention that Pasene was the driver of the Buick who shot
 Peneueta. Pasene's theory of defense was mistaken identity and
 reasonable doubt. Pasene suggested that the driver/shooter could
 have been his friend, Cedro Muna (Muna).
 
On appeal, Pasene contends: (1) the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
2 erred in denying his motion to
 
dismiss the charges based on State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 647
 P.2d 705 (1982), prior to the third trial; (2) the Circuit Court
 erred in permitting a detective to testify that he had eliminated
 Muna as a suspect in the case; (3) the Circuit Court erred in
 admitting cell phone site records; (4) the Circuit Court erred in
 admitting evidence of interactions between Pasene and an
 undercover police officer; (5) the Circuit Court erred in denying
 Pasene's request to excuse a juror; (6) the prosecutor engaged in
 misconduct which deprived Pasene of a fair trial; and (7) the
 Circuit Court erred in denying Pasene's motions for mistrial and
 for a new trial based on prosecutorial misconduct. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The following matters were undisputed. Sometime after
 
2:00 a.m. on March 28, 2009, Pasene and Peneueta got into an
 argument at a liquor store on Maunakea Street in Chinatown. At
 around 4:00 a.m., Peneueta was with a group of friends and
 associates a block away from the liquor store on Pauahi Street. 
A blue Buick four-door sedan drove up and abruptly stopped in
 front of Peneueta. Two men got out of the Buick. The driver,
 whose face was uncovered, was carrying a rifle. The passenger,
 whose face was covered, was carrying a shotgun. The two men
 approached Peneueta fired shots at Peneueta and continued to
 shoot at Peneueta as he attempted to flee. Peneueta eventually
 fell and remained on the ground in the middle of the road near
 
2
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided over the proceedings at issue
in this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the intersection of Pauahi and River Streets. He had been shot
 
several times with bullets from a rifle and birdshot pellets from
 a shotgun.
 
Peneueta was not breathing and had no pulse when the
 
paramedics arrived, and he was pronounced dead at Queen's Medical
 Center a short time later. The cause of Peneueta's death was
 loss of blood due to injuries inflicted by bullet wounds and
 shotgun pellets. Later in the morning of the shooting, at about
 6:00 a.m., a blue Buick, matching the description of the vehicle
 used in the shooting, was found burning in the Wahiawa area.
 
Pasene, Rye, Muna, and Antonias Paul Toloai (Toloai)
 
all grew up in the same neighborhood in San Francisco. Rye and
 Toloai are Pasene's cousins. Pasene and Toloai were Muna's
 friends.
 
Peneueta, Gabriel Sakaria (Sakaria), and Richard
 
Tagataese (Tagtaese) were from Kuhio Park Terrace (KPT). They
 grew up together, were in school together, were all friends, and
 resided at KPT.
 
II.
 
The State presented the following evidence at the third
 
trial.
 
A.
 
In late February 2009, a joint federal/state law
 
enforcement task force was formed "to address ongoing hostility
 and activity that was occurring between groups" in Chinatown. 
There are twenty five surveillance cameras located in the
 Chinatown area that the police can control and 
monitor from the Downtown substation. In the beginning of March
 2009, the task force introduced an undercover officer into the
 Chinatown area to interact with a particular group. The task
 force used video and audio surveillance in their undercover
 operations. 
On March 10, 2009, the undercover officer was
 
approached by Pasene. Between March 10 and March 26, 2009, the
 undercover officer met with Pasene six times. Pasene provided
 the undercover officer with a cell phone number, 699-1829, which
 the undercover officer used to set up his meetings with Pasene. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In every occasion in which the undercover officer used this phone
 
number to contact Pasene, only Pasene answered the phone. During
 his meetings with Pasene, the undercover officer saw Pasene
 driving a blue Buick sedan, license number JGA 055. Two of the
 undercover officers' meetings with Pasene were held inside this
 car while it was parked. A surveillance officer for the task
 force testified that between late February and March 26, 2009, he
 personally observed Pasene operating the blue Buick about ten
 times. The surveillance officer never saw anyone else operating
 the blue Buick during this time period.
 
Muna testified that he had purchased the Buick sometime
 
in January of 2009, owned it for about four weeks, then sold it
 to Tia (also known as Natalie) at the end of January. Muna was
 present when Tia sold the Buick to Pasene in the middle of
 February 2009. Motor vehicle records reflect a certificate of
 title for the Buick identifying Muna as the seller, with a
 February 10, 2009, date of transfer, and Sylvia Hall (Hall) as
 the new registered owner. Hall did not have a driver's license. 
When the police interviewed Hall during the murder investigation,
 she was accompanied by a social worker, and Hall was described as
 a "simple person" and a "simple type personality person."
 
B.
 
On the evening before the shooting, Peneueta was out
 
with his girlfriend, Mary Savusa (Savusa), and Savusa's cousin, 
Tutuila Peleafi (Peleafi). After leaving a strip bar on Keeamoku
 Street at around 1:30 or 2:00 a.m., the three drove to a nearby
 McDonald's to get something to eat. When they finished eating,
 Peneueta started driving toward KPT, where they all lived, but
 then decided to go to a liquor store on Maunakea Street in
 Chinatown. Peneueta parked across the street from the liquor
 store and went to the store, while Paleafi and Savausa remained
 in the car. Peneueta greeted a couple a friends who were outside
 the liquor store. Peneueta then approached a "tall guy" and
 began arguing with him on the sidewalk.
 
At trial, Paleafi identified the "tall guy" arguing
 
with Peneueta as Pasene. Paleafi stated that she later saw the
 person who had been arguing with Peneueta "on the news" and
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identified photographs of Pasene introduced at trial as this
 
person. Savusa also testified that she saw the person arguing
 with Peneueta on the news a day or two after the shooting, and
 her reaction was that "they got him."
 
During their argument, Peneueta was "up in" Pasene's
 
face and Pasene "looked tense." The windows in the car were up,
 and therefore Peleafi could not hear what Peneueta and Pasene
 were saying. After Pasene argued with Peneueta for several
 minutes, Pasene crossed the street and passed right by the two
 women in the car. Both Peleafi and Savusa testified that Pasene
 told Peneueta to "stay" or "wait" there; "I'll be right back."
 
Savusa told Peneueta to get back in the car, and he
 
complied. Peneueta drove Paleafi home to KPT and dropped her
 off. While there, Peneueta picked up a friend, whose nickname
 was "Giant," then Peneueta, Savusa, and Giant went back to
 Chinatown. Savusa testified that Peneueta and Giant did not have
 any weapons. Peneueta and Giant got out of the car in Chinatown,
 leaving Savusa behind. Savusa fell asleep in the car. When she
 woke up, the sun had risen, but Peneueta and Giant had not
 returned to the car. Savusa drove around Chinatown looking for
 them, saw police and yellow crime-scene tape all over, and
 decided to return home. When she returned to KPT, people told
 her what had happened.
 
C.
 
In the afternoon of March 27, 2009, prior to the
 
shooting, Pasene, Muna, and Toloai were arrested and taken to the
 main police station. With the assistance of bail bond agent
 Linda Del Rio (Del Rio), Muna posted bail and was released at
 about 1:00 a.m. the next morning. Del Rio took Muna to get
 something to eat, and they returned to the police station for
 Pasene and Toloai, who were released at about 1:30 a.m.
 
According to Muna, Rye also appeared at the police
 
station, and Rye drove Pasene, Muna, and Toloai to Chinatown in
 Rye's car, a gold Nissan Maxima. Rye dropped Muna and Toloai off
 on the corner of River and Beretania Streets. Muna and Toloai
 stayed there for about 30 minutes, then they walked to the liquor
 store on Maunakea Street.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There were about fifteen people gathered in front of
 
the liquor store, including Pasene and Rye. Muna saw Pasene and
 
Peneueta arguing. At that time, Muna did not know Peneueta, but
 knew "of him." The argument between Pasene and Peneueta lasted
 about two minutes and was "[a] little serious." No one else got
 involved in the argument. When the argument stopped, Pasene
 walked away from the liquor store with Rye, Muna, and Toloai. 
Sakaria, Peneueta's friend from KPT, was among the
 
people who were gathered in front of the liquor store. 
According to Sakaria, before Peneueta arrived, there was a fight
 at the store between "Ropati" and another guy, which several
 people intervened to stop. Peneueta arrived just after the fight
 ended and shook hands with Sakaria and a few others there. A
 short time later, Sakaria heard a commotion and observed Pasene
 and Peneueta aggressively arguing and swearing at each other. 
The argument lasted for "a couple minutes" and no one else
 participated. When the argument ended, Sakaria saw Pasene
 walking away with Muna and two other guys. Sakaria testified
 that he heard Pasene tell Peneueta, "Where we from we don't
 fight, we shoot, shoot to kill." Pasene was walking backwards
 and facing Peneueta when he made this statement.
 
Muna testified that after leaving the liquor store, he,
 
Pasene, Rye, and Toloai walked to the corner of River and
 Beretania Streets. Muna and Toloai stayed there and Pasene and
 Rye left. About 30 minutes later, Muna saw Pasene in a parking
 lot on the other side of Beretania Street. Muna and Toloai
 walked over to the parking lot. Muna saw Daniel Ropati (Ropati),
 who was from KPT, approaching the parking lot, and Muna told
 Ropati to turn around. Pasene pulled out a shotgun, pointed it
 towards Ropati, and told Ropati to "get away" or Pasene would
 shoot him. Pasene "was mad." Muna jumped in front of the
 shotgun because he did not want Pasene to shoot Ropati, and
 Pasene put the gun down. Ropati turned around and walked back
 across the street.
 
Muna and Toloai also walked across Beretania Street to
 
the corner of Beretania and River Streets to catch a taxi to go
 back to their hotels. After crossing Beretania Street, Muna saw
 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ropati, who also wanted to catch a taxi. Ropati's taxi
 
apparently arrived first, and it stopped on River Street facing
 towards Beretania Street. Ropati agreed to allow Muna and Toloai
 to take his taxi. Muna got into the back seat on the driver's
 side and Toloai got in on the other side. Just after Muna got
 into the taxi and while the taxi was still not moving because of
 a red light, Muna saw a blue Buick make a right turn from
 Beretania Street onto River Street, heading toward Pauahi Street. 
Muna recognized the Buick as his former car. Muna also saw that
 Pasene was driving the Buick.
 
When the light facing the taxi turned green and as the
 
taxi was proceeding on Beretania Street, Muna heard about ten
 gunshots. The taxi driver remarked that it sounded like
 firecrackers and kept driving away. The taxi dropped Muna off at
 the Plaza Hotel near the airport. At trial, the State introduced
 video surveillance recordings from the Plaza Hotel showing its
 lobby and front desk area. Muna identified himself as one of the
 people shown in the surveillance video. Muna testified that
 after arriving at the Plaza Hotel, he realized that he had
 already checked out of that hotel and was staying at the Miramar
 Hotel in Waikiki.
3 He therefore caught another taxi to the
 
Miramar Hotel in Waikiki.
 
Darren Kawelolani (Kawelolani) testified that on
 
March 28, 2009, at about 4:00 a.m., he was working as a taxi
 driver when he received a call from Ropati, who was a regular
 customer. Ropati asked to be picked up at the corner of River
 and Beretania Streets. When Kawelolani arrived, Ropati said he
 was not ready to leave, and two other passengers got into the
 backseat of Kawelolani's taxi. Kawelolani was asked to drive to
 the Plaza Hotel. Kawelolani's taxi was on River Street, near to
 and facing in the direction of Beretania Street, when he picked
 up the two passengers. While stopped on River Street, Kawelolani
 saw a blue car turn from Beretania Street onto River Street,
 coming toward him from the opposite direction. As the blue car
 turned onto River Street, it passed within about three feet of
 
3
 Muna stated on cross-examination that he had been staying at the
Miramar Hotel for a week when he mistakenly went to the Plaza Hotel.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kawelolani's taxi. Kawelolani was able to see the driver of the
 
blue car, who Kawelolani described as having long hair and a
 beard. Kawelolani later saw the driver "on the news on the
 television" and thought "that's the person that was on River
 Street that -- that passed me."
 
From River Street, Kawelolani turned left onto
 
Beretania Street. As he turned left, Kawelolani heard what
 sounded like fire crackers or gunshots, eight to ten very loud
 pops. One of the passengers said, "[i]t's gunshots, we should
 go." Kawelolani drove to the Plaza Hotel and dropped off one of
 the passengers. He drove the other passenger back to Chinatown. 
In an interview with the police and at trial, Kawelolani
 identified a photograph of Toloai as the passenger he had taken
 back to Chinatown. Kawelolani was not able to identify the
 passenger he dropped off at the Plaza Hotel.
 
D.
 
Sakaria testified that after witnessing the argument
 
between Pasene and Peneueta at the liquor store and seeing both
 of the them leave, he walked to the Pauahi Recreation Center,
 which is near the intersection of Pauahi and River Streets, about
 a block away from the liquor store. Sakaria sat on a plastic
 bucket near the entrance of the Recreation Center and was soon
 joined by his friends, Tagataese and Samson Filipo (Filipo) from
 KPT. A short time later, Peneueta and Giant arrived, walking
 from the direction of Maunakea Street. Other people were also
 gathered in front of the Recreation Center, and everyone was
 "kicking back" and talking.
 
Sakaria testified that a blue four-door Buick came
 
speeding up Pauahi Street from the direction of River Street and
 stopped in front of them. Two men jumped out of the Buick:
 Pasene, who was driving the Buick and whose face was not covered,
 and the passenger, whose face was covered. Pasene was carrying a
 rifle and pointed the rifle at Peneueta, who was standing next to
 Sakaria. The passenger pointed a shotgun at Peneueta and
 approached until he was right next to Peneueta. As Pasene walked
 toward Peneueta, Pasene said to Peneueta, "Oh, what's up now?"
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sakaria then "heard [] the gun go off, shot fired." 
Sakaria was a couple feet away from Pasene when the gun went off. 
Sakaria saw Peneueta try to grab the gun and pull it away. 
Sakaria ran towards Maunakea Street. As he was running away, he
 heard over ten shots fired.
4
 
Sakaria identified Pasene in court as the driver of the
 
Buick and as the same person he had seen arguing with Peneueta at
 the liquor store. Sakaria testified that while he was next to
 Peneueta, Pasene approached Peneueta holding the rifle until
 Pasene was three feet away. Sakaria testified that the lighting
 was bright and that from a distance of three feet, he had a clear
 and unobstructed view of Pasene's face while Pasene was pointing
 the rifle at Peneueta. Sakaria stated that he was a "[h]undred
 percent" sure that the person standing three feet away from him
 with the rifle was Pasene. Sakaria also stated that he knew
 
4 With respect to the sequence of events after the Buick pulled up,
Sakaria testified on cross-examination as follows:
 
Q. You're there, a car pulls up, two men get out, and
you see that they have guns, yes?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You see that they have guns, you see them moving
towards [Peneueta], and you start running up Pauahi towards
Maunakea, yes?
 
A. Yes.
 
. . . .
 
Q. And it's after you start running when you first
hear the shots, yes?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. Men get there, they jump out, see the guns,
start running, you hear the shots; right?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You started running away before the shots were
fired; right?
 
A. The same time I was running the shot was going
off.
 
Q. Okay. And because you were heading in the
opposite direction, running the opposite direction, you
didn't see the shots being fired; correct?
 
A. Yes.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cedro Muna and that he was positive that the driver holding the
 
rifle was not Muna.
 
Tagataese also identified Pasene as the driver of the
 
car. Tagataese testified that he and Filipo stopped in front of
 the Pauahi Recreation Center and were "talking story" with
 Sakaria. They were soon joined by 
Peneueta and Giant. There were twelve to fifteen people gathered
 in the area.
 
Tagataese heard a car speeding which came to a
 
screeching halt in front of them. Two men jumped out of the car
 holding guns. The passenger's face was covered with a
 handkerchief, but the driver's face was not covered. The two men
 taunted Peneueta, saying "What's up now?" as they pointed their
 guns at Peneueta and walked towards him.
 
The driver was carrying a rifle and the passenger was
 
carrying a shotgun. Peneueta took a swing at the passenger, who
 was holding the shotgun, and tried to get away by running towards
 River Street. Tagataese headed in the opposite direction, but
 turned so that he could see where the two gunmen were. Tagataese
 saw the two gunmen chasing Peneueta, taunting him and firing
 shots at him. Peneueta stumbled and fell to the ground near the
 intersection of Pauahi and River Streets. Tagataese saw the
 driver walk up to Peneueta, stand over his body, and "let off a
 couple more shots."
 
Tagataese identified Pasene in court as the driver. 
Tagataese testified that the lighting was good, and as the driver
 got out of the car and was walking towards Peneueta, Tagataese
 had a clear and unobstructed view of the driver from a distance
 of twenty feet. Tagataese testified that he was a "[h]undred
 percent" positive of his identification of Pasene as the driver. 
Tagataese also stated that he knows Cedro Muna and was sure that
 Muna was not the person who got out of the car and shot Peneueta.
 
E.
 
Paramedics responded to the scene at 4:21 a.m. 
Peneueta was not breathing and had no pulse. The paramedics
 transported Peneueta to Queen's Medical Center. Attempts to
 revive Peneueta and restart his heart were unsuccessful, and he
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was pronounced dead. An autopsy of Peneueta's body was performed
 
by forensic pathologist Kanthi De Alwis, M.D. (Dr. De Alwis). 
Dr. De Alwis found that Peneueta had sustained three separate
 gunshot wounds as well as injuries caused by birdshot pellets
 fired by a shotgun. Peneueta suffered multiple internal injuries
 to his vital organs, including his heart, both lungs, liver,
 aorta, and kidney, his spinal cord was severed, and his ribs were
 fractured. Dr. De Alwis opined that the cause of death was heavy
 bleeding due to injuries to Peneueta's vital organs caused by the
 gunshot and shotgun injuries and that the gunshot and shotgun
 injuries were all fatal wounds. Evidence recovered at the scene
 of the shooting included fourteen discharged cartridge casings
 that were fired from the same firearm and three discharged shot
 shells fired from the same firearm. A bullet hole was also found
 in the glass entrance door to the Pauahi Recreation Center.
 
F.
 Sakaria, Tagataese, and Filipo took cover and hid in
 
an alley while the gunmen were shooting at Peneueta. After the
 gunmen drove away, Sakaria, Tagataese, and Filipo went back to
 check on Peneueta, and they went to Queen's Medical Center after
 the ambulance took Peneueta there. At the hospital, a police
 officer asked Sakaria if he could identify the shooter, and
 Sakaria said he could. Sakaria, Tagataese, and Filipo went from
 the hospital to the police station to be interviewed.
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Detective Gregory
 
McCormick (Detective McCormick) was the lead homicide detective
 for the shooting of Peneueta. Detective McCormick was at home
 when he was notified of the shooting shortly after 5:00 a.m. on
 March 28, 2009. Detective McCormick went to Queen's Medical
 Center, where he was briefed by other detectives. Detective
 McCormick was given the names of Pasene, Muna, and Toloai as
 possible suspects and was told there were eyewitnesses to the
 shooting. Detective McCormick went to the police station to
 interview the eyewitnesses. He arrived at the police station at
 about 6:05 a.m. and printed out pictures of individuals named as
 possible suspects.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detective McCormick first interviewed Tagataese at 6:49
 
a.m. Before Tagataese entered the interview room, Detective
 
McCormick asked Tagataese if he had actually witnessed the
 
shooting, and Tagataese said he had. Detective McCormick asked
 Tagataese if he knew one or both of the people responsible for
 the shooting, and Tagataese said he knew one of the shooters and
 provided a name of "Sef" or "Sefa" (Pasene's first name is
 "Iosefa"). Tagataese said this person was someone he was
 familiar with in the Chinatown area. During the interview,
 Detective McCormick showed Tagataese a photograph of Pasene and
 asked him who that was. Tagataese responded that the person in
 the photograph was "Sef" or "Sefa," who was the driver of the
 vehicle and one of the shooters. Tagataese also stated that he
 learned that this person went by the name "Sef" earlier that day.
 Detective McCormick next interviewed Sakaria and asked
 
him if he actually witnessed the shooting and if he knew one or
 both of the shooters. Sakaria said he had actually witnessed the
 shooting and knew the driver of the vehicle as "Sef" or "Sefa." 
Detective McCormick also interviewed Filipo who did not recognize
 either of the individuals involved in the shooting.
 Detective McCormick used a single photograph in his interviews
 with Tagataese and Sakaria and a six photograph lineup in his
 interview with Filipo.
 
After Detective McCormick completed his interviews of
 
the three eyewitnesses, Muna showed up at the police station. 
Detective McCormick interviewed Muna, and Muna was not arrested
 in the case. As part of his investigation of Muna, Detective
 McCormick reviewed some of the camera videotape from Chinatown. 
Detective McCormick's review of that video as well as other
 aspects of his investigation led him to eliminate Muna as a
 suspect in the shooting. Detective McCormick interviewed
 Kawelolani, the taxi driver, and showed him a picture of Toloai.
 
Detective Theodore Coons (Detective Coons) was
 
Detective McCormick's partner in the homicide investigation. As
 part of the investigation, Detective Coons reviewed video from
 surveillance cameras in the Chinatown area, including video from
 a camera at the intersection of Pauahi and River Streets. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detective Coons testified that his review of the Chinatown video
 
was one of the aspects that led the police to rule out Muna as a
 suspect, and Muna was never arrested in this case. In
 investigating Muna, the police had received information that Muna
 had been taken from the Downtown area to the Plaza Hotel by the
 airport. Detective Coons went to the Plaza Hotel, met with the
 hotel's security officer, reviewed "surveillance footage," and
 made a copy of the footage to be used as evidence. The State
 introduced a copy of the Plaza Hotel surveillance footage as
 evidence at the trial.
 
G. 
On March 28, 2009, at 5:57 a.m., the police were
 
notified that a blue Buick sedan, license number JGA 055, was
 reported burning in the Wahiawa area. Task force officers had
 seen Pasene driving this car in the weeks preceding the shooting,
 and the car was identified as the car used in the shooting.
 
Pasene had provided the task force undercover officer
 
with a cell phone number, 699-1829, which the undercover officer
 had used to contact Pasene and which Pasene had used to call the
 undercover officer, to set up meetings before the shooting. At
 trial, the State introduced records pertaining to this cell phone
 number, which were obtained from Mobi PCS (Mobi), through Vincent
 Monaco (Monaco), a networking engineering manager and a custodian
 of record for Mobi. The Mobi cell phone account for 669-1829 was
 active from March 2, 2009, to March 30, 2009. The State
 introduced subscriber information for this account,
5 as well as
 
records showing which cell phone towers communicated with the
 cell phone for 669-1829 and the text messages sent from this
 phone number during the period surrounding the shooting.
 
At trial, Monaco was qualified as an expert "in cell
 
phone technology and the technique of locating and plotting
 origins of cell phone calls using cell phone records." Monaco
 testified that as part of its network, Mobi has about a hundred
 cell sites or towers on Oahu that are used to complete phone
 
5
 Mobi's records list Fasi Lya (Fasi) as the subscriber for the cell
phone with the 669-1829 number. However, Monaco testified that Mobi is a
"prepay provider" and does not verify the accuracy of information provided by
a customer in obtaining a phone.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
calls and text messages from its cell phones. Monaco explained
 
how Mobi's cellular telephones communicate with its cell towers;
 that Mobi records information and maintains records pertaining to
 the cellular phone services it provides, including the cell
 towers accessed by a specific phone number; and how he prepared
 the records pertaining to phone number 669-1829 that were
 introduced at trial. 
The cell record exhibits for 669-1829 introduced at
 
trial show, among other things, that on March 28, 2009, the day
 of the shooting, the cell phone associated with 669-1829
 communicated with a cell tower in the vicinity of the main police
 station at 1:33 a.m. and a cell tower in the vicinity of Wahiawa
 between 5:52-5:53 a.m., which is near the time the Buick was
 reported burning in the Wahiawa area. A text message sent from
 669-1829 at 7:47 a.m. on March 29, 2009, stated: "I need a lawyer
 because they trying 2 put a hot one on me so dont talk on da
 phone."
 
After Peneueta was shot, the police looked for Pasene
 
in Chinatown, where he previously had frequently been seen, but
 were unable to find him. The police had the undercover officer
 use the number Pasene had given him (669-1829), and which they
 had used in their prior dealings, to arrange a meeting with
 Pasene. The undercover officer used this number to set up a
 meeting with Pasene on March 30, 2009, in the parking lot near
 Anna Miller's in Pearlridge, to conduct a transaction involving
 $6,000. Pasene appeared at the scheduled date and time for the
 arranged transaction, and he was subsequently arrested by the
 police.
 
III.
 
After the State rested its case in chief, Pasene
 
presented the following evidence.
 
A.
 
Del Rio, the bail bond agent who assisted in posting
 
the bail for Pasene, Muna, and Toloai on March 28, 2009,
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that at some point after the shooting, Muna told her,
 
"Aunty, I shot someone."6
 
Pasene presented the testimony of Luatua Tuua (Tuua)
 
through Tuua's prior video deposition because Tuua could not be
 located and thus was unavailable for trial. Tuua is Pasene's
 cousin. Tuua testified that on March 28, 2009, after Pasene was
 released from police custody, Tuua met Pasene in Chinatown
 before 4:00 a.m. to give him a ride. Tuaa took Pasene to
 Pasene's girlfriend's house and dropped him off there. Tuaa
 asked Pasene if he could use Pasene's cell phone, and Pasene left
 a phone with Tuua.
 
On cross-examination, Tuua said he started work that
 
day at 7:30 or 8:30 a.m. After dropping Pasene off, Tuua kept
 possession of the phone until he gave the phone to Fasi right
 before Tuaa started work. According to Tuua, when he asked to
 borrow the phone from Pasene, he thought the phone belonged to
 Pasene. But Pasene told him it was Fasi's phone, so Tuua wanted
 to give the phone back to Fasi. Tuua did not know Fasi very
 well. Tuua said that Fasi called looking for the phone, and Tuua
 met Fasi and gave Fasi the phone. Tuua could not remember how
 long he had the phone before Fasi called or where in town he met
 Fasi. Tuua testified that he did not recall making any calls
 from the phone, did not answer the phone (except the call from
 Fasi), and did not remember whether he used the phone for text
 messages. Tuua did not remember the phone number of the phone he
 borrowed from Pasene and did not know if Pasene had more than one
 phone.
 
B.
 
Pasene testified in his own defense at trial. Pasene 
testified that he grew up in San Francisco and goes by the name "Sef." He came to Hawai' i in late February 2009 and had never 
6
 Muna testified that after his March 27, 2009, arrest for which Del
Rio had posted his bail, he made his first court appearance in that case and
was permitted to return to California. However, he did not return forsubsequent court appearances, his bail was revoked, and he was "on the run"until he was arrested in February 2013 and extradited back to Hawai 'i. Muna 
stated his relationship with Del Rio was bad because he jumped bail and thebail bonds person had to come up with the money because of his failure toappear for court. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lived in Hawai' i before then. Toloai is Pasene's cousin. Muna 
was Pasene's friend and they grew up together in San Francisco. 
Muna was good friends with Ropati, who was from KPT. Pasene stated that when he and Muna were arrested on March 28, 2009, they were the same weight, the same height, and both had long hair. Pasene identified photos taken at the time of their arrest, which showed that they were both wearing a white t-shirt and black pants. 
According to Pasene, when he, Muna, and Toloai were 
released from police custody on the morning of March 28, 2009, they were picked up by Rye. Rye dropped them off at the liquor store on Maunakea Street. While Pasene was at the liquor store, Ropati and another guy from KPT got into a fight with Aleka from Mayor Wright housing. Pasene broke up the fight, which angered Ropati, who began arguing with Pasene, because Ropati did not want Pasene to break up the fight. Peneueta then approached Pasene and told Pasene to stay out of their business and to mind his own business. Peneueta appeared to be drunk. Pasene did not know Peneueta and had never seen him before that night. Pasene denied telling Peneueta that "where I'm from, I shoot, and I shoot to kill." 
Pasene left the liquor store to find Fasi's car, which 
he had been using on March 27, 2009, prior to his arrest. 
When 
he could not find Fasi's car,7 Pasene called his cousin Tuua to 
pick him up. Pasene went back to the liquor store where he saw Muna and Toloai. They walked to River Street, where Pasene was picked up by Tuua, while Muna and Toloai remained there. Pasene testified that Tuua dropped him off at his girlfriend's house, which was located at the intersection of Lusitana and Punchbowl Streets. Pasene said that after he was dropped off, he stayed at his girlfriend's house until noon on March 29, 2009, at which time his girlfriend dropped him off at his cousin Will's house in Pearlridge. 
With respect to the 669-1829 cell phone, Pasene stated 
that this phone belonged to Fasi. Pasene acknowledged that he 
7
 Pasene stated that he later learned that Fasi had picked up the
car.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
frequently used this phone. Pasene stated that he used the phone
 
when he was with Fasi because Pasene had many of his personal
 numbers stored in this phone and because Fasi also had another
 phone. Pasene testified that when Tuua dropped him off at his
 girlfriend's house in on March 29, 2009, Pasene gave the 669-1829
 cell phone and Fasi's car keys to Tuua to have Tuua return them
 to Fasi. However, when his girlfriend dropped Pasene off at his
 cousin Will's house in Pearlridge on March 29, 2009, Pasene got
 the 669-1829 cell phone back because Fasi was also living there,
 and Pasene used the phone to call his bail bond agent. Pasene
 did not know what Tuua had done with the phone while Tuua was in
 possession of the phone. 
With respect to the blue Buick with license number JGA
 
055 that was involved in the shooting, Pasene acknowledged that
 he had occasionally used this car. Pasene, however, stated that
 the car belonged to Muna and that others including Muna, Ropati,
 and Toloai, also drove the car. Pasene said that he would only
 borrow the car for a few hours, then return it to Muna. He did
 not know Hall, the registered owner of the car.
 
Pasene denied shooting Peneueta or being there when he
 
was shot. Pasene stated that he had never seen Tagataese or
 Sakaria before they appeared to testify in this case. Pasene
 also denied that he had used this phone on March 29, 2009, to
 send the text "I need a lawyer because they trying 2 put a hot
 one on me so dont talk on da phone."
 
IV.
 
The jury found Pasene guilty as charged of the second-
degree murder of Peneueta and using a firearm in the commission
 of a felony. The Circuit Court sentenced Pasene to life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole on the second-degree
 murder conviction and twenty years of imprisonment on the
 conviction for using a firearm in the commission of a felony. 
The Circuit Court imposed these terms of imprisonment to run
 concurrently with each other and with any other term being
 served. The Circuit Court filed its Amended Judgment on March 9,
 2015, and this appeal followed.
 
17
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Pasene contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying 
his motion to dismiss based on Moriwake after two prior trials 
had ended in hung juries. In Moriwake, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
held that trial courts, "[w]ithin the bounds of duly exercised discretion," have the inherent power in appropriate circumstances to dismiss an indictment with prejudice following one or more mistrials resulting from genuinely deadlocked juries, even though the dismissal is not constitutionally required. Moriwake, 65 
Haw. at 55, 647 P.2d at 712. In reviewing a trial court's exercise of discretion in ruling on a motion to dismiss based on Moriwake, we will accord deference to the trial court's conclusion. State v. Deedy, 141 Hawai' i 208, 224, 407 P.3d 164, 
180 (2017) ("We will not vacate a trial court's Moriwake ruling unless the party challenging the ruling can make a strong showing that the court abused its discretion by clearly exceeding the bounds of reason or disregarding rules or principles of law or practice."). In this case, Pasene fails to make the requisite "strong showing" and we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Pasene's motion to dismiss. 
A.
 
Pasene's first two trials ended in hung juries.
8 Prior
 
to his third trial, Pasene filed a motion to dismiss the
 remaining charges
9 against him with prejudice based on Moriwake. 
8 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided over Pasene's first
trial. The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided over Pasene's second trial and
subsequent proceedings.
 
9 Pasene and Rye were charged in the indictment with the following
offenses: (1) second-murder of Peneueta (Pasene and Rye -- Count 1); (2) place
to keep loaded firearm (Pasene -- Count 2); (3) use of a firearm in commission
of a felony (Pasene -- Count 3); (4) first-degree terroristic threatening of
Ropati with the use of a dangerous instrument (Pasene -- Count 4); (5) place
to keep loaded firearm (Rye -- Count 5); and (6) use of a firearm in
commission of a felony (Rye -- Count 6). Prior to the first trial of Pasene
 and Rye, the Circuit Court granted with prejudice the State's motion to nolle
prosequi Counts 2 and 5. The first trial of Pasene and Rye ended in a hung
jury on the counts presented (Counts 1, 3, 4, 6). In the second trial of
 Pasene and Rye, the jury found Pasene not guilty of Count 4, could not reach a
unanimous verdict as to Pasene on Counts 1 and 3, and found Rye not guilty as
to Counts 1-6. Thus, prior to the third trial, the counts remaining were the
charges against Pasene for second-degree murder (Count 1) and for use of a
firearm in the commission of a felony (Count 3). 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State opposed the motion. The record indicates that the jury
 
split 9 to 3 in favor of guilty in the first trial on these
 charges, and 9 to 3 in favor of not guilty in the second trial. 
After holding a hearing on Pasene's motion, the Circuit Court
 denied the motion.
 
In Moriwake, the supreme court concluded that in
 
deciding whether to dismiss an indictment after one or more hung
 juries, the trial court should balance "the interest of the state
 against fundamental fairness to a defendant with the added
 ingredient of the orderly functioning of the court system." 
Moriwake, 65 Haw. at 55, 647 P.2d at 712. The trial court should
 consider several factors in undertaking this balance, including: 
(1) the severity of the offense charged; (2) the number of
prior mistrials and the circumstances of the jury
deliberation therein, so far as is known; (3) the character
of prior trials in terms of length, complexity and
similarity of evidence presented; (4) the likelihood of any
substantial difference in a subsequent trial, if allowed;
(5) the trial court's own evaluation of relative case
strength; and (6) the professional conduct and diligence of
respective counsel, particularly that of the prosecuting
attorney.
 
Id. at 56–57, 647 P.2d at 712–13.
 
B.
 
In denying Pasene's motion to dismiss, the Circuit
 
Court considered each of the Moriwake factors. Among other
 
things, the Circuit Court found that the severity of the murder
 offense charged clearly cut against dismissal; that the acquittal
 of Rye, which allowed the State to focus its evidence on Pasene,
 changed "the dynamic" of the case, such that the Circuit Court
 could not say that the outcome of a third trial would be the same
 and thus cut against dismissal; and that in terms of its
 evaluation of the relative case strength, there was ample
 evidence for a jury to reach a unanimous decision, which cut
 against dismissal.
10 According appropriate deference to the
 
10
 The Circuit Court found that the character of prior trials favored
dismissal; that the conduct of respective counsel was neutral; and that the
number of prior mistrials and the circumstances of jury deliberations did not
cut in favor of dismissal. With respect to this second factor, the State
represented that it had received information that in the first trial, the jury
had reached a unanimous verdict finding Pasene guilty of second-degree murder,
but that during a delay caused by the need to address a report of alleged
(continued...)
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court's consideration and application of the Moriwake 
factors, we conclude that Pasene failed to demonstrate that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying his motion to dismiss. See Deedy, 141 Hawai' i at 224-32, 407 P.3d at 180-88. 
II.
 
Pasene argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
permitting Detective McCormick to testify that he had eliminated Muna as a suspect in the case. Pasene asserts that this testimony was tantamount to an opinion that Muna was innocent, which Pasene claims was prejudicial to him because his "defense in large part was that Mr. Muna was the shooter, and that [Pasene] was misidentified due to his resemblance to Mr. Muna." Pasene contends that the Circuit Court should have precluded Detective McCormick's testimony under Hawai' i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rule 403.
11 He also contends that because Detective 
McCormick did not witness the shooting, his testimony was not rationally based on his perception as required by HRE Rule 701.
12 
We conclude that Pasene's arguments are without merit. 
A.
 
Detective McCormick was the lead detective in the
 
homicide investigation. At Queen's Medical Center, immediately
 after the fatal shooting of Peneueta, Detective McCormick was
 provided with the names of Pasene, Muna, and Toloai as possible
 suspects. On the day of the shooting, Muna came to the police
 station and was interviewed. After interviewing Muna, Detective
 
10(...continued)
improper contact with a juror, the jury re-voted and was split 9 to 3 in favor
of guilty.
 
11 HRE Rule 403 provides:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the
jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
12
 HRE Rule 701 provides:
 
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the
witness' testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is
limited to those opinions or inferences which are (1)
rationally based on the perception of the witness, and (2)
helpful to a clear understanding of the witness' testimony
or the determination of a fact in issue. 
20
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
McCormick took steps to corroborate the information Muna
 
provided, including reviewing recordings from surveillance
 cameras in Chinatown and surveillance cameras in the Plaza Hotel
 that were taken on the date of the shooting.
13
 
Detective McCormick was permitted to testify at trial
 
that Muna was interviewed and that he was not arrested in the
 case. Detective McCormick was also permitted to testify that he
 was able to eliminate Muna as a suspect based in part on his
 review of Chinatown surveillance videos:
 
[Prosecutor:] Q. Okay. So just to recap, you were
given three names at the Queen's Hospital?
 
[Detective McCormick:] A. Yes.
 
Q. One of 'em is Cedro Muna?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And I asked you if Cedro Muna had ever been
arrested and you said no?
 
A. Correct.
 
Q. Then I asked you what steps you took. And so now
 
I'm going to begin with my question.
 
A. Okay.
 
Q. As part of your investigation of Cedro Muna, you
reviewed some of the camera videotape from Chinatown; is
that correct?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. And based upon your review of that -- of
that video, that was part of the reason why you were able to
eliminate Mr. Muna as a suspect? 
A. That was part of the reason, yes.
 
13 The record indicates that Muna denied any involvement in the
shooting and told Detective McCormick that he heard gunshots just after he and
Toloai got into a taxi in Chinatown that dropped him off at the Plaza Hotel.
Detective McCormick purportedly reviewed video recordings from the Chinatown
surveillance cameras for the early morning of March 28, 2009, which depicted
two people, one resembling Muna, getting into a taxi on River Street as
another vehicle, similar to the suspect Buick, passed the taxi coming from the
opposite direction. Due to technical difficulties, the video recordings
purportedly reviewed by Detective McCormick were not preserved because they
were inadvertently overwritten. As a result, the Circuit Court did not permit
Detective McCormick to describe in detail the contents of the video
 recordings. Detective Coons obtained video surveillance footage from the
Plaza Hotel, which the police described as showing a male resembling Muna
enter the hotel lobby on March 28, 2009 at about 4:27 a.m. and then leave
twelve minutes later. The State introduced a copy of the surveillance footage
from the Plaza Hotel, but the State's copy did not include a date or time
stamp. Detective McCormick also interviewed taxi driver Kawelolani.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Okay. And in addition to other parts of your
investigation which -- in addition to the video that you saw
led you to eliminate Mr. Muna as a suspect in the shooting?
 
A. Yes.14
 
B.
 
In asserting that the charges against him were based on
 
a misidentification, Pasene explicitly and implicitly challenged
 
the validity, competence, and thoroughness of the police
 investigation. Detective McCormick's testimony was relevant to
 explain the actions of the police in conducting their
 investigation and to address the implication that the police
 investigation was deficient for failing to adequately investigate
 whether Muna was one of the shooters. We conclude that the
 probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed
 by the danger of unfair prejudice. See HRE Rule 403. We also
 
reject Pasene's argument that because Detective McCormick did not
 witness the shooting, his testimony was inadmissible as not
 rationally based on his perception. Detective McCormick had
 personal knowledge of the actions taken by Detective Coons and
 himself to eliminate Muna as a suspect. Accordingly, we conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not err in admitting Detective
 McCormick's testimony.
 
III.
 
Pasene contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
admitting cell phone site records for the cell phone associated
 with the number 699-1829. The admitted records identified the
 location of the particular Mobi cell tower that the Mobi cell
 phone with the number 699-1829 was communicating with at various
 times during the period surrounding the shooting on March 28,
 2009.
 
The process by which a cell phone communicates with
 
cell towers, which generates the information contained in cell
 phone site records, has been explained as follows:
 
14
 Detective Coons was also permitted to testify that his review of
video from Chinatown surveillance cameras was one of the aspects that led
police to rule out Muna as a suspect. Pasene does not specifically challenge
Detective Coons' testimony on appeal. Detective Coons also testified that he
 obtained surveillance footage from the Plaza Hotel, which was introduced at
trial. 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A cell phone transmits and receives signals throughout a
cellular network like a two-way radio. Cell phone networks
are divided into geographic coverage areas that are called
cell sites or towers. Each cell site contains an antenna
 that receives and transmits signals to cell phones. . . .
The size of the area served by a cell site will depend upon
a number of factors, including but not limited to, the
height of the antennas, topography of the land, vegetative
cover and physical obstructions. When a call is placed on a
cell phone, the phone will connect to the cell site with the
strongest signal. As a cell phone user moves from place to
place, the cell phone automatically switches to the tower
that provides the best reception.
 
. . . . 
[C]ell phone service providers create and maintain records
of cell phone interaction with cell phone towers. It has
 been observed that a cell service provider collects and
stores historical cell site data for its own business
 purposes, perhaps to monitor or optimize service on its
network or to accurately bill its customers for the segments
of its network that they use. That same information makes
 it possible to identify at least the general location of a
cell phone at the time the phone connects to a tower.
 
State v. Johnson, 797 S.E.2d 557, 562-563 (W. Va. 2017)
 
(citations, parentheticals, and quotation marks omitted).
 
Pasene argues that the Circuit Court erred in admitting
 
Mobi's cell phone site records for number 699-1829 under HRE Rule
 803(b)(6) (2016)
15 because he claims the records were created
 
solely in anticipation of litigation or prosecution. He further
 contends that the State failed to show that the information set
 forth in the records was based on a reliable foundation. We
 conclude that Pasene's arguments are without merit.
 
15 HRE Rule 803(b)(6) provides in relevant part:
 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule,
even though the declarant is available as a witness:
 
. . . .
 (b)	 Other exceptions.
 
. . . . 
(6)	 Records of regularly conducted activity. A
 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in
any form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or
diagnoses, made in the course of a regularly conducted
activity, at or near the time of the acts, events,
conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, as shown by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness,
. . . unless the sources of information or other
 circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
1.
 
Prior to his first trial, Pasene moved in limine to
 
preclude admission of the cell phone site records. At the first
 trial, the Circuit Court, the Honorable Richard W. Pollack
 presiding, heard testimony from Monaco, a network engineering
 manager and custodian of records for Mobi, and allowed cross-
examination by Pasene in order to determine whether the State had
 laid an adequate foundation for the cell phone site records.
 
Monaco testified that he had over 16 years of
 
experience working with cellular telephones as a radio engineer,
 systems engineer, and network engineer. He also received on-the­job training on plotting the geographical location of where cell
 phone calls originated. He explained, "I design, build, and
 troubleshoot the network from –- everything from the cell sites
 back to the switch." In explaining how cell phone calls are
 made, Monaco stated,
 
the phone communicates to the cell tower and says, hey, I'm
either making a call or I'm -- a call is coming in. And
 that page happens, and then a communication channel is set
up. That channel's used to bridge the radio portion of the
network that's from the handset to the cell tower. From
 that, it's all circuit-switched. It's all, you know, T-1
lines that -- or bring it back to our switch. Our switch
 connects -- or recognizes who the far end is and switches it
over and completes the call to the far end user.
 
Monaco explained that the "switch," which is like a
 
computer, is manufactured by Nortel and "connects the inbound leg
 
of the call to the outbound leg of the call," and the switch
 generates the call record. Monaco received training from Nortel
 in 2005 on translations and routing. He also worked with Nortel
 during his previous employment with Sprint. Monaco explained
 that Nortel guaranteed that the switch would work without fail
 99.999 percent of the time, and Nortel was selected based on its
 past performance and reliability. Mobi did not conduct tests on
 the switch for accuracy. Rather, Monaco explained that "the
 whole system is fully redundant and alarmed" so if anything fails
 at any stage in the process of a call, an alarm will sound. 
Monaco testified that all the information contained in the cell
 phone site records was generated and kept in the ordinary course
 of Mobi's business. 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Monaco further explained that the switch produces call
 
detail records which includes a code identifying the particular
 
cell tower used. In preparing the cell phone site records, he
 read the code to identify the cell tower used, then he cross-
referenced the tower with a database listing the street address
 for each Mobi tower, which Mobi also kept in the ordinary course
 of its business. The cell tower address can be looked up
 manually, but Monaco created a computer program to perform the
 cross-referencing automatically. In this case, in response to
 the State's subpoena, Monaco included the street address of the
 applicable cell phone tower in preparing the cell phone site
 records.
 
The Circuit Court found that Monaco qualified as an
 
expert, that the State had laid a sufficient foundation for the
 admission of the cell phone site records, and that the records
 were admissible. The Circuit Court explained: 
[the relevant information was] already retained and
kept in the phone records of [Mobi]. All they did was
actually come up with a program which retrieved the
record based on a subpoena from the government, and
there's nothing to show that these records aren't
trustworthy. . . . This is not a party that created
the records. They're a neutral company that retains
these records, and they were retrieved based on a
subpoena. And they have no interest in the
disposition of how the records are generated.
 
Secondly, with respect to the reliability, this
comes in under two ways. He was trained by Nortel.
He's worked in the business. He knows some of these
 companies. He knows the reliability. That's why he
was involved in the selection [of the Nortel switch].
He's very familiar with reliability. And secondly,
this system has all kinds of redundancy and alerts if
there's malfunctioning.
 
2.
 
During the second trial, Pasene again moved in limine
 
to exclude the cell phone site records. The Circuit Court, the
 
Honorable Rom A. Trader presiding, reviewed Monaco's testimony
 from the first trial and found that Monaco qualified as an expert
 in the area of cell phone technology and the application of that
 technology to the Mobi system. The Circuit Court further ruled
 that the cell phone site records "would be admissible as business
 records under 803(b)(6) of the Rules of Evidence." For purposes
 of the third trial, the Circuit Court incorporated its ruling
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the second trial in denying Pasene's renewed motion in
 
limine to exclude the cell phone site records.
 
3.
 
At the third trial, Monaco was qualified as an expert
 
in cell phone technology and the technique of locating and
 plotting origins of cell phone calls using cell phone records. 
Monaco explained how a cell phone communicates with a cell tower
 in making a phone call and how that information is collected and
 maintained by Mobi. Monaco testified that Mobi collects
 information regarding "the cell tower and sector that the call is
 made from" so that if problems arise, Mobi knows where to target
 its repair efforts. Monaco further explained that the general
 geographical location of where cell phone calls originate can be
 determined based on the coverage area of the cell tower and
 sector.
 
Monaco testified that Mobi maintains records showing
 
what calls were made by a specific phone number and what cell
 site towers were accessed by that phone in making those specific
 calls. Such cell detail records are generated, recorded, and
 maintained by computers (the Nortel switch) at or near the time
 the calls are made, and the computers are programed to keep
 accurate records. Monaco explained that such records need to be
 accurate because "it's important for companies to know when their
 customers are using the phone. For us it's particularly
 important to know for troubleshooting purposes when we have
 issues how to target those areas. So we use those records."
 
The cell detail records show a Common Language Locating
 
Indicator field (the CLLI field), "a coded number that when
 decoded gives the cell site and sector." Based on this coded
 number, Monaco is able to determine the particular cell site or
 tower, including its street address, that a cell phone was
 communicating with. Monaco explained how he obtained and
 prepared the cell phone site records for the 699-1829 cell phone
 that were introduced at trial.
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
1. 
We are not persuaded by Pasene's contention that the 
cell phone site records were inadmissible under HRE Rule 
803(b)(6) because they were prepared by Mobi solely in anticipation of litigation or prosecution. The rationale behind the HRE Rule 803(b)(6) "business records" hearsay exception is the "hallmark of reliability" established by the "regularity and continuity [of business records] which produce habits of precision, the actual experience of business in relying upon the records, and the duty to make an accurate record as part of a continuing job or occupation." HRE Rule 803 Commentary and citation (brackets omitted). On the other hand, records prepared in anticipation of litigation may lack reliability and trustworthiness because they are often "created with the motivation of prevailing against a particular party." State v. 
Fitzwater, 122 Hawai' i 354, 364, 227 P.3d 520, 530 (2010). 
In Fitzwater, the Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded that 
a speed check card that verified the accuracy of police car speedometer could qualify for admission as a business record under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) in an excessive speeding prosecution. The court rejected Fitzwater's claim that the speed check card was inadmissible because it was created in anticipation of litigation. The court reasoned that the speed check card was "created in a non-adversarial setting" and was not "created for use in a particular dispute" or "for the specific purpose of prosecuting Fitzwater." Id. 
Similarly, the information and underlying data
 
contained in the cell phone site records were generated and
 maintained by Mobi as part of its business records independent of
 and unrelated to the State's prosecution of Pasene. As the
 Circuit Court observed in admitting the cell phone site records
 in the first trial, Mobi, the company that created the records,
 was not a party to the litigation; Mobi was a neutral company
 that had kept and maintained the relevant information as part of
 its own business records; and there was nothing to show that the
 proffered records were untrustworthy. The cell phone site
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
records bore the hallmarks of reliability that underlie the
 
business records exception, and none of the suspect motivations
 and questions regarding trustworthiness associated with documents
 created in anticipation of litigation were applicable. See id.
 
at 363-64; 227 P.3d at 529-30. The need by Monaco to query data
 kept in the company's computer systems or read codes to identify
 cell towers in compiling the cell phone site records did not
 prevent them from being admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). See
 
People v. Zavala, 156 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841, 846-47 (Cal. Ct.
 App. 2013) ("That the documents ultimately entered in trial were
 necessarily produced by human query does not render the data
 inadmissible because the underlying data itself was not produced
 by human input, but rather, was recorded by the computer system
 itself each time a user made a call."); Commonwealth of Penn. v.
 McEnany, 732 A.2d 1263, 1272-73 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1999) (concluding
 that electronically stored call records may qualify as a business
 record even if it needed to be translated from binary code to
 understandable English prior to trial).
 
2.
 
Pasene's contention that the State failed to show that
 
the information set forth in the records was based on a reliable
 foundation is likewise without merit. The State's establishment
 that Mobi relied upon the records in conducting its business and
 that the records qualified under the business records exception
 provided strong indicia of reliability. In addition, the State
 presented evidence that the Nortel switch which generated the
 underlying data was guaranteed to be 99.999 percent accurate;
 that Monaco was trained by Nortel; that Monaco was familiar with
 the reliability of the Nortel switch; and that the Nortel system
 was fully redundant to prevent malfunctions with comprehensive
 alarms to warn of problems at any stage of the process. Courts
 from other jurisdictions that have been called upon to decide
 whether to admit cell phone site records have almost universally
 determined that such records are admissible. E.g., U.S. v.
 
Jones, 918 F. Supp. 2d 1, 5 (D.C. 2003); People v. Fountain, 62
 N.E.3d 1107, 1124 (Ill. App. Ct. 2016); Johnson, 797 S.E.2d at
 563.
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pasene claims that Monaco did not establish that the
 
program he designed to cross-reference a site tower with its
 
street address was widely accepted in the industry. However,
 Monaco explained that he could have manually looked up the street
 address for each cell tower but simply designed a program to
 perform this function automatically. Pasene did not demonstrate
 that a computer program performing such a basic function had to
 be widely accepted in the industry before it could be used by an
 expert. In any event, Monaco testified at trial, explained what
 the program did, and could have been cross-examined regarding any
 claimed inaccuracy in cross-referencing a cell tower with its
 street address. 
Pasene also contends that the cell phone site records
 
should have been excluded because they do not precisely establish
 the location of a cell phone at a given time. This is because 
testimony at trial showed that a cell phone communicates with the
 cell tower emitting the strongest signal, which generally, but
 not always, is the site closest to the cell phone. However, the
 evidence presented at trial established the limitations on using
 the cell phone site records to precisely establish the location
 of a cell phone, and Pasene's argument goes to the weight, and
 not the admissibility, of the records. 
IV.
 
Pasene argues that the Circuit Court erred in admitting
 
evidence of his meetings and transactions with the undercover
 officer. Although the Circuit Court precluded the State from
 referring to these activities as involving drugs,
16 Pasene
 
characterizes the evidence admitted as "evidence regarding the
 Defendant's prior drug transactions." He contends that the
 Circuit Court erred in admitting the evidence of undercover
 contacts because its probative value was substantially outweighed
 
16
 Permitting direct evidence of Pasene's involvement in drugs would
have served to strengthen the State's case against Pasene. Such evidence
 
could have been used to show the reason for possible hostility between groups
from San Francisco and KPT and why Pasene, who was from San Francisco, would
have a specific motive to kill Peneueta, who was from KPT. Such evidence
 could also have been used to explain why Sakaria and Tagataese, both from KPT,
would be familiar with Pasene and feel confident they could identify him, even
if they had not personally associated with him. 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the danger of unfair prejudice under HRE Rule 403. We
 
disagree.
 
The evidence of Pasene's numerous meetings and
 
interactions with the undercover officer in the period
 immediately preceding the shooting was highly relevant to showing
 that Pasene was using and in possession of the blue Buick and the
 cell phone with the number 699-1829 at the time of the shooting.
 Pasene's use and possession of the Buick and cell phone, in turn,
 was highly relevant to showing that he was the driver of the
 Buick who shot and killed Peneueta. Evidence that Pasene was the
 subject of an undercover investigation and had engaged in
 numerous interactions with the undercover officer was necessary
 to explain why the police had focused their attention on Pasene.
 It also served to enhance the significance and credibility of the
 testimony of task force officers that Pasene was the only person
 seen driving the Buick in the month before the shooting and that
 Pasene was the sole user of the cell phone with the 699-1828
 number in their dealing with him.
 
Pasene was not the registered owner of the Buick or the
 
named subscriber for the cell phone. Pasene claimed at trial
 that he only occasionally drove the Buick; that the Buick was
 owned by Muna; and that he was not the person who drove the Buick
 and shot Peneueta. Pasene also claimed that he only used the
 cell phone on occasion; that the cell phone belonged to Fasi; and
 that he did not have possession of the cell phone when the Buick
 was set on fire in Wahiawa shortly after the shooting. The
 undercover contacts evidence challenged by Pasene provided direct
 and concrete links between Pasene and the Buick and cell phone,
 and thereby served to corroborate the eyewitness testimony that
 Passene was the driver of the Buick who shot Peneueta. The
 challenged evidence was therefore highly probative of crucial
 issues in dispute.
17
 
The Circuit Court attempted to minimize any unfair
 
prejudice by prohibiting the State from referring to the
 undercover contacts as involving drugs. Pasene, however,
 
17
 Pasene fails to show that his proffered stipulation provided the
necessary context and the same probative value as the admitted evidence.
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends that the permitted evidence implied that drugs were 
involved. We conclude that even if the permitted evidence strongly indicated Pasene's involvement in drug activity, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. See State v. 
Cordeiro, 90 Hawai' i 390, 413-16, 56 P.3d 692, 716-18 (2002). 
V.
 
Pasene's argument that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying Pasene's request to excuse a juror is without merit. 
During a break in the testimony of the undercover
 
officer, a juror approached the officer and asked if he practiced
 martial arts. The officer, recognizing that the person posing
 the question was a juror, shook his head and had no further
 contact with the juror, who the officer said was a "[c]omplete
 stranger." The officer reported the incident to the Circuit
 Court. In response, the Circuit Court questioned the juror, who
 verified the officer's account of the incident. The juror stated
 that he asked the witness if the witness practiced jiu jitsu, to
 which the witness responded no. The juror stated that this was
 the extent of the contact. The juror said he had mentioned the
 incident to one other juror, and he just told the other juror
 that the witness did not do jiu jitsu. The juror stated that the
 incident would not affect his ability to be fair and impartial.
 
The Circuit Court denied Pasene's request to excuse the
 
juror. The Circuit Court found that the juror's inquiry was
 "fairly innocuous," and that while the juror's inquiry "may be a
 violation of what the Court's instructions were, there's nothing
 about that particular encounter that remotely touched upon the
 facts of this case." The Circuit Court further found that based
 on its examination of the officer and the juror, there was no
 suggestion that the juror could not be fair and impartial.
 
We review a trial court's decision regarding whether to
 
excuse a juror for abuse of discretion. See State v. Jones, 45
 
Haw. 247, 262, 365 P.2d 460, 468 (1961). We conclude under the
 
31
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances presented that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Pasene's request to excuse the juror.18
 
VI.
 
Pasene contends that the prosecutor engaged in
 
misconduct which deprived him of a fair trial and that the
 Circuit Court erred in denying his motions for mistrial and for a
 new trial that were based on this claim. We conclude that the
 prosecutor's alleged misconduct did not deprive Pasene of a fair
 trial and does not warrant vacating his convictions.
 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the
 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the
 prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a
 fair trial." State v. Mara, 98 Hawai' i 1, 16, 41 P.3d 157, 172 
(2002) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). To
 determine whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct requires
 vacating the defendant's conviction, the reviewing court
 considers "the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness
 or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness
 of the evidence against the defendant." State v. Clark, 83
 
18 It appears that the Circuit Court and Pasene viewed the juror's
question to the witness as a violation of a prior instruction of the Circuit
Court not to have any contact with any of the parties or witnesses in the
case. However, the Circuit Court instructed the jurors at the beginning of
the trial not to "discuss the case with anyone" and not to "allow anyone to
discuss the case with you." With respect to contact with parties and
witnesses, it stated: 
We talked about seeing the attorneys, right, out and about
the courthouse or anyplace else. If you see them, you can
say "hi"; see witnesses, you know, same goes for that. But
 please have as minimal interaction as you possibly can with
them because we want to make sure the trial is fair in
 actuality -- both in actuality but as well as in perception,
okay, all right, and appearances.
 
Thus, there is some question as to whether the juror's question to the
witnesses violated the Circuit Court's prior instruction as the question did
not involve a discussion concerning a matter related to the case, and the
court's instruction did not prohibit jurors from having all contact with
witnesses. In any event, as the Circuit Court found, the brief exchange
between the juror and the witness was benign and did not warrant removing the
juror. We reject Pasene's contention that the Circuit Court should have
questioned the other juror. When asked at trial whether questioning of the
other juror would be appropriate, Pasene's counsel deferred to the Circuit
Court on that issue, and the record does not indicate that questioning of the
other juror was necessary.
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
After the jury returned its guilty verdicts, the 
Circuit Court considered Pasene's motions for mistral and new 
trial, which were based on alleged prosecutorial misconduct during the trial. 
The Circuit Court considered the same three 
factors an appellate court considers in reviewing claims of prosecutorial misconduct. While the Circuit Court stated that it did not condone certain aspects of the prosecutor's alleged misconduct, it ruled that the alleged misconduct did not deprive Pasene of a fair trial and denied Pasene's motions. In support of its decision, the Circuit Court concluded that to the extent the prosecutor had engaged in misconduct, it acted promptly in striking the prosecutor's remarks and giving curative instructions, and it cited the relative strength of the State's evidence during the third trial. 
A.
 
Pasene argues that the prosecutor engaged in misconduct
 
by presenting argument in his opening statement and asking
 leading questions during the State's case-in-chief. 
Prior to
 
opening statement, the Circuit Court twice instructed the jury to
 the effect that "what the attorneys say in opening statement is
 not evidence. The evidence comes from the witness stand and the
 exhibits that will be admitted in the case." The Circuit Court
 sustained objections by defense counsel that the prosecutor's
 remarks in opening statement were argumentative and instructed
 the jury to disregard one remark. During the redirect
 examination of Sakaria cited by Pasene in his brief, the Circuit
 Court sustained several objections that the prosecutor was asking
 leading questions, and the prosecutor rephrased those questions. 
We conclude that the prosecutor's alleged misconduct during
 opening statement and the State's case-in-chief was relatively
 innocuous and did not prejudice Pasene's right to a fair trial.
 
B.
 
Pasene contends that the prosecutor engaged in
 
misconduct during closing arguments by making arguments not
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
supported by the evidence and in remarks concerning the
 
presumption of innocence. 
1.
 
Pasene cites the following remarks by the prosecutor in
 
closing as improper arguments not supported by the evidence.
 
a. The prosecutor characterized Hall, the registered
 
owner of the Buick, as "a mentally handicapped person." The
 Circuit Court sustained Pasene's objection to this
 characterization and instructed the jury to disregard it. The
 evidence presented at trial was that Hall did not have a driver's
 license, was accompanied by a social worker to her police
 interview, and was described as a "simple person" and a "simple
 type personality person."
 
Although the Circuit Court sustained the objection, we
 
conclude that the evidence that Hall was accompanied by a social
 worker and was described as "simple" and having a "simple type
 personality" could arguably imply that Hall was mentally
 handicapped. In any event, the primary significance of the
 State's evidence regarding Hall was to show that Hall was not
 driving the Buick, even though she was listed as the registered
 owner. The State introduced evidence that Hall did not have a
 driver's license and Hall's lack of ownership of or control over
 the Buick was not disputed. We conclude that the prosecutor's
 characterization of Hall did not deprive Pasene of a fair trial.
 
b. The prosecutor stated: 
Now, lets talk about Cedro Muna. Okay. Cedro Muna was not
 
one of the shooters, but he was one of the suspects. The
 detectives told you that. How was he eliminated as a
 possible shooter? They didn't go on his word. What they
did was they told you they went to the Chinatown station and
they looked at the camera, and they saw a person that looked
like Cedro Muna.
 
Pasene objected to the prosecutor last statement, and the Circuit
 
Court sustained the objection. The Circuit Court also struck the
 prosecutor's remark and gave a strong cautionary instruction: 
You are specifically instructed to completely disregard in
its entirety the last statement made by the prosecutor with
respect to what may or may not have been observed by law
enforcement utilizing the Chinatown surveillance system as
to Mr. Muna or anything else for that matter. And so you
are not to consider it in any way, shape, or form in your
deliberations.
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At trial, Detective McCormick testified that he had
 
eliminated Muna in part by reviewing videotape from Chinatown,
 
but had not stated what he saw on the videotape. The
 prosecutor's statement was therefore improper.
19 Nevertheless,
 
the prosecutor did not say how seeing Muna on the Chinatown video
 eliminated Muna as a suspect, and the State introduced ample
 other evidence supporting the detectives' elimination of Muna as
 a suspect, including the Plaza Hotel video, the detectives'
 interviews of taxi driver Kawelolani, and Sakaria and Tagataese,
 who witnessed the shooting. Given these circumstances and the
 Circuit Court's strong curative instruction, we conclude that the
 prosecutor's improper comment did not affect Pasene's substantial
 rights.
 
c. Toward the end of the prosecutor's closing, the
 
following exchange occurred:
 
[Prosecutor:] Who else IDs Mr. Pasene? [Kawelolani]
the taxi driver. [Kawelolani] the taxi driver and [Muna],
they're sitting at the light waiting for the light to turn
green so they can turn left onto Beretania, and guess what,
here comes the blue Buick.
 
[Defense counsel]: Objection, you Honor. Mr.
 
Kawelolani never identified Mr. Pasene.
 
[Prosecutor]: He did.
 
[Defense counsel]: That misstates the testimony.
 The Court: At the bench.
 
At side bar, the Circuit Court noted that Muna had
 
identified Pasene in the blue Buick, but directed the prosecutor
 
to clarify his statement as to Kawelolani because Kawelolani did
 not directly identify Pasene. When closing argument resumed, the
 prosecutor clarified that 
[Kawelolani] said that he saw the driver, and he later, like
Mary Savusa and Tutuila, recognized that person on the news.
Cedro Muna, who is sitting directly behind [Kawelolani] at
that same moment, sees the same blue car coming towards the
taxi and turning right onto River. He recognizes the car
 
19
 The State notes that at the second trial, Detective McCormick was
permitted to testify that in reviewing Chinatown videos, he "saw an individual
who resembled Cedro Muna get in the back seat of that taxicab directly behind
the driver." While this may provide support for the State's contention that
the prosecutor was confused by evidence presented at a prior trial in making
the improper argument, it does not justify the prosecutor's action.
Obviously, a prosecutor cannot base his or her closing arguments on evidence
presented at a prior trial.
 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because he used to be the owner of that car, and he
recognizes the driver as Iosefa Pasene.
 
Given the prosecutor's clarification, which accurately
 
recounted the evidence presented during the trial, we conclude
 
that any misstatement regarding Kawelolani's identification of
 Pasene did not affect Pasene's substantial rights.
 
2.
 
The following exchange occurred at the beginning of the
 
prosecutor's rebuttal closing:
 
[Prosecutor]: Let me start where [defense counsel]
began. He has this nice drawing of presumption of
innocence, blah, blah, blah, right, it's our burden, and
we're over here and he draws a stick man. But when you get
picked up for shoplifting or when you get picked up for a
DUI, you're presumed innocent. When -­
[Defense counsel]: Well, objection, your Honor.
 
THE COURT: Hold on a second. Overruled.
 [Prosecutor]: That's the nature of the system. So
 
what he's telling you is a fundamental principle of the laws
and the justice system.
 
So John Gotti, when he goes to trial, he's presumed
innocent.
 
[Defense counsel]: Objection, your Honor
 
[Prosecutor]: Charles -­THE COURT: Hold on. Hold on a second. At the bench,
please.
 
The Circuit Court sustained Pasene's objection to the
 
prosecutor's references to "John Gotti" and "Charles" (presumably 
Charles Manson) and instructed the jurors to "disregard the last
 statements of the prosecutor." The prosecutor resumed by
 explaining to the jury: "My point being that our system of
 justice, that's the starting point every time no matter what
 crime, all right, so it's not something brand-new. It's not some
 magical concept. That's how we start. Let's move on."
 
It appears that the prosecutor was attempting to argue
 
that the presumption of innocence applies to every defendant in
 every case and therefore its existence does not necessarily mean
 that Pasene is not guilty. Such an argument would not be
 improper. However, the prosecutor's choice of words in making
 his argument, such as using the phrase "blah, blah, blah" in
 
36
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
referring to defense counsel's remarks concerning the presumption
 
of innocence, was careless and poor. His references to John
 Gotti and Charles Manson also raised potential concerns. These
 concerns, however, were mitigated by the Circuit Court's
 instruction to disregard the references to John Gotti and Charles
 Manson and by the prosecutor's subsequent remarks, which
 indicated that: (1) he was not comparing Pasene to John Gotti or
 Charles Manson; (2) that his references to them was to show that
 the presumption of innocence applies to every defendant; and
 (3) that he was not arguing that the presumption of innocence did
 not apply to Pasene. Given the circumstances, we conclude that
 the prosecutor's remarks in rebuttal closing did not deprive
 Pasene of his right to a fair trial.
 
C.
 
In light of the foregoing analysis, and based on our
 
review of the record, we conclude that individually and
 cumulatively the prosecutor's alleged acts of misconduct did not
 deny Pasene of a fair trial and do not warrant vacating his
 convictions.
20
 
CONCLUSION 
For the reasons set forth in this Memorandum Opinion, 
we affirm the Circuit Court's Amended Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 27, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Thomas M. Otake,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
20
 We do not condone or excuse a prosecutor's conduct in making
improper remarks in opening statement or closing statement or asking improper
questions during trial. We agree with the Circuit Court that the prosecutor's
conduct in this case created issues that could easily have been avoided and
unnecessarily raised the potential for a mistrial. 
37
 