 
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS  AND P ACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000603 29-JAN-2025 08:15 AM Dkt. 153 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I  
---o0o---
DAVID KIMO FRANKEL, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES AND RESORTTRUST HAWAII LLC, 
Defendants-Appellees. 
 
 
NO. CAAP-20-0000603 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CC181001959) 
  
JANUARY 29, 2025 
 
 
NAKASONE AND MCCULLEN, JJ., WITH HIRAOKA, PRESIDING JUDGE, 
CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART 
 
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCCULLEN, J. 
Simply put, this case is about whether the State of 
Hawai‘i fulfilled its trust duty regarding the ceded land at 
issue here, "Lot 41." 
To have a deeper understanding of the State's duty as 
to Lot 41, some historical context is necessary. 
Historically,   
 
 
 
  
  
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[l]and and natural resources were not privately owned. Rather, 
the Hawaiian people maintained a communal stewardship over the 
land, ocean, and all of the natural resources of the islands." 
Melody Kapilialoha MacKenzie, Historical Background, in Native 
Hawaiian Law: A Treatise 6-7 (Melody Kapilialoha MacKenzie et 
al. eds. 2015); see Ching v. Case, 145 Hawai‘ i 148, 177 n.49, 449 
P.3d 1146, 1175 n.49 (2019) ("To native Hawaiians, land is not a commodity; . . . [it] is part of their ‘ ohana, and they care for 
it as they do for other members of their families." (citations 
omitted)). 
Western contact changed that. Following the overthrow 
of the Hawaiian Kingdom in 1893 and annexation by the United 
States in 1898, the crown and government lands of 
Hawai‘i were 
ceded to (or taken by)1 the United States. MacKenzie, supra, at 
24, 27; Ching, 145 Hawai‘ i at 176–77, 449 P.3d at 1174–75 
(chronicling the transfer of ceded lands during Hawaii's 
kingdom, republic, territorial, and statehood eras). In 1959, 
those crown and government lands were returned to 
Hawai‘i, and as 
explained more fully below, are held in trust by the State. 
1 Of course, as with history in general, it depends on whose historical 
narrative prevailed. See State v. Wilson
, 154 Hawai‘i 8, 21, 543 P.3d 440, 
453 (2024) ("History is messy. It's not straightforward or fair. It's not 
made by most."). 
2   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MacKenzie, supra, at 32; Ching, 145 Hawai‘ i at 176-77, 449 P.3d 
at 1174-75. 
We hold that the State, through Defendant-Appellee the 
Board of Land and Natural Resources (or BLNR), did not fulfill 
its duty regarding Lot 41, which is part of the returned crown 
and government lands (or ceded lands) the State holds in trust. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Factual Background 
In 1963, four years after the crown and government 
lands were returned, the State entered into an agreement with 
the Kahala Hilton Hotel, Charles J. Pietsch, Jr., and David T. Pietsch (collectively, Kahala Hotel)
2 to allow Kahala Hotel to 
"dredge a swimming area and construct a beach . . . for and on behalf of the State." The agreement provided that "[t]itle to 
and ownership of all filled and reclaimed lands and improvements 
seaward of the makai boundaries . . . shall remain in and vest 
in the State of [Hawai‘ i] and shall be used as a public beach." 
(Emphasis added.) 
This newly constructed beach and swimming area 
(Lot 41) is part of the returned crown and government lands. 
2 The Waialae Country Club and the Bishop Estate Trustees were also 
parties to the agreement, but they appear to be nominal parties based on the 
filings below and on appeal. 
3   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In 1968, shortly after completion of Lot 41, the Board 
granted a temporary month-to-month permit for one year to Kahala 
Hotel allowing it "to enter and occupy" 6,250 square feet of 
Lot 41 for "[r]ecreational purposes." The Board granted these 
temporary month-to-month yearly permits for the next 50 years.3 
B. Procedural Background 1. Board Proceedings 
In June 2018, Sierra Club of Hawai‘ i sent a letter to 
the Board raising several issues related to Kahala Hotel's use 
of Lot 41. Among the issues Sierra Club asked the Board to 
consider was the State's public trust duty. 
In July 2018, Hawaii's Thousand Friends sent a letter 
to the Board also raising the public trust issue: 
3 Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 171-55 (2011) allows the Board to 
grant temporary occupancy of S tate lands on a month- to-month basis not to 
exceed one year, but may allow a permit to continue for additional one- year 
periods: 
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the board of 
land and natural resources may issue permits for the 
temporary occupancy of state lands or an interest therein on a month- to-month basis by direct negotiation without 
public auction, under conditions and rent which will serve the best interests of the State, subject, however, to those 
restrictions as may from time to time be expressly imposed 
by the board. A permit on a month- to-month basis may 
continue for a period not to exceed one year from the date 
of its issuance; provided that the board may allow the permit to continue on a month- to-month basis for additional 
one[-]year periods. 
Whether renewing Kahala Hotel's permit for 50 years as a "temporary 
occupancy" is proper under this statute is not an issue before us. 
4   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this era of climate change and rising seas the 
Department and Board's obligation under the Public Trust 
Doctrine and State Constitution (Article XI, Section 1) to 
". . . conserve and protect Hawai‘ i's natural beauty and all 
resources, including land, water . . ." because "All public 
natural resources are held in trust by the State for the benefit of the people" is even more critical. 
(Emphasis added.) 
In August 2018, the new owner of Kahala Hotel, 
Defendant-Appellee Resorttrust Hawaii (or RTH), requested to 
amend its permit for Lot 41, which granted it use of 40,460 
square feet. The request recounted some of the history of the 
Kahala Hotel's use of Lot 41, noting that the Board granted Kahala Hotel use of the entire parcel in 1986; the parcel served 
as a "buffer zone" between the sandy beach and hotel; and the 
parcel was used for "hukilaus," parties, weddings and other 
"important events," with public access along the side of the 
parking structure and by the shoreline. The request explained 
Resorttrust's attempt to take "corrective action" and 
"substantially reduce" its use of Lot 41. 
Resorttrust identified five categories of 
encroachment: (1) storage of recreational items; (2) restaurant seating; (3) outdoor seating; (4) shower and recreational 
facilities, and (5) roof overhang. Resorttrust did not identify 
or discuss possible alternatives to using ceded land for these 
encroachments in its request. 
5   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a) September 2018 Board Meeting 
On September 14, 2018, the Board held a meeting to 
consider Resorttrust's request. 
Department of Land and Natural 
Resources (DLNR) staff submitted an eight-page report with 
recommendations and numerous attachments regarding Resorttrust's 
request to the Board. This submittal indicated the land subject 
to Resorttrust's request was zoned as urban, and described the 
"trust land status" as "Section 5(b) lands of the Hawaii 
Admission Act."   4
4 Section 5(b) of the Admission Act was the vehicle through which the 
federal government returned crown and government lands to the newly formed 
State of Hawai‘ i, and section 5(f) required th ose lands to be held in trust: 
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) and (d) of 
this section, the United States grants to the State of 
Hawaii, effective upon its admission into the Union, the 
United States' title to all the public lands and other 
public property, and to all lands defined as "available 
lands" by section 203 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 
1920, as amended, within the boundaries of the State of Hawaii, title to which is held by the United States 
immediately prior to its admission into the Union. The 
grant hereby made shall be in lieu of any and all grants provided for new States by provisions of law other than 
this Act, and such grants shall not extend to the State of Hawaii. 
 . . . . 
(f)
 The lands granted to the State of Hawaii by 
subsection (b) of this section . . . together with the 
proceeds from the sale or other disposition of any such 
lands and the income therefrom, shall be held by said State 
as a public trust for the support of the public schools and 
other public educational institutions, for the betterment 
of the conditions of native Hawaiians, as defined in the 
Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, for the 
development of farm and home ownership on as widespread a 
basis as possible for the making of public improvements, 
and for the provision of lands for public use. Such lands, 
(continued . . .) 
6   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As justification for the permit, the staff submittal 
provided that (1) a permit was needed to regulate Kahala Hotel's 
activities, (2) the Property was unsuitable for public auction 
lease, and (3) Resorttrust withdrew its draft environmental 
assessment due to community concerns: 
JUSTIFICATION FOR REVOCABLE PERMIT: 
A land disposition is needed to regulate the hotel's 
improvements and activities at the subject location, and a 
revocable permit is able to meet this objective as supported by the following justifications. 
A. Site issues make property unsuitable for public auction 
lease: 
• No legal vehicular access. 
• Irregular shape. 
• The requested location and other portions of State 
unencumbered lands in the vicinity are not legally 
subdivided lots. 
B. Since RTH became the owner of the hotel around 2014, its 
representative approached the Land Division discussing the possibility of obtaining an easement for some of the 
hotel's activities and improvements. RTH published a 
draft environmental assessment ("DEA") pursuant to 
Chapter 343, [Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS)] in the 
summer of 2017, but decided to withdraw the DEA in 
August 2017 due to community concerns and maintain the 
current revocable permit. 
(Formatting altered.) 
The staff submittal reiterated some of the community's 
concerns and noted the June 2018 letter from Sierra Club was 
(. . . continued) 
proceeds, and income shall be managed and disposed of for one or more of the foregoing purposes in such manner as the 
constitution and laws of said State may provide, and their 
use for any other object shall constitute a breach of trust 
for which suit may be brought by the United States. . . . 
The Admission Act, 1959, Pub. L. No. 86- 3, § 5(b), 73 Stat. 4, reprinted in 
1 HRS at 136– 37 (2009) (emphasis added). 
7   
 
 
 
  
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attached, but did not mention that Sierra Club raised a public 
trust issue. The staff submittal detailed the list of items 
Resorttrust requested to place on Lot 41, including a storage 
area, cabana hale, cabana tents, shower, outdoor restaurant 
seating area, hammock, trash cans, beach chair storage, beach 
chairs, and outrigger canoe storage. 
The staff submittal clarified why individuals may have 
trouble distinguishing between hotel property and State land: 
[T]here is a continuous stretch of landscaped area along 
the Kahala Beach from Diamond Head side to Koko Head 
direction maintained by RTH. As a result, depending on the 
exact location, it may be difficult to distinguish whether 
an individual is physically standing on the hotel property 
or the State land [revocable permit]  area.  
(Internal brackets omitted.) 
The staff submittal also explained that Resorttrust 
installed public access signs, attended neighborhood board 
meetings to share information, maintained Kahala Beach as part 
of its operations, and agreed to continue maintaining Kahala 
Beach. 
In their recommendation to the Board, the staff 
considered HRS Chapter 3435 and Hawai‘ i Administrative Rules 
5 The Hawai‘i Environmental Policy Act (HEPA), as codified in HRS 
Chapter 343 and implemented by HAR Chapters 11- 200.1 and - 201, establishes an 
environmental review process that assesses the environmental, social, 
cultural, and economic impacts of proposed projects or programs prior to their implementation. HEPA also aims to increase public participation 
throughout the environmental review process. HRS § 343- 1 (2010). 
8   
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(HAR) Chapter 11-2006 and determined the project would "probably 
have minimal or no significant effect on the environment[.]" 
The staff thus concluded the project was exempt from preparing 
an environmental assessment and recommended issuing the permit 
for "recreational and maintenance purposes" with certain 
conditions. 
Plaintiff-Appellant David Kimo Frankel submitted 
eleven pages of written testimony regarding the permit request. 
Frankel raised the State's public trust duties regarding Lot 41, among other issues. He also requested a contested case hearing. 
The Board deferred its decision on the revocable 
permit pending receipt of Frankel's contested case petition. 
(b) November 2018 Board Meeting 
The Board met again on November 9, 2018. DLNR staff 
submitted a two-page report with recommendations and numerous attachments for the meeting. In the report, DLNR staff recommended denying Frankel's request for a contested case 
hearing. The staff then reiterated their September 2018 
recommendations. 
The Board approved the revocable permit as DLNR staff 
recommended with additional conditions, including: 
(1) Resorttrust "will obtain the necessary permits or approvals 
6 On December 18, 2018, HAR § 11-200 was repealed and HAR § 11-200.1 
was adopted. 
9   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the uses allowed under this new permit"; (2) "[p]ublic 
access shall be allowed in the permit area, to the extent the 
area is not in use as allowed by the Revocable Permit"; 
(3) "[t]here shall be two (2) twenty feet wide clear pathways 
for public access/walkway"; (4) restaurant overflow seating 
should not exceed fourteen days annually; and (5) "[n]o 
weddings, surf lessons or kayaking/boating activities" are 
allowed in the permitted area. 
Two days prior to the hearing, Frankel submitted 
written testimony explaining he could not attend in person.7 In 
his written testimony, Frankel again raised concerns about the 
Board's "compliance with its public trust duties[.]"8 
(c) Permit Issued 
The ten-page permit was executed on January 29, 2019, 
but retroactive to January 1, 2019. The permit was for "[r]ecreational and maintenance purposes limited to storage area, cabana hale, cabana tent, beach shower, tower caddy, 
hammock, trash can, beach chair storage, clam shell lounger, 
beach chair set up, and outrigger canoes storage." The permit 
established monthly rent at $1,320.05, which could increase to 
7 Agenda Item D- 17: Annual Renewal of Revocable Permits on the Island 
of Oahu, Meeting Before the Board of Land and Natural Resources ( Nov. 2018), 
at 37–38 (written testimony of David Kimo Frankel), 
https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/wp- content/uploads/2018/11/D- 17T-18T-19T.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/G7KB- PB8Z]. 
8 Id. 
10   
 
 
 
  
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$6,300.00 or 3% of gross monthly revenues, whichever was 
greater, as well as other financial details. 
The permit stated "beach chairs, umbrellas, shade 
devices, mats, towels, and personal recreational equipment are 
permitted on the Premises as long as the user is physically 
present or such items have been placed on the Premises at the 
request of the user." (Emphasis added.) It further instructed, 
"[e]xcept as otherwise provided herein, the Permittee shall not 
engage in any presetting of any equipment on the Premises." (Emphasis added.) 
The permit required Resorttrust establish and maintain 
two twenty-foot-wide pathways for public access. It further 
mandated public access "to the extent the area is not occupied 
for a use allowed under the Permit." The permit prohibited 
"weddings, surf lessons, or kayaking/boating activities" on 
Lot 41. 
2. Circuit Court Proceedings 
(a) Frankel's Complaint 
Frankel filed a four-count complaint in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit in December 2018. Under Count 4 (Breach of Trust Duties), the only count relevant to this 
appeal, Frankel asserted procedural and substantive allegations: 
96. BLNR must fulfill public trust duties when it manages 
and renders decisions regarding ceded land. 
11   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
97. Any balancing between public and private purposes 
must begin with a presumption in favor of public use, access and enjoyment. 
98. BLNR may compromise public rights in resources 
pursuant only to a decision made with a level of 
openness, diligence, and foresight commensurate with 
the high priority these rights command under the laws of our state. 
99. BLNR has a trust duty to respond to a permittee's violations of the law and noncompliance with a permit 
on public trust ceded land. 
100. HRS § 171-7 mandates that BLNR shall prevent illegal 
activities on public land and enforce permits of public land. 
101. HRS § 171-6(14) and (15) authorizes BLNR to set, 
charge and collect additional rentals and fines for 
the unauthorized use of public lands by a permittee who violates any term of a permit. 
102. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for [Lot 41] BLNR failed to begin with a presumption in 
favor of public use, access and enjoyment. 
103. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for [Lot 41], BLNR failed to render any findings or 
provide any explanation as to why public recreational 
uses should be sacrificed for a restaurant, storage, 
and other commercial pur poses. 
104. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for 
[Lot 41], BLNR failed to make any findings or provide 
any explanation that justifies excluding members of 
the public from portions of the public trust beach. 
105. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for 
[Lot 41], BLNR failed to exercise diligence. 
106. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for 
[Lot 41], BLNR did not rely on an appraisal, or any 
methodology to establish the rental amount. 
107. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for [Lot 41], BLNR failed to gather reliable information, or use any criteria, to determine an appropriate 
rental amount. 
108. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for [Lot 41], BLNR ignored RTH's violations of the law 
and its permit conditions. 
12   
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
109. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for 
[Lot 41], BLNR failed to exercise the authority vested in it by HRS §§ 171- 7 and 171- 6(14) and (15). 
110. In its decisionmaking on RTH's revocable permit for 
[Lot 41], BLNR breached its trust duties. 
111. BLNR's failure to fulfill their trust obligations harms Frankel's recreational, aesthetic, environmental and beneficial interests. 
(Formatting altered.) 
In his prayer for relief, Frankel requested, among 
other things, that the circuit court (1) invalidate the Board's 
November 2018 approval of the permit, (2) declare any permit 
issued pursuant to the November 2018 approval void ab initio, (3) enjoin DLNR and the Board from granting any permit for 
commercial use of Lot 41 "unless it fully complies with . . . 
its public trust duties," and (4) order the Board to adopt rules 
governing its decision making regarding revocable permits. 
(b) Board's and Restorttrust's Motions for Summary 
Judgment 
The Board moved for summary judgment on all counts, 
stating it was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
As to Count 4, the Board argued the public trust 
doctrine did not apply to Lot 41 because the Hawai‘i Supreme 
Court "specifically declined to rule that other types of public 
land - such as the urban land at issue here - are covered" under 
the public trust doctrine. The Board stated the circuit court 
"should rule on this case based on the present state of the 
13   
 
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
public trust doctrine which does not include state owned land in 
the urban district." 
In the alternative, the Board argued it was still 
entitled to summary judgment because its "decision easily meets 
any reasonable standard for applying the public trust doctrine 
even if applicable here." The Board asserted it "could have -
but did not - allow commercial use of Lot 41" and "could have -
but did not - lease Lot 41 or otherwise afford exclusive rights 
to a private party." To support these assertions, the Board relied on the concept that a "central feature of the public 
trust doctrine is that the State has a duty both to protect 
natural resources and to promote their use and development." 
Numerous exhibits were attached to the Board's motion. Resorttrust also moved for summary judgment and joined 
the Board's motion. 
(c) Frankel's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment 
Frankel moved for summary judgment on Count 4, relying 
in part on article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) and 
article XI, section 1 (Natural Resources Trust) of the Hawai‘ i 
Constitution and "the ancient public trust doctrine[.]" 
Frankel argued the Board breached its duties by 
failing to: 
14   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) "take any enforcement action" regarding the commercial 
use of Lot 41 when the permit was granted for "recreational and maintenance purposes"; 
(2) "provide clarity in granting a new revocable permit[,]" relying on the explanation in In re Waiāhole Ditch Combined Contested Case Hearing 
(Waiāhole I), 94 Hawai‘ i 97, 9 P.3d 409 (2000) that 
"[c]larity in the agency's decision is all the more 
essential 'in a case such as this where the agency 
performs as a public trustee and is duty bound to 
demonstrate it has properly exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and the statute'"; 
(3) "act consistently with trust purposes" because "[t]here is no evidence that the BLNR Defendants began their decisionmaking with a presumption in favor of 
public use access and enjoyment" relying on 
Waiāhole I's explanation that any balancing begins with the presumption in favor of public use; and 
(4) "consider alternatives," such as asking RTH to place the items on its own property. 
(Formatting altered.) See Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai‘ i at 142, 158, 9 
P.3d at 454, 470. 
Frankel further argued that, "[a]t a minimum, the 
[Board] should have prepared written findings to justify 
excluding members of the public from public trust ceded land 
dedicated to be used as a public beach. . . . They failed to do 
so." Frankel attached numerous exhibits to his motion. 
The Board's Opposition. In its opposition to 
Frankel's motion for partial summary judgment, and similar to 
its motion for summary judgment, the Board argued Waiāhole  I 
15   
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"did not extend the scope of the trust doctrine beyond submerged 
land and water" and the Hawai‘i Supreme Court "specifically 
declined to rule that other types of public land - such as the 
urban land at issue here - are covered." 
Resorttrust's Opposition
. Resorttrust also filed an 
opposition to Frankel's motion for partial summary judgment, arguing Frankel's claim failed as a matter of law because he 
"cannot demonstrate the State's public trust obligations apply 
to" Lot 41. (Formatting altered.) Resorttrust argued the 
public trust doctrine did not apply because Lot 41 is not a 
water resource or conservation land. 
Resorttrust then argued that even if the public trust 
doctrine applied to Lot 41, the "evidence in the record, including [Frankel's] declarations, demonstrate that the 
public's interest and use in the remaining 52,520.3 [square 
feet] of the total 55,756.8 [square feet revocable permit] 
Premises is not substantially impaired." Resorttrust further 
argued "the conditions of the most recent [revocable permit] 
evidence [the Board's] careful consideration of public interests 
in the State Parcel and beach, and include measures to further protect those interests." 
Finally, Resorttrust argued the Board properly 
considered alternatives and claimed Frankel "ignore[d] the 
16   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nearly five hours of testimony and questioning by [the Board] at 
the September 14, 2018 meeting, which was followed by over two 
hours of listening, questioning, and deliberating at the 
November 9, 2018 [Board] meeting." 
Resorttrust attached numerous exhibits. One exhibit 
was the Revocable Permits Task Force Report dated June 24, 2016. 
This task force was convened "to revisit and evaluate the 
existing protocols and criteria for selecting a revocable permit 
or a lease for a disposition of use of State lands and to make recommendations for improvement." Among its goals was to 
"satisfy the fiduciary responsibility to the State of Hawai‘ i[,]" 
as the DLNR "has a responsibility to implement the public trust 
in managing State lands and as such, it is [DLNR's] duty to 
award and steward these lands accordingly." The task force's 
"priority was to be mindful of our obligations to the Public 
Trust and stewardship overseeing these public lands." 
The task force submitted a "REVISED BOARD SUBMITTAL 
TEMPLATE" (
Revised Template) to "[s]tandardize the Division['s] 
submittal template to the Board to include a checklist for revocable permits and supporting details for their review[.]" The Revised Template referenced HRS §§ 171-13 and -15, section 5 
lands of the 
Hawai‘i Admission Act, HRS Chapter 343, and HAR 
§ 11-200-8. Nowhere does the Revised Template reference 
17   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
article XI, section 1 (Natural Resources Trust) and article XII, 
section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) of the Hawai‘ i Constitution or the 
public trust. 
(d) Circuit Court's Decisions 
The circuit court denied Frankel's motion for parital 
summary judgment reasoning that the public trust doctrine did not apply to Lot 41 and even if it did, whether an agency 
violated the public trust doctrine was fact-based: 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Plaintiff's Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment as to Count 4, filed April 17, 
2019, is DENIED on the following grounds: 
(1) The public trust doctrine does not apply to 
[Lot 41], which is designated urban district land. The 
Supreme Court of the State of Hawai‘ i has only applied the 
public trust doctrine to conservation district lands and 
use of water resources. 
(2) In the alternative, even if the public trust 
doctrine applies to [Lot 41], Plaintiff's claim that an 
agency violated the public trust doctrine by approving the 
revocable permit at issue here, notwithstanding Plaintiff's 
opposition to that approval before the agency, requires an inherently fact- based balancing analysis of that agency's 
decision, which is not appropriate for determination on summary judgment. 
The circuit court then granted the Board's and 
Resorttrust's motions for summary judgment referencing its 
denial of Frankel's motion for partial summary judgment stating it "has already ruled that the public trust doctrine does not 
apply to [Lot 41], which is designated urban district land. The 
Supreme Court of Hawai‘ i has only applied the public trust 
18   
 
 
 
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
doctrine to conservation district lands and use of water 
resources." 
Frankel filed a timely notice of appeal. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
We review the grant or denial of summary judgment de 
novo. Villaver v. Sylva, 145 Hawaiʻ i 29, 34, 445 P.3d 701, 706 
(2019). "When both sides move for summary judgment and the trial court grants one motion and denies the other, the 
reviewing court should review both sides' summary judgment 
evidence and determine all questions presented." Ke Kauhulu O 
Mānā v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res.
, 154 Hawai‘ i 158, 547 P.3d 1188, 
No. CAAP-18-0000057, 2024 WL 1886115, at *7 (App. Apr. 30, 2024) 
(mem. op.) (citation omitted), cert. granted, No. SCWC-18
-
0000057, 2024 WL 3582474 (Haw. 2024). 
"[W]hether or not an agency has followed proper 
procedures or considered the appropriate factors in making its 
determination is a question of law, and will be reviewed de 
novo." Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. (Superferry), 115 Hawai‘ i 
299, 315, 167 P.3d 292, 308 (2007) (emphasis omitted). 
Motions for reconsideration are reviewed for an abuse 
of discretion. Kaleikini v. Yoshioka , 128 Hawai‘i 53, 68, 283 
P.3d 60, 75 (2012). 
19   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. LEGAL LANDSCAPE 
A. The Public Trust Doctrine 
Historically, "the Hawaiian people maintained a 
communal stewardship over the land, ocean, and all of the 
natural resources of the islands." MacKenzie, supra, at 6-7. 
Today, in this decision, we look to Hawaii's constitution 
(article XI, section 1 and article XII, section 4) and a seminal 
Hawai‘i Supreme Court case (Waiāhole I) to understand the State's 
responsibility to ceded lands held in trust for the people of Hawai‘i. 
1. Hawai‘i Constitution Article XI, Section 1 - Natural 
Resources Held in Public Trust 
Ratified in 1978, article XI, section 1 (Natural 
Resources Trust) of the Hawai‘i Constitution enshrined the 
State's commitment to uphold the centuries-old public trust 
doctrine, particularly in light of the state's growing 
population and increased demand for our natural resources: 
ARTICLE XI 
 . . . . 
CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES 
Section 1. For the benefit of present and future 
generations, the State and its political subdivisions shall 
conserve and protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all 
natural resources, including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and shall promote the development and 
utilization of these resources in a manner consistent with 
their conservation and in furtherance of the self
-
sufficiency of the State. 
20   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the 
State for the benefit of the people. 
Haw. Const. art. XI, § 1 (underline added). 
The standing committee report from the 1978 
Constitutional Convention demonstrates the primacy of natural 
resource conservation over financial gain: 
In the present Constitution, the policy with regard to 
natural resources seems to be overly weighted by the 
emphasis on development and utilization. Though the use of 
our natural resources is necessary it must be done in such a manner as to ensure the optimum long- term benefits for 
the inhabitants of our State. The development and use of 
natural resources must be consistent with their 
conservation for future availability. 
When considering use and development of our natural 
resources, economic and social benefits are major concerns. 
However, the broad definition of economics, that of 
"careful and thrifty" use of the resources, rather than in 
the narrow sense of immediate financial return, should be 
adopted.  
Comm. of the Whole Rep. No. 18, in 1 Proceedings of the 
Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of 1978, at 1025–26 (1980) (emphases added). 
2. Hawai‘i Constitution Article XII, Section 4 - Ceded 
Lands Held in Public Trust 
Also ratified in 1978, article XII, section 4 (Ceded 
Lands Trust) directed the state to hold the ceded lands as a 
public trust for native Hawaiians and the general public: 
ARTICLE XII 
PUBLIC TRUST 
Section 4. The lands granted to the State of Hawaii by 
Section 5(b) of the Admission Act and pursuant to 
Article XVI, Section 7, of the State Constitution, 
21  . . . .   
 
 
 
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
excluding therefrom lands defined as "available lands" by 
Section 203 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, shall be held by the State as a public trust for 
native Hawaiians and the general public. 
Haw. Const. art. XII, § 4 (underline added); see Ching, 145 
Hawai‘i at 176, 449 P.3d at 1174 (defining "'ceded land' [as] 
lands that were held by the civil government or the monarchy of 
the Hawaiian Kingdom at the time of the 1893 overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy"). 
"Recognizing their special character, the Joint 
Resolution of Annexation exempted these lands from the general 
laws of the United States that governed federal land." Ching, 
145 Hawai‘ i at 176, 449 P.3d at 1174.  Instead, these lands were 
to "be held in a 'special trust' for the benefit of the people 
of Hawai
‘i" and later to be returned "subject to the trust 
provisions set forth in section 5(f) of the Admission Act." Id. 
Article XII, section 4 "formally recognize[s] these 
responsibilities, specifying that the land 'shall be held by the 
State as a public trust for native Hawaiians and the general 
public." Id. at 177, 449 P.3d at 1175. 
The Hawai‘ i Supreme Court explained that "[t]he State's 
duty of care is especially heightened
 in the context of ceded 
land held in trust for the benefit of native Hawaiians and the 
general public under article XII, section 4." Id. at 177 n.49, 
22   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
449 P.3d at 1175 n.49 (emphasis added). The court also 
explained the unique connection Hawaiians have to the ‘ āina. Id. 
3. Waiāhole I (2000) 
In Waiāhole I, decided twenty-five years ago, the 
Hawai‘i Supreme Court surveyed and analyzed the public trust 
doctrine, and then applied that doctrine to the resource at 
issue - water. 94 
Hawai‘i at 131–33, 9 P.3d at 443–45.  The 
court explained "that article XI, section 1 [(Natural Resources 
Trust)] and article XI, section 7 [(Water Resources Trust)] 
adopt the public trust doctrine as a fundamental principle of 
constitutional law in Hawai‘ i."9 Id. at 132, 160, 9 P.3d at 444, 
472 (footnote omitted). 
9 Article XI, section 7 of the Hawaiʻ i Constitution provides as 
follows: 
ARTICLE XI 
 . . . . 
WATER RESOURCES 
Section 7. The State has an obligation to protect, 
control and regulate the use of Hawaii's water resources 
for the benefit of its people. 
The legislature shall provide for a water resources 
agency which, as provided by law, shall set overall water 
conservation, quality and use policies; define beneficial and reasonable uses; protect ground and surface water resources, watersheds and natural stream environments; 
establish criteria for water use priorities while assuring 
appurtenant rights and existing correlative and riparian 
uses and establish procedures for regulating all uses of 
Hawaii's water resources. 
(Formatting altered.) 
23   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court then set forth basic principles to 
apply when contemplating whether to compromise a public trust 
resource, including (1) the burden of the permit applicant, 
(2) the duty of the permitting agency, and (3) the need for a 
decision that reflects a clear analysis, which is subsumed 
within the agency's duty. Id. at 143, 160, 9 P.3d at 455, 472. 
First, the applicant wanting to compromise the public 
trust resource has the burden of "justifying their proposed uses 
in light of protected public rights in the resource." Id. at 
142, 160, 9 P.3d at 454, 472. This includes showing mitigating 
measures and the absence of practicable alternatives. Id. at 
143, 161, 9 P.3d at 455, 474. 
Next, the agency tasked with protecting the trust 
resource "must not relegate itself to the role of a mere 'umpire passively calling balls and strikes for adversaries appearing 
before it,' but instead must take the initiative in considering, protecting, and advancing public rights in the resource at every 
stage of the planning and decisionmaking process." Id. at 143, 
9 P.3d at 455 (citations omitted). 
Competing interests must be assessed on a case-by-case 
basis. Id. at 142, 9 P.3d at 454. "[A]ny balancing between 
public and private purposes begin[s] with a presumption in favor 
of public use, access, and enjoyment." Id. This is consistent 
24   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the 1978 Constitutional Convention delegates' definition of 
"conservation," which is "the protection, improvement and use of 
natural resources according to principles that will assure their 
highest economic or social benefits." Id. at 139, 9 P.3d at 451 
(quoting Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 77, in 1 Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of Hawaii of 1978, at 685–86 (1980)) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). "In short, the object is 
not maximum consumptive use, but rather the most equitable, 
reasonable, and beneficial allocation of [trust] resources, with full recognition that resource protection also constitutes 
'use.'" Id. at 140, 9 P.3d at 452 (emphasis added). 
"Specifically, the public trust compels the state duly 
to consider the cumulative impact of existing and proposed 
diversions on trust purposes and to implement reasonable 
measures to mitigate this impact, including the use of 
alternative sources." Id. at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. "The trust 
also requires planning and decisionmaking from a global, long-
term perspective." Id. 
Increasingly important is our supreme court's 
recognition that, although the public trust doctrine is elastic 
and responsive to ever-shifting conditions, "the public trust 
has never been understood to safeguard rights of exclusive use 
for private commercial gain. Such an interpretation, indeed, 
25   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
eviscerates the trust's basic purpose of reserving the resource 
for use and access by the general public without preference or 
restriction." Id. at 135, 138, 9 P.3d at 447, 450 ("The public 
trust, by its very nature, does not remain fixed for all time, but must conform to changing needs and circumstances."). "[I]f 
the public trust is to retain any meaning and effect, it must 
recognize enduring public rights in trust resources separate 
from, and superior to, the prevailing private interests in the 
resources at any given time." Id. at 138, 9 P.3d at 450. 
It logically follows that a "'higher level of 
scrutiny' for private commercial uses" applies. Id. at 142, 9 
P.3d at 454. 
Finally, "where the record demonstrates considerable 
conflict or uncertainty in the evidence, the agency must 
articulate its factual analysis with reasonable clarity, giving 
some reason for discounting the evidence rejected." Id. at 163-
64, 9 P.3d at 475–76. "In sum, the state may compromise public 
rights in the resource pursuant only to a decision made with a 
level of openness, diligence, and foresight commensurate with 
the high priority these rights command under the laws of our 
state." Id. at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. The agency's "basis must be 
set forth with such clarity as to be understandable." Id. at 
26   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
163, 9 P.3d at 475 (citations and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
B. Post Waiāhole I - Relevant Case Law 
In the twenty-five years since Waiāhole I, the Hawai‘ i 
Supreme Court has issued a number of opinions that guide our 
decision in this case. 
In particular, we look (chronologically) 
at seven of these opinions to determine (1) whether the public trust applies to ceded lands; (2) whether questions of an agency 
following correct procedures or considering appropriate factors 
may be determined as a matter of law; (3) how an agency makes 
findings in its decision reflecting its public trust duty, or in the absence of findings, shows how it arrived at its decision; 
and (4) whether an agency may provide after-the-fact or extra-
record evidence on review or remand to show its compliance with 
its public trust duties. 
1. Superferry (2007) In 
Superferry
, decided eighteen years ago, 
environmental groups sought a declaratory judgment that the 
State of Hawai‘ i Department of Transportation (DOT) and 
Superferry company were required to prepare an environmental assessment under HRS Chapter 343. 115 
Hawai‘i at 304, 312, 167 
P.3d at 297, 305. Although the 
Superferry decision did not 
involve the public trust doctrine, it looked at whether an 
27   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agency followed correct procedures and considered appropriate 
factors. Id. at 317, 167 P.3d at 310. 
The Hawai‘ i Supreme Court explained "the dispute is 
whether DOT was correct to analyze only the harbor improvements 
in making its exemption determination, or was also required to 
consider the potential environmental impacts caused by the 
Hawaii Superferry project." Superferry, 115 Hawai‘ i at 336, 167 
P.3d at 329. 
The court further explained the "applicable 
standard of review requires that this court determine, as a 
matter of law, whether or not DOT has followed the correct 
procedures and considered appropriate factors in making its 
determination
 that the harbor improvements made to Kahului 
harbor to facilitate the Superferry project should be exempted from the requirements of HRS chapter 343." Id. at 342, 167 P.3d 
at 335 (emphasis added). 
The supreme court then determined "the record in this 
case shows that DOT did not consider whether its facilitation of 
the Hawaii Superferry Project will probably have minimal or no 
significant impacts, both primary and secondary, on the 
environment." Id. (emphasis added). It thus held, "based on 
this record, we can only conclude that DOT's determination that the improvements to Kahului Harbor are exempt from the 
28   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirements of [the Hawai‘ i Environmental Policy Act (HEPA)] was 
erroneous as a matter of law." Id. 
The supreme court, inter alia, instructed the circuit 
court to enter judgment in favor of the environmental groups on 
their claim as to the request for an environmental assessment. 
Id. at 343, 167 P.3d at 336. 
The takeaway from Superferry, as relevant to this 
appeal, is that the appellate court determines as a matter of 
law whether an agency followed the correct procedures and 
considered the appropriate factors in its decisionmaking. 
2. Kauai Springs (2014) 
In Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Commission of 
County of Kaua‘ i, decided eleven years ago, a water bottling 
company sought permits to continue operating its bottling 
facility and a contested case hearing was held. 133 Hawai‘ i 141, 
147, 324 P.3d 951, 957 (2014). Kauai Springs, like Waiāhole I, 
emphasized the agency's duty to make clear findings. Id. at 
164, 324 P.3d at 974 (quoting Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai‘ i at 157, 9 
P.3d at 469). 
In Kauai Springs
, the Hawai‘i Supreme Court explained 
that 
[w]hen an agency or other deciding body considers an 
application for permits  under circumstances that requires 
the deciding body to perform as a public trustee  to protect 
a public trust resource, the agency or other deciding body 
must make findings  sufficient to enable an appellate court 
29   
 
 
 
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to track the steps that the agency took in reaching its 
decision. 
Id. at 173, 324 P.3d at 983 (emphases added). "An agency is 
encouraged to be clear; 'clarity in the agency's decision is all 
the more essential . . . where the agency performs as a public 
trustee and is duty bound to demonstrate that it has properly 
exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and the statute.'" Id. at 173-74, 324 P.3d at 983–84 (quoting 
Waiāhole
 
I, 94 Hawai‘i at 158, 9 P.3d at 470). 
The supreme court emphasized that "[u]nder the 
foregoing principles and purposes of the public trust, it is manifest that a government body is precluded from allowing an 
applicant's proposed use to impact the public trust 
in the 
absence of an affirmative showing that the use does not conflict with those principles and purposes." Id. at 174, 324 P.3d at 
984 (emphasis added). And, "a lack of information from the applicant is exactly the reason an agency is empowered to deny a 
proposed use of a public trust resource." Id. (emphasis added). 
The supreme court ultimately determined the Kaua‘i 
County Planning Commission's findings were not clearly erroneous and its conclusions were not wrong, thus, its denial of the 
permit was not arbitrary and capricious. 
Id.
 at 181, 324 P.3d 
at 991. Nevertheless, the court remanded the matter to the 
30   
 
 
 
  
     
   
    
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Planning Commission to clarify its findings and conclusions as 
they "are essential when it performs as a public trustee." Id. 
As relevant to this appeal, Kauai Springs repeated the 
need for the agency's decision to be clear so as to show it 
fulfilled its trust duties. 
3. Mauna Kea II (2018) In Matter of Conservation District Use Application HA-
3568 (Mauna Kea II),
10 decided seven years ago, the plaintiffs 
appealed the BLNR's grant of the University of Hawaii's application for development of the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) 
following a contested case hearing. 143 Hawai‘ i 379, 384, 387, 
431 P.3d 752, 757, 760 (2018). 
The issue before the Hawai‘ i 
Supreme Court was "whether the BLNR properly applied the law in 
analyzing whether a permit should be issued for the TMT." Id. 
at 384, 431 P.3d at 757. 
In addressing the public trust doctrine, the supreme 
court stated it "has never precisely demarcated the dimensions 
of the public trust doctrine as incorporated in Article XI, 
Section 1" (Natural Resources Trust) and held that "conservation 
district lands owned by the State, such as the lands in the 
10 We refer to this opinion as Mauna Kea II because it is the follow -up 
to Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v. Board of Land & Natural Resources, 136 Hawaiʻi 376, 
363
 P.3d 224 (2015), commonly known as Mauna Kea I. Both ca
ses concern the 
same application for a conservation district use permit submitted by the 
University of Hawaiʻi to construct the Thirty Meter Telescope atop Mauna Kea 
on Hawaiʻ i Island. 
31   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summit area of Mauna Kea, are public resources held in trust for 
the benefit of the people pursuant to Article XI, Section 1." 
Id. at 400, 431 P.3d at 773 (footnote omitted). 
Relying on Waiāhole
 I
, the supreme court reaffirmed 
the requirements of article XI, section 1 such as the balancing 
between the conservation and protection of public natural 
resources and the development and utilization consistent with 
conservation. Id. at 400-01, 431 P.3d at 773–74. The court 
also reiterated that "any balancing between public and private 
purposes must begin with a presumption in favor of public use, 
access and enjoyment." Id. at 401, 431 P.3d at 774. 
The supreme court then explained, "[i]n our de novo 
determination of whether these requirements of Article XI, 
Section 1 have been met, we consider relevant findings in the 
BLNR Decision and Order." Id. Ultimately, the court held that 
"TMT comport[ed] with Article XI, Section 1 public trust 
principles and that the BLNR met its duties as trustee under the 
Article XI, Section 1 public land trust through its Decision and 
Order." Id. at 402, 431 P.3d at 775 (footnote omitted). 
In holding that the "conservation district lands owned 
by the State, such as the lands in the summit area of Mauna Kea, 
are public resources held in trust for the benefit of the people 
pursuant to Article XI, Section 1[,]" the supreme court noted in 
32   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
footnote 23 that "[o]ther types of public lands (and whether or 
how public trust principles should apply to such lands) are not 
before us at this time." Id. at 400, 400 n.23, 431 P.3d at 773, 
773 n.23. 
To that point, in footnote 24, the supreme court also 
noted the plaintiffs only asserted violation of article XI, section 1 (Natural Resources Trust) and did not assert a 
violation of the "ceded lands trust" pursuant to section 5(f) of 
the Admission Act or article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) 
of the Hawai‘ i Constitution.  Id. at 401 n.24, 431 P.3d at 774 
n.24. The court explained that the ceded lands are subject to 
specific purposes established in section 5(f) and are also 
subject to article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) and 
article XVI, section 7 (Compliance with Trust)  of the 
Hawai‘i 
Constitution. Id. ("Ceded lands are also subject to Article XII, Section 4 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution, which 11
11 Article XVI, s ection 7 of the Hawai‘ i Constitution provides: 
ARTICLE XVI 
 . . . . 
COMPLIANCE WITH TRUST 
Section 7
. Any trust provisions which Congress shall 
impose, upon the admission of this State, in respect of the 
lands patented to the State by the United States or the 
proceeds and income therefrom, shall be complied with by 
appropriate legislation. Such legislation shall not diminish or limit the benefits of native Hawaiians under 
Section 4 of Article XII. 
33   
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provides that '[t]he lands granted to the State of Hawaii by 
Section 5(b) of the Admission Act and pursuant to Article XVI, 
Section 7 . . . shall be held by the State as a public trust for 
native Hawaiians and the general public.'"). The court noted 
that these "constitutional provisions and effectuating 
legislation are not at issue in this case, but they may play a 
part in defining public trust principles under Article XI, 
Section 1 [(Natural Resources Trust)] with regard to 
conservation district lands owned by the State." Id. (emphasis 
added). The court then stated, "with respect to the Article XI, 
Section 1 public trust as to conservation lands, we do not 
wholesale adopt our precedent setting out public trust 
principles as applied to the state water resources trust" and 
"[r]ather the dimensions of this trust remain to be further 
demarcated." Id. (emphasis added). 
As relevant to this appeal, Mauna Kea II shows us that 
beginning with a presumption in favor of public use, access, and enjoyment is a basic trust duty, and not a procedure limited to 
water resources. Also, Mauna Kea II
 recognized that ceded lands 
are subject to article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) of the 
Hawaiʻi Constitution. 
34   
 
 
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
   
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Ching (2019) 
In Ching, decided six years ago,12 plaintiffs brought a 
declaratory action against DLNR and BLNR claiming, "the State, as trustee of the state's ceded lands, breached its trust duty 
'to protect and maintain the public trust lands'" based on its 
failure to monitor the U.S. military's compliance with the lease 
of ceded lands in Hāmākua and North Kona for training purposes 
within the Pōhakuloa Training Area (PTA).
13 145 Hawai‘ i at 152, 
154, 160, 449 P.3d at 1150, 1152, 1158 (brackets omitted). 
Following a bench trial, the circuit court entered its findings, 
conclusions, and order in favor of the plaintiffs and against the State. Id. at 160, 162, 164, 449 P.3d at 1158, 1160, 1162. 
The circuit court found the State breached its trust 
duties by failing to (1) conduct reasonable inspections, 
(2) ensure the terms of the lease impacting the condition of the 
land or preserving cultural interests were followed, and 
(3) take prompt steps when made aware of possible lease 
violations. Id. at 164, 449 P.3d at 1163. 
12 Ching was decided seventeen days after the circuit court in this 
case denied Frankel's motion for partial summary judgment and three days 
after granting the State's motion for summary judgment, but fourteen days 
before Frankel' s motion for reconsideration was filed. 
13 Regarding the issue in Ching being a nonjusticiable political 
question, the supreme court explained that "[i]t is well settled that the 
determination of whether or not a particular proposed action, by the trustee 
of a charitable trust, would constitute a breach of that trust, is a ma
tter 
to be determined by the courts, as part of their inherent jurisdiction." 145 
Hawai‘i at 175, 449 P.3d at 1173 (citations omitted). 
35   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, the State argued even if it had a public 
trust duty, the circuit court erred because, "it was reasonable 
for the State to delegate its duties and rely on its review of 
ancillary documents to monitor the PTA." Id. at 179, 180, 449 
P.3d at 1177, 1178 (emphasis added and footnote omitted). "Typically, whether a fiduciary acted prudently -- or in other 
words, as a reasonably prudent fiduciary -- is a question of 
fact." Id. at 179, 449 P.3d at 1177 (emphasis added, citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted); Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway 
Hotel, Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 385, 742 P.2d 377, 383 (1987) 
("Whether there was a breach of duty or not, i.e. whether there 
was a failure on the defendant's part to exercise reasonable 
care, is a question for the trier of fact.") (emphasis added). 
The supreme court explained the "State's duties with 
respect to the leased PTA land are derived in part from the 
properties' status as 'ceded land' -- which are lands that were held by the civil government or the monarchy of the Hawaiian 
Kingdom at the time of the 1893 overthrow of the Hawaiian 
monarchy." Ching
, 145 Hawai‘i at 176, 449 P.3d at 1174. The 
State conceded that "our case law and common law of trusts make 
the State 'subject to certain general trust duties, such as a 
general duty to preserve trust property.'" Id.
 at 177, 449 P.3d 
at 1175. 
36   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court held that delegating the State's 
duties was inherently invalid under the Hawai‘ i Constitution and 
our common law of trusts. Id. at 180-81, 449 P.3d at 1178-79. 
And even if it were permissible, the "delegation would itself 
have to be reasonable under the prudent person standard, and the 
State would maintain a trust duty to reasonably supervise the 
agent in its performance of the monitoring." Id. at 181, 449 
P.3d at 1179 (emphases added). Ultimately, the court held that the circuit court did not err in its findings. Id. at 182, 449 
P.3d at 1180. 
As relevant to this appeal, the supreme court again 
recognized that ceded lands are held in trust and the State has 
a duty to preserve that trust resource. And whether the State 
acted as a reasonably prudent fiduciary in preserving that trust 
resource is a question of fact. 
5. In re MECO (2022) In Matter of Maui Electric Co. (In re MECO
), decided 
three years ago, appellants asked the Hawai‘i Supreme Court to 
vacate the Public Utilities Commission (PUC)'s approval of a 
power purchase agreement contending, in part, "that the PUC 
failed to fulfill its public trust duties." 150 Hawai‘ i 528, 
531, 532, 506 P.3d 192, 195, 196 (2022). Specifically, 
appellants maintained "the PUC should have made explicit 
37   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
findings identifying the affected trust resources and assessing 
how they would be protected." Id. at 536, 506 P.3d at 200. 
The supreme court held that "the statutes governing 
the PUC's [power purchase agreement] review - HRS §§ 269-6(b) 
and 269-145.5(b) - reflect the core public trust principles: the 
State and its agencies must 
protect and promote the justified 
use of Hawai‘i's natural beauty and natural resources." Id.
 at 
532, 506 P.3d at 196. "Thus, when there is no reasonable threat 
to a trust resource, satisfying those statutory provisions 
fulfills the PUC's obligations as trustee." Id. "But when a 
project poses a reasonable threat, the public trust principles 
require more from the PUC: the commission must assess that 
threat and make specific findings about the affected trust 
resource." Id. 
The supreme court held "the 'public interest'-minded 
balancing requirement under HRS §§ 269-6(b) and 269-145.5(b) 
aligns with the core public trust principles weighing protection 
and utilization." Id. at 538, 506 P.3d at 202. The "PUC 
considered [the selected company's] efforts to explore an alternative site[,]" among other factors and found that relocation "was not feasible due to archaeological, cultural, 
and topographical concerns." Id. at 540, 506 P.3d at 204. 
38   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"The PUC did not make explicit findings about its 
public trust duties in the Approval Order. But its Recon Order 
concluded that it had fulfilled its public trust duties by 
satisfying its obligations under HRS §§ 269-6(b) and 269-
145.5(b)." Id. 
The supreme court affirmed the PUC's approval of the 
power purchase agreement. Id. at 541, 506 P.3d at 205. 
As relevant to this appeal, In re MECO shows us that 
an agency's failure to make findings regarding its public trust duties is not always fatal. In the absence of explicit findings 
regarding its public trust duties, an agency's decision may 
nonetheless be upheld if there was no reasonable threat to the 
trust resource or the public record shows it fulfilled its 
public trust duty. 
6. Carmichael (2022) In Carmichael v. Board of Land and Natural Resources, 
decided three years ago, plaintiffs brought a declaratory action 
against DLNR and BLNR among others claiming violation of HRS 
Chapter 343 where, like this case, "revocable permits were 
annually 'continued' by a process in which the BLNR reviewed and 
voted to approve for continuation a 'master listing' of hundreds 
of revocable permits submitted by DLNR." 150 Hawai‘ i 547, 555-
56, 506 P.3d 211, 219-20 (2022). The temporary permits at issue 
39   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Carmichael were renewed for ten years. Id. at 555, 506 P.3d 
at 219. 
On appeal to the ICA, this court determined that 
"there were genuine issues of material fact as to whether the 
BLNR's continuance decision (1) was temporary or de facto 
indefinite, and (2) served the best interests of the State, such 
that it was inappropriate to dispose of this case at the summary 
judgment stage." Id. at 562, 506 P.3d at 226 (cleaned up). 
However, the supreme court held the ICA "erred by 
ruling on the basis of perceived issues of material fact." Id. 
The supreme court explained, "HRS § 171-55 did not authorize the 
BLNR's 2014 continuation decision because the BLNR did not make 
factual findings or enter conclusions of law positing that it 
was serving the State's best interests" and "[a]s a trustee of 
the public trust, the BLNR failed to demonstrate that it 
properly exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and the statute." Id.; see HRS § 171-55 (2011) 
("[T]he [BLNR] may issue permits for the temporary occupancy of state lands . . . on a month-to-month basis . . . under 
conditions and rent which will serve the best interests of the 
State[.]") (emphasis added). 
The supreme court reiterated the fundamental principle 
that the public trust "requires that state agencies 'must take 
40   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the initiative in considering, protecting, and advancing public 
rights in the resource at every stage of the planning and 
decision-making process.'" Id. at 566, 506 P.3d at 230 
(citation omitted). "In particular, where an agency performs as a trustee, it is 'duty bound to demonstrate that it has properly 
exercised the discretion vested in it by the constitution and 
the statute.'" Id. (citations omitted). 
The supreme court determined the permit continuation 
"was not authorized by HRS § 171-55 because the BLNR did not make any findings of fact or conclusions of law." Id. The 
court noted that "the BLNR's failure to make findings here was particularly troubling in light of the magnitude of the water 
diversions authorized and the BLNR's role as a public trustee of 
the State's water resources." Id. at 567, 506 P.3d at 231. The 
court explained that while it does "not fully set out the scope of BLNR's duty to make the requisite findings, we note that the duty may vary in conjunction with the resources implicated" and 
"[a]t minimum, the BLNR must make findings 'sufficient to enable 
an appellate court to track the steps that the agency took in 
reaching its decision.'" Id. (emphases added) (citing Kauai 
Springs
, 133 Hawai‘i at 173, 324 P.3d at 983). 
The supreme court affirmed the circuit court's order 
granting the plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment as to its 
41   
 
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusion that the revocable permits were not authorized under 
HRS § 171-55. 150 Hawai‘ i at 572, 506 P.3d at 236. 
As relevant to this appeal, the supreme court again 
emphasized the need for an agency's decision to be clear. Where 
the agency failed to make findings regarding a factor it was 
required to consider - serving the best interest of the State -
the agency failed to demonstrate it properly exercised its 
discretion. 
7. Kia‘i Wai (2022) 
Finally, in Kia‘ i Wai v. Department of Water, also 
decided three years ago, the Kaua‘ i Department of Water (KDOW) 
proposed to install a water transmission line and obtained a 
finding of no significant impact. 151 Hawai‘i 442, 447, 517 P.3d 
725, 730 (2022). Kia
‘i Wai filed a complaint contending, inter 
alia, that KDOW violated its trust obligations. Id. at 452, 517 
P.3d at 735. 
KDOW moved for, and the circuit court granted, 
summary judgment. Id. at 453, 517 P.3d at 736. 
Although the supreme court did not reach the public 
trust issue, the court explained that "whether or not an agency 
has followed proper procedures or considered the appropriate 
factors in making its determination is a question of law, and 
will be reviewed de novo." Id. at 454, 517 P.3d at 737 
(emphasis added and citation omitted). The supreme court 
42   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further explained that appellate courts "must take a close look 
at agency decisions that involve the public trust" and "agency 
decisions affecting public trust resources carry a presumption 
of validity." Id. at 454-55, 517 P.3d at 737–38 (cleaned up). 
The supreme court held KDOW "failed to properly 
consider increased water withdrawals as a secondary impact" 
because the finding that water withdrawals will not increase was 
clearly erroneous and the department "misapplied HEPA by 
limiting its review to the physical footprint of the project and failing to consider secondary impacts beyond the project site." 
Id. at 455, 517 P.3d at 738. 
The supreme court explained, that based on the record 
before it, "there can be no dispute that KDOW failed to take the 
required 'hard look' at the possibility of increased water 
usage." Id. at 460, 517 P.3d at 743. "If KDOW can demonstrate 
the relief line will likely not increase water withdrawals, it 
must do so in a revised [environmental assessment]. That is, 
KDOW cannot merely present additional evidence to the 
environmental court on remand." Id. 
The supreme court further explained that "while 
plaintiffs may present extra-record evidence to identify issues 
with the environmental review process, an agency cannot rely on 
extra-record evidence as a substitute for analysis the agency 
43   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
should have included in an environmental review document." Id. 
(some emphasis added). 
If the agency knew that it could always 'supplement' or 
'create' the administrative record in the reviewing court, then the agency would have little incentive to prepare an 
adequate and reviewable administrative record, despite the 
clear mandate of [the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA)]  and HEPA that the agency prepare the required 
record before deciding upon a particular course of conduct.  
 . . . . 
Additionally, it would frustrate public participation in 
the HEPA process if agencies could remedy deficient HEPA analysis with evidence submitted to a  court after- the-
fact.  . . . While it may sometimes be appropriate for 
agencies to submit extra- record evidence -- for example, to 
provide context, explain their procedures, or rebut the plaintiffs' evidence -- courts must not allow that evidence 
to pass as explanations or justifications that should have 
been in the environmental review documents in the first 
place.  
Id. at 460-61, 517 P.3d at 743–44 (cleaned up). "Further, HEPA, 
like NEPA, 'expressly places the burden of compiling information 
on the agency so that the public and interested government 
departments can conveniently monitor and criticize the agency's 
action.'" Id. at 461, 517 P.3d at 744 (citation omitted). 
The supreme court vacated the circuit court's judgment 
and remanded the case for further proceedings consistent with 
its opinion. Id. at 467, 517 P.3d at 750. 
As relevant to this appeal, the supreme court again 
explained that whether an agency followed correct procedures or considered appropriate factors in making its decision are 
questions of law. Of particular note, the supreme court 
restricted what an agency may present when its decision is on 
44   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
review, and warned that extra-record evidence cannot be used to 
explain what should have been included in the agency's decision. 
8. Summary In surveying these supreme court opinions, we glean 
the following: 
First, the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court clarified that the 
public trust doctrine applies to ceded lands. Ching, 145 Hawai‘ i 
at 176-77, 449 P.3d at 1174-75. 
Second, whether an agency followed the correct 
procedure or considered the appropriate factors are legal 
questions that may be determined as a matter of law. 
Superferry, 115 Hawai‘ i at 317, 167 P.3d at 310; Kia‘ i Wai, 151 
Hawai‘i at 454, 517 P.3d at 737.  This is different from 
determining whether the agency failed to exercise reasonable 
care in executing its trust duties, which is a factual question 
as it generally requires the weighing of evidence and 
determining the credibility of witnesses. See Ching, 145 Hawai‘ i 
at 152, 179, 180, 449 P.3d at 1150, 1777, 1178. 
Weighing of evidence and determining the credibility 
of witnesses are not part of the appellate review to determine 
whether the agency followed correct procedures or considered 
appropriate factors. See id. at 152, 179, 180, 449 P.3d at 
1150, 1777, 1178; Superferry
, 115 Hawai‘i at 317, 167 P.3d at 
45   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
310; Kia‘ i Wai, 151 Hawai‘ i at 454, 517 P.3d at 737.  Whether 
correct procedures were followed and appropriate factors were 
considered should be evident from the agency decision itself or 
in the record available to the public. See Superferry, 115 
Hawai‘i at 342, 167 P.3d at 335; Kia‘ i Wai, 151 Hawai‘ i at 460-61, 
517 P.3d at 744-45 ("[I]f the agency knew that it could always 'supplement' or 'create' the administrative record in the 
reviewing court, then the agency would have little incentive to 
prepare an adequate and reviewable administrative record[.]") 
(cleaned up). 
The supreme court in Superferry and Kia‘ i
 Wai 
considered the agency's duty in the context of the agency's 
compliance with its statutory mandate under HEPA. Superferry
, 
115 Hawai‘ i at 317, 167 P.3d at 310; Kia‘ i Wai
, 151 Hawai‘i at 
460, 517 P.3d at 743. Our consideration of whether an agency 
followed the correct procedure or considered appropriate factors 
is no different here, where the agency's duty is set forth in 
common law. See generally Waiāhole  I
, 94 Hawai‘i at 130-31, 9 
P.3d at 442-43. 
Third, the Hawai
‘i Supreme Court has been consistent in 
its mandate from Waiāhole I that an agency make clear findings. Kauai Springs, 133 Hawai‘ i at 164, 324 P.3d at 974; see 
Carmichael, 150 Hawai‘ i at 567, 506 P.3d at 231.  Where an 
46   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agency's findings reflect that trust resources were protected 
and not compromised, the agency's decision may be upheld. See 
generally In re MECO, 150 Hawai‘ i at 532, 540, 506 P.3d at 196, 
204. But where an agency's decision fails to "articulate its 
factual analysis with reasonable clarity" when compromising a public trust resource, the agency's decision may be vacated. 
Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai‘ i at 163-64, 9 P.3d at 475–76. 
Finally, an agency does not get a do-over of its 
decision-making process on appellate review or in a declaratory 
action. See Kia‘ i Wai, 151 Hawai‘ i at 460, 517 P.3d at 743 
(explaining that "an agency cannot rely on extra-record evidence 
as a substitute for analysis the agency should have included" in 
its decision or on the record). While the court's review in 
Kia‘i Wai was in the context of the agency's statutory HEPA 
mandate, we see no reason why the court's reasoning - that "[i]f 
the agency knew that it could always 'supplement' or 'create' 
the administrative record in the reviewing court, then the 
agency would have little incentive to prepare an adequate and 
reviewable administrative record" - should not similarly apply to the agency decision here. Id. (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
We address Frankel's appeal in light of the above 
principles from these Hawaiʻi Supreme Court opinions.  
47   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. DISCUSSION 
As stated earlier, the circuit court granted the 
Board's and Resorttrust's motions for summary judgment, ruling 
the public trust doctrine did not apply to Lot 41 because it was 
zoned urban. The circuit court denied Frankel's motion for 
partial summary judgment for the same reason, and added that 
even if the public trust doctrine applied to Lot 41, whether the 
agency violated the public trust doctrine "requires an 
inherently fact-based balancing analysis" not appropriate for summary judgment. 
On appeal, Frankel raises five points of error (POE), 
contending the circuit court erred when it: 
(1) "held that trust principles do not apply to Lot 41"; 
(2) "held that a court cannot conclude that a breach of 
trust occurred in the context of a summary judgment motion even when no facts are in dispute"; 
(3) "denied [his] motion for partial summary judgment as to Count 4"; 
(4) "granted summary judgment to all the defendants as to Count 4"; and 
(5) "denied [his] motion for reconsideration of the three orders relating to count 4" that he brought pursuant to Ching. 
As explained below, we hold that the circuit court 
erred because public trust principles applied to Lot 41, Frankel 
48   
 
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
met his summary judgment burden, and the Board and Resorttrust 
did not meet their summary judgment burden. 
A. Public Trust Principles Apply to Lot 41 (POE 1 & 5) 
On appeal, Frankel contends the circuit court erred in 
determining that public trust principles did not apply to 
Lot 41. To support his contention, Frankel relies in part on 
article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) and article XI, 
section 1 (Natural Resources Trust) of the Hawai‘ i Constitution. 
It is undisputed that Lot 41 is part of the "[s]ection 
5(b) lands of the Hawaii Admission Act" and, thus, is ceded 
land. The Admission Act mandated these lands be held in public trust. The Admission Act, 1959, Pub. L. No. 86-3, § 5(f), 73 
Stat. 4, reprinted in 1 HRS at 136–37 (2009). 
Since 1978, the ceded lands were expressly held in 
public trust under article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) of 
the Hawai‘ i Constitution.  The burdens and duties of article XII, 
section 4's public trust mandate, like that of article XI, 
section 1 (Natural Resources Trust), are guided by the 
principles set forth in Waiāhole I
. 94 Hawai‘i at 131–32, 9 P.3d 
at 443–44. Again, these principles instruct as to (1) the 
burden of the applicant requesting to compromise a trust 
resource, (2) the duty of the agency entrusted with protecting 
the trust resource, and (3) the need for decisions to reflect 
49   
 
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clear analysis, which is subsumed within the agency's duty. Id. 
at 143, 160, 163-64, 9 P.3d at 455, 472, 475-76. 
In addition, the applicant's burden and agency's duty 
set forth in Waiāhole I are heightened due to the special 
character of, and the complicated history surrounding, ceded 
lands. See Ching, 145 Hawai‘ i at 177 n.49, 449 P.3d at 1175 n.49 
("The State's duty of care is especially heightened in the 
context of ceded land held in trust for the benefit of native 
Hawaiians and the general public under article XII, 
section 4."). 
Finally, the applicant's burden and agency's duty are 
subject to a higher level of scrutiny in this case because the 
proposed use is a private commercial use. Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai‘ i 
at 142, 9 P.3d at 454. 
As set forth in article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands 
Trust) of the Hawai‘i Constitution and 
Ching, the public trust 
applies to ceded lands and, thus, applies to Lot 41. We 
therefore hold the circuit court was wrong in concluding public 
trust principles did not apply to Lot 41. 
B. Frankel's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (POE 2 & 3) 
The circuit court erred in denying Frankel's motion 
for partial summary judgment because the evidence, even when 
viewed in the light most favorable to the Board and Resorttrust, 
50   
 
 
 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not show that the Board (1) began with the presumption in 
favor of public use, (2) considered alternatives, or 
(3) provided a clear analysis when it issued a permit that 
compromised a public trust resource. 
1. Summary Judgment Burden The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment 
"to show the absence of any genuine issue as to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of substantive law, 
entitles the moving party to judgment as a matter of law." 
Umberger v. Dep't of Land & Nat. Res.
, 140 Hawai‘i 500, 528, 403 
P.3d 277, 305 (2017) (cleaned up). The movant must satisfy two 
components in order to meet its burden. Ralston v. Yim
, 129 
Hawai‘i 46, 56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286 (2013). 
The movant has the burden of production - to show 
there is not a genuine issue of material fact as to the essential elements of the claim and that it is entitled to a 
judgment as a matter of law. Id. The movant also bears the 
burden of persuasion - to convince the court that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the movant is entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law. Id.
 at 57, 292 P.3d at 1287. 
If the plaintiff, who has the burden of proof at 
trial, is the movant, "the plaintiff must establish, as a matter of law, each element of its claim for relief by the proper 
51   
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidentiary standard applicable to that claim." Ocwen Fed. 
Bank, FSB v. Russell, 99 Hawai‘ i 173, 182-83, 53 P.3d 312, 321-22 
(2002). 
If the plaintiff as the movant satisfies this burden, 
the burden then shifts to the nonmoving party defendant to 
"demonstrate the existence of a triable, material factual issue 
on the plaintiff's claims" or adduce "evidence of material facts 
which demonstrate the existence of affirmative defenses that 
would defeat the plaintiff's claim." Id. at 183, 53 P.3d at 
322. 
2. Procedural Requirements for an Agency Determining 
Whether to Compromise a Public Trust Resource 
In his summary judgment motion, Frankel asserted four 
bases for the Board's breach of its public trust duties: 
(1) failure to enforce the permit conditions in the past; (2) failure to start with the presumption in favor of public 
use; (3) failure to consider alternatives; and (4) failure to 
provide clarity in its decision. The first basis is a 
substantive challenge,  while the other three are procedural. 
We address the three procedural challenges, and do not reach the substantive challenge. 14
14 Asserting a substantive breach of an agency's public trust duty is a 
fact-based dispute that requires application of the standard set forth in 
Ching. The circuit court here, in its alternate ruling, characterized 
Frankel's breach of trust challenge as a substantive challenge requiring 
resolution of disputed material facts. 
52   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When compromising a public trust resource, Hawai‘ i law 
requires the agency entrusted to protect that trust resource to 
(1) begin its analysis with the presumption in favor of public 
use when balancing between public and private purposes, (2) consider practicable alternatives, and (3) set forth its 
decision with clarity. Waiāhole I, 94 
Hawai‘i at 142, 143, 158, 
171, 9 P.3d at 454, 455, 470, 483. 
Whether an agency has considered the appropriate 
factors or followed the proper procedures are questions of law. Superferry, 115 Hawai‘ i at 315, 167 P.3d at 308; Kia‘ i Wai, 151 
Hawai‘i at 454, 517 P.3d at 737.  As a question of law, the 
agency's decision is not entitled to deference. See Kaleikini, 
128 Hawai‘ i at 79, 283 P.3d at 86 (explaining that "whether or 
not an agency has followed proper procedures . . . in making its 
determination is a question of law and will be reviewed de novo
" 
and, thus, "the agency is not entitled to deference" (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted)); Ho‘ omoana Found. v. Land 
Use Comm'n, 152 
Hawai‘i 337, 343, 526 P.3d 314, 320 (2023) 
(explaining that "questions regarding procedural defects are 
reviewable under [HRS § 91-14(g)](3)" where the agency decision was "[m]ade upon unlawful procedure" (citations omitted)); In re 
Robert's Tours & Transp., Inc., 104 Hawai‘ i 98, 102, 85 P.3d 623, 
627 (2004) (explaining that under HRS § 91-14(g) "we see no 
53   
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reason why the standards of review for an agency decision should 
differ depending on whether the appeal arises from a contested 
or noncontested case"). 
Here, the Board did not make explicit findings showing 
it fulfilled these three procedural requirements in executing 
its public trust duties. Pursuant to In re MECO, even in the 
absence of explicit public trust findings in the agency's 
decision, the decision may nonetheless be upheld if the public 
record reflects an application of the public trust principles. 
150 Hawai‘ i at 540, 506 P.3d at 204. 
Applied here, if the evidence before the circuit court 
did not show in publicly available information that the Board 
considered alternatives, Frankel was entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law because the Board failed to consider the 
appropriate factors in compromising the public trust resource. 
See id.; Superferry, 115 Hawai‘ i at 315, 167 P.3d at 308; Kia‘ i 
Wai, 151 Hawai‘ i at 454, 517 P.3d at 737. And if the evidence 
before the circuit court did not show in publicly available 
information that the Board began with the presumption in favor 
of public use or articulated its decision to compromise the 
public trust resource with clarity, Frankel was also entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law because the Board failed to follow 
the proper procedure. See In re MECO, 150 Hawaiʻ i at 540, 506 
54   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 204; Waiāhole I, 94 Hawai‘ i at 142, 158, 167 P.3d at 454, 
470; Kia‘ i Wai, 151 Hawai‘ i at 454, 517 P.3d at 737. 
3. Frankel Met His Burden 
The circuit court record contained the following 
pertinent evidence: (1) the June 2018 letter from Sierra Club and July 2018 letter from Hawaii's Thousand Friends; (2) the September 2018 and November 2018 testimonies from Frankel;
  
(3) the September 2018 staff submittal and meeting minutes; (4) the November 2018 staff submittal and meeting minutes; and 
(5) the January 29, 2019 Permit.  15
The letters from Sierra Club and Hawaii's Thousand 
Friends, as well as Frankel's testimonies,16 placed the issue of 
the Board's public trust duties squarely before the Board. But the September 2018 staff submittal and minutes, the November 
2018 staff submittal and minutes, and the January 29, 2019 permit did not show that the Board, in compromising a public 
trust resource, (1) started with the presumption in favor of 
public use, (2) considered alternatives, and (3) provided 
clarity in its decision. 
15 See Agenda Item D- 17: Annual Renewal of Revocable Permits on the 
Island of Oahu, Meeting Before the Board of Land and Natural Resources, at 
37–38 (written testimony of David Kimo Frankel) for Frankel' s November 2018 
testimony. 
16 See id. 
55   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board's September 2018 staff submittal identified 
Lot 41 as part of "Section 5(b) lands of the Hawaii Admission 
Act," or ceded lands. The submittal did not reference the 
Board's constitutional and public trust duties regarding ceded 
lands, however. 
There was nothing in the September 2018 staff 
submittal to show that the Board began with the presumption in 
favor of public use. 
The September 2018 staff submittal did not 
mention article XI, section 1 (Natural Resources Trust) and 
article XII, section 4 (Ceded Lands Trust) of the Hawai‘i 
Constitution or the public trust; the only legal references in 
the document were HRS § 171-55, HAR § 11-200-8, HAR Chapter 11
-
200, and HRS Chapter 343. 
The justification for the permit was to "regulate the 
hotel's improvements and activities at the subject location," noting the property's unsuitability for public auction lease, 
and the hotel's withdrawal of its draft environmental 
assessment. There was no mention of the presumption in favor of 
public use or consideration of alternate sites. 
The September 2018 staff submittal explained public 
access was always required and there were prior incidents where access was denied. The submittal also explained Resorttrust 
made a "promise" to comply with the requirement of public 
56   
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
access.17 This analysis does not establish that the Board, in 
determining whether to compromise public use of Lot 41, began 
with the presumption in favor of public use. 
Like the September 2018 staff submittal, the September 
2018 meeting minutes, the November 2018 staff submittal, the 
November 2018 meeting minutes, and the January 29, 2019 permit 
do not reflect that the Board, in compromising a public trust 
resource, (1) started with the presumption in favor of public 
use, (2) considered alternatives, and (3) provided clarity in its decision. 
Thus, Frankel met his burden of showing the Board did 
not consider the appropriate factors and did not follow the 
correct procedures in rendering its decision to compromise a 
public trust resource. 
4. The Board and Resorttrust Did Not Meet Their Burden 
The burden then shifted to the Board and Resorttrust 
to show there were genuine issues of material fact as to 
whether, or present evidence of where, the Board followed the 
procedural requirements for agency public trust decisionmaking 
17 The Board considering Resorttrust's promise of public access is not 
the same as starting its analysis with the presumption in favor of public use 
when determining whether to compromise a public trust resource for private 
commercial use. But, assuming arguendo that, when viewed in the light most 
favorable to the State and Resorttrust, the promise of public access would 
constitute sufficient evidence to survive summary judgment, the Board did not meet the other procedural requirements of considering alternatives and 
providing clarity in its decision. 
57   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant here by (1) starting with the presumption in favor of 
public use, (2) considering alternatives, and (3) providing 
clarity in its decision. See Ocwen
, 99 Hawai‘i at 183, 53 P.3d 
at 322. The Board and Resorttrust did not meet their burden. 
The Board argued the public trust doctrine did not 
extend to urban-zoned land. 
In the alternative, the Board 
asserted it was entitled to summary judgment because it easily 
met the standards "for applying the public trust doctrine." 
Specifically, the Board stated it "could have - but did not -
allow commercial use of Lot 41" and "could have - but did not -
lease Lot 41 or otherwise afford exclusive rights to a private party." These statements appear to imply that the public is 
fortunate the Board did not compromise the public resource even 
more than it did. But these statements do not demonstrate the 
Board began with the presumption in favor of public use or 
considered alternatives. 
Nowhere in its memorandum in opposition did the Board 
cite to where in the record it started with the presumption in 
favor of public use or where it considered alternate sites upon 
which Resorttrust could place the items it wanted to place on ceded land. See generally Int'l Bhd. of Elec. Workers, Loc. 
1357 v. Hawaiian Tel. Co., 68 Haw. 316, 332, 13 P.2d 943, 956 (1986) (emphasizing "again that an appellate court is not 
58   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to sift through a voluminous record for documentation 
of a party's contention") (footnote omitted). 
In its memorandum in opposition to Frankel's summary 
judgment motion, Resorttrust similarly argued Frankel's claim 
failed as a matter of law because he "cannot demonstrate the 
State's public trust obligations apply to" Lot 41. (Formatting 
altered.) In the alternative, Resorttrust maintained the permit 
does not substantially impair Lot 41 and the conditions imposed 
upon it shows the Board considered public interests. Finally, Resorttrust argued Frankel ignored the hours of testimony 
presented at the September and November 2018 meetings. 
Resorttrust, however, did not identify where in the 
record (or where in the hours of hearing testimony) the Board 
started with the presumption in favor of public use or 
considered alternatives. 
Resorttrust also did not identify where in the record 
it met its burden of providing the Board with information for consideration of alternate sites for the items it sought to 
place on ceded land. This alone was a basis to deny 
Resorttrust's application. See generally Kauai Springs
, 133 
Hawai‘i at 174, 324 P.3d at 984 (explaining that "a lack of 
information from the applicant is exactly the reason an agency 
59   
 
 
 
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is empowered to deny a proposed use of a public trust 
resource"). 
Notably, Resorttrust attached a 2016 "Report and 
Recommendations from the [DLNR] Revocable Permits Task Force" 
as an exhibit. The task force stated its "priority was to be 
mindful of our obligations to the Public Trust and stewardship 
overseeing these public lands." The attached Revised Template 
resembled the format used in the September 2018 staff submittal. 
The Revised Template, however, did not mention the public trust or provide direction for the staff to incorporate the agency's 
public trust duties in their submittals and recommendations to 
the Board. 
5. Conclusion In conclusion, even when viewing the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the Board and Resorttrust, the record does not establish that the Board complied with the three procedural requirements for agency public trust decisionmaking 
relevant here - (1) starting with the presumption in favor of 
public use, (2) considering alternatives, and (3) providing 
clarity in its decision. Thus, the Board's decision compromised 
a public trust resource, ceded lands, without the required 
"level of openness, diligence, and foresight" our state law 
requires. See Waiāhole I
, 94 Hawai‘i at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. 
60   
 
 
 
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Frankel was therefore entitled to judgment as a matter 
of law on the procedural breach of trust challenges in his 
motion for partial summary judgment, and his substantive breach 
of trust challenge (which would require a reasonableness 
determination and is a question of fact) need not be addressed. 
Thus, the circuit court erred in denying Frankel's motion for 
partial summary judgment and abused its discretion in denying 
Frankel's motion for reconsideration brought pursuant to Ching. C. Board's and Resorttrust's Motions for Summary Judgment 
(POE 4) 
The circuit court granted the Board's and 
Resorttrust's motions for summary judgment referencing its 
denial of Frankel's motion for partial summary judgment and stating it "has already ruled that the public trust doctrine 
does not apply to [Lot 41], which is designated urban district 
land. The Supreme Court of the State of Hawai‘ i has only applied 
the public trust doctrine to conservation district lands and use 
of water resources." 
However, the Board and Resorttrust did not 
demonstrate that Frankel could not carry his burden of proof at trial. 
1. Summary Judgment Burden A defendant movant "may satisfy [its] initial burden 
of production by either (1) presenting evidence negating an element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the 
61   
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[non-movant] will be unable to carry his or her burden of proof 
at trial." Ralston, 129 Hawai‘ i at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290. "Where 
the movant attempts to meet his or her burden through the latter 
means, he or she must show not only that the non-movant has not placed proof in the record, but also that the movant will be 
unable to offer proof at trial." Id. at 60-61, 292 P.3d at 
1290-91 (emphasis omitted). 
2. The Board Did Not Meet Its Burden 
In Count 4 of his complaint, Frankel made numerous 
allegations (numbers 99-111) to support his claim that the Board breached its public trust duties, some procedural and some substantive. 
If Frankel could prove any one of his allegations, 
he would establish breach of the public trust. 
To show it was entitled to summary judgment on Count 4 
as a matter of law, the Board argued that the public trust did not apply to urban-zoned land. If true, the inapplicability of 
the public trust to Lot 41 would have defeated Frankel's breach 
of public trust claim. However, contrary to the Board's 
argument, the public trust applies to ceded lands and, thus, 
applies to Lot 41. And none of the Board's other arguments showed Frankel could not meet his burden at trial as to each 
allegation supporting his breach claim in Count 4. 
62   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. Resorttrust Did Not Meet Its Burden 
In its motion for summary judgment, Resorttrust 
stated Frankel "attacks" the permit, "trying to impose his desire for a less crowded beach" and "to change more than 50 
years of the status quo and BLNR's long history of issuing 
[revocable permits] for use of the State Parcel by the Hotel and 
its guests, along with the general public." Resorttrust then 
argued Frankel's "claim fails as a matter of law, because 
(1) [he] cannot demonstrate the State's public trust obligations apply to the State parcel, and (2) the Board properly discharged 
its obligations." (Formatting altered.) 
Like the Board, Resorttrust argued "aside from water 
and Conservation District lands, the Court has not explicitly 
ruled that public trust obligations must be fulfilled for other 
types of lands, such as the State Parcel, which is designated in 
the Urban District." Resorttrust also asserted the revocable permit "clearly protects, and indeed facilitates, public use of 
the State Parcel while balancing that with RTH's rights to use 
the State Parcel for certain enumerated activities." 
Resorttrust maintained "BLNR has exercised diligence and a high 
standard of care to protect the State Parcel over the decades" 
and "the conditions of the most recent [revocable permit] 
evidence the BLNR's careful consideration of public interests in 
63   
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State Parcel and beach, and include measures to further 
protect those interests." 
As discussed above, the public trust doctrine applies 
to Lot 41. As for Resorttrust's secondary argument that the 
Board met its obligations, none of its assertions showed Frankel 
could not meet his burden at trial as to each allegation 
underlying his breach claim such that Resorttrust was entitled 
to a judgment as a matter of law. 
4. Conclusion 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
Frankel, the Board and Resorttrust did not meet their burden of showing they were entitled to judgment as a matter of law on 
each allegation supporting Frankel's breach claim. As the Board 
and Resorttrust failed to meet their burden, the burden did not 
shift to Frankel. 
Because the Board and Resorttrust failed to show they 
were entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the Board and 
Resorttrust. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's 
August 6, 2019 order denying Frankel's motion for partial summary judgment and August 20, 2019 orders granting the Board's 
64   
 
 
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Resorttrust's motions for summary judgment. We remand this 
case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with this opinion. 
On the briefs: /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
 Associate Judge 
David Kimo Frankel,  
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
 Associate Judge 
William J. Wynhoff, 
Deputy Attorney General, for Defendant-Appellee 
State of Hawaiʻ i.  
 
Jennifer A. Lim, 
William M. Harstad, 
Derek B. Simon, (Carlsmith Ball), 
for Defendant-Appellee 
Resorttrust Hawaii LLC. 
65 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OPINION BY HIRAOKA, J.
CONCURRING IN PART AND DISSENTING IN PART 
I concur that the public trust doctrine applied to 
BLNR's 2018 decision-making on Resorttrust's HRS § 171-55 permit 
application because Lot 41 is ceded land.1 I also concur that 
the agency record should let a reviewing court determine whether BLNR followed proper procedure and considered appropriate factors for issuing or continuing an HRS § 171-55 permit during a public meeting. But I respectfully dissent from the majority's holding that BLNR did not fulfill its public trust duty regarding Lot 41. In my view, the record contains uncontroverted evidence showing that BLNR followed proper procedure for decision-making in a public meeting and acted as a reasonably prudent fiduciary of the public trust by beginning with a presumption favoring public use, access, and enjoyment; considering alternatives; and applying public trust principles to its decision-making on Resorttrust's permit application. I would affirm the order granting BLNR's motion for summary judgment, but for reasons other than those stated by the circuit court. See Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai# i 
137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994) (stating that "where the circuit court's decision is correct, its conclusion will not be disturbed on the ground that it gave the wrong reason for its ruling"). 
1 Today's opinion should only apply to BLNR's 2018 decision to
approve Resorttrust's 2019 permit. That was the only subject of Frankel's
complaint. Frankel filed an amended complaint after the circuit court grantedBLNR's motion for summary judgment. The amended complaint added a claim thatBLNR breached its public trust duties in October 2019 by approving a revocablepermit for 2020. The parties did not move for summary judgment on the newclaim, the circuit court entered no order on that claim, and the First AmendedFinal Judgment dismissed all claims that were not adjudicated. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) As the majority notes, the supreme court has 
stated, "any balancing between public and private purposes 
begin[s] with a presumption in favor of public use, access, and enjoyment." Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai# i at 142, 9 P.3d at 454. The 
majority states, "[t]here was nothing in the September 2018 staff submittal to show that the Board began with the presumption in favor of public use." 
In my view, the majority's focus on Lot 41 
disregards the broad scope of BLNR's public trust duty, which "requires planning and decisionmaking from a global, long-term perspective." Id. at 143, 9 P.3d at 455. 
The 2018 staff submittal was not the only evidence 
before the circuit court. 
In a 2011 public meeting, BLNR 
approved a DLNR request "to designate additional properties for income generation to support the management of lands under the jurisdiction of the Land Board." Lot 41 was one of those properties. The February 25, 2011 DLNR staff submittal — a matter of public record — stated that staff reviewed "over 1,300 leases, permits, licenses, etc., managed by [DLNR's] Land Division." Staff also reported that "revenues generated from these additional properties are projected to result in approximately $697,000 of additional revenue for the SLDF[
2] to 
2 DLNR's Special Land Development Fund, or SLDF, funds "planning,
development, management, operations, or maintenance of all lands and
improvements under the control and management of" BLNR, "management,maintenance, and development of trails and trail accesses under thejurisdiction of" DLNR, "protection, planning, management, and regulation ofwater resources under chapter 174C [(the State Water Code)]," "invasivespecies control and mitigation by the invasive species council under chapter194," and "reforestation and sediment run-off mitigation," among other DLNRfunctions. HRS § 171-19 (2011 & Supp. 2016). 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
help fund the Department's efforts to manage and protect the 
State's cultural, historic and natural resources." The September 2018 DLNR staff submittal stated that Lot 41 was zoned for urban use but was "unsuitable for public auction lease" because of the "site issues" described in the submittal. This shows that BLNR did "begin with a presumption in favor of public use, access, and enjoyment" for all "lands and improvements under [its] control and management[,]" HRS § 171-19(a)(2); balanced the need to generate revenue to fund the SLDF; and decided that Lot 41 should be used to generate income that would fund global, long-term protection of all public lands. 
(2) Citing Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai# i at 171, 9 P.3d at 
483, the majority notes that BLNR must "consider practicable alternatives" when compromising a public trust resource. The majority then states BLNR did not show "it considered alternate sites upon which Resorttrust could place the items it wanted to place on ceded land." In my view, the majority's focus on alternatives "such as asking [Resorttrust] to place the items on its own property" instead of on Lot 41 is also too narrow. The record shows that BLNR considered over 1,300 alternatives before deciding that Lot 41 (among others) should be used for "income generation to support the management of lands under the jurisdiction of the Land Board." Cf. HRS § 171-55 (2011) (requiring that temporary revocable permits be issued "under conditions and rent which will serve the best interests of the State"). Thus did the record show that BLNR did "consider 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
practicable alternatives" before compromising exclusive public 
use of Lot 41. 
(3) The majority states that BLNR "did not make 
explicit findings showing it fulfilled these three procedural requirements in executing its public trust duties." Two of the three cases cited by the majority — Wai
âhole I and Kauai Springs 
— involved contested case hearings where the agency was required by HRS § 91-12 to make findings of fact. There is no similar statutory requirement for agency decisions made in public meetings. The third case, Carmichael, involved a decision made in a public meeting. 
The supreme court still quoted Kauai 
Springs to support its statement that "BLNR must make findings 'sufficient to enable an appellate court to track the steps that the agency took in reaching its decision.'" Carmichael, 150 Hawai#i at 567, 506 P.3d at 231.  But the court prefaced its 
statement by the qualifier, "[w]hile we do not fully set out the scope of the BLNR's duty to make the requisite findings, we note that the duty may vary in conjunction with the resources implicated." Id. And as the majority acknowledges, "even in the absence of explicit public trust findings in the agency's [contested case] decision, the decision may nonetheless be upheld if the public record reflects an application of the public trust principles." In re MECO, 150 Hawai# i at 540, 506 P.3d at 204; 
see also Sierra Club v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 154 Hawai# i 264, 3
3 The quote from Kauai Springs , 133 Hawai #i at 173, 324 P.3d at 983,
cited 
Kilauea Neighborhood Ass'n v. Land Use Commission, 7 Haw. App. 227, 751
P.2d 1031 (1988), which also involved a contested case hearing. 
4  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
282 n.19, 550 P.3d 230, 248 n.19 (App. 2024) ("When BLNR met on 
November 13, 2020, there was no statute, rule, or judicial precedent requiring that BLNR make written findings to support decisions made during public meetings. We note that for decisions made during a public meeting, rather than after a contested case hearing, BLNR could refer to its staff submittals or other evidence in the meeting record to support its decision. The meeting record and minutes should be sufficient for an appellate court to track the agency's steps."), cert. granted, No. SCWC-22-0000516, 2024 WL 3378462 (Haw. July 11, 2024). 
Here, BLNR did not simply give Resorttrust carte 
blanche to use Lot 41 for its own purposes, to the exclusion of the public. BLNR imposed conditions on Resorttrust's permit. Resorttrust had to obtain required City permits and pay real property tax assessed on Lot 41. Resorttrust could not indiscriminately fill Lot 41 with beach chairs, umbrellas, or other specified items; they could be placed on Lot 41 only if "the user is physically present or such items have been placed on [Lot 41] at the request of the user." Resorttrust had to create and maintain two twenty-foot wide pathways mauka-to-makai
4 for 
public access. It had to maintain the public beach makai of Lot 41 at its own cost. Weddings, surf lessons, and kayaking or boating activities — which would monopolize an inordinate amount of space — were not allowed. Resorttrust had to let the public use Lot 41 "to the extent the area is not occupied for a use 
4 Mauka means toward the mountains. Makai means toward the ocean. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allowed under the Permit." In my view, BLNR's imposition of 
these conditions shows it considered, and complied with, its duty to protect the public's use of the trust resource while balancing the need to use the urban-zoned land for income generation. 
(4) The issue before the circuit court was whether 
BLNR followed proper procedures and considered the appropriate factors in making its decision on Resorttrust's application. That "is a question of law, and will be reviewed de novo." Kia'i 
Wai v. Dep't of Water, 151 
Hawai#i 442, 454, 517 P.3d 725, 737 
(2022). "As in other cases, agency decisions affecting public trust resources carry a presumption of validity." Id. at 455, 517 P.3d at 738 (quoting Kaua# i Springs, 133 Hawai# i at 164, 324 
P.3d at 974). When deciding whether an executive-branch agency followed proper procedures and considered the appropriate factors in its decision-making, a court cannot substitute its judgment about the application of public policy for that of the agency. "[L]ike the federal government, ours is one in which the sovereign power is divided and allocated among three co-equal branches." Tax Found. of Haw. v. State, 144 Hawai# i 175, 190, 
439 P.3d 127, 142 (2019) (quoting Trs. of the Off. of Hawaiian Affs. v. Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 170-71, 737 P.2d 446, 455-56 (1987)). "A court's domain is the law, and judges should recognize the limits of their expertise." Rosehill v. State, 155 Hawai#i 41, 59, 556 P.3d 387, 405 (2024). A court is not 
"authorized to substitute its judgment about the application of public policy to the facts for that of the agency, which is constitutionally delegated that power." Sierra Club, 154 Hawai# i 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 284, 550 P.3d at 250. 
Nor should a court reweigh the evidence 
considered by an expert agency dealing with a specialized field. 
Sierra Club v. D.R. Horton-Schuler Homes, LLC, 136 Hawai#i 505, 
522, 364 P.3d 213, 230 (2015). 
Here, the legal issue of whether BLNR followed proper 
procedures and considered the appropriate factors in its decision-making implicates the facts surrounding the decision-making. 
In my view, the uncontroverted material facts in the 
record show that BLNR followed proper procedure for decision-making in a public meeting; began with a presumption favoring public use, access, and enjoyment for all DLNR-managed land; considered alternatives, both for the generation of income and for preserving the public's ability to use Lot 41; and applied public trust principles to its decision-making on Resorttrust's permit application. Absent a constitutional or statutory violation, BLNR's decision carries a presumption of validity and it is not a court's function to judge whether the decision itself was right or wrong. I would therefore affirm the order granting BLNR's motion for summary judgment, but for reasons other than those stated by the circuit court. 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
7 