NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000821 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DALE E. TAYLOR, SR., Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
GARED SAXBURY, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-149K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Gared Saxbury a.k.a. Jared Saxbury
 
(Saxbury) appeals from an "Order Denying Respondent's Motion to
 
Strike Petitioner's Declaration Regarding Attorney's Fees and
 
Costs," entered on October 7, 2015, by the District Court of the
 Third Circuit, North and South Kona Division (District Court).
1
 
On appeal, Appellant Saxbury contends that the District
 
Court abused its discretion by denying his motion to strike a
 Declaration requesting attorney's fees (Declaration for Fees)
 
submitted by counsel for Petitioner-Appellee Dale E. Taylor, Sr.
 
2
(Taylor),  because: the District Court failed to account for
Saxbury's due process rights where the Declaration for Fees was
 
1
 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 
2
 In the District Court, it appears that Dale E. Taylor, Jr. was also a
Petitioner, however, he is not party to the appeal. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[a]pproved and so ordered" by the District Court before it was
 
served on Saxbury, such that he had no opportunity to be heard
 regarding the request for fees and costs; the District Court
 erroneously determined Saxbury was given sufficient notice to
 file an objection; and the request constituted improper ex parte
 communication.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced, the issues raised, and the applicable
 legal authorities, we resolve Saxbury's points of error as
 follows, and we vacate and remand.
 
On December 9, 2014, the District Court issued an
 
Injunction Against Harassment in favor of Taylor and against
 Saxbury. On March 25, 2015, the Declaration for Fees was filed
 based on Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-10.5(h) (2016),
3
 
which included the signature of the District Court approving and
 ordering attorney's fees of $3,307.27.
 
Subsequently, on September 4, 2015, Saxbury filed his
 
"Motion to Strike Petitioner's Declaration Regarding Attorney's
 Fees and Costs" (Motion to Strike), which included the
 
declaration of Saxbury's counsel attesting that the Declaration
 
for Fees was never served on him as required by Rule 5 of the
 District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) and that he "only
 
knew about the Declaration when, on April 27, 2015, over one
 
month after the Declaration was filed, [Taylor's] counsel
 demanded payment on the Declaration." In his opposition to the
 Motion to Strike, Taylor conceded that Saxbury had not been
 served with the Declaration for Fees until April 27, 2015, but
 asserted nonetheless that the District Court had authority under
 HRS § 604-10.5(h) to grant the fees, that Saxbury had notice
 since April 27, 2015, and that Saxbury's motion did not challenge
 the fees that had been awarded.
 
3
 HRS § 604-10.5(h) provides: "The court may grant the prevailing party
in an action brought under this section costs and fees, including attorney's
fees."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the hearing on the Motion to Strike, the District
 
Court noted that Taylor's notice of the Declaration for Fees was
 
a bit delayed, but in ample time to file any objections, and that
 Saxbury had not filed the Motion to Strike until September 2015,
 which was a delay from when he had received notice of the fees
 award in April 2015. The Motion to Strike was thereafter denied. 
In responding to Saxbury's points on appeal, Taylor
 
argues, inter alia, that the Declaration for Fees followed DCRCP
 Form 2, which allows a party to apply for fees without filing a
 motion and contemplates a summary granting of fees if the request
 comports with an applicable statute such as HRS § 604-10.5.
 Taylor further asserts there is no requirement that he should
 have immediately served Saxbury with the Declaration for Fees, no
 requirement that the District Court must consider Saxbury's
 objections prior to granting fees under HRS § 604-10.5(h), and
 that Saxbury had the opportunity via his Motion to Strike to have
 the District Court consider objections to the fees award, which
 he failed to argue.
 
Given the record in this case, we conclude Saxbury was
 
not properly served with the Declaration for Fees as required
 under DCRCP Rule 5, which provides in pertinent part:
 
Except as otherwise provided in these rules, . . . every
pleading subsequent to the original complaint unless the
court otherwise orders because of numerous defendants, every
written motion other than one which may be heard ex parte,
and every written notice, appearance, demand, brief or
memorandum of law, offer of judgment, bill of costs,
designation of record on appeal, and similar paper shall be
served upon each of the parties . . . .
 
It appears there is no specified time period or procedure under 
the DCRCP for the District Court to consider and decide a request for fees as set forth in DCRCP Form 2. However, by failing to timely serve Saxbury with the Declaration for Fees, Taylor precluded Saxbury from having a meaningful opportunity to address the request for fees. See In re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 
Hawai
'i 236, 239, 151 P.3d 717, 720 (2007); Sandy Beach Def. Fund 
v. City Council of City and Cty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378,
 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, the Declaration for Fees was not served
 
on Saxbury when it was submitted to the District Court. If the
 
Declaration for Fees had properly been served when it was
 submitted to the District Court, Saxbury could have immediately
 filed an opposition or objection as to the merits of the
 requested attorney's fees. Instead, the record reflects that
 Saxbury was first given notice about the award of fees on April
 27, 2015, more than a month after the District Court's order
 approving the fees. This does not comport with DCRCP Rule 5, and
 it also undermined Saxbury's ability to appeal directly from the
 fees award.
 
Given the above, we need not address Saxbury's other
 
arguments on appeal. We conclude that, on remand, the District
 Court should strike its order awarding attorney's fees to Taylor
 and allow Saxbury an opportunity to address the merits of the
 fees request.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
 
Respondent's Motion to Strike Petitioner's Declaration Regarding
 Attorney's Fees and Costs," entered on October 7, 2015, by the
 District Court of the Third Circuit, North and South Kona
 Division, is vacated. This case is remanded to the District
 Court for further proceedings consistent with this decision.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
J. Porter DeVries,
D. Kaena Horowitz,for Respondent-Appellant. Chief Judge 
David B. Kaapu,for Petitioner-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
4
 