NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000635
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOSHUA JAMES DIOGO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-217K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joshua James Diogo (Diogo) appeals 
from the June 26, 2012 Judgment and Sentence entered by the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).1 On June 8, 
2010, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged Diogo 
with Reckless Endangering in the First Degree, in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-713(1) (2014) (Count 1), and 
Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(b) 
(2014) (Count 2).2 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
2
 Count 1 of the Information provided:
 
On or about the 18th day of July, 2009, in Kona,
County and State of Hawaii, JOSHUA JAMES DIOGO intentionally
fired a firearm in a manner which recklessly placed another
person, KIELE KREINBERG, in danger of death or serious
bodily injury, thereby committing the offense of Reckless
Endangering in the First Degree, in violation of Section
707-713(1), Hawaii Revised Statutes, as amended.
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
On appeal, Diogo argues  that the Circuit Court erred
because it (1) failed to properly instruct the jury with regard
 
to (a) merger, (b) mistake of fact, and (c) negligence; (2)
 
denied Diogo's three motions for mistrial; (3) denied Diogo's
 
motion for judgment of acquittal; and (4) substituted a juror
 
with an alternate without proper foundation or cause.
 
After a careful review of the points raised, arguments
 
made by the parties, the applicable authority, and the record, we
 
resolve Diogo's issues on appeal as follows:
 
1(a). The Circuit Court did not err when it did
 
not instruct the jury on "continuous course of conduct" merger
 
pursuant to HRS § 701-109(1)(e) (2014).4 Whether a crime
 
qualifies as a "continuing course of conduct" crime depends
 primarily upon the statutory language and secondarily upon
 
legislative history. "HRS § 701–109(1)(e) prohibits multiple
 
convictions where the defendant's actions constitute an
 
uninterrupted, continuing course of conduct. This prohibition,
 
2(...continued)
Count 2 of the Information provided:
 
On or about the 18th day of July, 2009, in Kona,
County and State of Hawaii, JOSHUA JAMES DIOGO recklessly
caused serious bodily injury and/or substantial bodily
injury to another person, KIELE KREINBERG, thereby
committing the offense of Assault in the Second Degree, in
violation of Section 707-711(1)(b), Hawaii Revised Statutes
as amended.
 
3 Diogo's first point on appeal does not comply with Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(B) insofar as it fails to quotethe refused instruction along with his objection urged at trial. Counsel is cautioned that violations of this Rule could result in sanctions. 
4
 
§ 701-109. Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense. (1) When
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for
each offense of which such conduct is an element. The
 defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one
offense if:
 
. . . .
 
(e) 	The offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant's course of conduct
 was uninterrupted, unless the law provides that
specific periods of conduct constitute separate
offenses.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
however, does not apply where these actions constitute separate 
offenses under the law." State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i 1, 21, 928 
P.2d 843, 863 (1996) (quoting State v. Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 251, 710 P.2d 1193, 1197 (1985)). None of the crimes with which Diogo 
was charged nor the included offenses presented to the jury are 
statutorily defined as uninterrupted or continuing courses of 
conduct, nor do they manifest a plain legislative purpose to be 
treated as such. 
1(b).
 
Diogo argues that the Circuit Court erred 
when it failed to give a jury instruction on mistake of fact 
because Diogo testified that the gun went off accidentally. 
However, as Diogo fails to set forth any legal authority 
supporting his asserted point of error, it is waived. HRAP Rule 
28(b)(7). Nor does his point present plain error. "A reckless 
mistake would afford a defense to a charge requiring intent or 
knowledge--but not to an offense which required only recklessness 
or negligence[.]" State v. Palisbo
, 93 Hawai 'i 344, 355 n.17, 3 
P.3d 510, 521 n.17 (App. 2000) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Commentary on HRS § 702-218). Here, all crimes for which the 
jury was instructed required the mens rea of recklessness. 
Therefore, Diogo was not entitled to a mistake of fact 
instruction. 
1(c). Diogo argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it failed to give a jury instruction on negligence because
 
"the difference between a negligent versus a reckless statement
 
[sic] of mind [. . .] was the core of [Diogo's] defense regarding
 
the state of mind element." However, while Diogo restated his
 
point of error in his argument, he again fails to set forth any
 
legal authority supporting his asserted point of error and
 
therefore has waived the point. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
Neither does Diogo's asserted point present plain 
error. This court has rejected a similar argument in State v. 
Nakama, 120 Hawai
'i 282, 204 P.3d 501, No. 28372 2009 WL 953305 
at *1-2 (App. Apr. 9, 2009) (SDO) (proffered defense of 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
negligence adequately covered by instruction defining
 
recklessness).
 
2 and 4. Diogo argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it denied his three motions for mistrial because of alleged
 
prosecutorial misconduct and/or when the Circuit Court released a
 
juror and replaced her with an alternate.
 
Motions for mistrial are reviewed for abuse of 
discretion. State v. Lagat, 97 Hawai 'i 492, 495, 40 P.3d 894, 
897 (2002). Factors to consider in assessing prosecutorial misconduct are "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness 
of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of 
the evidence against the defendant." State v. Pacheco, 96 
Hawai
'i 83, 93, 26 P.3d 572, 582 (2001). "Prosecutorial 
misconduct warrants a new trial or the setting aside of a guilty 
verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused 
prejudice to the defendant's right to a fair trial." State v. 
Meyer, 99 Hawai 'i 168, 171, 53 P.3d 307, 310 (App. 2002) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
2(a). Diogo argues that the Circuit Court abused
 
its discretion when it denied his June 6, 2012 oral motion for
 
mistrial.
 
The denial of a motion for mistrial is within the
 
sound discretion of the trial court and will not be upset
absent a clear abuse of discretion. The trial court abuses
 its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason
or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Lagat, 97 Hawai 'i at 495, 40 P.3d at 897 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). Diogo moved for mistrial on the basis 
of the following exchange between the trial prosecutor and 
Officer Bryan Ellis (Officer Ellis): 
[Prosecutor:] When you receive a call, as a patrol
officer, at some point in time do some cases need a

detective to be involved?
 
[Officer Ellis:] Yes. 
[Prosecutor:]
the department? And is that common practice within 
[Officer Ellis:] Yes. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Prosecutor:] Now, does a detective come on scene
every single case you take?
 
[Officer Ellis:] No. 
[Prosecutor:]
will come on? So only certain cases a detective 
[Officer Ellis:] Yes, usually felony cases. 
Diogo argues that the prosecutor engaged in misconduct
 
because "the prosecutor was responsible for insuring that the
 
penalty or severity of the charge or charges was not disclosed to
 
the jury to avoid prejudice and to conduct a fair trial."
 
We disagree that there was misconduct here. Diogo
 
points to nothing that indicates the mention of the term "felony"
 
per se informed the jury of the severity of the charges or
 
penalties therefor in this case. Through the opening statements
 
of counsel, the jury was already aware that this case concerned a
 
complaining witness who was shot in the abdomen. Thus, to the
 
extent that the term "felony" indicates to a lay person that the
 
case is serious, they were already aware of the seriousness of
 
this case by the time Officer Ellis gave this testimony. Diogo
 
has not demonstrated that the prosecutor's conduct was improper.5
 
2(b). The Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion when it denied Diogo's June 12, 2012 motion for 
mistrial because there was no prosecutorial misconduct. With 
regard to the nature of the prosecutor's conduct, "a comment is 
not improper if it is directed to and made in response to a 
subject which the defense raised in its closing argument to the 
jury." Meyer, 99 Hawai 'i at 172, 53 P.3d at 311 (quoting State 
v. Lincoln, 3 Haw. App. 107, 125, 643 P.2d 807, 819 (1982))
 
5
 We also note that, during the discussion on Diogo's motion for
mistrial, Diogo expressed the concern that, "[a]s you know, your Honor, we're
not supposed to be talking about penalties." First, there was no discussion ordisclosure of possible penalties in the quoted exchange. Furthermore,although no curative instruction was given, in part due to Diogo's previousobjection to such an instruction, the jury was told during instructions at theend of the case that "[y]ou must not discuss or consider the subject ofpenalty or punishment in your deliberations of this case." We presume thejury adhered to this instruction. State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai' i 38, 59, 79 P.3d
131, 152 (2003) ("This court has repeatedly adhered to the construct that thejury is presumed to have followed the [circuit] court's instructions.")(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(internal quotation marks omitted). In Diogo's closing argument,
 
defense counsel argued that Diogo's post-shooting behavior was
 
consistent with the occurrence of an accident, not a crime. In
 
response, during closing arguments the prosecutor argued that the
 
jury cannot speculate on how a guilty person behaves. Because
 
the prosecutor is entitled to respond to arguments raised by the
 
defendant, the nature of the prosecutor's conduct was not
 
improper.
 
Diogo apparently argues in the alternative that the 
prosecutor's "cumulative prosecutorial acts" were prejudicial and 
sufficient to support a mistrial. In Pemberton, the Supreme 
Court of Hawai 'i explained that "although no single misstatement 
or other erroneous remark standing alone may have sufficient prejudicial weight to deprive the defendant of a fair trial, the 
cumulative weight of such errors may create an atmosphere of bias 
and prejudice which no remarks by the trial court could erase." 
State v. Pemberton, 71 Haw. 466, 475, 796 P.2d 80, 84 (1990) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). In 
that case, the prosecutor made several improper remarks that were 
individually harmless but cumulatively harmful. By contrast, in 
the instant case, the Circuit Court correctly held that neither 
of the objected-to remarks were improper. 
2(c) and 4. Diogo argues that the Circuit Court 
abused its discretion when it denied his third motion for 
mistrial, based on the Circuit Court's substitution of an 
alternate juror. A seated juror communicated that she could not 
give her full attention to the deliberations because of a death 
in her family. The Circuit Court excused the juror, called the 
first alternate to sit in the juror's place, and instructed the 
jury to begin its deliberations anew. Diogo cites no legal 
authority supporting his conclusory assertions. To the contrary, 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 24(c) allows for the 
substitution of a juror with an alternate, even after deliberations have begun. ("[i]f an alternate juror replaces a 
regular juror after deliberations have begun, the court shall 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
instruct the jury to begin its deliberations anew.") The Circuit
 
Court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Diogo's third
 
motion for mistrial. 
3. Diogo argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
denied his motion for judgment of acquittal. Preliminarily, we
 
note that Diogo fails to argue his first two sub-points of error,
 
namely (1) that the testimony of Dr. Kyle Boyd lacked foundation
 
and/or was not qualified as an expert witness; and (2) that no
 
curative instruction was given after Officer Ellis testified that
 
"he was pursuing a 'felony' investigation" and they are therefore
 
deemed waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
In his third and final sub-point, Diogo argues that the
 
Circuit Court erred when it admitted State's Exhibits Nos. 1, 1a,
 
1b, and 1c, involving the pistol allegedly used in the shooting,
 
because the chain of custody was not properly established. Diogo
 
argues that the chain of custody was not established because the
 
evidence custodian was not called to testify. However, "[i]n
 
showing chain of custody, all possibilities of tampering with an
 
exhibit need not be negated. Chain of custody is sufficiently
 
established where it is reasonably certain that no tampering took
 
place, with any doubt going to the weight of the evidence." 
State v. DeSilva, 64 Haw. 40, 41, 636 P.2d 728, 730 (1981); see
 
also State v. Vance, 61 Haw. 291, 304, 602 P.2d 933, 942 (1979)
 
("It is sufficient to establish that it is reasonably certain
 
that no tampering took place, with any doubt going to the weight
 
of the evidence.'").
 
The State presented sufficient evidence to demonstrate
 
to a reasonable certainty that no tampering took place. Officer
 
Ellis's uncontroverted testimony that the contents of Exhibit 1
 
were the pistol and related items that he recovered on July 18,
 
2009, and the Evidence and Property Receipt (EPR) form indicating
 
that Exhibit 1 had been deposited with Maldonado in 2009 and
 
remained unopened until May 29, 2012, sufficiently established to
 
a reasonable certainty that Exhibit 1 was not tampered with. If
 
it is reasonably certain that no tampering took place, "any doubt
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[goes] to the weight of the evidence" rather than admissibility. 
Vance, 61 Haw. at 291, 602 P.2d at 942.
 
Diogo apparently further argues that the Circuit Court
 
erred when it admitted Exhibit 1 because portions of the EPR were
 
whited-out, in violation of evidence protocol. Diogo asserts
 
that Exhibit 1 "had been altered with portions of the chain of
 
custody log being whited-out." In fact, the Circuit Court
 
clarified with Pike that the whiteout was located on the
 
"location" portion of the EPR, rather than the chain of custody
 
portion. Moreover, Diogo presents no legal authority for his
 
proposition that any breach in evidence protocol must result in a
 
grant of judgment of acquittal. Vance and related cases, supra,
 
directly oppose that proposition.
 
Furthermore, any error in the admission of these
 
exhibits was harmless. Diogo did not dispute that he fired the
 gun that injured the complaining witness and there were multiple
 
witnesses that testified that he had a firearm in his possession
 
when the complaining witness was shot. Diogo cites no authority
 
that requires that the firearm, under these circumstances, must
 
be introduced into evidence to withstand a motion for judgment of
 
acquittal. Diogo has failed to show the court erred in denying
 
his motion for judgment of acquittal.
 
Therefore, based on the foregoing, we affirm the
 
June 26, 2012 Judgment and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court
 
of the Third Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 12, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Robert D.S. Kim,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Chief Judge

Linda L. Walton,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Associate Judge

Associate Judge

 
8
 