NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000201
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GREGORY I. SADO, Defendant-Appellant.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NOS. 12-1-0525(1) and 14-1-0361(1))
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Gregory I. Sado (Sado) with: (1) place to
keep pistol or revolver, (2) place to keep ammunition, (3) first-
degree terroristic threatening, (4) third-degree promoting a
dangerous drug, and (5) prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia.  The charges stem from an altercation between Sado
and Jayson Rego, Jr. (Jayson), during which Sado allegedly
pointed a gun at Jayson's face, and evidence recovered by the
police in their investigation at the scene.  A jury found Sado
guilty of these charges.  The Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
(Circuit Court)1/ sentenced Sado to concurrent terms of
imprisonment of ten-years, five-years (3 counts), and one year. 
On appeal, Sado contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
erred in denying his motion to suppress packets of cocaine
recovered during a search incident to his arrest; (2) the Circuit
1/ The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court failed to obtain a valid waiver of his right to testify
pursuant to Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai #i 226, 900 P.2d 1293
(1995); and (3) the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
sentencing him to prison based on his failure to admit guilt to
the charges.  We affirm. 
BACKGROUND
I.
Sado's hostility toward Jayson apparently began in May
2010, when Sado's girlfriend approached Jayson and spoke briefly
with him at Casanova's, a bar in Makawao, Maui.  Sado took
offense, immediately went up to Jayson, and said he did not like
Jayson talking to his girlfriend.  Jayson apologized and told
Sado that he did not want any trouble.  This did not appease
Sado, who remained upset.
Three months later, Jayson, his younger brother Jordan,
and friends Victor, Caylee, Joshua, and Cullen went to
Casanova's.  Sado was there with eight to ten friends, including
Kili and Keahi.  Sado and his friends kept glaring over at
Jayson's group.  At one point, Jayson and his brother went
outside to talk to Sado and Kili.  Jayson tried to amicably
resolve Sado's "disgruntled feelings" by again apologizing to
Sado and saying he did not want any trouble.  Jayson offered to
shake Sado's hand, but Sado refused, and everyone went back
inside.
At about 1:30 a.m., when Casanova's began to close, 
both groups left.  As Jayson was walking down the street towards
his car, Sado ran up to Jayson and said that he wanted to fight.
Jayson accepted the challenge and took off his shirt.  While Sado
was jumping around and taunting Jayson, Sado's friend, Keahi,
shoved Jayson from the side.  Jayson's brother, Jordan, stepped
in and grabbed Keahi, and the two of them began fighting.  Jayson
turned to look at Jordan fighting with Keahi.  When Jayson turned
back toward Sado, Sado was pointing a gun at Jayson's face,
holding it a few inches away.  Sado said to Jayson, "[W]hat now,
bitch, you effing pussy."  Jayson put his hands up and started 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
back-pedaling.  But he also told Sado, "if you're going to use
it, then just use it."
As he was moving away from Sado, Jayson saw that his
brother appeared to be in danger -- Jordan was on the ground with
someone on top of him.  Jayson ran over to help Jordan.  Sado
approached Jayson from behind and blind-sided Jayson with a punch
to the side of Jayson's face.  Jayson grabbed Sado by the shirt,
they began grappling with each other, and eventually they hit a
store window, breaking it.  After breaking the window, Sado fell
into a planter that was in front of the window.
Jayson testified to the foregoing matters at trial. 
Jayson's testimony that Sado had pointed a gun at Jayson's face
was corroborated by the testimony of Caylee, Victor, and Cullen. 
Caylee testified that she saw Sado pull out a gun, point it at
Jayson's face, then put the gun back in his waistband when Jayson
went to help Jordan.  Victor testified that he saw Sado reach
into his pants, pull out a gun, point it at Jayson's face, then
put the gun back in his waistband when Jayson put his hands up
and moved away.  Cullen testified that he heard someone yell,
"gun," then saw Sado pointing a silver revolver at Jayson's head.
II.
The night of the incident was "ladies night" at
Casanova's.  Because it was common for the police to have
disorderly conduct type calls when Casanova's closes on "ladies
night," two police officers, Officers Tristian Hickman and Jared
Dudoit, were already present on patrol outside of Casanova's that
evening.  In addition to Officers Hickman and Dudoit, two off-
duty police officers were at Casanova's, and other officers
responded to the scene.
As Casanova's was closing and everyone was leaving,
people reported to Officers Hickman and Dudoit that there was a
fight down the street.  Officer Hickman ran toward, and Officer
Dudoit drove his patrol car toward, the reported fight.  When
Officer Hickman arrived, he saw multiple physical altercations
taking place among a crowd of people, and he described the
situation as "quite chaotic."  Officer Hickman, who was in his
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
police uniform, separated Sado and Jayson who were fighting. 
Officer Hickman then went to stop another fight.  When he turned
back, he saw Sado and Jayson grappling with each other.  He also
saw them both hit a store window, then fall into a planter
outside the window.  Officer Hickman went back up the street to
separate Sado and Jayson again.  Sado attempted to walk away, and
Officer Hickman told him to stay in the area.  Officer Dudoit
came over to provide assistance.        
Initially, Officer Dudoit grabbed Jayson and Officer
Hickman grabbed Sado.  However, when Officer Dudoit heard people
in the crowd shouting that Sado had a gun, he let Jayson go and
went to assist Officer Hickman with Sado.  Officer Dudoit did a
quick pat down search of Sado, who was wearing a white t-shirt
and blue jeans.  In conducting the pat down, Officer Dudoit was
looking for weapons such as a gun or a knife, but did not feel
anything he believed was a weapon.  Officer Dudoit detained Sado,
but did not place him under arrest.  Officer Dudoit handcuffed
Sado's hands behind his back and took him to Officer Dudoit's
patrol car.  Officer Dudoit did another pat down search of Sado
for weapons and then placed Sado in the rear passenger seat of
the patrol car.  When Officer Dudoit closed the door, he found a
round of .38 caliber ammunition on the ground near the door.
Officer Dudoit recovered the .38 caliber round, then
went to interview witnesses, keeping his eye on the patrol car. 
While interviewing witnesses, Officer Dudoit learned that other
officers at the scene had recovered a gun.  After completing his
investigation, Officer Dudoit believed there was sufficient
evidence to arrest Sado for terroristic threatening.  He went
back to the patrol car, placed Sado under arrest, and advised
Sado of his Miranda rights.  Upon opening the passenger door next
to Sado, Officer Dudoit noticed four additional rounds of .38
caliber ammunition in the door handle of the patrol car.  Prior
to using the patrol car that evening, Officer Dudoit had searched
it to make sure that nothing had been left behind by the previous
user, and Sado was the only person Officer Dudoit had placed in
the patrol car that evening.  Officer Dudoit had been watching
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the patrol car after he left Sado in it and had not seen anyone
approach the patrol car or open its doors.
After placing Sado under arrest, Officer Dudoit
conducted a search incident to arrest.  This search was more
comprehensive than the previous pat-down searches for weapons and
included a search for evidence that would connect Sado to the
offense of terroristic threatening or the gun that had been
recovered.  During the search incident to arrest, Officer Dudoit
recovered a prescription pill bottle from Sado's pocket.  Officer
Dudoit could see through the bottle without opening it and
noticed packets containing a white powdery substance inside the
bottle.  Based on his training and experience, Officer Dudoit
suspected the white powdery substance was cocaine.  Several hours
later, after returning to the Wailuku Police Station, Officer
Dudoit opened the pill bottle without a search warrant.  He
removed the packets and performed a presumptive test for cocaine
on the white powdery substance inside the packets.  The substance
tested presumptively positive for cocaine.
III.
During their investigation at the scene, the police
recovered a .38 caliber revolver in the planter that Sado had
fallen into while grappling with Jayson.  The five rounds of .38
caliber ammunition recovered by Officer Dudoit outside his patrol
car and in the door handle next to Sado could be used in this
gun.  The .38 caliber revolver recovered by the police was shown
to Jayson, Caylee, Victor, and Cullen at trial, and they all
testified that it resembled the gun they saw Sado point at
Jayson's face.  The gun was test fired with one of the .38
caliber rounds recovered by Officer Dudoit, and both were found
to be operational.  The white powdery substance in packets found
in the pill bottle recovered from Sado's jeans pocket was
analyzed and found to contain cocaine.
DISCUSSION
I.
Sado contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying
his motion to suppress the packets of cocaine recovered by
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Officer Dudoit during a search incident to Sado's arrest.  We
disagree.
A.
At the outset, we note that the argument Sado raises on
appeal is different from the argument he presented in his
suppression motion before the Circuit Court.  In the Circuit
Court, Sado argued that the packets of cocaine should be
suppressed because five hours after recovering it from Sado,
Officer Dudoit opened it at the police station without obtaining
a search warrant.  In rejecting Sado's argument, the Circuit
Court found that because the pill bottle was transparent or
translucent, and Officer Dudoit could see the packets of cocaine
inside the pill bottle in plain view, no search warrant was
required to open the bottle.
On appeal, Sado does not seek to suppress the packets
of cocaine because the pill bottle was opened at the police
station without a warrant.  Instead, he challenges Officer
Dudoit's seizure of the pill bottle from Sado at the scene,
arguing that Officer Dudoit's removal of the pill bottle from
Sado's pocket exceeded the permissible scope of a valid search
incident to arrest.  Sado did not raise the argument he now
asserts on appeal before the Circuit Court.  Accordingly, he
waived this argument.  See State v. Ildefonso , 72 Haw. 573, 584,
827 P.2d 648, 655 (1992) ("Our review of the record reveals that
[the defendant] did not raise this argument at trial, and thus it
is deemed to have been waived."); State v. Moses , 102 Hawai #i
449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if a party
does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed
to have been waived on appeal[.]"); State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw.
147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990) ("Generally, the failure to
properly raise an issue at the trial level precludes a party from
raising that issue on appeal."); State v. Matias , 57 Haw. 96,
101, 550 P.2d 900, 904 (1976) ("[T]here can be no doubt that the
making of an objection upon a specific ground is a waiver of all
other objections." (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted)).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.
In any event, we conclude that Sado's argument on
appeal is without merit.  Officer Dudoit's seizure of the pill
bottle from Sado's pocket was pursuant to, and did not exceed the
permissible scope of, a valid search incident to arrest. 
Accordingly, the pill bottle and its contents were not subject to
suppression.
1.
Under the Fourth Amendment to the United States
Constitution, once a person is subject to a lawful custodial
arrest, the police may search that person incident to the arrest
for weapons and to discover evidence.  United States v. Robinson ,
414 U.S. 218, 235 (1973).  The search for evidence incident to
arrest is not limited to evidence related to the crime for which
the person was arrested.2/  Id.
However, under the Hawai #i Constitution, the
permissible scope of a search for evidence incident to arrest is
more restrictive than under the Fourth Amendment.  Under Article
I, Section 7 of the Hawai #i Constitution, the search for evidence
incident to arrest is limited to "the discovery of fruits of the
crime for which the accused has been arrested" and "the 
2/ In Robinson , the Supreme Court explained its rationale for declining
to impose restrictions on the scope of the permissible search for evidence
incident to a lawful arrest: 
A police officer's determination as to how and where to search the
person of a suspect whom he has arrested is necessarily a quick ad
hoc judgment which the Fourth Amendment does not require to be
broken down in each instance into an analysis of each step in the
search.  The authority to search the person incident to a lawful
custodial arrest, while based upon the need to disarm and to
discover evidence, does not depend on what a court may later
decide was the probability in a particular arrest situation that
weapons or evidence would in fact be found upon the person of the
suspect.  A custodial arrest of a suspect based on probable cause
is a reasonable intrusion under the Fourth Amendment; that
intrusion being lawful, a search incident to the arrest requires
no additional justification.  It is the fact of the lawful arrest
which establishes the authority to search, and we hold that in the
case of a lawful custodial arrest a full search of the person is
not only an exception to the warrant requirement of the Fourth
Amendment, but is also a 'reasonable' search under that Amendment.
Robinson , 414 U.S. at 235. 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
instrumentalities used in its commission[.]"  State v. Melear , 63
Haw. 488, 494, 630 P.2d 619, 624 (1981).
The Hawaii Supreme Court has defined the scope of a
permissible search incident to arrest under Article I, Section 7
of the Hawai #i Constitution as follows: "A warrantless search of
an individual incident to a valid arrest properly may be directed
towards a protective search for weapons, or towards the discovery
of fruits of the crime for which the accused has been arrested,
as well as the instrumentalities used in its commission, or to
prevent the arrestee from escaping."  Id. at 494, 630 P.2d at
624-25.3/  The search incident to arrest cannot be broader than
necessary to accomplish these permissible purposes.  Id.  #
2.
Here, the pill bottle recovered from Sado during the
search incident to his arrest was properly seized as a fruit or
an instrumentality of the terroristic threatening offense for
which he had been arrested.  Prior to conducting the search
incident to arrest, Officer Dudoit had received information that
Sado had committed terroristic threatening by pointing a gun at
Jayson's face.  He also knew that a gun had been found by other
officers at the scene, and he had himself recovered five rounds
of .38 caliber ammunition which appeared to have been discarded
by Sado.  Officer Dudoit therefore, at minimum, had reason to
believe that Sado may be in possession of additional ammunition. 
The pill bottle recovered from Sado's pocket was three inches
tall and one and a half inches in diameter, large enough to
conceal ammunition.  Under these circumstances, we conclude that
Officer Dudoit's removal of the pill bottle from Sado's pocket
and his plain view observation of its contents was a permissible
search incident to Sado's arrest.  We therefore affirm the
Circuit Court's denial of Sado's suppression motion.
3/ See State v. Kaluna , 55 Haw. 361, 370-71, 520 P.2d 51, 59 (1974)
(stating that a search incident to arrest is "limited in scope to a situation
where it is reasonably necessary to discover the fruits or instrumentalities
of the crime for which the defendant is arrested, or to protect the officer
from attack, or to prevent the offender from escaping").
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
Sado's contention that the Circuit Court failed to
obtain a valid waiver of his right to testify pursuant to
Tachibana is without merit.
A.
Immediately prior to the start of jury selection, the
Circuit Court provided Sado with the following advisement:
THE COURT:  . . . [Y]ou have a constitutional right to
testify in your own defense.  Although you should consult
with your lawyer regarding the decision to testify, it is
your decision, and no one can prevent you from testifying
should you choose to do so.  If you decide to testify, the
prosecutor will be allowed to cross-examine you.
You also have a constitutional right not to testify
and to remain silent.  If you choose not to testify, the
jury will be instructed that it cannot hold your silence
against you in deciding your case.
If you have not testified by the end of the trial, I
will briefly question you to make sure that it was your
decision not to testify.  Do you understand?
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am. 
Just prior to the defense resting its case, the Circuit
Court engaged in the following exchange with Sado:
[Defense Counsel]:  My client is ready for the
Tachibana, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Okay.  
Mr. Sado, as I discussed with you before at the start
of the trial, you have a constitutional right to testify in
your own defense.  Although you should consult with your
lawyer regarding the decision to testify, it is your
decision, and no one can prevent you from testifying should
you choose to do so.
If you decide the [sic] testify, the prosecutor will
be allowed to cross-examine you; in other words, ask you
questions.  You also have a constitutional right not to
testify and to remain silent.
If you choose not to testify, the jury will be
instructed that it cannot hold your silence against you in
deciding your case.
It is my understanding today that you wish to --
[Defense Counsel]:  Your Honor, my client will not be
testifying and asserting his right to remain silent.
THE COURT:  Okay.  So it's my understanding today that
you do not intend to testify.  Is it your decision not to
testify?
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  All right.  And you had an opportunity to
consult with [defense counsel] about this decision?
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  And regardless of his advice, you decided
to testify -- this is a decision you made of your own free
will?
THE DEFENDANT:  To not testify.
THE COURT:  To not testify?
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  Is anyone forcing you or making you not
testify?
THE DEFENDANT:  No, ma'am.
THE COURT:  Are you doing this voluntarily of your own
free will?
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  Nobody is using any pressure, threats or
coercion to get you to not testify? 
THE DEFENDANT:  No, ma'am.
THE COURT:  Okay.  And regardless of [defense
counsel's] advise [sic], is it your decision not to testify
in your trial.  Is that correct?
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  All right.
B.
In Tachibana , the supreme court stated that:
In conducting the [ultimate] colloquy, the trial court
must be careful not to influence the defendant's decision
whether or not to testify and should limit the colloquy to
advising the defendant
that he or she has a right to testify, that if
he or she wants to testify that no one can
prevent him or her from doing so, and that if he
or she testifies the prosecution will be allowed
to cross-examine him or her.  In connection with
the privilege against self-incrimination, the
defendant should also be advised that he or she
has a right not to testify and that if he or she
does not testify then the jury can be instructed
about that right.
Tachibana , 79 Hawaii at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (citation
and brackets omitted).
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Sado argues that the Circuit Court's Tachibana  colloquy
was defective because the Circuit Court did not inquire if Sado
understood and ensure that he understood each element of the
Tachibana advisement.  In determining whether a defendant validly
waived his or her right to testify at trial, we "look to the
totality of the facts and circumstances of each particular case." 
State v. Han, 130 Hawai# i 83, 89, 306 P.3d 128, 134 (2013)
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Here, the record indicates that Sado was a high school 
graduate who attended college in two separate years; that he had
no difficulty reading or understanding English; that he was
represented by counsel; that counsel had discussed Sado's
testimonial rights and Sado's decision on whether to testify with
Sado; and that Sado fully understood that the decision to testify
was his decision, regardless of the advice of his counsel. 
Although the Circuit Court did not ask Sado at the end of the
case whether he understood the Tachibana  advisement, Sado
indicated that he understood the Circuit Court's pretrial
advisement, which had covered every element of the Tachibana
advisement.  Moreover, there is nothing in the record to suggest
that Sado harbored any uncertainty or lack of understanding of
his Tachibana rights, or that any "salient fact" existed that
would impede his ability to understand these rights.  See State
v. Barros, 105 Hawai #i 160, 169-70, 95 P.3d 14, 23-24 (App.
2004).  Under these circumstances, we reject Sado's claim that
his waiver of the right to testify was invalid.  
III.
Sado argues that the Circuit abused its discretion in
sentencing him to prison based on his failure to admit guilt to
the charges.  We disagree.
A.
After Sado was arrested on the night of the incident,
he waived his Miranda rights and agreed to be interviewed by the
police.  During this police interview, Sado denied that he had
been carrying a gun and denied any knowledge of the gun and
ammunition recovered at the scene or the cocaine found in the
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
pill bottle recovered from his pocket.  Sado was interviewed a
second time approximately two weeks after the incident.  In this
second interview, Sado again denied that he had a gun during his
altercation with Jayson.  During the second interview, Sado was
discovered using his cell phone under a table to text Keahi, who
was at the police station waiting to be interviewed, telling
Keahi not to say anything.  Also, after asking to use the
bathroom at the police station, Sado "blurted out" to Keahi to
refuse to answer questions and to ask for a lawyer.
Sado's theory of defense at trial was that the gun
belonged to Jayson and that the police had manufactured evidence
against him and had failed to perform an impartial investigation
because Jayson's father was a police officer.  Sado did not
testify at trial, and he declined to exercise his right of
allocution at sentencing. 
In imposing its sentence on Sado, the Circuit Court
provided an extensive explanation of why it was sentencing him to
terms of imprisonment.  The Circuit Court stated:
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you very much, gentlemen.
Stand up, Mr. Sado.
What kind of person brings a gun, much less a loaded
firearm, to a bar?  Were you going to use it?  Were you
showing off?  Were you trying to scare someone?  Or all of
the above?
This whole case from day one with this Court has been
about deny, deny, deny.  But five people that -- the five
people who testified to the jury, the five people who the
jury found to be credible all say that you were the one with
the gun that night.  You were the one that pointed this gun
inches, inches from Jayson Rego's face.  You were the one
who smacked him on the side of the head.  And you two were
the ones that ended up in the window of the Sherri Reeve's
Gallery, and so on and so forth.  It's about denial, and
it's about blame.
Let's talk about blame a little bit.  I sat through
that trial, and so did the jury.  And I'll tell you, I've
never seen a case where so many different people got blamed
for so many different things.  Police got blamed for being
keystone cops, placing bullets -- et cetera.  [Jayson's
father] got blamed for trying to influence the police
department because he's a retired police officer.  [Jayson]
got blamed for either bringing the gun or having planted the
gun, or something along those lines.  But let's talk about
what's factual.  Let's talk about the what jury heard, what
this Court heard, and what you were found guilty of.
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
There was five people who you saw with a gun.  You
were the only one that was seen that night with a gun.  One
gun that you denied.  This gun was found in a planter near
the area where you and Jayson Rego ended up smashed into the
Sherri Reeve Gallery.  Right where you guys were wrestling
or fighting, that's where the gun was found.
The bullets, the five bullets.  One bullet was found
outside of the patrol car.  You were the only one that night
put into the patrol car.  Into the patrol car.  In the
patrol car, four other identical bullets were found in the
interior of the patrol car in the door handle.  So one
outside, four inside, all .38 caliber, all match, all fit
the gun that was found that you denied.  And you were the
only one in the car that night.  Does it fit?  I think so. 
Do the pieces fit?  They sure do. 
You deny about the drugs being found.  The drugs were
found in a pill container in your pocket.  When you were
interviewed by the probation officer, one of the concerns
was when you asked about drugs -- she asked you about drugs,
you said you didn't do any drugs.  Yet they found five
baggies, packets inside this pill container, totaling
approximately 2.91 grams of cocaine in your pocket in the
police car.
You're charged, Mr. Sado, with five very, very serious
matters today; four of which are felonies, and one is a
misdemeanor.  And for whatever reason, I'm trying to rack my
brain about, how did this whole thing start?  What's the
problem?  What happened between you and Jayson Rego to get
this far?  What kind of bad blood is there between the two
of you?
I don't know if it had something to do with the
ex-girlfriend and previous girlfriend and your run-in with
Jayson Rego back at Casanova's back in May.  And I think
there was a bumping in at Lulu's a couple weeks later, and
then you guys end up back at Casanova's on July 15, 2010.
I know at one point, he tried to shake your hand, he
tried to make amends.  He tried to apologize on previous
occasions, even though he did not do anything wrong.  He was
trying do what his parents taught him to do; apologize, walk
away from trouble, don't get involved.  And that's what he
tried to do.
That night he offered you an olive branch.  He offered
to shake your hand and pretty much let it go.  You refused
that night to shake his hand.  You refused to let it go. 
You said something along the lines "it ain't good, we still
got problems," or something to that effect.
And when it was all done that night and everyone was
disbursing and going home after Casanova's closed that
night, and they were going home, Jayson and brother and his
friend Caylee and her boyfriend Victor and the other friend,
Cullan . . ., they were just minding their own business,
walking down Makawao Avenue, going to their cars with the
intent of just going home.  You're the one who came after
him.  You're the one who confronted him.  You're the one who
threatened him, held the gun to his face, pulled the gun on 
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
him.  Pulled the gun on him.  What does he do?  He raised
his hand, he backed away, and he didn't want any problems. 
He didn't want any trouble with you.  Defensive posture, he
raised his hands.  That's what he did.
And then he saw his brother being attacked by one of
the other cohorts of yours, so he ran after that and went to
help his brother.  And that's when you cold-cocked him,
tussle began, you guys smashed into the planter, and
eventually into the Sherri Reeve's Gallery window.  And
that's where we are today.
So everything that happened that night happened for --
happened at your hands.  It really shows to me that you have
no responsibility for what -- you're taking no
responsibility for what took place back on July 15th, 2010.
And when the police did interview -- and I found this
extremely disturbing.  When the police interviewed you down
at the station and you were saying whatever you were saying,
more denials when you were talking to the police.  What did
they catch you doing?  Texting under the table.  Texting
[Keahi], telling him not to make a statement.
They looked at your phone.  They saw who you were
texting.  And when you had to go on a bathroom break, one of
the detectives stuck had his head out to let the other
detective know that you were taking a bathroom break, you
yell into [Keahi] and basically tell him not to say anything
and lawyer up.
So how is that taking responsibility?  I don't get it. 
I don't get it.  These are serious crimes.  And serious
crimes deserve serious punishment.  People can't go around
brandishing weapons.  People can't go around accusing
innocent people of planting evidence, planting guns,
planting drugs.  This is not the kind of world that we live
in.  And you've been telling lie after lie after lie.
And it's really disheartening.  Because when I read
your PSI, I found 20, 30, letters from people that you have
known all your life.  Family, friends, people you went to
church with, Father Colton came here today to speak on your
behalf.  All these people say they know you.  And they know
what you're capable of, and they say you're a good person. 
But all these people were not there on July 15, 2010.
Caylee . . . was there.  Cullan . . . was there. 
Jordan Rego was there.  Jayson Rego was there.  Victor . . .
was there.  They all know what you are capable of.  They saw
firsthand what you were capable of.  And although for you it
may -- it's been a long four or four and a half years, and
you had to live through this, and you've turned your life
around.  Not once did I hear you say anything or to think
about what has Jayson Rego had to go through.
This has been hanging over him as well.  He doesn't
know what the outcome was.  Four and a half years have gone
by.  He's tried to go on with his life, but he still feels
the effects of being threatened with a gun that he doesn't
even know was loaded on unloaded that night.  His life 
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
probably flashed before his eyes.  You had long-term --
you've had a long-term effect on him as well.  You know, he
has to live with this as well.  And you keep thinking you
own Makawao town, or something along those lines.
While what I see here is, even though you've done well
in the past four, four and a half years, you still need a
major attitude adjustment.  So I'm making the attitude
adjustment right now.
B.
"[A] sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence."  Keawe v. State, 79 Hawai# i 281, 284, 901
P.2d 481, 484 (1995).  "[A] sentencing court may consider any and
all accurate information that reasonably might bear on the proper
sentence for the particular defendant, given the crime
committed."  Id.  at 286, 901 P.2d at 486.
In light of the Circuit Court's remarks, it is clear
that its focus in, and overriding justification for, sentencing
Sado to imprisonment was the serious and dangerous nature of his
conduct -- bringing a gun and ammunition to a bar and pointing
the gun at Jayson's head -- and the character he revealed --
escalating matters and refusing to accept Jayson's attempts to
make peace -- in committing the charged offenses.  The Circuit
Court also properly relied on its view that Sado had lied to the
police in denying any involvement in threatening Jayson with a
gun and in denying any knowledge of the gun, ammunition, or drugs
recovered at the scene.  Evidence that Sado had lied to the
police was relevant to an assessment of his character.  Such
evidence, as well as his telling Keahi not to talk to the police,
also indicated a lack of remorse for his criminal conduct.
C.
In State v. Kamana #o, 103 Hawai #i 315, 82 P.3d 401
(2003), the supreme court stated that "it is well settled that a
sentencing court may consider a defendant's lack of remorse in
assessing the likelihood of successful rehabilitation." 
Kamana#o, 103 Hawai# i at 321, 82 P.3d at 407.  It further stated,
however, that "[a] sentencing court . . . may not  infer a lack of
remorse from a criminal defendant's refusal to admit guilt."  Id. 
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
It is difficult in many cases to evaluate the "subtle,
yet meaningful, distinction" between a trial judge "[permissibly] 
imposing a harsher sentence upon a defendant based on his or her
lack of remorse, on the one hand, and [a trial judge
impermissibly] punishing a defendant for his or her refusal to
admit guilt, on the other[.]"  Id.  In Kamana#o, the supreme
court applied the following three-factor analysis in determining
whether the sentencing court erroneously relied upon the 
defendant's refusal to admit guilt in imposing the sentence: "(1)
the defendant's maintenance of innocence after conviction, (2)
the judge's attempt to get the defendant to admit guilt, and (3)
the appearance that, had the defendant affirmatively admitted
guilt, his sentence would not have been so severe."  Id.  at 323,
82 P.3d at 409 (block quote format, citation, and brackets
omitted).
Here, Sado maintained his innocence after the jury's
guilty verdicts, but the Circuit Court did not attempt to induce
Sado to admit his guilt at sentencing.  We conclude that the
dispositive factor in this case is whether it appears that the
Circuit Court would not have imposed its sentence of concurrent
terms of imprisonment if Sado had affirmatively admitted his
guilt.
Certain aspects of the Circuit Court's remarks could be
interpreted as indicting that the Circuit Court based its
decision to sentence Sado to imprisonment on his refusal to admit
guilt to the charges.  However, viewing the Circuit Court's
statements as a whole, it appears clear that the overriding
factors relied upon by the Circuit Court were the serious and
dangerous nature of Sado's conduct in committing the charged
offenses and the character he revealed in committing the
offenses, lying to the police, and attempting to induce Keahi not
to cooperate.  The Circuit Court's remarks do not suggest that
had Sado affirmatively admitted his guilt to the charges, his
sentence would have been less severe.  We therefore decline to
overturn the Circuit Court's sentence.
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
Court's Judgment.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, October 31, 2017. #
On the briefs:
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Peter A. Hanano
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge
17