 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000396 25-FEB-2025 07:28 AM Dkt. 47 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000396  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
RICHARD K. TAYLOR, JR., Plaintiff-Appellant,  
v.  
ATTORNEYS  AT LAW,  CRUDELE & DE LIMA; ROBERT J. CRUDELE;  
BRIAN J. DE LIMA, Defendants-Appellees; JOHN DOES 1-20, JANE 
DOES 1-20, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-20, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20, DOE 
ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants   
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  3CC161000344)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.)  
Self-represented Plaintiff-Appellant Richard K. 
Taylor, Jr. (Taylor ) appeals from the "Order Granting Defendants 
Crudele & De Lima, Attorneys at Law, Robert J. Crudele and Brian 
J. De Lima's [(collectively, the  Defendants)] Motion for Summary 
Judgment or, Alternatively, for Dismissal for Failure to 
Prosecute Under [ Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP)] Rule 
41(b)(1), Filed March 15, 2022," ( Order) filed May 24, 2022, and   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Final Judgment, filed on June 1, 2022, by the Circuit Court 
of the Third Circuit ( circuit court ). 1 
This appeal arises out of a legal malpractice 
complaint filed by Taylor against the Defendants.   The 
Defendants represented Taylor in bringing a wrongful death 
action for the death of Taylor's father. The Engagement 
Agreement for legal services, which was signed and acknowledged 
by Taylor, defined the scope of the Crudele & De Lima  law firm's 
(Crudele  & De Lima ) legal  services to Taylor  as follows,  
Scope of Engagement  
The following DESCRIBES and LIMITS the legal service which 
we have agreed to provide to you (i.e., the "Scope of Our 
Engagement") and it cannot be changed unless agreed to by 
us in writing. You have asked us to:  
Represent you as a residual claimant against 
the legal representative or estate of Donald 
Ingoglia for a wrongful death claim and related 
causes of action as a result of an accident 
that occurred on or about January 23, 2013, 
which caused the death of Rich ard Taylor Sr. 
Unless we have explicitly agreed in writing to do so, by 
entering into this Agreement we have only agreed to 
represent and advise you and no one else concerning the 
scope of this engagement . Unless explicitly agreed, our 
representation does not entail a continuing obligation to 
represent you concerning any subsequent legal development 
which may arise out of the subject matter of this 
engagement . 
(Italics in original) (Emphasis added.) 
The wrongful death action resulted in a settlement  in 
Taylor's favor.   Taylor did not challenge the settlement award  
in the underlying action; however, he alleged that the 
1 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. 
2   
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants committed legal malpractice in their handling of 
Taylor's settlement award . 
The circuit court granted the Defendants ' motion for 
summary judgment , and their motion to dismiss the complaint due 
to Taylor's failure to prosecute the case under HRCP Rule 
41(b)(1) . On appeal, Taylor contends that the circuit court 
erred in entering Final Judgment in favor of the Defendants 
because his settlement award "was distributed in an illegal 
man[n]er under [Crudele & De Lima 's] representation, and the 
firm[']s releas[e] . . . cause[d] damages" to Taylor. 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve 
Taylor's contentions as follows : 
(1) We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to j udgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi  46, 55–56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285–86 
(2013) (citation omitted).  
3   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the Defendants  satisfied their 
initial burden on summary judgment  through the declaration of 
Francis R. Alcain ( Alcain), and the attached exhibits.   Alcain, 
an attorney with Crudele & De Lima, represented that, pursuant 
to Taylor's own instructions, Crudele & De Lima distributed the 
entirety of Taylor's portion of the settlement award to Taylor's  
daughter and sister in four disbursements,  2
14. [Taylor] was informed regarding Crudele & De Lima's 
receipt of the settlement funds. 
15. [Taylor] instructed Crudele & De Lima to disburse his 
portion of the settlement funds to various third parties. 
16. Attached hereto as Exhibit "A" is a true and accurate 
copy of the Receipt for Partial Distribution dated November 
25, 2014, with the enclosed letter from [Taylor] dated 
November 17, 2014 instructing Crudele & De Lima to disburse 
his under insured motorist policy funds to his daughter, 
Shainalyn Taylor. 
17. Attached hereto as Exhibit "B" is a true and accurate 
copy of the Receipt for Partial Distribution dated January 
29, 2015, with the enclosed letter from [Taylor] dated 
December 19, 2014 instructing Crudele & De Lima to disburse 
a portion of his settlement funds from the Settlement, 
Mutual Release and Indemnity Agreement to his daughter, 
Shainalyn Taylor. 
18. Attached hereto as Exhibit "C" is a true and accurate 
copy of the Receipt for Partial Distribution dated March 4, 
2015, with the enclosed letter from [Taylor] dated February 
21, 2015 instructing Crudele & De Lima to disburse a 
portion of his settlement funds from the Settlement, Mutual 
Release and Indemnity Agreement to his sister, Melody 
Lindsey. 
19. Attached hereto as Exhibit "D" is a true and accurate 
copy of the Receipt for Third and Final Distribution dated 
April 23, 2015, with the enclosed letter from [Taylor] 
dated April 11, 2015, instructing Crudele & De Lima to 
disburse the remaining portion of his settlement funds from 
2 The Defendants attached excerpts of Alcain's deposition testimony 
to its motion for summary judgment, in which Alcain confirmed that the last 
of Taylor's settlement proceeds were distributed to Taylor's sister, Melody 
Lindsey, on April 23, 2015. 
4   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Settlement, Mutual Release and Indemnity Agreement to 
his sister, Melody Lindsey. 
20. In his instructions to disburse his settlement funds, 
[Taylor] did not object to the Settlement , Mutual Release 
and Indemnity Agreement and he did not dispute the 
resolution of the above -entitled matter. 
We conclude that the Defendants met their initial 
burden on summary judgment of "presenting evidence negating an 
element of [Taylor's legal malpractice] claim," or demonstrating 
that Taylor would "be unable to carry his . . . burden of proof 
at trial ." Id. at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290 (citations omitted) . 
The burden then shifted to Taylor, who did not dispute 
the evidence presented by the Defendants , and did not present 
any specific facts to establish a genuine issue of material fact 
for trial . Taylor did not present any evidence that the 
Defendants breached any duty they may have owed regarding the 
disbursement of Taylor's settlement funds. See id. at 56–57, 
292 P.3d at 1286 –87 ("[W]hen the moving party satisfies its 
initial burden of production [,] . . . the burden shift[s] to the 
nonmoving party to respond to the motion for summary judgment 
and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general 
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.") 
(citation omitted ). 
The circuit court was not wrong in granting summary 
judgment. Taylor did not raise a genuine issue of material 
fact, and the Defendants  were entitled to summary judgment as a 
matter of law.  
5   
   
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Because we find that the circuit court was not 
wrong in granting summary judgment in favor of the Defendants, 
we decline to address the circuit court's alternative  ruling to 
"dismiss[] the action under HRCP  Rule 41(b)(1) for lack of 
prosecution"  because  it found that Taylor "deliberately delayed 
or engaged in contumacious conduct which . . . caused actual 
prejudice to [the]  Defendants."  
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Order and Final Judgment . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, February 25, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine  G. Leonard  
 Acting Chief  Judge  
Richard K. Taylor, Jr.,   
Self-represented  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Plaintiff-Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Nadine Y. Ando,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
for Defendants-Appellees.  Associate Judge 
6 