NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0001050
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF KB1
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 07-11642)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Appellant Father ("Father") appeals from the Order 
Terminating Parental Rights ("Order"), filed on December 5, 2011 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit ("Family Court").2 More 
than four years after Appellee State of Hawai' i Department of 
Human Services ("DHS") first filed a Petition for Foster Care Custody over Mother and Father's daughter ("KB"), the Order terminated Mother and Father's parental rights and awarded permanent custody of KB, who was six years old at the time, to DHS. Mother did not appeal. 
On appeal, Father argues that (1) the service plans
 
ordered by the Family Court did not include him and, due to his
 incarceration until April 2009, he should not have been expected
 to demonstrate the skills required by DHS until a service plan
 was created upon his release, (2) DHS failed to use reasonable
 
1
 In a prior appeal and in prior orders issued in this case, we
referred to the child as "KB." For consistency, we will refer to the child as
"KB" in the case caption and in our decision.
 
2
 The Honorable Sherri-Ann L. Iha presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
efforts to reunify him with KB because timely referrals for
 
services were not provided, and (3) DHS failed to demonstrate by
 clear and convincing evidence that he failed to complete any
 recommended services prior to the termination of his parental
 rights in February 2010.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's points of error as follows: 
At a termination of parental rights hearing for a child
 
under the age of fourteen, the Family Court must determine
 whether there exists clear and convincing evidence that:
 
(1)	 A child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination is not presently willing and able to
provide the parent's child with a safe family home,
even with the assistance of a service plan;
 
(2)	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that the child's
parent whose rights are subject to termination will
become willing and able to provide the child with a
safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not exceed two years from the child's date
of entry into foster care; [and]
 
(3)	 The proposed permanent plan is in the best interests
of the child. In reaching this determination, the
court shall:
 
(A)	 Presume that it is in the best interests of the
 
child to be promptly and permanently placed with
responsible and competent substitute parents and
family in a safe and secure home; and 
(B)	 Give greater weight to the presumption that the
permanent plan is in the child's best interest,
the younger the child is upon the child's date
of entry into foster care[.]
 
HAW.  REV.  STAT. ยง 587A-33(a)(1)-(3) (Supp. 2011). With a single
 
exception discussed below, Father does not challenge the Family
 
Court's relevant conclusions of law ("COL") and findings of fact
 ("FOF"). Instead, Father's arguments focus on DHS's alleged
 failure to provide every reasonable opportunity to help him "to
 succeed in remedying the problems that put his daughter, [KB], at
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
risk, as required by HRS [ยง] 587A-2."3.
 
(1) Father contends that he was not included in
 
service plans or that those service plans did not recommend that
 
he participate in services. To the contrary, however, Father was
 included in service plans, dated July 11, 2008, September 25,
 2008, and February 13, 2009. Those plans ordered both Mother and
 Father to complete recommended services. Father also contends
 that DHS should have developed a new service plan after his
 release from prison in April 2009, and that he should have only
 been required to fulfill a post-release service plan. In
 support, Father argues that it was unjust to require that he
 fulfill, prior to his release, the pre-release service plans. 
The record, however, establishes that Father acknowledged that he
 needed to complete the recommended services after release, and
 despite a ten-month window of post-release opportunity, he failed
 to do so. 
(2) Contrary to Father's contention, DHS exerted
 
reasonable and active efforts to pursue family reunification, but
 Father's lack of compliance frustrated its efforts. Father
 failed to provide current residential addresses and working
 telephone numbers. Nonetheless, DHS social workers made repeated
 attempts to contact Father with limited success. Father
 repeatedly missed appointments for a psychological evaluation and
 only completed the evaluation twenty days before the termination
 of parental rights hearing. Yet Father acknowledged that the
 psychological evaluation was necessary to determine what other
 
3 HRS ยง 587A-2 provides in relevant part:
 
Purpose; construction. . . . 
. . . .
 . . . Every reasonable opportunity should be provided
to help the child's legal custodian to succeed in remedying
the problems that put the child at substantial risk of being
harmed in the family home. Each appropriate resource,
public and private, family and friend, should be considered
and used to maximize the legal custodian's potential for
providing a safe family home for the child.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. ยง 587A-2 (Supp. 2011).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
services were necessary for reunification with KB. Father made
 
no effort to reschedule a failed 2011 home study visit. Although
 Father claims that he was referred to a closed drug testing
 facility, he also acknowledged that DHS referred him to another
 facility for subsequent substance abuse assessment and testing,
 but that he did not complete a substance abuse assessment.
 
(3) It was not clearly erroneous for the Family Court
 
to find that Father failed to complete any recommended services
 prior to February 2010. Father admitted that a social worker
 informed him that the programs he completed in prison were not
 the same as DHS services. Father was released from prison in
 April 2009, but did not complete a psychological evaluation until
 November 2011. Furthermore, as stated above, Father admitted
 that he did not complete a substance abuse assessment, or a
 second home study. Father only attempted to complete services by
 taking parenting and domestic-violence classes after this case
 was previously on appeal in February 2010.
 
In his points of error, Father challenges COL 9, which
 
determined that "[t]he legal mother, legal father, adjudicated,
 presumed or concerned natural father, as defined under HRS
 Chapter [587A], are not presently willing and able to provide the
 Children [sic] with a safe family home, even with the assistance
 of a service plan." Father contends that the COL is incorrect
 because DHS did not prove that he was not presently willing and
 able to provide KB with a safe family home with the assistance of
 a service plan that actually included him. As noted above,
 however, Father was included in the DHS service plans, he failed
 to satisfy those service plans, and that failure served, in part,
 as the basis for COL 9.
 
In light of Father's failure to establish that it was
 
clearly erroneous for the Family Court to adopt COL 9, the fact
 that the other points raised are equally without merit, and the
 fact that Father raises no arguments contesting the Family
 Court's other relevant COLs and FOFs (in particular, COLs 10 and
 12, and FOFs 81 and 86) that serve as the basis for the Order,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 5, 2011 Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights entered in the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 20, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Wilfred S. Tangonan
for Father-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier andJonathan M. Fujiyama,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 