NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000644 07-NOV-2024 08:12 AM Dkt. 103 SO 
CAAP-21-0000644 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TYLER BENJAMIN NICHOLS, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-21-0000023) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ. 
Defendant-Appellant Tyler Benjamin Nichols (Nichols) 
appeals from the October 12, 2021 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence; Notice of Entry (Judgment
) entered against him by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).  At the 
conclusion of a jury trial, Nichols was convicted of Assault Against a Law Enforcement Officer in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-712.6 (2014)
 21
1 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided. 
2 HRS § 707-712.6 provides: 
§ 707-712.6. Assault against a law enforcement
officer in the second degree. (1) A person commits the
offense of assault against a law enforcement officer in the
second degree if the person recklessly causes bodily injuryto a law enforcement officer who is engaged in theperformance of duty.
(2) Assault of a law enforcement officer in the second 
degree is a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the person whohas been convicted of this offense to a definite term of imprisonment, pursuant to section 706-663, of not less than thirtydays without possibility of probation or suspension of sentence. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Assault LEO Second) and the offense of Rules and Orders in 
violation of HRS §§ 127A-25 (2023)3 and 127A-29 (Supp. 2019)
(Violation of Rules and Orders), as designated in the Third Supplementary Proclamation by David Y. Ige, Governor of the State 
of Hawai# i, dated March 23, 2020 (Proclamation).
   54 
3 HRS § 127A-25 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 127A-25 Rules and orders. (a) For the purpose of
carrying out any provision of this chapter, the governor may
adopt rules for the State and the mayor may adopt rules forthe county which may, if so stated in the rules, have theforce and effect of law. Even though the rules areprescribed pursuant to a power conferred, or havingmandatory or prohibitive effect, only in the event of astate of emergency or local state of emergency, the rulesnevertheless may be prescribed prior thereto if statedtherein to have the force and effect of law only in theevent of a state of emergency or local state of emergency.All the rules, and likewise all other action taken underthis chapter, shall be made and taken with due considerationof the orders, rules, regulations, actions, recommendations,and requests of federal authorities relevant thereto. . . 
4 HRS § 127A-29 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 127A-29 Misdemeanors. Any person violating any
rule of the governor or mayor prescribed and promulgatedpursuant to this chapter and having the force and effect oflaw, shall, if it shall be so stated in the rule, be guiltyof a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the person shall befined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than oneyear, or both. 
5 Nichols was charged by Complaint, inter alia , as follows: 
Nichols intentionally or knowingly fail[ing] to stay
at home or in his/her place of residence, without beingpermitted to do so for essential activities and/or to engagein essential businesses and operations, and/or except asnecessary to maintain continuity of operations of thefederal critical infrastructure sectors and as further designated in the [Proclamation] and/or by the Director ofthe 
Hawai #i Emergency Management Agency, with intent or
knowledge that a state of emergency had been proclaimed bythe governor of the State of Hawai #i pursuant to Chapter
127A of the [HRS] and that the state of emergency was ineffect on April 21, 2020, throughout the State of Hawai #i,
and that a rule was prescribed and promulgated pursuant toChapter 127A of the [HRS] by the governor of the State ofHawai #i, having the force and effect of law, in the
[Proclamation], thereby committing the offense of Rules andOrders, in violation of Section 127A-25 and Section 127A-29
of the [HRS]. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nichols raises three points of error on appeal, 
contending that: (1) the Circuit Court erred in allowing the 
State to adduce the testimony of Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
Officer Darrell Bryce (Officer Bryce) that Nichols had provided a home address without first holding an evidentiary hearing to 
determine voluntariness; (2) there is insufficient evidence to support Nichols's conviction for Assault LEO Second; and (3) there is insufficient evidence to support Nichols's conviction for the Violation of Rules and Orders. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Nichols's points of error as follows: 
(1) Nichols argues that the Circuit Court should have 
made a voluntariness determination as mandated by HRS § 621-26 (2016) before it admitted Officer Bryce's testimony that Nichols had provided him a home address after he was arrested. 
HRS § 621-26 provides: "No confession shall be 
received in evidence unless it is first made to appear to the judge before whom the case is being tried that the confession was in fact voluntarily made." The 
Hawai#i Supreme Court has held: 
Pursuant to HRS § 621–26, the trial court must make a
determination of the voluntariness of a defendant's 
statements, and the failure to do so constitutes reversible error. See State v. Green, 51 Haw. 260, 264, 457 P.2d 505,
508 (1969) ("[T]he trial judge has the duty to determine theadmissibility of an inculpatory statement out of thepresence of the jury and prior to the jury's exposure tosuch evidence."). Whether a motion to determine the voluntariness of a confession is initiated by the
prosecution, the defense, or sua sponte  by the trial court,
is ultimately immaterial to the statutory requirement of a
voluntariness hearing. Cf. Jackson v. Denno, 378 U.S. 368,
84 S.Ct. 1774, 12 L.Ed.2d 908 (1964) (holding that failureto conduct hearing into voluntariness of defendant's 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
confession amounted to denial of due process in violation of
[F]ourteenth [A]mendment to the United StatesConstitution)[.] 
State v. Naititi , 104 Hawai#i 224, 233, 87 P.3d 893, 902 (2004); 
accord State v. Hewitt
, 149 Hawai#i 71, 76, 481 P.3d 713, 718 
(App. 2021), 
rev'd on other grounds
, 153 Hawai#i 33, 526 P.3d 558 
(App. 2023); 
State v. White, 1 Haw. App. 221, 224, 617 P.2d 98, 
100–01 (1980). HRS § 621-26 applies to inculpatory statements as 
well as confessions. See State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw. 479, 501-02 
n.13, 849 P.2d 58, 69 n.13 (1993). 
Here, Nichols's provision of a home address to Officer 
Bryce upon arrest was an inculpatory statement requiring a voluntariness determination under HRS § 621-26. Whether or not Nichols had a home was relevant to the issue of whether he was disregarding the Governor's order to stay at home. For example, in opposing Nichols's motion for judgment of acquittal, the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) pointed to Officer Bryce's 
testimony in arguing, inter alia: 
In addition, Officer Bryce testified that [Nichols]
provided him information, so he did provide that he had a
residence and that he was a cook in a restaurant, and thetrier of fact can infer from that information because Officer Oshiro also testified that in addition to the policedepartment getting updated as to the proclamations that werebeing given by the governor, this is approximately 26 daysinto the shutdown, and Officer Oshiro said that thisinformation as to the shutdown was being provided throughthe newspaper and television that he was watching andreading both, he knew that it was being provided. 
(Emphasis added). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in not making 
a voluntariness determination prior to the admission of Officer 
Bryce's testimony that Nichols provided him with a home address. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Nichols argues that there is insufficient evidence 
to support Nichols's conviction for Assault LEO Second because 
the evidence presented by the defense indicates that what happened was an accident when Officer Bryce, a rather large man, pushed Nichols's head down onto HPD Officer Aaron Oshiro's (Officer Oshiro) hand. 
In order to convict a defendant for Assault LEO Second, 
the State must prove that they "recklessly cause[] bodily injury to a law enforcement officer who is engaged in the performance of duty." HRS § 707-712.6. 
HRS § 702-206(3) (2014) defines "recklessly," in 
relevant part, as follows: 
(c) A person acts recklessly with respect to a result of
his conduct when he consciously disregards asubstantial and unjustifiable risk that his conductwill cause such a result. 
(d) A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within themeaning of this section if, considering the nature andpurpose of the person's conduct and the circumstancesknown to him, the disregard of the risk involves agross deviation from the standard of conduct that alaw-abiding person would observe in the samesituation. 
The State need not "introduce direct evidence of a 
defendant's state of mind in order to prove that the defendant 
acted . . . recklessly." State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai#i 131, 
140–41, 913 P.2d 57, 66–67 (1996) (citation omitted). 
[P]roof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences
arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant'sconduct is sufficient. The mind of an alleged offender maybe read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawnfrom all the circumstances. 
Id. at 141, 913 P.2d at 67 (citing State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 
254, 831 P.2d 924, 934 (1992)). 
5  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, viewing the evidence in the strongest light for 
the State, substantial evidence exists that Nichols recklessly 
caused bodily injury to Officer Oshiro.  Nichols contends that the evidence adduced at trial establishes that Officer Oshiro's injury was caused by Officer Bryce pushing Nichols's open mouth into Officer Oshiro's hand. However, other evidence existed from which the jury could reasonably infer Nichols's reckless state of mind in causing Officer Oshiro's injury. The struggle between Nichols and the officers wherein Nichols pushed Officer Oshiro in the chest, knocked Officer Oshiro's taser out of his hand, and 
physically resisted Officer Oshiro's efforts to get his hands 
behind his back to arrest him, were sufficient evidence for a 
jury to infer that Nichols consciously disregarded a substantial 
and unjustifiable risk that his conduct would cause injury to Officer Oshiro. 
(3) Nichols argues that there is insufficient evidence 
to support his conviction for Violation of Rules and Orders because the State failed to prove that Nichols had actual knowledge of the Governor's stay-at-home order. Nichols points to the charge in Count 2, which states, in relevant part: 
On or about April 21, 2020, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai #i [Nichols] did intentionally or
knowingly fail to stay at home or in his/her place ofresidence, . . . 
with intent or knowledge  that a state of 
emergency had been proclaimed by the governor of the Stateof Hawai #i pursuant to Chapter 127A of the [HRS] and that
the state of emergency was in effect on April 21, 2020,throughout the State of 
Hawai #i, and that a rule was
prescribed and promulgated pursuant to Chapter 127A of the[HRS] by the governor of the State of Hawai #i, having the 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
force and effect of law, in the [Proclamation], thereby
committing the offense of [Violation of Rules and Orders]. 
(Emphasis added).6 
In conjunction with this argument, Nichols points to 
the State's argument that Nichols's pre-arrest silence was 
substantive evidence of Nichols's guilt. In closing argument, the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) argued to the jury, inter 
alia: 
And also looking at rule -- page number 16, it talks
about what's called the state of mind, what a person's
thinking or what the person knows. These are facts that we have to prove. So it says the state of mind with which aperson commits an act such as intentionally, knowing, orrecklessly may be proved by circumstantial evidence. While witnesses may see and hear, and thus be able to give directevidence of what a person does or fails to do, there can beno eyewitness account of the state of mind with which theacts are done or omitted. But what a person does or failsto do may or may not indicate the state of mind with whichthe person does or refrains from doing an act. 
What happens upon the initial arrival of the officer?
First thing he tells everybody is, eh, the beaches areclosed, you're going to have to leave. And for a verychatty person that Mr. Nichols is, he never says anything
like why, why is the park closed?  You know why? Because 
just like John Orr, he knew that the beach was closed, thatthere was a stay at home order, and he knew he wasn'tsupposed to be there, that's the reason why they knew thebeach was closed. 
(Emphasis added). 
The DPA further argued, "You can infer that [Nichols] 
knew by the way he behaved, by the fact that he didn't argue with 
the officer, about the fact that the beach was closed. He's guilty of that charge." (Emphasis added). The DPA's primary argument was that Nichols's failure to ask why the beach was closed, i.e., his pre-arrest silence, proved that he was guilty 
6 The State now argues that "actual knowledge" is not an element of
the offense. However, this argument is raised for the first time on appeal,
as evidenced by, inter alia , the Complaint, the jury instructions, and the
State's closing argument. Therefore, we disregard this argument. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Violation of Rules and Orders offense. There is no 
subtlety here - the DPA directly argued that Nichols's silence was evidence of Nichols's guilt. 
Neither party specifically briefed the issue of whether 
the DPA committed prosecutorial misconduct in his closing argument when he argued that Nichols was guilty of Violation of Rules and Orders as evidenced by his not responding to the officer, i.e., his silence – in other words, whether the prosecutor asked the jury to infer an admission or consciousness of guilt from Nichols's silence. Therefore, pursuant to Hawai# i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4), this court entered an order allowing the parties to file supplemental briefs on the issues of whether the DPA committed prosecutorial misconduct when he asked the jury to infer guilt from Nichols's silence – "he never says anything like why, why is the park closed?" 
In supplemental briefing, the State merely repeats its 
"actual knowledge" argument noted in footnote 6 above and argues that, therefore, the prosecutor's alleged misconduct "is not relevant to any material issue in this case." In supplemental briefing, Nichols argues that the prosecutor's argument was an impermissible, unconstitutional comment on his prearrest silence that implied his guilt to the jury and constituted prosecutorial misconduct that may have contributed to the verdict on Count 2 (Violations of Rules and Orders). 
The supreme court has held: 
[P]rosecutorial misconduct is a legal term of art that
refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor,
however harmless or unintentional. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We have also repeatedly recognized the importance of
the constitutional right against self-incrimination. This 
right is secured by article I, section 10 of the Hawai #i 
Constitution, which provides, "nor shall any person becompelled in any criminal case to be a witness againstoneself." The right against self-incrimination issacrosanct. 
Hence, we have held the right prohibits the
prosecution from adducing evidence of or commenting on aperson's exercise of that right. 
State v. Borge, 152 Hawai# i 458, 464-65, 526 P.3d 435 441-42 
(2023) (cleaned up) (concerning comment on a defendant's 
affirmative exercise of the right not to self-incriminate). 
Furthermore, "the State may not use as substantive 
proof of guilt a defendant's prearrest silence that occurs at least as of the time of detention, for doing so would violate the right against compelled self-incrimination under article I, section 10 of the Hawai# i Constitution." State v. Tsujimura, 140 
Hawai#i 299, 314, 400 P.3d 500, 515 (2017). Accordingly, when a 
prosecutor adduces evidence of or comments on a defendant's pre-arrest silence at least as of the time of detention, they have committed prosecutorial misconduct. See id.; accord State v. 
Ikimaka, 147 Hawai# i 207, 220, 465 P.3d 654, 667 (2020) (stating 
that a prosecutor making "even one reference," let alone "three references in quick succession" to defendant's pre-arrest silence was "improper"); State v. Pada, CAAP-19-0000680, 2021 WL 1156564, at *7 (Haw. App. Mar. 25, 2021) (SDO) ("[W]e conclude that the State violated Pada's right to remain silent, by eliciting during cross-examination [testimony about his pre-arrest silence], and by commenting on this information during the State's closing argument."). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Notably, the silence the DPA used against Nichols was 
not made in response to a question posed to him by Officer 
Oshiro. The Tsujimura court expressed particular concern with protecting defendants from the usage of this type of silence against them: 
In light of these circumstances, permitting silence to
serve as an implication of guilt would mean that the State
would always be able to use as substantive proof of guiltprearrest silence not made in response to a question by apolice officer. The prosecutor need only identify a point
in time during the defendant's interaction with the policeofficer when no question was posed and no verbal exchangewas had (and, therefore, the defendant was expectedlysilent) and use that silence as evidence to infer thedefendant's guilt. This would engender a result where, in
any encounter between a law enforcement officer and acitizen, the State would be able to adduce evidence ofprearrest silence in myriad ways (e.g., When she was handingyou her driver's license and registration, did she sayanything about her injuries?, While she was opening theglove box, did she say anything about her injuries?, Whileshe was outside the car, did she say anything?, etc.). 
140 Hawai# i at 313–14, 400 P.3d at 514–15 (emphasis added). 
We conclude that the DPA's argument that Nichols's 
failure to "say anything" was evidence of his guilt constituted a 
flagrant violation of Nichols's due process rights and prosecutorial misconduct. Defense counsel did not object, but this court may nevertheless recognize such misconduct as it was plainly erroneous due to its effect on Nichols's substantial rights. See State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 
317, 326 (2003). 
Thus, we consider "whether there is a reasonable 
possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction. Factors considered are: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
All three factors weigh in Nichols's favor. As noted, the DPA's 
argument constituted a flagrant violation of Nichols's due process rights. There was no curative instruction. And, finally, there was very little other evidence from which a reasonable juror could infer that Nichols acted intentionally or knowingly with respect to the Violation of Rules and Orders. In fact, practically the only other evidence was Officer Bryce's testimony, in response to the DPA's questioning, "did you inquire and get a response as to if [Nichols] had an occupation?", Nichols "related he was a -- a cook." "At a restaurant?" "Yeah."
7 Thus, in essence, the only other evidence purportedly 
establishing Nichols's knowledge of the stay-at-home order was evidence indicating that (1) Nichols worked in an industry impacted by a different rule in the Proclamation that issued the stay-at-home order; and (2) a different person (Orr) knew about the order. We cannot conclude there is no reasonable possibility that the prosecutorial misconduct here contributed to Nichols's conviction for Violation of Rules and Orders. 
Finally, the supreme court has held that, "in limited 
'exceptional circumstances,' prosecutorial misconduct may be 'so egregious' that the double jeopardy protections of article I, section 10 of the 
Hawai#i Constitution may bar retrial." State 
v. Underwood, 142 Hawai# i 317, 329, 418 P.3d 658, 670 (2018) 
(citation omitted). A very high standard is applied to determine if misconduct is sufficiently egregious and "the relevant inquiry 
7 On cross-examination, Orr testified that he knew Nichols was a
cook at a restaurant. Orr also testified that he, Orr, knew about the stay-
at-home order. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is whether, 'from an objective standpoint,' the misconduct was so 
egregious that it 'clearly denied a defendant his or her right to a fair trial.'" Id.In this case, the DPA did not simply make a 
passing comment on Nichols's silence, he directly argued that: "You can infer . . . by the fact that [Nichols] didn't argue with the officer, . . . he's guilty of that charge." We conclude that this misconduct was so egregious that it clearly denied Nichols his right to a fair trial, and therefore, a retrial is prohibited by the protections of double jeopardy. Accordingly, we need not reach the issue of insufficient evidence. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 12, 2021 
Judgment is affirmed with respect to Nichols's conviction of Assault LEO Second, and reversed with respect to Nichols's conviction of Violation of Rules and Orders. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, November 7, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
William K. Li,for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
City and County of Honolulu, Associate Judgefor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
12 