 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND P ACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000274 24-MAR-2025 08:13 AM Dkt. 57 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000274 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
LEONARD JAMES PERREIRA, MARY ANN PERREIRA AND 
GLORIA PERREIRA, Plaintiffs/Counterclaim 
Defendants-Appellants, v. CASSANDRA LEILANI COMER, 
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee, 
DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, 
DOE GOVERNMENT ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CCV-20-0000095(1))  
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: 
Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellants Leonard  
James Perreira, 
Mary Ann Perreira, and Gloria Perreira 
(collectively the Perreiras) appeal from the Circuit Court of 
the Second Circuit's April 12, 2022 Judgement in favor of 
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee Cassandra Leilani Comer.  1
1 The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In 2000, Irene Brittain deeded her 7.80-acre property 
(Lot 13) in Ha‘ikū, Maui, equally to four parties as tenants in 
common while reserving a life estate for herself: 
DEED 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
[Granting Clause] That Irene Brittain, of Makawao, Maui, 
Hawaii, hereinafter called the "Grantor", for good and 
sufficient consideration to her paid by Sylvia A.P. Comer and Clifford F. Comer, husband and wife, whose address is 
P.O. Box 224, Makawao, Maui,  Hawaii 96768; Barbara M. Wylie 
and E.G. Wylie, husband and wife, whose address is 3 816 
Parks Drive, Power Springs, Georgia 30073; Herman G. Perreira and Gloria Perreira, husband and wife, whose address is P.O. Box 10432, Lahaina, Maui, Hawaii 96761; and 
Allen LeRoy Vierra, Jr., married, whose address is P.O. 
Box  224, Makawao, Maui, Hawaii 96768, hereinafter called 
the "Grantees", the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, 
does hereby grant and convey unto the Grantees,  as tenants 
in common, all that certain real property known as Lot 13  
of the Gomes Subdivision, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A" annexed hereto, in the manner, and subject 
to the provisions hereinafter stated, being the property  
conveyed to the Grantor by deed dated September 17, 1993, 
and recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances as Document 
No.  93-163073.  Said property is granted to the Grantees in 
tenancies and shares as follows:  
A 1/4th undivided share to Sylvia A.P. Comer and 
Clifford F. Comer, as tenants by the entirety, reserving to the Grantor a life estate therein
. 
A 1/4th undivided share to Barbara M. Wylie and E.G. 
Wylie, as tenants by the entirety. 
A 1/4th undivided share to Herman G. Perreira and 
Gloria Perreira, as tenants by the entirety. 
A 1/4th undivided share to Allen LeRoy Vierra, Jr., 
his heirs and assigns. 
AND the reversions, remainders, rents, issues and profits thereof, and all of the estate, right, title and interest 
of the Grantor, both at law and in equity, therein and thereto. 
[Habendum Clause] To have and to hold the same, together 
with all rights, easements, privileges, improvements and 
appurtenances thereon and thereunto belonging or 
appertaining or held and enjoyed therewith, unto the said 
Grantees, subject as follows: 
2   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sylvia A.P. Comer and Clifford F. Comer, shall be 
entitled to exclusive use, possession, and enjoyment 
of the northerly 2 acres of the parcel, with the 
improvements thereon, from and after the death of the 
Grantor, the Grantor reserving to herself for and during her life the use, possession, and enjoyment of 
said portion of the property. The other Grantees
shall be entitled to exclusive use, possession, and 
enjoyment of the remaining portion of the property. 
(Some formatting altered and emphases added.) As relevant to 
this appeal, the deed provided Cassandra's parents, Sylvia and Clifford Comer, "exclusive use, possession, and enjoyment of the 
northerly 2 acres" while providing the others "exclusive use, 
possession, and enjoyment of the remaining portion of the 
property." 
Mary Ann acquired Barbara and E.G Wylies' 1/4 
undivided share via compliance deed in 2005, and then acquired 
Allen LeRoy Vierra's 1/4 undivided share via corrected deed in 
2010.
2 As to Clifford and Sylvia's 1/4th undivided share of 
Lot 13, they conveyed "the northerly two (2) acres" to Cassandra 
via warranty deed in 2017. And, Gloria retained her 1/4th 
undivided share. In sum, the property division was as follows: 
2 By 2011, Leonard co- owned the 1/2 undivided share with Mary Ann as 
tenants by the entirety, but Leonard passed away in 2021. 
3   
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gloria  1/4 undivided share  
Mary Ann  1/2 undivided share  
(from the Wylies and 
Vierra) 
Cassandra  1/4 undivided share  
(northerly 2 acres from Clifford and Sylvia) 
In 2020, the Perreiras filed a complaint for 
partition. 
They asserted Lot 13 "cannot be economically 
partitioned" because Cassandra's "undivided ownership interest 
is too small to create a separate lot and therefore [Lot 13] 
should be sold by the court appointed Commissioner at public 
auction . . . ." 
Cassandra filed an answer and counterclaim in 
response. In the counterclaim, Cassandra asserted "as the successor in interest" to Sylvia and Clifford, she was "entitled 
to the exclusive use, possession and enjoyment of the northerly 
2 acres" and that Lot 13 was capable of being subdivided. 
Both parties moved for partial summary judgment, with 
the Perreiras asking the circuit court to determine that 
Cassandra's ownership was limited to a 1/4th undivided interest 
in Lot 13, and Cassandra asking the circuit court to determine 
she was also "entitled to the exclusive use, possession and 
enjoyment of the northerly two (2) acres" and its improvements. 
4   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court denied the Perreiras' motion, granted 
Cassandra's motion, and entered judgment in favor of Cassandra.3 
The Perreiras appealed, challenging the circuit 
court's construction of the deed.4 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below, and vacate and remand. 
We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo. Villaver v. Sylva
, 145 Hawaiʻi 29, 34, 445 
P.3d 701, 706 (2019). 
In construing a deed, "the intention of the party or 
parties ascertained from a fair consideration of the language 
employed in the entire document must control." De Freitas v.
Coke
, 46 Haw. 425, 430, 380 P.2d 762, 766 (1963). "All of the 
provisions of a deed must be considered in order to arrive at 
the proper interpretation thereof." Midkiff v. Castle & Cooke,
Inc., 45 Haw. 409, 415, 368 P.2d 887, 891 (1962). 
3 We note that the Perreiras did not appeal or contend error with the 
denial of their motion for partial summary judgment. 
4 "A judge deciding a summary judgment motion may not fact- find, even 
if the matter is set for a bench trial." State ex. rel. Shikada v. Bristol-
Myers Squibb Co.
, 152 Hawai‘i 418, 442, 536 P.3d 395, 419 (2023). Thus, we do 
not consider the circuit court's findings of fact. 
5   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Brittain's deed contained two clauses - the 
Granting Clause and the Habendum Clause. "The purpose of the 
granting clause is to define and designate the estate conveyed 
though a court is not limited to examining the granting clause 
in determining the quantity of an estate conveyed by deed." 
22B Am. Jur. 2d Deeds § 236 (2025) (footnote omitted). "A 
habendum clause is the part of a deed that defines the extent of 
interest being granted and any conditions affecting the grant[.]" Id. (footnote omitted). 
The Granting Clause "grant[ed]" and "convey[ed]" 
Lot 13 to the grantees as "tenants in common[.]" The Granting 
Clause specifically identified the share each party was to 
receive (1/4) and that each share was undivided. Finally, the 
Granting Clause conveyed "the reversions, remainders, rents, 
issues and profits" and all of Brittain's "right, title and 
interest[.]" With this language in the Granting Clause, 
Brittain's intent to convey title in 1/4 undivided shares to each grantee as tenants in common was unambiguous and specific. 
"Tenancy in common is characterized by unity of 
possession[.]" 2 Tiffany Real Prop. § 426 (3d ed. Rev. 2024). 
"The unity of possession means the unity of right of possession 
and not possession in fact." Id.
"Each cotenant has a right to enter upon, explore and 
possess the entire premises, and to do so without the consent of 
6   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his cotenants, though he may not do so to the exclusion of his 
cotenants to do likewise." Id."One tenant in common has no 
right to exclusively possess the property against another cotenant without consent or an agreement to that effect." Id.
"All cotenants are entitled to occupy the property, and that right extends to every part of the property" and "[n]either 
tenant in common has a right to occupy a particular part of the 
property to the exclusion of the other." Id.
"A cotenant in possession of the property is presumed 
to be holding the property for all cotenants." Id.
Contrary to some of the common law rules governing 
tenancies in common, the Brittain deed allocated "exclusive use, possession, and enjoyment of the northerly 2 acres of the 
parcel, with the improvements thereon" to Sylvia and Clifford. 
Also contrary to some common law rules governing tenancies in 
common, the Habendum Clause restricted the other grantees "use, 
possession, and enjoyment" of Lot 13 to the rest of the property. 
Nonetheless, the Habendum Clause spoke to possession 
in fact, not possession as a right or the conveyance of title. 
Thus, the Granting and Habendum clauses may be read in 
harmony as Brittain intended the grantees to own equal undivided 
shares as tenants in common with Sylvia and Clifford living in 
the house on the northerly 2 acres. See 22B Am. Jur. 2d Deeds
7   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 197 (2025) ("Because construing an unambiguous deed entails a 
holistic approach, courts examine the entire instrument and seek 
to harmonize and give effect to all its provisions[.]"). 
Importantly, the Habendum Clause's allocation of 
possession in fact did not alter the 1/4 undivided shares 
Brittain conveyed in the Granting Clause. And nothing in the 
Habendum Clause suggested that the possession in fact of the 
northerly 2 acres and the house was transferable. 
In other words, although Sylvia and Clifford were 
allowed to possess in fact the northerly 2 acres and the house, the title Brittain conveyed was to a 1/4 undivided share of 
Lot 13. And to the extent there was conflict between the 
Granting and Habendum clauses, the unambiguous and specific 
Granting Clause prevails. See 22B Am. Jur. 2d Deeds § 236 
(explaining "the granting clause, if unambiguous and specific, will prevail over conflicting recitals"). 
In sum, Sylvia and Clifford could only convey what 
they owned - a 1/4 undivided share of Lot 13 - and, thus, could not convey the northerly 2 acres to Cassandra. Therefore, the 
circuit court erred in granting Cassandra's motion for summary 
judgment and entering judgment in her favor. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's 
(1) April 12, 2022 Judgment and (2) March 29, 2022 Order to the 
extent it granted Cassandra's motion for partial summary 
8   
 
 
    
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment. This case is remanded to the circuit court for 
further proceedings consistent with this summary disposition 
order. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, March 24, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
 Presiding Judge 
Thomas R. Cole,  
for Plaintiffs/Counterclaim /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Defendants-Appellants. Associate Judge 
  
Paul L. Horikawa, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
for Defendant/ Associate Judge 
Counterclaimant-Appellee. 
9 