NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-12-0000593 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
KONA'S BEST NATURAL COFFEE LLC,
a Hawai# i limited liability company,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v. 
MOUNTAIN THUNDER COFFEE PLANTATION INT'L INC.,
a 
Hawai# i corporation, TRENT BATEMAN and LISA BATEMAN,
Defendants/Counterclaimants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and 
NATURESCAPE HOLDINGS GROUP INT'L INC.,
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50, DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants. 
MOUNTAIN THUNDER COFFEE PLANTATION INT'L INC.,
A Hawai# i corporation, TRENT BATEMAN; LISA BATEMAN,
Third-Party Plaintiffs/Appellees/
Cross-Appellees,
vs. 
MICHAEL ROBERTS and BRENT HIGHT,
Third-Party Defendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and 
MARIN ARTUKOVICH, KOA COFFEE COMPANY, LLC;
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; 
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Third-Party Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-098K (Kona))  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.) 
This Summary Disposition Order resolves the remaining 
issues pending in CAAP-12-0000593, which were not resolved by our 
August 2, 2017 Memorandum Opinion, Kona's Best Nat. Coffee LLC v. Mountain Thunder Coffee Plantation Int'l, Inc., No. CAAP-12-0000593, 2017 WL 3310451 (Hawai# i App. Aug. 2, 2017) (Mem. Op.) 
(
Kona's Best I).  In Kona's Best I, we were unable to address 
certain portions of the appeals after receiving notice that involuntary bankruptcy petitions under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code had been filed against Mountain Thunder Coffee Plantation Int'l, Inc. (Mountain Thunder) and Naturescape 
Holdings Group Int'l, Inc. (Naturescape). Id. at *2. 
After Kona's Best I was issued, we also received notice 
that Trent Allen Bateman (
Trent), one of the owners of Mountain 
Thunder, had filed for bankruptcy. On February 27, 2018, after 
receiving a further update on the status of bankruptcy proceedings against Mountain Thunder and Naturescape, we issued an order stating that we would take no further action in this appeal until we received notice and verification that the bankruptcy proceedings for Mountain Thunder, Naturescape and Trent had been concluded, or that the Bankruptcy Court had filed an order lifting the stay for this appeal or authorizing the appeal or specified portions of the appeal to proceed. 
We subsequently received notice that the bankruptcy 
stays related to Mountain Thunder, Naturescape, and Trent were lifted to allow a final decision in this appeal. On November 26, 2018, Kona's Best Natural Coffee LLC (
Kona's Best), Michael 
Roberts (Roberts), and Brent Hight (Hight) (collectively the
Kona's Best Appellants) filed in this court a "Notice of Order 
Granting Motion for Relief from Automatic Stay" (Notice). 
Attached to the Notice were three separate orders issued by the 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
United States Bankruptcy Court, District of Hawai# i (Bankruptcy
Court
) granting motions by Kona's Best in each of the bankruptcy 
proceedings involving Naturescape, Mountain Thunder, and Trent, 
respectively, and lifting the automatic bankruptcy stay in order to, inter alia, "allow the [Intermediate Court of Appeals] to issue a final decision in CAAP No. 12-0000593[.]" 
We therefore turn to the remaining issues on appeal: (1) Roberts' and Hight's appeal, which challenges the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's (
Circuit Court's)1 denial of 
their request for attorney's fees and costs against Mountain Thunder, Trent, and Lisa Bateman (collectively, the Mountain 
Thunder Defendants); 
(2) Naturescape's cross-appeal, which seeks to overturn 
the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against 
Naturescape on Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint; and 
(3) "the portions of the cross-appeal by Mountain 
Thunder that seek to overturn the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against Mountain Thunder on claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint and the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against Mountain Thunder." See Kona's Best I at *3. 
The appeals herein arise out of the breakdown and 
eventual termination of negotiations regarding an asset purchase agreement of a Kona coffee business, as thoroughly described in Kona's Best I. See id. at *3-12. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve the remaining parts of the appeals as follows. 
1 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Roberts' and Hight's Appeal. Roberts and Hight 
assert that the Circuit Court erred in denying them attorney's 
fees and costs, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607-
14 (2016),  because they prevailed on every count alleged against 
them by the Mountain Thunder Defendants in their First Amended 
Third Party Complaint.    32
[The appellate] court reviews the denial and granting of
attorney's fees under the abuse of discretion standard. The same standard applies to [the appellate] court's review ofthe amount of a trial court's award of attorney's fees. An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearlyexceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules orprinciples of law or practice to the substantial detrimentof a party litigant. 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai# i, 106 
Hawai# i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 354 (2005) (internal quotation 
marks, citations, brackets, and ellipses omitted) (quoting Chun 
v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai# i
, 92 Hawai# i 
432, 439, 992 P.2d 127, 134 (2000)). 
2 HRS § 607-14 provides, in relevant part: 
§607-14 Attorneys' fees in actions in the nature of
assumpsit, etc. In  all the courts, in all actions in the
nature of assumpsit and in all actions on a promissory note
or other contract in writing that provides for an attorney'sfee, there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be paid bythe losing party and to be included in the sum for whichexecution may issue, a fee that the court determines to bereasonable; provided that the attorney representing theprevailing party shall submit to the court an affidavitstating the amount of time the attorney spent on the actionand the amount of time the attorney is likely to spend toobtain a final written judgment, or, if the fee is not basedon an hourly rate, the amount of the agreed upon fee. The court shall then tax attorneys' fees, which the courtdetermines to be reasonable, to be paid by the losing party;provided that this amount shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the judgment. 
(Emphasis added). 
3 The Mountain Thunder Defendants do not contest this point of error by
Roberts and Hight. In their Answering Brief section titled "Roberts and HightClaim of Error Regarding Attorney Fees and Costs Have No Merit[,]" theMountain Thunder Defendants argue that "KNBC should not be awarded itsattorney fees and costs when it is evident that they simply breached the dutyof confidence to force [Mountain Thunder] out of the Kona coffee businesswhich should not go unwarranted[,]" but make no arguments as to whetherRoberts and Hight should be awarded attorney's fees and costs. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
During trial, Kona's Best was represented by Joseph
Fagundes, III ( Fagundes) for purposes of pursuing its claims
under its First Amended Complaint.  Fagundes also represented
Roberts and Hight in their defense of the Mountain Thunder
Defendants' First Amended Third Party Complaint.   In defending
against the Mountain Thunder Defendants' First Amended
Counterclaim, Kona's Best was represented by George W. Playdon,
Jr. (Playdon) and R. Aaron Creps ( Creps). 4
On April 19, 2011, after trial, the Kona's Best
Appellants submitted a combined motion seeking attorney's fees
for Fagundes' successful efforts in pursuing the claims in Kona's
Best's First Amended Complaint and defending Roberts and Hight
against the claims made in the Mountain Thunder Defendants' First
Amended Third Party Complaint.  No attorney's fees were sought by
Creps and Playdon.   The Circuit Court awarded attorney's fees of
$3,435.34 for Fagundes' efforts in pursuing the claims in the
First Amended Complaint in favor of Kona's Best only,  and denied
recovery for Fagundes' defense of the First Amended Third Party
Complaint on behalf of Roberts and Hight.  At the hearing on the
motions for fees, the court reasoned that the First Amended 5
4 The Mountain Thunder Defendants' First Amended Third Party Complaint
alleged nineteen counts: Count I, Breach of Contract - Nonpayment for Coffee
Beans and Coffee Services; Count II, Promissory Estoppel - Nonpayment for
Coffee Beans and Coffee Services; Count III, Breach of Contract - Termination
of Purchase; Count IV, Breach of Duty to Negotiate in Good-Faith; Count V,
Promissory Estoppel - Financing; Count VI, Breach of Contract -
Confidentiality; Count VII, Trade Secret Violation; Count VIII, Tortious
Interference of Contract; Count IX, Tortious Interference of Prospective
Contractual Relations; Count X, Defamation; Count XI, Intentional Infliction
of Emotional Distress; Count XII, Unjust Enrichment; Count XIII, Fraud; Count
XIV, Misrepresentation; Count XV, Unfair Competition; Count XVI, Attempt to
Monopolize; Count XVII, Vicarious Liability - Alter Ego; Count VIII,
Injunctive Relief; Count XIX, Liability on KBNC's Complaint. 
5  The Circuit Court computed this fee award by subtracting the jury's
award of $154,000 in favor of the Mountain Thunder Defendants' assumpsit
claims from the jury's award of $167,741.35 in favor of Kona's Best's
assumpsit claims, and multiplying that amount by the 25% limit set forth in
HRS § 607-14.  
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complaint and the First Amended Third Party Complaint arose out 
of "one continuous transaction[.]" 
Roberts and Hight were interpleaded into this case in 
their individual capacities and had to defend themselves against the Mountain Thunder Defendants' claims in the First Amended Third Party Complaint. They asserted no claims against any of the Mountain Thunder Defendants. They were the prevailing parties under the First Amended Third Party Complaint as the jury and Circuit Court found in their favor on all the claims raised against them. Kona's Best I, at *10-12. 
The First Amended Third Party Complaint included counts 
sounding in both assumpsit (i.e., Count I, Breach of Contract -Nonpayment for Coffee Beans and Coffee Services; Count III, Breach of Contract - Termination of Purchase; Count VI, Breach of Contract - Confidentiality) as well as in tort (i.e., Count IX, Tortious Interference of Prospective Contractual Relations; Count X, Defamation; Count XI, Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress; Count XIII, Fraud; Count XIV, Misrepresentation). The types of relief sought in the First Amended Third Party Complaint are as follows: 
PRAYER FOR RELIEF 
Now therefore , the THIRD PARTY PLAINTIFFS MOUNTAIN
THUNDER, TRENT and LISA, individually and jointly, now prays
for judgment in his favor against ROBERTS, and/or HIGHT,and/or KBNC, and/or DOE DEFENDANTS, jointly and severally,and other relief as follows: 
1. That he be awarded judgment on all Counts against
all Defendants, jointly and severally, and that he beawarded special, consequential, general and punitive damagesin such amounts as will be proven at the time of trial; 
2. That ROBERTS, and/or HIGHT, and/or KBNC, and/or
DOE DEFENDANTS be found to have interfered with the rightsof MOUNTAIN THUNDER and that they be enjoined from the useof the confidential information they gained from THIRD PARTYPLAINTIFFS during their due diligence or their interactionwith TRENT and/or LISA and/or MOUNTAIN THUNDER. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. That in the alternative to punitive damages, TRENT
and/or LISA and/or MOUNTAIN THUNDER demand treble damages
based upon the Judgment entered pursuant to Chapter 480 ofthe Hawaii Revised Statutes and all attorney's fees andcosts and all other relief allowed by law. 
4. That this Court award injunctive relief where
appropriate. 
5. That this Court award THIRD PARTY PLAINTIFFS their 
costs, attorneys' fees and all other relief that this Courtdeems just and proper. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Roberts and Hight are clearly entitled to attorney's 
fees under HRS § 607-14 related to their defense of Counts I 
(Breach of Contract - Nonpayment for Coffee Beans and Coffee Services), Count III (Breach of Contract - Termination of Purchase), and Count VI (Breach of Contract - Confidentiality) of the First Amended Third Party Complaint. We also conclude that Counts II (Promissory Estoppel - Nonpayment for Coffee Beans and Coffee Services) and Count V (Promissory Estoppel - Financing) are in the nature of assumpsit. In this regard, we consider the essential character of the action: 
The character of the action should be determined from the 
facts and issues raised in the complaint, the nature of theentire grievance, and the relief sought. Where there is doubt as to whether an action is in assumpsit or in tort,there is a presumption that the suit is in assumpsit.Additionally, this court recently stated, for the firsttime, that, in awarding attorneys' fees in a case involvingboth assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims, a court must base
its award of fees, if practicable, on an apportionment of
the fees claimed between assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims. 
Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai# i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 (2001) 
(internal citations, footnote, and quotation marks omitted). The 
nature of the grievances detailed in Counts II and V focus on alleged promises made by, inter alia, Roberts and Hight to pay for coffee beans and/or coffee related services, and to financially invest in and help the Mountain Thunder Defendants in the expansion and growth of its roasting business. These claims against Roberts and Hight are inextricably linked to the alleged contracts that are claimed by the Mountain Thunder Defendants, 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and are thus "in the nature of assumpsit" as provided under HRS 
§ 607–14. See id. at 332-33, 31 P.3d at 189-90. 
We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying the recovery of any attorney's fees to Roberts and Hight under HRS § 607-14. Generally, a prevailing party in an assumpsit action, including a prevailing third party defendant, is entitled to recover attorney's fees against the non-prevailing party, as provided under HRS § 607-14. See e.g. Eastman v. McGowan, 86 
Hawai# i 21, 946 P.2d 1317 (1997). 
We also conclude that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying an award of costs to Roberts and Hight as the prevailing parties under Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
54(d)(1).
6 
In calculating the attorney's fees award for Roberts 
and Hight on remand, the Circuit Court must apportion Fagundes' fees between his work pursuing the First Amended Complaint, as opposed to his work defending Roberts and Hight from the First Amended Third Party Complaint.   The Circuit Court may also 
consider the common facts underlying the claims in the First Amended Complaint and the First Amended Third Party Complaint in determining the reasonableness of the award. Finally, the Circuit Court must, if practicable, apportion its award of the fees in favor of Roberts and Hight between the assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims asserted against them in the First Amended Third Party Complaint. See Blair, 96 Hawai# i at 332, 31 P.3d at 
189 (citing TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai# i
 243, 264, 
990 P.2d 713, 734 (1999) (citation omitted)).
(2) Naturescape's Cross-Appeal. In its first point of 
error, Naturescape argues that the Circuit Court abused its discretion by denying Naturescape's October 6, 2010 "Corrected 
6 HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) provides, in relevant part, that "[e]xcept when
express provision therefor is made either in a statute or in these rules,
costs shall be allowed as of course to the prevailing party unless the courtotherwise directs[.]" 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Motion to Sever Trial as to Count XIII (Fraudulent Transfer)"
(Motion to Sever Trial ).  However, neither Naturescape's Notice
of Cross-Appeal, Opening Brief, nor Reply Brief provide any
citation to the Circuit Court's denial.  Our review of the record
on appeal similarly fails to produce any minutes, transcripts, or
orders denying Naturescape's Motion to Sever Trial.  
It is the responsibility of each appellant "to provide
a record, as defined in Rule 10 of [the Hawai#i Rules of
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP)] and the Hawai#i Court Records Rules,
that is sufficient to review the points asserted and to pursue
appropriate proceedings in the court or agency appealed from to
correct any omission."  HRAP Rule 11(a); see also HRAP Rule
28(b)(3, 4, 7) (providing that an appellant's opening brief must
contain: a concise statement of the case, with record references
supporting each statement of fact or mention of court or agency
proceedings; a concise statement of the points of error, with
each point stating where in the record the alleged error
occurred; and an argument, with citations to the authorities,
statutes, and parts of the record relied on).
Based on the foregoing, Naturescape's first point of
error is deemed waived.
Naturescape's second and third points of error argue
that the Circuit Court's Conclusions of Law ( COLs) 59-69  and7
7  On February 22, 2011, the Circuit Court entered its "Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Regarding Equitable Claims on Counts II, V,
XII, XVII and XVIII of the Counterclaim and Third Party Complaint; and Counts
XII and XIII of the First Amended Complaint."  COLs 59-69 provide:
59.Count XIII of the First Amended Complaint is entitled
Fraudulent Conveyance.
60.At the time of the transfer of assets, KBNC was a
creditor of Trent, Lisa and Mountain Thunder.  Trent
made the transfer of the assets of Mountain Thunder to
Naturescape in response to existing and pending
litigation by KBNC.  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 651C-4(b)(4).
61.Brooke is an insider and an affiliate.  Haw. Rev.
Stat. § 651C-4(b)(1).
62.Naturescape is an insider and an affiliate.  Id.
63.Trent transferred the assets of Mountain Thunder to
Naturescape with the actual intent "to hinder, delay
or defraud" KBNC.  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 651C-4(a)(1).
(continued...)
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
June 15, 2012 First Amended Final Judgment were in error because
the jury's Special Verdict awarded more aggregate damages to the
Mountain Thunder Defendants than to Kona's Best, meaning that the
Mountain Thunder Defendants were no longer debtors to Kona's
Best, and thus Count XIII for fraudulent transfer must fail as a
matter of law.  See Kona's Best I, at *11 (recounting the
parties' claims and liabilities as determined in part by the
jury's Special Verdict).  Naturescape does not otherwise
challenge the content of said COLs. 
[The appellate] court reviews the trial court's COLs de
novo.  A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness.  Moreover, a COL that
is supported by the trial court's FOFs and that reflects an
application of the correct rule of law will not be
overturned.
(...continued)
64.Trent made the transfer of the assets of Mountain
Thunder to Naturescape "without receiving reasonably
equivalent value in exchange" for the assets of the
Mountain Thunder corporation.  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 651C-
4(a)(1).
65.As of the time of the transfer of the assets from
Trent to Naturescape on July 1, 2008 Mountain Thunder
was undercapitalized and the transfer of assets to
Naturescape rendered Mountain Thunder virtually
insolvent.  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 651C-4(b)(4).
66.Trent and Lisa, acting through Mountain Thunder,
"intended to incur, or believed or reasonably should
have believed that the [company] would incur, debts
beyond the [company's] ability to pay as they became
due."  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 651C-4(a)(2)(B).
67.Under the [Hawai #i Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act
[HUFTA)] framework, "any transfer whereby the
transferee gives less than reasonably equivalent value
in exchange for the transfer from the debtor and has
the effect of reducing the debtor's assets by a
certain sum may be avoided."  See Valvanis v.
Milgroom, 529 F.Supp. 2d 1190, 1197-98 (2007).
68.KBNC has established by clear and convincing evidence
that the sale of the Mountain Thunder corporation's
assets to Naturescape was a fraudulent conveyance
pursuant to the [HUFTA], Haw. Rev. Stat. § 651C-4. 
See Kekona v. Abastillas, 113 Haw. 174, 150 P.3d 823
(2006).
69.The Court finds in favor of KBNC as against Trent,
Lisa, and Naturescape on Count XIII.
(Emphasis added). 
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bhakta v. Cty. of Maui, 109 Hawai# i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets 
omitted). 
To support its argument, Naturescape cites the HUFTA's 
definitions of "Claim[,]" which "means a right to payment, whether or not the right is reduced to judgment, liquidated, unliquidated, fixed, contingent, matured, unmatured, disputed, undisputed, legal, equitable, secured, or unsecured[,]" and "Debtor[,]" which "means a person against whom a creditor has a claim." HRS § 651C-1 (2016) (emphasis added). 
We note that under HRS § 651C-4 (2016),  a transfer 
made by a debtor is fraudulent as to a creditor if the debtor made the transfer "[w]ith actual intent to hinder, delay, or defraud any creditor of the debtor[,]" and in determining actual intent, consideration may be given to whether, inter alia
, 8
8 HRS § 651C-4 provides, in relevant part: 
[§651C-4] Transfers fraudulent as to present and
future creditors. (a) A transfer made or obligation
incurred by a debtor is fraudulent as to a creditor, whether
the creditor's claim arose before or after the transfer was made or the obligation was incurred, if the debtor made thetransfer or incurred the obligation:
(1) With actual intent to hinder, delay, or defraudany creditor of the debtor; or
(2) Without receiving a reasonably equivalent valuein exchange for the transfer or obligation, andthe debtor: 
. . . 
(B) Intended to incur, or believed orreasonably should have believed that thedebtor would incur, debts beyond thedebtor's ability to pay as they becamedue. 
(b)
 In determining actual intent under subsection
(a)(1), consideration may be given, among other factors, towhether: 
(1) The transfer or obligation was to an insider;[and] 
. . . 
(4) 
Before the transfer was made or obligation wasincurred, the debtor was sued or threatened withsuit[.] 
(Emphasis added). 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[b]efore the transfer was made . . . the debtor was sued or 
threatened with suit[.]" HRS §§ 651C-4(a)(1) and (b)(4). 
Given the unambiguous statutory language, we must give 
effect to its plain and obvious meaning. See Kekona v. Abastillas, Nos. CAAP-16-0000679 and CAAP-16-0000782, 2018 WL 6259487, at *6-7 (
Hawai# i App. Nov. 30, 2018) (Mem. Op.) (quoting 
State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai# i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 
(2009) (citation omitted)). 
Here, the Circuit Court determined, 
inter alia, that 
the transfer of assets from Mountain Thunder to Naturescape was made in response to existing and pending litigation by Kona's Best, that Mountain Thunder did not receive reasonably equivalent value in exchange for the assets, and the transfer of the assets rendered Mountain Thunder virtually insolvent. The Circuit Court's COLs 59-69 correctly addressed and properly decided the fraudulent transfer claim against Naturescape under HRS § 651C-4. 
Based on the foregoing, Naturescape's second and third 
points of error are without merit.
(3) Mountain Thunder's Cross-Appeal. In Kona's Best 
I, we did not decide "the portions of the cross-appeal by Mountain Thunder that seek to overturn the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against Mountain Thunder on claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint and the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against Mountain Thunder" because of Mountain Thunder's pending bankruptcy. Kona's Best I, at *3 (emphasis added). However, we did decide the identical issues arising from the cross-appeal with regards to the Batemans. See id. [W]e will decide in this Memorandum Opinion: . . . (3) the portions of the cross-appeal by the Batemans that seek to overturn the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against the Batemans on claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint and the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against the Batemans." (Emphasis added)). 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on our subsequent review for the purposes of this 
Summary Disposition Order, none of the eleven points of error 
alleged in the Mountain Thunder Defendants' cross-appeal require further discussion with regard to Mountain Thunder alone, as all points were adequately addressed in Kona's Best I. See id., at *17-22. Furthermore, "the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against Mountain Thunder" was not alleged as a point of error in the Mountain Thunder Defendants' Opening Brief, was not argued, and only appears in the Conclusion section of their Opening Brief. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented."). Therefore, we need not address the award of attorney's fees to Kona's Best and against Mountain Thunder. 
Therefore, based on the foregoing: (1)
 We vacate the Circuit Court's "Order Granting in 
Part and Denying in Part Plaintiff Kona's Best Natural Coffee LLC and Third Party Defendants Michael Roberts and Brent Hight's Motion for Attorneys' Fees, Filed April 19, 2011" entered on May 31, 2011, to the extent that it denied attorney's fees and costs to Roberts and Hight. In this regard, we remand for further proceedings on Roberts' and Hight's claim for attorney's fees under HRS § 607-14, and for costs, consistent with this Summary Disposition Order; 
(2) We affirm the First Amended Final Judgment entered 
by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on June 15, 2012, with regard to Naturescape Holdings Group Int'l, Inc.'s cross-appeal; 
(3) We affirm the First Amended Final Judgment with 
respect to its entry of judgment as between Kona's Best and Mountain Thunder on the Counts asserted by Kona's Best in its First Amended Complaint; and 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) We affirm the First Amended Final Judgment to the 
extent that it awarded attorney's fees to Kona's Best and against 
Mountain Thunder. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 19, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Michael J. Matsukawa, 
for Naturescape Holdings GroupInt'l Inc., a Hawai# i corporation. Chief Judge
Joseph Fagundes, III, (Attorney at Law, a Law Corporation)for Kona's Best Natural Coffee LLC.,a Hawai# i limited liability company,
Michael Roberts and Brent Hight. Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
George W. Playdon, Jr.,
R. Aaron Creps,(O'Connor Playdon & Guben LLP)for Kona's Best Natural Coffee LLC.,a Hawai# i limited liability company. 
Grant K. Kidani,(Kidani Law Center)for Mountain Thunder Coffee Plantation Int'l, Inc., a Hawai# i 
corporation, Trent Bateman andLisa Bateman. 
14 