NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. CAAP-13-002347, CAAP-13-0002752 and
CAAP-13-0003040
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
No. CAAP-13-0002347
RICHARD MISSLER and PATRICIA MISSLER,
Appellants-Appellees,
v.
BOARD OF APPEALS OF THE COUNTY OF HAWAI #I; B.J. LEITHEAD-TODD,
Planning Director, Department of Planning, County of Hawai# i,
Appellees-Appellants,
and
MALAMA INVESTMENTS LLC, a Hawai# i limited liability company;
LOREN SAXTON and MARY SAXTON, Co-Trustees of the
Saxton Trust dated March 17, 2005, Appellees-Appellees
and
No. CAAP-13-0002752
RICHARD MISSLER and PATRICIA MISSLER, 
Appellants-Appellees,
v. 
B.J. LEITHEAD-TODD, Appellee-Appellant,
and
BOARD OF APPEALS OF THE COUNTY OF HAWAI #I,
MALAMA INVESTMENTS LLC, a Hawai #i limited
liability company; LOREN SAXTON and MARY SAXTON,
Co-Trustees of the Saxton Trust dated March 17, 2005,
Appellees-Appellees
andNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1 Pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1),
Michael Yee, as Planning Director, is automatically substituted for B.J.
Leithead-Todd. 
2 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
2No. CAAP-13-0003040
RICHARD MISSLER and PATRICIA MISSLER, 
Appellants-Appellants,
v.
BOARD OF APPEALS OF THE COUNTY OF HAWAI #I,
MALAMA INVESTMENTS LLC, a Hawai #i limited
liability company; LOREN SAXTON and MARY
SAXTON, Co-Trustees of the Saxton Trust dated
March 17, 2005; and PLANNING DIRECTOR, 
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, COUNTY OF HAWAI# I, 
Appellees-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-449K)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
In these consolidated appeals, Appellees-Appellants
Board of Appeals for the County of Hawai #i (BOA) and Michael
Yee,1 Planning Director, Department of Planning, County of
Hawai#i (Planning Director ) (collectively, the County) appeal
from the (1) Judgment, filed on June 27, 2013, and (2) "Order
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Appellants' Motion for
Taxation of Attorney's Fees and Costs [Filed May 30, 2013]"
(Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Attorney's Fees and
Costs), filed on July 25, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit ( circuit court).2  
Richard Missler and Patricia Missler ( the Misslers)
appeal from the Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
Attorney's Fees and Costs.
The County contends the circuit court erred when it:
(1) concluded that a planned unit development ( PUD)
permit issued to Riehm Owensby Planners Architects was invalid
because the County did not comply with the County of Hawai #i NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3  In their answering brief, the Misslers also contend that the BOA does
not have standing to bring this appeal.  We disagree.
Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 72(a) provides that
in an appeal to the circuit court from an order or action of a governmental
official or body, an "'appellee' means every governmental body or official
(other than a court) whose decision, order or action is appealed from, and
every other party to the proceedings."  Thus, the BOA became a party to this
case at the circuit court when the Misslers appealed from the BOA Decision and
Order to the circuit court.#
In Fasi v. State Public Employment Relations Board, 60 Haw. 436,
591 P.2d 113 (1979), the Supreme Court of Hawai
#i stated that an
administrative board may appeal from an order rendered in judicial review of
the board's order, if the board is an aggrieved party.  Id. at 441, 591 P.2d
at 116.  The administrative board is an aggrieved party "where the effect of
the judgment is to overturn a decision of the board with respect to the
implementation of legislation entrusted to the board for administration." 
 Id.
at 442, 591 P.2d at 117.  The Hawai# i County Charter states that the BOA,
inter alia, hears and determines appeals from final decisions of the planning
director and is part of the Planning Department for administrative purposes. 
Haw. Cty. Charter § 6-9.2 (2014).  Thus, as part of the Planning Department,
the BOA acts to review the Planning Director's implementation of the Hawai# i
County Code, and in this case whether a PUD permit was appropriate. 
Therefore, the BOA has standing to bring an appeal from the circuit court's
decision.
3General Plan ( General Plan) and the Kona Community Development
Plan (Kona CDP ); (2) concluded the PUD permit was invalid because
it did not contain specific measures which required the lots to
be used for agricultural uses; (3) concluded the PUD permit was
invalid because the County did not review the PUD application
pursuant to their constitutional duties under the public trust
doctrine; and (4) granted attorney's fees to the Misslers under
the private attorney general doctrine.
The Misslers are owners of property adjacent to the
land subject to the PUD application in this case.  They contend
the circuit court abused its discretion when it failed to award
attorney's fees and costs incurred: (1) at the administrative
level of the case against the Planning Director and Malama
Investments, LLC ( Malama) and Loren Saxton and Mary Saxton ( the
Saxtons) (collectively, the Applicants ); and (2) at the trial
level against the BOA and the Applicants.3
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm in part and
vacate in part.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4  At the time of this case, Section 25-6-1 of the Hawai# i County Code
provided:
Section 25-6-1.  Purpose.
The purpose of planned unit development (P.U.D.) is to
encourage comprehensive site planning that adapts the design
of development to the land, by allowing diversification in
the relationships of various uses, buildings, structures,
open spaces and yards, building heights, and lot sizes in
planned building groups, while still insuring that the
intent of this chapter is observed.
5 See HCC § 25-5-71 ("Designation of A districts.  Each A (agricultural)
district shall be designated on the zoning map by the symbol 'A' followed by a
number together with the lower case letter 'a' which indicates the required or
minimum number of acres for each building site.  For example, A-10a means an
agricultural district with a minimum site area of ten acres.").
6  Hawai# i County Code § 25-5-74 provides: "The minimum building site
area in the A district shall be five acres."
4I. Background
The PUD4 application in this case concerns a property
located in South Kona, Hawai# i, called Waik ~ku#u Ranch (the
property).  The property consists of 72.178 acres and is zoned
Agricultural A-5a (requiring a minimum site area of five acres of
land).5  The PUD application states the proposed PUD consists of
fourteen lots, one lot to be plus or minus 40.14 acres and the
rest of the lots to be plus or minus two acres in size. The
application also requests several variances, one of which is from
Section 25-5-74 of the Hawai# i County Code,6 requesting a
variance from the minimum building site area of five acres to
allow lots two through fourteen to be two or more acres in size. 
In a letter dated September 14, 2011, the County of
Hawai#i Planning Department (Planning Department) approved the
PUD application "to allow the development of a master-planned
community of 13 lots and 1 bulk lot of approximately 40.14
acres."  The Planning Department found, inter alia , that the
proposed agricultural lots were consistent with the General Plan
and the PUD application was consistent with the spirit of the
Kona CDP.
On October 13, 2011, the Misslers appealed to the BOA
from the Planning Department's approval of the PUD permit,NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5requesting that the BOA reverse the Planning Director's decision
granting the PUD.
After several hearings before the BOA, on August 10,
2012, the BOA filed its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Decision and Order ( BOA Decision and Order).  The BOA concluded,
inter alia , that the PUD application was complete and the Kona
CDP does not apply to the processing of a PUD application.  The
BOA denied the Misslers' appeal and ordered all parties to bear
their own fees and costs incurred in the proceeding.
On August 24, 2012, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 91-14 (2012) the Misslers appealed to the circuit court
from the BOA Decision and Order. 
On April 25, 2013, the circuit court filed its Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order ( Circuit Court
Decision and Order ), which concluded, inter alia , that:
a. The permit is not valid because the Director and BOA
did not comply with the General Plan and KCDP.  The
Director and the BOA violated HRS § 91-14(g)(1) and
(4).
b. The permit is not valid because the Director and BOA
did not review the PUD application pursuant to their
constitutional duties and responsibilities with regard
to the public natural resources trust.  The Director
and the BOA violated HRS § 91-14(g)(1), (4) and (5).
c. The permit is not valid because it does not contain
specific measures that require project lots to be used
for bona fide agricultural uses.  The Director and the
BOA violated HRS § 91-14(g)(1) and (4).
The circuit court remanded the case for further proceedings
consistent with the Circuit Court Decision and Order.
On May 20, 2013, the Misslers filed a motion requesting
that the circuit court grant them attorney's fees and costs
incurred both at the administrative level before the BOA and
before the circuit court "because the agency appeal below and the
judicial review constitute a single 'proceeding.'"
On June 26, 2013, the circuit court filed an "Order
Clarifying Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Decision
and Order Filed April 25, 2013," which amended the last sentence
of the Circuit Court Decision and Order to read:
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the August 10, 2012 decision of
Appellee BOA is reversed because the substantial rights ofNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6Appellants have been prejudiced by the violations and errors
described hereinabove.  The Director's September 14, 2011
decision-letter is vacated and the matter is remanded to
Appellee Planning Director, Department of Planning, County
of Hawai# i to consider the PUD Application consistent with
the analysis set forth in the Findings of Fact, Conclusions
of Law and Decision and Order, pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g).
On June 27, 2013, the circuit court filed the Judgment.
On July 25, 2013, the circuit court filed its Order
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Attorney's Fees and Costs, 
awarding attorney's fees and costs to the Misslers that were
incurred at the circuit court, but not during the administrative
proceedings, ruling that the Misslers met the three-prong test
under the private attorney general doctrine.  Although the
Misslers requested attorney's fees and costs against the Planning
Director, the BOA, and the Applicants, the circuit court awarded
attorney's fees and costs only against the Planning Director.
II. Standard of Review
A. Secondary Appeals
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. The
standard of review is one in which this court must determine
whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its
decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g)
to the agency's decision. This court's review is further
qualified by the principle that the agency's decision
carries a presumption of validity and appellant has the
heavy burden of making a convincing showing that the
decision is invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in
its consequences.
Curtis v. Bd. of Appeals, 90 Hawai #i 384, 392, 978 P.2d 822, 830
(1999) (citation omitted).
HRS § 91-14(g) (2012) provides:
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; orNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
B. Public Trust
The public trust is a question of constitutional law,
which requires the court to "'exercise its own independent
judgment based on the facts of the case' under the right or wrong
standard."  Kauai Springs, Inc. v. Planning Comm'n , 133 Hawai #i
141, 165, 324 P.3d 951, 975 (2014) (citation and brackets
omitted).   
C. Private Attorney General Doctrine
The court's determination as to the private attorney
general doctrine is reviewed "under the abuse of discretion
standard," however, "we review de novo whether the trial
court disregarded rules or principles of law that arise in
deciding whether or not a party satisfies the three factors
of the private attorney general doctrine." 
Asato v. Procurement Policy Bd., 132 Hawai# i 333, 357, 322 P.3d
228, 252 (2014) (citation omitted).
III. The County's Appeal
A. The County Must Comply With the Kona CDP
1. Relevant Provisions in the Kona CDP have the
force and effect of law
The County contends that the circuit court erred in its
interpretation of the relationship between the General Plan and
the Kona CDP, contending the Kona CDP is not part of the General
Plan and only makes recommendations.
The circuit court concluded in pertinent part:
64. The Director must interpret, apply and enforce all
ordinances, statutes, rules and other laws pertaining to
planning and land use matters in the County, including the
General Plan and KCDP, to fulfill the responsibilities as
the Chief Planning Officer of the County.  Hawaii County #
Charter § 6-7.2(b).
65. The General Plan was adopted as an ordinance by
the Hawai# i County Council on February 2, 2005. Ordinance
No. 05 25. See also, County of Hawai# i Charter § 3-15.
66. The KCDP was adopted as an ordinance by the
Hawai#i County Council on September 25, 2008.
67. A community development plan is a part of the
general plan and implements the general plan. 
GATRI v.
Blane, 88 Hawai# i 108, 114, 962 P.2d 367, 373 (1998).
68. Conformance to the 2005 General Plan, of which the
KCDP is a part, is a decision criterion under SectionNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
825-6-10(b) of the County Zoning Code and [County of Hawai i
Planning Department Rules of Practice and Procedure Rule]
7-7(a)(2). An application must contain an "analysis" of the
general plan and community development plan as required by
Section 25-6-3(2)(E) of the County Zoning Code. The petition
must also include how the proposed development substantially
conforms to the General Plan. Department Rule 7-4(b)(2)(D).#
. . . . 
75. Sixth, the BOA may not nullify an ordinance that
it is charged to administer.  HOH Corp. v. Motor Vehicle
Industry Licensing Board, 69 Haw. 135, 141, 736 P.2d 1271,
1275 (1987.
76. When the County Council enacted the 2005 General
Plan Ordinance 05-25, the council stated in Section 15.1 of
the 2005 General Plan Ordinance that a community development
plan "may contain ... detailed land use and zoning guide
maps ... architectural design guidelines, planning for
watersheds ... and any other matters relating to the
planning area." Section 15.1, Page 1, 2005 General Plan
Ordinance.
In GATRI v. Blane , 88 Hawai #i 108, 962 P.2d 367 (1998),
the Supreme Court of Hawai# i concluded, inter alia, that the
Kihei-M~ kena Community Plan, on the island of Maui had the force
and effect of law.  Id. at 115, 962 P.2d at 374.  The applicant,
GATRI, applied to the Department of Planning of the County of
Maui for a Special Management Area ( SMA) permit pursuant to HRS
§ 205A-26(2)(C), and the statute required, inter alia, that the
proposed development be consistent with both the county general
plan and zoning .  Id. at 113, 962 P.2d at 372.  The supreme court
held that the general plan had the force and effect of law
"insofar as the [SMA] statute requires that a development within
the SMA must be consistent with the general plan."  Id.  at 114,
962 P.2d at 373.  
With regard to the Kihei-M ~kena Community Plan the
supreme court noted that it provided a "relatively detailed
scheme for implementing the [General Plan]" as opposed to "broad,
hortatory policy statements."  Id. at 114-15, 962 P.2d at 373-74. 
The supreme court also concluded that the Kihei-M ~kena Community
Plan had the force and effect of law because (1) it was adopted
after extensive public input and enacted into law by the Maui
County Council; and (2) the Maui County Code explicitly states
that community plans adopted by the County Council are part of
the general plan.  Id. at 113, 115, 962 P.2d at 372, 374.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7  It appears that in 2015, Hawai# i County Code § 25-6-3(2)(E) was
amended to provide that a PUD permit shall be accompanied by "[a]n analysis of
the relationship of the proposed development to the general plan, any adopted
community development plan, other adopted master plan, and if applicable, any
other adopted design guidelines and/or standards affecting the project area."
(Emphasis added.)
9At the relevant time in the instant case, the Hawai #i
County Code required a PUD permit to include an "analysis of the
relationship of the proposed development to the general plan,"
but did not specifically mention community development plans.7 
HCC § 25-6-3(2)(E).  Further, unlike in GATRI, the Hawai #i County
Code does not explicitly state that community development plans
are part of the General Plan.  However, upon a review of the
section in the General Plan addressing community development
plans, it appears that community development plans are intended
to be part of the General Plan. 
Chapter 15 of the Hawai# i County General Plan, entitled
"Plan Implementation," provides: "The General Plan sets forth
broad goals, objectives, and policies.  Implementation requires
translating these broad statements to specific actions,
systematically evaluating progress, and active community
participation. In this regard, follow-up planning efforts will
involve the preparation of  Community Development Plans, Capital
Improvements Program, and an annual report."  Haw. Cty. Gen. Plan
Chapter 15 at 15-1 (emphasis added).  In addition, section 15.1
of the General Plan identifies the purpose of a community
development plan, stating in pertinent part:
The Community Development Plans are intended to be the forum
for community input into managing growth and coordinating
the delivery of government services to the community. The
Community Development Plans will translate the broad General
Plan statements to specific actions as they apply to
specific geographical areas.
A Community Development Plan should direct  physical
development and public improvements within a specific area.
The Community development Plan may contain detailed land use
and zoning guide maps, plans for roadways, drainage, parks,
and other infrastructure and public facilities,
architectural design guidelines, planning for watersheds and
other natural features, and any other matters relating to
the planning area.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10Id. (emphasis added).  Thus, based on the language in the General
Plan, a community development plan implements the General Plan
with specific actions applicable to specific geographic areas.
Like the community development plan in GATRI , Hawai#i
County Code § 16-2 (Bill 333), effective September 25, 2008,
adopted and incorporated by reference the Kona CDP as an
ordinance.  The Kona CDP contains a "detailed scheme" for
implementing the General Plan, and states that its purposes are
to:
#Articulate Kona's residents' vision for the planning
area;
#Guide regional development in accordance with that
vision, accommodating future growth while preserving
valued assets;
#Provide a feasible infrastructure financing plan to
improve existing deficiencies and proactively support
the needs of future growth;
#Direct growth to appropriate areas;
#Create a plan of action where government and the
people work in partnership to improve the quality of
life in Kona for those who live, work, and visit;
#Provide a framework for monitoring the progress and
effectiveness of the plan and to make changes and
update it, if necessary.
Kona CDP § 1.2.
Chapter 4 of the Kona CDP is entitled "Goals,
Objectives, Policies, and Actions" and contains eight elements
meant generally to correspond with similar elements (some
combined) in the General Plan: 1. Transportation, 2. Land Use, 3.
Environmental Resources, 4. Cultural Resources, 5. Housing, 6.
Public Facilities, Infrastructure and Services, 7. Energy, and 8.
Economic Development.  Kona CDP Chapter 4 at 4-1.  Chapter 4
provides that each element has components, including "goals,"
"objectives," "policies," and "actions."  As to policies and
actions, Chapter 4 states:
6. Policies, that prescribe how each objective will be
achieved. The policies that use the word "shall" are
mandatory directives legally binding on County agencies.
Among the most significant legally binding policies are
those presented in Section 4.2 Land Use. These policies must
be implemented through land use decisions and development
permits issued after the KCDP is adopted. Such policies,
however, would not be retroactive to prior decision-making
and existing zoning. Some mandatory
 policies requireNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8  In a letter written to several Community Development Plan Steering
Committee members, the Planning Department stated that the regulatory effect
of a community development plan is to "guide, and in some cases mandate, how
other regulatory programs are handled."  The letter also states that the
actual effects of enacting a community development plan by ordinance "depends
upon the specific wording or the provisions of the CDP and upon the type of
follow-up action."
9  Chapter 25, Article 6 of the Hawai# i County Code outlines the
regulations for a "Planned Unit Development (PUD)."  Although the Kona CDP
sometimes refers to a PUD as a " Project Unit Development (PUD)" (emphasis
added), it appears from the references in the Kona CDP to Chapter 25 of the
Hawai
#i County Code that a "Project Unit Development" is meant to be a
"Planned Unit Development."
11balancing with other policies, particularly those that
require County funding. Some policies create special
provisions that differ from the County Code; these
Code-amending policies are summarized and noted as "enacted
by plan" in Section 5.3. Other policies that use the word
"should" are not legally binding as they recommend desired
actions especially those affecting agencies over which the
plan does not have authority (e.g. State agencies,
utilities, non-profits)
. Each policy is identified by the
alpha-numeric code for its corresponding objective, followed
by a decimal and its numeric sequence. For example, "Policy
TRAN-3.2" is the second policy of the third objective in the
Transportation Element.
7. Actions, that specify how the policy will be
implemented. An action may be a precursor to implementing a
policy or may specify what is required or recommended to
implement it. The list of actions are meant to be refined
during the process of implementation in consideration of
available resources, more detailed analysis, feasibility,
and other factors. Thus, these actions are not legally
binding but are meant to be implemented in good faith.
Kona CDP Chapter 4 at 4-2 (emphasis added).  Thus, the Kona CDP
recognizes that some of its provisions are recommendations and
some are legally binding on County agencies, and specifically
points to the policies in section 4.2, Land Use, as the "most
significant legally binding policies."8  Policies which include
the designation "LU" are in section 4.2, Land Use.  
In their appeal before the BOA, the Misslers
specifically challenged that the PUD permit did not comply with
Policy LU-3.3, Policy LU-3.4, Attachment "C" Clustered Rural
Subdivision Guidelines, and Policy ENV-1.5 in the Kona CDP.
Policy LU-3.3 in the Kona CDP is entitled "Clustered
Rural Subdivision Project Unit Development (PUD)"9  and states:  
Provided a PUD application for rural- or
agriculturally-zoned land substantially meets the ClusteredNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10  The parties do not dispute that the property associated with the PUD
application in this case is outside the Kona Urban Area.
12Rural Subdivision Guidelines in Attachment C, the Planning
Director shall issue approval, with or without conditions
within sixty (60) days after acceptance of the application,
and the approval shall be considered a tentative subdivision
approval. All other requirements and procedures of a PUD
shall be as set forth in Article 6 of the Zoning Code.
Kona CDP § 4.2.3 at 4-48 (emphasis added).  Following Policy LU-
3.3, Action LU-3.3a states it: "Amends Chapter 25 Zoning Code and
Chapter 23 Subdivision Code to establish Clustered Rural
Subdivision PUD (Enacted by plan)."  Id.   Thus, the Kona CDP
augments the Zoning Code and the Subdivision Code by adding
requirements for PUD applications in rural or agriculturally
zoned lands, requiring the application to substantially meet the
Clustered Rural Subdivision Guidelines in Attachment C of the
Kona CDP.
Policy LU-3.4, entitled "Clustered Rural Subdivision
Guidelines," provides:
The Clustered Rural Subdivision Guidelines in Attachment C
apply to proposed subdivisions outside of the Kona Urban
Area (UA).[10] The intent of the guidelines is to minimize
grading, preserve the natural appearance of the land to the
maximum extent possible, ensure agriculture use in the State
Land Use Agricultural District, and create a rural setting
for residences. Towards this end, the guidelines shall, at a
minimum, specify:
1. Minimum lot sizes;
2. Natural and cultural resources meriting protection and
associated buffer areas, as applicable;
3. Minimum standards for roads and wastewater disposal;
4. Legal tools for permanent protection, maintenance of
open space, and/or agricultural lands;
5. Connections to the open spaces of surrounding areas.
Id. (emphasis added.)
Attachment C to the Kona CDP, entitled "Clustered Rural
Subdivision Guidelines," provides that its purpose is to 
provide a flexible procedure to identify and preserve open
space while maintaining the existing density of residential
units for the overall site area. "Neutral density" is
achieved by allowing smaller individual owned residential
lots that include or are adjacent to aesthetically and
ecologically important areas. Individually owned residential
lots and the importance of preserving rural open space is as
follows:NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11  In a letter dated February 2, 2012 and addressed to Council member
Brittany Smart, Paul J. Conry an Administrator with the State of Hawai# i
Department of Land and Natural Resources wrote that the property involved in
this case
is characterized by habitat that is known to be used by the
Hawaiian hoary bat and the Hawaiian hawk for breeding,
foraging, and roosting. In addition, we note that records of
endangered plants such as loulu palm (Pritchardia spp.) are
known from the area, indicating that listed plants may
potentially exist within the subject parcel. Activities that
include the cutting or clearing of vegetation in forests
that support those species have the potential to result in
take of listed species.
Based on the above considerations, we recommend that
biological surveys (to include plants and animals) be
conducted for the project area, or that the applicant
schedule a meeting with our staff to consult on any
potential impacts of this project on protected resources and
to determine [sic].
12  Several letters from community members were submitted to the BOA
indicating that the upper portion of the property contained a pristine # Çhi#a
forest.  In her testimony before the BOA the Planning Director testified that
(continued...)
13A. Protection of significant ecological, cultural,
scenic, recreational, and agricultural areas in
perpetuity;
B. Prevention of flooding, erosion, and water
pollution, and protecting the quality and
quantity of drinking water;
C. Promoting a more compact form of development.
Kona CDP Attachment C at 1.  Attachment C further states:
These Guidelines apply to a special type of "Planned Unit
Development" (PUD) for North and South Kona for lands
outside the Urban Area zoned Agricultural, Intensive
Agricultural, Family Agricultural, or Rural-Agricultural. 
The guidelines supplement the requirements and procedures
for PUDs and subdivisions set forth in the Zoning Code,
Subdivision Code, and Planning Department Rules.
Id. (emphasis added.)  Attachment C also details a process to
follow when applying for a clustered rural subdivision.
Finally, Policy ENV-1.5, entitled "Sensitive
Resources," provides in pertinent part:
In the context of Kona’s ecology and history, the following
natural and cultural resources shall be considered sensitive
and therefore 
shall be inventoried, as part of any permit
application to the County Planning Department (see Figures
4-8a to 4-8d):
#Critical habitat areas as identified by the U.S. Fish
& Wildlife or County General Plan;[11]
#Predominantly native ecosystems, which may not be
considered endangered but are valued because of their
nearly pristine condition;[12]NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12(...continued)
the Planning Department was not required to include information in the PUD
approval describing the property as an old # Çhi#a forest based on letters
received from community members.
13 Mauka is defined as "inland."  Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert,
Hawaiian Dictionary (6th ed. 1986).
14 A letter from Jason K. Knable, representing the Applicants, to Deanne
Bugado, a planner with the Department of Planning, states that "[a]ll of the
farm dwellings developed within this PUD, in addition to any farm dwellings
developed on the large makai bulk lot, will be located above the 1,640 foot
elevation[.]"
14. . . 
#High-level groundwater recharge area which shall
initially be defined as all lands mauka  of the[13]
1,500 foot elevation and which may be refined by the
Kona Mauka Watershed Management Program;[14]
. . .
Any permit application that encompasses any of the above
resources shall strive to incorporate these resources as
assets. If a proposed project will have significant,
unavoidable, adverse impacts to any of the above resources,
the presumption shall be denial of the application and the
applicant will have the burden of explaining any overriding
considerations.
Kona CDP § 4.3.3 at 4-58 (emphasis added).
The above provisions of the Kona CDP provide a detailed
scheme for implementing the General Plan.  Further, because the
Kona CDP was adopted pursuant to the General Plan and Hawai# i
County Code § 16-2 (Bill 333) adopts and incorporates by
reference the Kona CDP as an ordinance, the provisions indicated
in the Kona CDP to be legally binding on County agencies hold the
force of law.
The County argues, however, that by adopting the Kona
CDP the County was not adopting law, but only recommendations. 
We disagree.  Rather, we agree with the circuit court when it
concluded:
The BOA’s narrow interpretation of Section 15.1 [of the
General Plan] would limit the County Council’s legislative
power and would restrict the council to "recommending" to
itself that the council (or a future council) enact at some
future date amendments or supplements to various land use
regulations even though the council already has that present
authority and ability to enact such amendments or
supplements.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15Therefore, the PUD application in this case must comply
with the legally binding provisions of the Kona CDP, which
include Policy LU-3.3, Policy LU-3.4, Attachment "C" Clustered
Rural Subdivision Guidelines, and Policy ENV-1.5.
2. The title of Bill 333 was adequate
The County contends that amendments to the Zoning Code
and the Subdivision Code included in the Kona CDP land use
section specifically addressing PUD permits are invalid, because
the title of Ordinance No. 08 131 (Bill 333), "An Ordinance
Adopting the County of Hawai# i Kona Community Development Plan,"
does not mention these amendments.
With regard to Bill 333, the circuit court concluded:
81. The BOA's ruling on Bill 333's title is wrong. The
title of Bill 333 reads "An Ordinance Adopting the County of
Hawai#i Kona Community Development Plan."
82. Since a community development plan may contain
"regulatory measures" such as Policy ENV-1.5, Policy LU-3.3,
Policy [LU-]3.4 and Attachment "C," Bill 333's title is
adequate. In Re Application of Tom Pong, 17 Haw. 566, 570,
572-575 (1906); Schwab v. Ariyoshi
, 58 Haw. 25, 33-35, 564
P.2d 135, 140-141 (1977) (bill title sufficient if the
bill's subjects are "connected with or related to each
other" and are "parts of, or germane to, one general
subject").
83. The BOA's determination that the KCDP Ordinance
does not mention Chapters 23 and 25 of the Zoning Code is
wrong. The KCDP Ordinance states on its face (at Page 4-48,
Policy LU-3.3a), that the County Council "Amends Chapter 25
Zoning Code and Chapter 23 Subdivision Code to establish
Clustered Rural Subdivision PUD (Enacted by plan)."
(Footnote omitted.)
The Hawai #i County Charter provides: "Every ordinance
of the council shall embrace but one subject, which subject shall
be expressed in its title. If an ordinance embraces a subject not
expressed in its title, only that subject shall be void."  Haw.
Cty. Charter § 3-10(b).
The Hawai #i Supreme court has stated:
The term 'subject,' as used in the [state] constitution is
to be given a broad and extended meaning, so as to allow the
legislature full scope to include in one act all matters
having a logical or natural connection.  To constitute
duplicity of subject, an act must embrace two or more
dissimilar and discordant subjects that by no fair
intendment can be considered as having any legitimate
connection with or relation to each other.  All that is
necessary is that act should embrace some one generalNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16subject; and by this is meant, merely, that all matters
treated of should fall under some one general idea, be so
connected with or related to each other, either logically or
in popular understanding, as to be parts of, or germane to,
one general subject.
Schwab v. Ariyoshi, 58 Haw. 25, 33, 564 P.2d 135, 140 (1977).
In this case, the title to Bill 333, "An Ordinance
Adopting the County of Hawai# i Kona Community Development Plan,"
embraces the subject expressed in its title.  Although the Kona
CDP addresses several topics including transportation,
development, and the environment, all of the topics embrace the
general goal of a community development plan to "translate the
broad General Plan statements to specific actions as they apply
to specific geographic areas."  Haw. Cty. Gen. Plan § 15.1 at 15-
1.  In addition, the General Plan provides that "Community
Development Plans shall recommend amendments as appropriate to
the codes[.]"  Id. at 15-2.  Thus, it is within the scope of the
title that the ordinance could contain amendments to specific
provisions of the Hawai# i County Code.
Therefore, the title of Ordinance No. 08 131, "An
Ordinance Adopting the County of Hawai# i Kona Community
Development Plan," does not violate the requirement under Hawai# i
County Charter § 3-10(b) for a sufficient title. 
3. The alleged "grandfather clause" contained in
the Kona CDP does not preclude application of
the Kona CDP to PUD permits
The County contends that the Kona CDP Land Use section
4.2.2 contains a "grandfather clause," which precludes
application of the Kona CDP to the PUD permit application in this
case and that the circuit court mischaracterized the legal effect
of the Kona CDP's grandfather clause.
The circuit court concluded:
84. The BOA also erroneously construed the KCDP
Ordinance's substantive provisions in question as being
inapplicable to a planned unit development.
. . . . 
86. In reaching its erroneous conclusion, the BOA
relied upon the KCDP Ordinance's "grandfather clause" thatNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17protects existing entitlements, but that also makes clear
that landowners with such pre-existing entitlements must
still comply with the substantive provisions of the KCDP
Ordinance if the landowners were to apply for "new changes
of zone, time extensions on existing zoning requiring County
Council action, state land use boundary amendments, and
Special Management Area (SMA) permits, when applicable."
87. More importantly, the "grandfather clause" does
not exempt the Applicants or the Property from the KCDP
Ordinance's substantive provisions governing a planned unit
development.
. . . . 
90. In its August 10, 2012 decision, the BOA erred in
statutory interpretation by exempting the PUD application
under the "grandfather clause," and when it concluded that
the KCDP Ordinance's substantive provisions in question,
viz., Policy ENV-1.5, Policy LU-3.3, Policy 3.4 and
Attachment "C" could not be enforced or applied.
(Citations omitted.)
Within the Land Use portion of the Kona CDP, Section
4.2.2 is entitled "Overall Strategy" and contains the language
relied upon by the County:
The legally binding policies in this section, as defined in
4.0 Goals, Objectives, Policies and Actions, do not override
or invalidate existing zoning. Such legally binding
policies, however, shall be implemented with new changes of
zone, time extensions on existing zoning requiring County
Council action, state land use boundary amendments, and
Special Management Area (SMA) permits, when applicable.
Where such policies modify subdivision standards and
requirements, they would only apply to subdivision
applications received after the effective date of the
ordinance enacting the Kona CDP. Variances to policies
modifying subdivision standards and requirements may be
applied for in accordance with the standards and procedures
set forth in the Subdivision Code.
Kona CDP § 4.2.2 at 4-32.  The County focuses on the language
that states, "[s]uch legally binding policies, however, shall be
implemented with new changes of zone, time extensions on existing
zoning requiring County Council action, state land use boundary
amendments, and Special Management Area (SMA) permits, when
applicable."  The County contends that "[b]y the plain language
of the KCDP, the policies of the land use element of the KCDP do
not apply to this particular PUD permit as it does not involve
any change of zoning, state land use boundary amendment or SMA
permit."NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18In our view, the County focuses on the wrong sentence. 
Rather, the relevant sentence is the one that follows and states:
"[w]here such policies modify subdivision standards and
requirements, they would only apply to subdivision applications
received after the effective date of the ordinance enacting the
Kona CDP."  By its own terms, the Kona CDP creates Clustered
Rural Subdivision Guidelines for PUD applications, which apply to
"proposed subdivisions outside the Kona Urban Area."  Kona CDP
§ 4.2.3 at 4-48.  Further, the Clustered Rural Subdivision
Guidelines "supplement the requirements and procedures for PUDs
and subdivisions set forth in the Zoning Code, Subdivision Code,
and Planning Department Rules."  Kona CDP Attachment C, at 1. 
Here, the Kona CDP was enacted as an ordinance in 2008
and the PUD application was submitted in 2010, after the Kona
CDP's enactment, and thus the Kona CDP applies to the PUD
application in this case.
B. The PUD Application Does Not Comply With the
Hawai#i County Code
The County contends that the circuit court erred when
it concluded that the PUD permit was invalid because it did not
contain specific measures to ensure the lots would be used for
agricultural purposes.
The BOA made the following finding: "[i]nasmuch as the
proposed Project will establish agricultural lots that are
consistent with permitted density allowed by zoning, the
development of the Project will remain consistent with
agricultural uses that prevail within the surrounding area." 
By contrast, the circuit court concluded:
104. Appellants also argue that the PUD permit is not
valid because it does not contain specific measures that
require project lots to be used for bona fide agricultural
uses.
105. The BOA found that the Project would establish
agricultural lots consistent with permitted density allowed
by zoning and consistent with agricultural uses that prevail
in the surrounding area.
106. According to the application, each of the
thirteen 2-acre lots would support a "farm dwelling," the
design for which will be "governed by the [Covenants,
Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&R's)]."  However, theNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15  Hawai# i County Code § 25-1-5 defines "structure" as: "anything above
existing grade constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or
requiring a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having or
requiring a fixed location on the ground.  The term 'structure' includes the
term 'building.'" "Building" is defined as: "any structure used or intended
for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy."
19CC&R's (as well as any drawings of the proposed structures)
do not appear in the application as required by Section
25-6-3(3)(A) of the County Zoning Code.
The application does not contain an agricultural107. 
plan as part of the "comprehensive site plan" and "general
development plan covering the entire area" as required by
Sections 25-6-1 and 25-6-3(3) of the County Zoning Code.
. . . . 
109. The Director’s decision contravenes Sections
25-6-1 and 25-6-3(3)(A) and thus is in violation of
statutory provisions.
(Emphasis added, citations omitted.)  The circuit court further
concluded the "permit is not valid because it does not contain
specific measures that require project lots to be used for bona
fide agricultural uses."
The circuit court concluded that the PUD application
did not comply with Hawai #i County Code § 25-6-3(3)(A), which
requires that a PUD application contain: "Drawings and plans
comprising a general development plan covering the entire area of
the P.U.D., and providing the following information: (A) Uses,
dimensions, and locations of proposed structures[.]"15  HCC § 25-
6-3(3)(A).
The PUD application states that each of the proposed
fourteen plots will have a farm dwelling.  The PUD application
does not contain uses, dimensions, and locations of the proposed
farm dwelling structures as required under Hawai# i County Code 
§ 25-6-3-(3)(A).  Therefore, we agree with the circuit court that
the PUD application does not comply in this regard with the
requirements of the Hawai #i County Code.
However, contrary to the circuit court's conclusion,
Hawai#i County Code §§ 25-6-1 and 25-6-3(3) do not contain
language requiring an "agricultural plan."  Thus, this aspect of
the circuit court's ruling was in error.  Further, as to theNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20circuit court's conclusion that the permit should have contained
specific measures requiring project lots to be used for
agricultural purposes, there likewise do not appear to be
specific requirements in the Hawai #i County Code, the General
Plan, or the Kona CDP for PUD permits to contain such
requirements.  Thus, we do not agree with the circuit court's
conclusion that "the permit is not valid because it does not
contain specific measures that require project lots to be used
for bona fide agricultural uses."  (Emphasis added.)  We note,
however, that the applicable zoning of Agricultural A-5a for the
property remains in place and the property must still comply with
the statutorily required activities and permissible uses for an
agricultural district.  See  HRS § 205-2 (Supp. 2008)
("Districting and classification of lands"); HRS § 205-4.5 (Supp.
2009) ("Permissible uses within the agricultural districts"); see
also HRS § 205-12 (2001) (regarding enforcement by the
appropriate county officer or agency).
Therefore, the circuit court was correct in ruling that
the PUD application violated Hawai #i County Code § 25-6-3(3)(A)
because the application does not contain uses, dimensions, and
locations of the proposed structures.  However, the circuit court
erred when it held that the PUD application failed to include an
agricultural plan, and when it ruled that the PUD permit was "not
valid" because it did not contain specific measures requiring the
project lots to be used for bona fide agricultural uses.
C. The County's public trust obligation 
The County contends the circuit court erred when it
concluded that the County did not properly consider its public
trust obligation when it approved the PUD permit.
With regard to the public trust, the circuit court
concluded in pertinent part:
26. According to the Hawai
#i Constitution and
sovereign reservation, the public trust doctrine "applies to
all water resources without exception or distinction." In re
Water Use Permit Applications ("Waiahole I"), 94 Hawai
#i 97,
133, 9 P.3d 409, 445 (2000).NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21 . . . .
37. Affirmative obligation to preserve the public
natural resources trust according to law is among the
responsibilities of the Director as an officer of the
County.
. . . .
41. As was recognized by the majority of the Supreme
Court in Wai# ola, "maximizing the water resource's social
and economic benefits includes the protection of the
resource in its natural state." [Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside
,
111 Hawai# i 205, 223, 140 P.3d 985, 1003 (2006)] (citations
and quotations omitted).
42. The County’s duty to conserve and protect is
clear. Id. at 225[,] 140 P.3d at 1005.
43. The Director may not defer decision-making action
with regard to the public natural resources trust to another
agency nor to a future date. The Director, as an officer of
the County, has a constitutional duty to "conserve and
protect Hawaii# s natural beauty and all natural resources,
including ... water," in her official decision-making. In
deferring this responsibility, the Director’s decision
violated constitutional provisions.
. . . . 
45. While a PUD permit may not be "a ground disturbing
permit," this does not free the Director from her obligation
to protect the public natural resources trust.
46. Appellees have not cited any authority to support
their argument. Instead, the clear weight of authority
requires the Director to consider the public natural
resources trust without regard to the stage of the planning.
. . . .
54. The actions of Appellees failed to meet
obligations and duties pursuant to the public natural
resources trust and are in contravention of Appellees’ duty
under the Constitution, as further elucidated by the Hawai# i
Supreme Court. See [Waiahole I], 94 [Hawai# i] at 143, 9 P.3d
at 455.
(Some ellipses in original, footnotes omitted.) 
Article XI, § 1, known as the public trust doctrine, of
the Constitution of the State of Hawai# i provides:
For the benefit of present and future generations, the State
and its political subdivisions shall conserve and protect
Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources, including
land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and shall
promote the development and utilization of these resources
in a manner consistent with their conservation and in
furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State.
All public natural resources are held in trust by the State
for the benefit of the people.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
22"The public trust doctrine applies to all water
resources  without exception or distinction."  Kauai Springs , 133
Hawai#i at 172, 324 P.3d at 982 (citation and brackets omitted). 
The supreme court enumerated four recognized protected uses of
water under the public trust doctrine: (1) "the maintenance of
waters in their natural state"; (2) "domestic water use, in
particular, protecting an adequate supply of drinking water"; (3)
"the use of water in 'the exercise of Native Hawaiian and
traditional and customary rights"; and (4) "the reservation of
water enumerated by the State Water Code[.]" Id.
The supreme court also provided the duties and
obligations of an agency under the public trust doctrine,
including that "[a]n agency must take the initiative in
considering, protecting, and advancing public rights in the
resource at every stage of the planning and decision-making
process."  Id. at 173, 324 P.3d at 983 (emphasis added, citation
omitted).  In addition, the "agency measures the proposed use
under a 'reasonable and beneficial use' standard, which requires
examination of the proposed use in relation to other public and
private uses" and "[t]he agency must apply a presumption in favor
of public use, access, enjoyment, and resource protection."  Id.
(citations omitted).  
The agency must also "place the burden on the applicant
to justify the proposed water use in light of the trust
purposes."  Id.  "If there is a reasonable allegation of harm to
one of the uses protected by the public trust, then the applicant
must demonstrate that there is no harm in fact or that any
potential harm does not preclude a finding that the requested use
is nevertheless reasonable and beneficial."  Id. (citation
omitted).  The applicant: (1) "is obligated to demonstrate
affirmatively
 that the proposed use will not affect a protected
use"; (2) "must demonstrate the absence of a practicable
alternative water source"; and (3) "if the impact is found to be
reasonable and beneficial, then in light of the cumulative impact
of existing and proposed diversions on trust purposes, . . . mustNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16 Makai is defined as "ocean."  Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert,
Hawaiian Dictionary (6th ed. 1986).
17  Ahupua# a is defined as:
Land division usually extending from the uplands to the sea,
so called because the boundary was marked by a heap (ahu) of
(continued...)
23implement reasonable measures to mitigate this impact."  Id.
(citations, brackets and quotation marks omitted).
The County contends that it fulfilled its duty under
the public trust doctrine when it reviewed the PUD permit in
accordance with the criteria set forth in the Hawai #i County Code
and when it sought review and comment of other agencies as to the
effect of the permit on public natural resources.  However, the
County has duties under the public trust doctrine independent of
the PUD permit requirements found in the Hawai #i County Code. 
See Kauai Springs , 133 Hawai# i at 177, 324 P.3d at 987 (stating
"the Planning Commission also had duties under the public trust
independent of the permit requirements").  The County was "duty-
bound to place the burden on the applicant to justify the
proposed water use in light of the trust purposes."  Id. at 173,
324 P.3d at 983.
The PUD application proposes to divide the 72.178 acre
parcel of land into fourteen smaller plots, each of which would
support a farm-dwelling and an unknown agricultural pursuit with
rain-water catchment tanks located on each parcel.  Catchment
tanks would also supply water for fire fighting purposes.  Thus,
the proposed development requires water for both domestic and
agricultural use.
In addition to the uses for water proposed in the PUD
application, written testimony was submitted to the BOA regarding
the exercise of Native Hawaiian traditional and customary
practices using fresh water from the Waik ~ku#u Ranch area. 
Walter Kahiwa ( Kahiwa), submitted written testimony stating that
"Waik~ku#u is a major source of fresh water in the mauka and
makai16 sections of the ahupua# a"17 and "[i]n the coastal area ofNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)17
stones surmounted by an image of a pig ( ), or because a
pig or other tribute was laid on the altar as tax to the
chief.  The landlord or owner of an ahupua# a might be a
konohiki.pua#a
Mary Kawena Pukui & Samuel H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary  (6th ed. 1986).
24Waik~ku#u, people [including Kahiwa himself] would collect
('ku#u') the fresh water at points where the fresh water pours
into the sea through underwater caves."  The testimony also
states that the zone of mix where the fresh water meets the sea
provides a special environment for certain sea weed and fish
species to survive.  The testimony also mentions water holes that
are found in the area of Waik ~ku#u from which people would
collect fresh water.
Richard Missler also testified in the contested case
hearing before the BOA that there is a ravine on the property
that runs mauka to makai.  Missler testified that a portion of
the proposed roadway in the PUD application crosses the ravine. 
Brenda J. Ford, a council member on the Hawai #i County
Council, sent a letter to the BOA stating:
There is a section of the parcel 34 that has a large ravine
through it. I estimate that one ravine section is 30-40 feet
deep and at least 100-150 feet across. This ravine section
is located in the area designated as the entrance for a road
into the parcel. Any road through this section would require
a substantial bridge to be built to county standards to
access the other side of the ravine.
This same ravine would carry tremendous quantities of water
in a heavy rain, but unfortunately, the ravine is not listed
on any floodplain maps because it is too far south (between
the 96 and the 97 mile marker of the M~ malahoa Highway) of
most of the houses to be considered for flood mapping. This
ravine leads upward into the rain forest and narrows as it
continues mauka. I requested an aerial photograph of the
area from the floodplain manager, but the resolution is not
sufficient to see the ravine(s) clearly. Also, the trees are
so large that even if they grow from deep within the ravine,
they provide cover sufficient to obstruct the aerial views.
Apparently, the applicant wants to cluster the housing
development in the upper section of the ravine, but the only
way to do that is to fill the ravine(s) with dirt and rocks.
This would be a flooding catastrophe in the making. Once the
water is dammed behind such a fill, it is only a matter of
time until the dammed water will breach the fill and create
a mud and rock flow that may reach the highway andNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
25potentially cross it. Such a massive mud and rock flow may
kill and bury any drivers on the highway that it encounters.
In this case, under the public trust doctrine, the
Applicants had the burden to justify the proposed water use for
the PUD project.  The PUD application does not address the effect
of the proposed project on the water resources in the area.  The
application also does not reference a ravine on the property or
what effect, if any, the project would have on the flow of water
through the ravine.  Further, because the Applicants did not
analyze the impact of the project in this regard, the application
in turn does not propose any mitigation measures.
Therefore, the County did not fulfill its duty under
the public trust doctrine.
D. The circuit court erred in granting attorney's
fees and costs under the private attorney general
doctrine
The County contends the circuit court erred when it
awarded the Misslers fees and costs under the private attorney
general doctrine because no Hawai# i appellate court has applied
the private attorney general doctrine in a secondary appeal from
a contested case.  The County alternatively contends that even if
the private attorney general doctrine applies, the Misslers did
not satisfy the three-prong test.
In reviewing an award of attorney's fees under the
private attorney general doctrine, the Hawai #i Supreme Court has
recognized that "[w]e retain the abuse of discretion standard,
noting however that we review de novo whether the trial court
disregarded rules or principles of law that arise in deciding
whether or not a party satisfies the three factors of the private
attorney general doctrine."  Honolulu Constr. and Draying Co. v.
State, Dep't of Land &  Nat. Res., 130 Hawai #i 306, 313, 310 P.3d
301, 308 (2013).
The Misslers requested that the circuit court award
attorney's fees and costs against the Planning Director, BOA, and
the Applicants, seeking fees and costs incurred at both theNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
26administrative level before the BOA and the proceedings in the
circuit court.  Based on the private attorney general doctrine,
the circuit court awarded the Misslers attorney's fees and costs
against the Planning Director only, and limited the award to fees
and costs incurred in the Misslers' appeal to the circuit court.
The circuit court denied fees and costs incurred in the
proceeding before the BOA because the Misslers did not prevail at
that level.
The private attorney general doctrine is an exception
to the American Rule, which requires that "each party is
responsible for paying his or her own litigation expenses." 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. , 120 Hawai #i 181, 218, 202 P.3d
1226, 1263 (2009).  The private attorney general doctrine
is an equitable rule that allows courts in their discretion
to award attorneys' fees to plaintiffs who have vindicated
important public rights. Courts applying this doctrine
consider three basic factors: (1) the strength or societal
importance of the public policy vindicated by the
litigation, (2) the necessity for private enforcement and
the magnitude of the resultant burden on the plaintiff, (3)
the number of people standing to benefit from the decision.
Maui Tomorrow v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 110 Hawai #i 234, 244,
131 P.3d 517, 527 (2006) (quoting  In re Water Use Permit
Applications , 96 Hawaii 27, 29, 25 P.3d 802, 804 (2001) # (Waiahole
II))(brackets omitted).
The first prong of the test requires the court to
consider "the strength or societal importance of the public
policy vindicated by the litigation."  Maui Tomorrow, 110 Hawai# i
at 244, 131 P.3d at 527 (citation omitted).  This case addresses
two important issues regarding land use and development in the
County of Hawai #i.  First, this case clarifies that certain
provisions in the Kona CDP hold the force and effect of law, and
must be applied when approving PUD permits.  Second, this case
reaffirms existing Hawai #i case law that the Planning Director
has a duty under the public trust doctrine to consider public
trust resources such as water when approving permits such as the
PUD permit in this case.  However, it is questionable whether the
Misslers have met the purpose of the private attorney generalNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
27doctrine, which "is to promote vindication of important public
rights."  Sierra Club, 120 Hawai# i at 219, 202 P.3d at 1264. 
Here, the Misslers have a significant personal stake in
litigating this case because they claim their property will be
directly affected by the PUD permit.  In their appeal to the BOA,
the Misslers stated they have an interest in the PUD application
because they are adjacent property owners and the PUD application
proposes to use a roadway that also serves to access the
Misslers' property.  The Misslers also challenged the PUD
application because it does not address, inter alia, the "impact
of the proposed development on adjoining properties and
roadways."  It is thus unclear whether the Misslers meet the
first prong of the test.
 The second prong of the private attorney general
doctrine requires the court to consider "the necessity for
private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant burden on
the plaintiff."  Maui Tomorrow , 110 Hawai #i at 244, 131 P.3d at
527 (citation omitted).  The County cites to Waiahole II  and Maui
Tomorrow in asserting that the private attorney general doctrine
does not apply to cases arising out of a contested case hearing.  
In Waiahole II, the supreme court stated that the case
appeared to meet the first and third prongs of the private
attorney general doctrine test because the case involved
"constitutional rights of profound significance, and all of the
citizens of the state, present and future, stood to benefit from
the decision."  96 Hawai #i at 31, 25 P.3d at 806.  Additionally,
the supreme court stated "[t]he public rights at issue in this
case compare favorably with those considered in other cases in
which the courts awarded attorneys' fees under the private
attorney general doctrine."  Id.
  However, the supreme court
concluded that the second prong of the test was not satisfied, in
part because the case involved a secondary appeal from a public
tribunal.  As explained by the supreme court:
The Windward Parties cite no case in which attorneys' fees
were awarded in an adversarial proceeding against a tribunal
and the losing parties and in favor of the prevailing party,NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
28based on the reversal of the tribunal's decision on appeal.
Nor does such a rule appear prudent from a policy
standpoint, where public tribunals in adversarial settings
must invariably consider and weigh various "public
interests."  Therefore, we hold that this case does not
qualify for an award of attorneys' fees under the
conventional application of the private attorney general
doctrine.
Id. at 32, 25 P.3d at 807 (emphasis added). 
In Maui Tomorrow , the supreme court also concluded that
the second prong of the private attorney general doctrine was not
satisfied.  In relevant part, the court noted that Maui Tomorrow, 
as in Waiahole II , involves an appeal from the decision of a
tribunal in an adversarial proceeding, and the circuit court
"made no rulings regarding the ultimate disposition of water
resources, but simply remanded the matter ... for further
findings and conclusions."  Like the Windward Parties, Na
Moku cites to no cases in which fees were awarded against a
tribunal and the losing parties based on the reversal of the
tribunal's decision on appeal.
110 Hawai# i at 245, 131 P.3d at 528 (citation omitted).
In this case, the circuit court reversed the decision
of the BOA, vacated the decision by the Planning Director, and
remanded the matter to the Planning Director to consider the PUD
application consistent with the Circuit Court Decision and Order. 
As noted by the County, the private attorney general doctrine has
not been applied in a case such as this, a secondary appeal
pursuant to HRS § 91-14 from a contested case.  Therefore, based
on our de novo review, we conclude the circuit court erred in
determining that the second prong of the private attorney general
doctrine applied.  See also Hou v. Univ. of Haw. Inst. for
Astronomy , No. 29032, 2011 WL 2002223, at *9-10 (Haw. App. May
24, 2011)(mem. op.) (holding that the private attorney general
doctrine did not apply to a secondary appeal from a contested
case proceeding).
Because the second prong of the private attorney
general doctrine is not met, we need not address the third prong. 
See Waiahole II , 96 Hawai #i at 31, 25 P.3d at 806 (noting that
the private attorney general doctrine did not apply where the NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
29first and third prong were met, but the second prong was not);
Hou, 2011 WL 2002223, at *10.
IV. The Misslers' Appeal
In their appeal, the Misslers challenge the circuit
court's award of attorney's fees and costs, asserting that the
circuit court abused its discretion when it: (1) did not award
them attorney's fees and costs against the Planning Director and
the Applicants for the fees and costs incurred to establish the
administrative record during the contested case hearing before
the BOA; and (2) denied the Misslers attorney's fees and costs
incurred at the circuit court against the BOA and the Applicants. 
The Misslers argue that they should have been awarded their
requested attorney's fees and costs under the private attorney
general doctrine.
In its Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
Attorney's Fees and Costs, the only basis on which the circuit
court awarded attorney's fees and costs was the private attorney
general doctrine.  In light of our holding that the private
attorney general doctrine does not apply, we conclude that the
Misslers' appeal is without merit.
V. Conclusion
The "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision
and Order" entered on April 25, 2013, the "Order Clarifying
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order
Filed April 25, 2013" entered on June 26, 2013, and the Judgment
entered on June 27, 2013, by the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit, are hereby: (1) vacated to the extent the circuit court
concluded that the PUD application failed to contain an
"agricultural plan" under Hawai #i County Code §§ 25-6-1 and 25-6-
3(3), and that the PUD permit was not valid because it did not
contain specific measures requiring the project lots to be used
for bona fide agricultural uses; and (2) affirmed in all other
respects.
The circuit court's "Order Granting in Part and Denying
in Part Appellants' Motion for Taxation of Attorney's Fees andNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
30Costs [Filed May 30, 2013]," filed on July 25, 2013, is vacated
to the extent that it granted attorney's fees and costs to the
Misslers under the private attorney general doctrine.
The case is remanded to the Department of Planning,
County of Hawai #i for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 26, 2017.
On the briefs:
Amy G. Self,
Renee N.C. Schoen, 
Deputies Corporation Counsel,
Office of the Corporation Counsel
for Appellees-Appellants.Chief Judge
,
Associate Judge
Michael J. Matsukawa,
for Appellants-Appellees.
Steven S.C. Lim,
Edmund W.K. Haitsuka,
Jacob L. Matson, 
(Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Appellees-Appellees.Associate Judge