FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000485 31-MAY-2024 08:19 AM Dkt. 39 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
–––O0O––– 
SIERRA CLUB OF HAWAI# I, MAUI GROUP, a non-profit organization,
a
nd MAUI TOMORROW FOUNDATION, a non-profit organization,
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellees,
v. 
ANAERGIA SERVICES, LLC, a foreign limited liability company,
MAUI ALL NATURAL ALTERNATIVE, LLC, a foreign limited liability
company, Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and 
DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT, COUNTY OF MAUI,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and 
DOES 1-27 
NO. CAAP-19-0000503 
(CONSOLIDATED WITH CAAP-19-0000485) 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 18-1-0236(3)) 
MAY 31, 2024 
LEONARD, ACTING C.J., AND WADSWORTH AND NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY WADSWORTH, J. 
This appeal stems from a dispute involving a proposed 
project for renewable energy conversion and sludge processing at 
the Wailuku-Kahului Wastewater Reclamation Facility (WKWRF) in 
Kahului, Maui (the Project). Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-
Appellees Sierra Club of Hawai#i, Maui Group and Maui Tomorrow 
Foundation (collectively, Plaintiffs) sued Defendant-  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellant/Cross-Appellee Director of the Department of 
Environmental Management, County of Maui (the County) and 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Anaergia Services, LLC 
(Anaergia) and Maui All Natural Alternative, LLC (MANA) 
(together, the Anaergia Defendants, and collectively with the 
County, Defendants). Plaintiffs alleged, among other things, 
that Defendants violated the Hawai# i Environmental Policy Act 
(
HEPA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) chapter 343, by processing 
an environmental impact statement (EIS) for the Project as an "applicant action" rather than an "agency action." 
The County appeals and the Anaergia Defendants cross-
appeal from the Final Judgment (Judgment
), entered in favor of 
Plaintiffs and against Defendants on June 7, 2019, by the Circuit 
Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1/ Defendants also 
challenge the following Circuit Court orders, entered on May 30, 2019: (1) "Order Granting in Part and Denying as Moot Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Counts VII and VIII)" (Order Granting Summary Judgment on Count VII); (2) "Order 
Denying Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Counts 
II and V) as Moot"; and (3) "Order Denying [the Anaergia Defendants'] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on Counts VII and VIII." 
On appeal, the County asserts four points of error, all 
apparently based on the same contention stated in its first point of error
2/ – that the Circuit Court "erroneously ruled that the 
. . . [P]roject constituted an 'Agency Action' rather than an 'Applicant Action' for the purposes of environmental review" 
1/ The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
On July 3, 2019, the County filed a notice of appeal from the
Judgment, initiating appellate case number CAAP-19-0000485. On July 11, 2019,
the Anaergia Defendants filed a notice of appeal from the Judgment, initiatingappellate case number CAAP-19-0000503. The latter notice was actually anotice of cross-appeal. See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule
4.1. On September 3, 2019, this court entered an order consolidatingappellate case numbers CAAP-19-0000485 and CAAP-19-0000503 under CAAP-19-0000503. 
2/ The County presents no separate, discernible argument supporting
points of error 2, 3, and 4. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may
be deemed waived."). 
2   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under HRS chapter 343./ The Anaergia Defendants substantively 
join the County's opening brief. 3
We hold that the Project is an "agency action" for 
purposes of environmental review under HEPA. First, the Project 
is a HEPA "action" because it is a "program or project" – namely, "a planned undertaking" – "to be initiated by an agency or applicant." HRS § 343-2 (2010); Umberger v. Dep't of Land & Nat. Res., 140 
Hawai#i 500, 513, 403 P.3d 277, 290 (2017). Second, 
the County "initiated" the Project by issuing a request for proposals (RFP) and hiring MANA to execute the Project.  Based on 
the plain language of HRS § 343-2, the Project is an "agency 
action." The Circuit Court did not err in so ruling. 
Accordingly, we affirm the Judgment. 
3/ HRS § 343-5(b) and (e) (Supp. 2016) state, in relevant part: 
(b) Whenever an agency proposes an action in
subsection (a), other than feasibility or planning studies
for possible future programs or projects that the agency hasnot approved, adopted, or funded, or other than the use ofstate or county funds for the acquisition of unimproved realproperty that is not a specific type of action declaredexempt under section 343-6, the agency shall prepare anenvironmental assessment for the action at the earliest practicable time to determine whether an environmentalimpact statement shall be required; provided that if theagency determines, through its judgment and experience, thatan environmental impact statement is likely to be required,the agency may choose not to prepare an environmentalassessment and instead shall prepare an environmental impactstatement that begins with the preparation of anenvironmental impact statement preparation notice asprovided by rules. 
. . . . 
(e) Whenever an applicant proposes an action specified
by subsection (a) that requires approval of an agency and
that is not a specific type of action declared exempt undersection 343-6, the agency initially receiving and agreeingto process the request for approval shall require theapplicant to prepare an environmental assessment of theproposed action at the earliest practicable time todetermine whether an environmental impact statement shall berequired; provided that if the agency determines, throughits judgment and experience, that an environmental impactstatement is likely to be required, the agency may authorizethe applicant to choose not to prepare an environmentalassessment and instead prepare an environmental impactstatement that begins with the preparation of anenvironmental impact statement preparation notice asprovided by rules. The final approving agency for therequest for approval is not required to be the acceptingauthority. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Background 
On March 21, 2016, the County issued the RFP for the 
"design, construction, operation and maintenance of a gas turbine 
system with sludge dryer for the [WKWRF] under a power purchase agreement (PPA)[,]" i.e., the Project. (Formatting and capitalization altered.) The County's purpose was to replace existing fossil-fuel generated electricity with locally-sourced, renewable energy to meet the power needs of WKWRF, and to reduce wastewater sludge management costs by drying the sludge. 
Anaergia was awarded the Project on May 19, 2016, and 
subsequently formed MANA to execute the Project. 
On December 16, 2016, the Maui County Council approved 
Resolution No. 16-171, authorizing the County to lease to MANA "approximately one-acre of the [WK]WRF property for the Project" under the terms of a 20-year site lease. 
On February 14, 2017, MANA and the County entered into 
a services agreement, which included the supply of firm, renewable energy for the WKWRF and sludge drying service for all municipally generated wastewater sludge. 
The parties agree that the Project triggered 
"environmental disclosure document preparation" under HRS § 343-5. Accordingly: 
• On June 23, 2017, the County submitted an Environmental Impact Statement Preparation Notice (EISPN) for the Project, which identified the 
Project as an "applicant action." On or about 
July 24, 2017, Plaintiffs submitted comments on the EISPN. 
• On December 23, 2017, MANA's draft EIS was published; it identified MANA as the "applicant." On or about February 6, 2018, Plaintiffs submitted comments on the draft EIS. 
• On March 12, 2018, MANA transmitted the Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) for the 
Project, which included responses to Plaintiffs' 
comments. The FEIS was published on March 23, 2018, and the County's acceptance of the FEIS was 
4  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
published on April 8, 2018. 
On May 31, 2018, Plaintiffs filed their Complaint, 
alleging nine claims for relief. Count Seven (VII) alleged, 
among other things, that the County violated HRS Chapter 343 procedures by processing the EIS as an "applicant action" instead of an "agency action." 
On February 27, 2019, Plaintiffs filed two motions for 
partial summary judgment, including a motion for summary judgment on Count VII. On April 4, 2019, the Anaergia Defendants filed a cross-motion for partial summary judgment, including for summary judgment on Count VII. 
The Circuit Court heard the motions on April 24, 2019, 
and announced its decision on April 30, 2019, as follows: 
As a matter of law, this Court concludes that the
application should have been processed as an agencyaction[;] instead it was processed as an applicant action,. . . contrary to the requirements of [HRS] Chapter 343. . . and the rules and regulations that relate to that. 
Accordingly, the . . . Court grants summary judgment
in favor of plaintiffs as to count seven and denies . . .defendant's cross-motion for summary judgment. 
On May 30, 2019, the Circuit Court entered the Order 
Granting Summary Judgment on Count VII, which stated in relevant 
part: 
The proposed action is an agency action because it
involves both the use of County land and the disposal of
sludge generated from wastewater management, a governmentfunction that in part is being sourced to a private entity.The proposed action's final environmental impact statementwas accepted as an applicant action instead of an agencyaction. The different types of actions are classified andprocessed differently. Therefore, the proposed action'sfinal environmental impact statement is invalid. 
The Court further ruled that "[t]he granting of summary judgment 
in favor of Plaintiffs as to Count Seven moots all other counts raised in the Complaint filed May 31, 2018." 
Accordingly, on June 7, 2019, the Circuit Court entered 
the Judgment. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. Discussion 
HEPA requires an environmental assessment "if three 
conditions are satisfied: (1) the proposed activity is an 
'action' under HRS § 343-2 (2010); (2) the action proposes one or more of the nine categories of land uses or administrative acts enumerated in HRS § 343-5(a) . . .; and (3) the action is not declared exempt pursuant to HRS § 343-6(a)(2) (2010)." Umberger, 
140 Hawai# i at 512, 403 P.3d at 289. "HEPA defines 'action' as 
'any program or project to be initiated by any agency or applicant.'" Carmichael v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 150 Hawai# i 
547, 568, 506 P.3d 211, 232 (2022) (quoting HRS § 343-2). 
"It 
follows from this definition that there are two types of HEPA 'actions': agency actions and applicant actions." Umberger, 140 
Hawai#i at 512 n.17, 403 P.3d at 289 n.17 (citing Sierra Club v. 
Dep't of Transp., 115 Hawai# i 299, 306, 167 P.3d 292, 299 
(2007)). 
Here, the parties do not dispute that the Project 
required the preparation of an EIS pursuant to HRS § 343-5. Rather, their dispute concerns the proper processing of the EIS. As to this issue, the parties disagree as to what precisely the "action" was that triggered the environmental review provisions of HEPA, and whether that action is properly considered an "agency action" or an "applicant action" under HEPA. 
A HEPA "action," again, is "any program or project to 
be initiated by an agency or applicant." HRS § 343-2. "'Program' is generally defined as 'a plan or system under which action may be taken toward a goal[]' [and] '[p]roject' is defined as 'a specific plan or design' or 'a planned undertaking.'" Carmichael
, 150 Hawai#i at 568-69, 506 P.3d at 232-33 (quoting 
Umberger
, 140 Hawai#i at 513, 403 P.3d at 290). "'Agency' is 
defined as 'any department, office, board, or commission of the state or county government which is a part of the executive branch of that government' and 'applicant' is defined as 'any person who, pursuant to statute, ordinance, or rule, officially requests approval for a proposed action.'" 
Id.
 at 568 n.36, 506 
P.3d at 232 n.36 (quoting HRS § 343-2). "An important preliminary step in assessing whether an 'action' is subject to 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
environmental review is defining the action itself." Sierra 
Club, 115 Hawai# i at 306 n.6, 167 P.3d at 299 n.6. 
Relying in part on these definitions, Defendants 
contend that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that the 
Project was an "agency action" rather than an "applicant action." First, Defendants argue that "the 'action' which triggered the need for an EIS is the actual implementation of the . . . [P]roject to be undertaken by the Anaergia Defendants in response 
to the County's RFP," not the RFP itself. 
Relatedly, Defendants 
assert that the RFP included no "specific plans, systems, designs 
or undertakings[.]" Second, Defendants argue that the Project is an "applicant action" under former 
Hawai#i Administrative Rules 
(HAR) § 11-200-6, because the Project (1) requires agency 
approval from the County, and (2) is being implemented entirely 
by the Anaergia Defendants. 
Plaintiffs, on the other hand, contend that wastewater 
and waste management are "traditional government functions," and "[t]he [C]ircuit [C]ourt correctly identified municipal waste management as the action under review." 
(Formatting altered.) 
Plaintiffs argue: "[T]he [P]roject . . . is a public wastewater system that includes a subprocess – sludge drying – that would be operated by a private entity – Anaergia. That the County privatizes one subprocess in the wastewater system to a private entity does not turn the public wastewater system into a private one." Based on the definition of "action" in HRS § 343-2, Plaintiffs further argue that the Project is an "agency action" because the County "initiated" it. 
In reaching its decision, the Circuit Court reasoned in 
part: "At its core the activity itself involves the processing and disposal of waste. The technology may be new and innovative and arguably more efficient, . . . [but] regardless of . . . what technology is used, the project does involve the disposal of sludge generated from wastewater management, a government function that in part is being sourced to a private entity, MANA." The County does not directly refute this conclusion, focusing instead on "the unspecified and open ended nature of the RFP," which the County contrasts with "the actual implementation 
7   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the . . . [P]roject as proposed by the Anaergia Defendants in 
the service agreement . . . ." Thus, it appears that the County 
is attempting to separate and silo the RFP from the Project the 
County intended to initiate through the RFP, and despite the fact that the County is a party to the operative services agreement with MANA. 
The County's narrow construction of the relevant HEPA 
"action" does not comport with HEPA's statutory language or mandate. At bottom, the County issued the RFP to initiate a "program" or "project" (HRS § 343-2) – the "design, construction, operation and maintenance of a gas turbine system with sludge dryer for the [WKWRF] under a [PPA]." The later EIS, which the County approved, repeated the County's purpose in issuing the RFP, as follows: 
The County . . . desires to supplant existing fossil fuel
generated electricity at its [WKWRF] with locally sourced,renewable energy for the community. In addition, the County. . . seeks an outcome that reduces wastewater sludge(biosolids) management costs by drying the sludge. The County . . . issued [the RFP] to address these needs andengaged [MANA] as a result of the RFP. 
In short, the County hired MANA to execute the County's "planned 
undertaking" of the Project. Umberger, 140 Hawai# i at 513, 403 
P.3d at 290. 
The Project is the HEPA "action." 
Further, the Circuit Court did not err in concluding 
that the Project was an "agency action" rather than an "applicant action" for purposes of environmental review under HRS chapter 343. The County "initiated" the Project by issuing the RFP and engaging MANA to execute the Project. Based on the plain language of HRS § 343-2, the Project qualifies as an "agency action." HRS § 343-2 (defining an "action" as "any program or project to be initiated by any agency or applicant"); Umberger, 140 Hawai# i at 512 n.17, 403 P.3d at 289 n.17 (noting that this 
definition distinguishes "agency actions" and "applicant actions"). In addition, as the Circuit Court reasoned, the Project involves the use of County land and wastewater management, which is not only a traditional government function, but one which the County has undertaken at WKWRF. The Project is an "agency action" for purposes of environmental review under 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HEPA. 
The County's reliance on former HAR §§ 11-200-5 and -6 
is misplaced. HAR §§ 11-200-5 and -6, which addressed the 
applicability of HRS chapter 343 to agency actions and applicant actions, respectively, were repealed, effective August 9, 2019. That was before the County filed its opening brief asserting that these rules control in determining whether an action is an agency or applicant action. It appears that these repealed rules were replaced in part by HAR §§ 11-200.1-8 and -200.1-9, but the new rules contain substantively different language from the old rules, and, importantly, do not contain the language relied on by the County. In any event, we reject the County's interpretation and application of former HAR § 11-200-6, as inconsistent with the plain language of HRS § 343-2. 
For the reasons discussed above, the Final Judgment 
entered on June 7, 2019, by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, is affirmed. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Caleb P. Rowe and Acting Chief Judge
Richelle K. Kawasaki,
Deputies Corporation Counsel,County of Maui, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
for Defendant-Appellant/ Associate Judge
Cross-Appellee 
Lance D. Collins /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
for Plaintiffs-Appellees/ Associate Judge
Cross-Appellees 
9 