  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000666
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KAOLINO RICHARD BAKER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION
 
(FC-CR. NO. 10-1-0329K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Kaolino Richard Baker (Baker) with abuse of a
 
family or household member, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) (Supp. 2012).
1 The complaining
 
witness (CW) was Baker's girlfriend. Baker and his counsel
 signed a "Waiver of Jury Trial." After a bench trial, the Family
 Court of the Third Circuit (Family Court) found Baker guilty as
 charged and sentenced him to two years of probation. Baker's
 
1
 HRS § 709-906(1) provides, in relevant part:
 
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert,
to physically abuse a family or household member. . . .
 
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses
or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a child in common,
parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, and persons
jointly residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
term of probation was subject to the special condition that he
 
serve thirty days of imprisonment, with twenty-five days
 suspended as long as he remained compliant with certain other
 conditions of his probation. Baker's sentence was stayed pending
 appeal.
 
Baker appeals from the Judgment of the Family Court
 
that was entered on August 10, 2011. On appeal, Baker argues
 that: (1) the Family Court plainly erred in failing to ensure
 that Baker fully waived his right to a jury trial; (2) the Family
 Court erred in finding Baker guilty because there was
 insufficient evidence to negate a "choice of evils" justification
 defense; and (3) the Family Court violated Baker's rights by
 relying on a written police report of Baker's interview
 statement, which had not been admitted at trial, to find Baker
 guilty and in relying on that report, which Baker claims he did
 not have the opportunity to review, controvert, or supplement, in
 sentencing him.
2 For the reasons explained below, we affirm the
 
Family Court's Judgment.
 
BACKGROUND
 
Baker's prosecution stemmed from an altercation with
 
the CW, who at the time was his girlfriend. Baker and the CW
 lived together for six years and owned a house together. At the
 time of trial, they no longer lived together, but still jointly
 owned the house.
 
On the night in question, the CW and her friend Tara
 
had left a bar at about 2:00 a.m., after the last call. The CW
 had agreed to give Tara a ride to her car. Baker, who had also
 been at the bar, arrived at the CW's car after the CW and Tara
 had entered it. All three of them were intoxicated. Baker
 reached into the car and attempted to grab the keys from the CW. 
A struggle ensued and Baker ended up with the keys.
 
2
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr., presided over Baker's trial.
The Honorable Andrew P. Wilson presided over the proceedings relevant to
Baker's waiver of his right to a jury trial. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Officer Jared Cabatu (Officer Cabatu) of the Hawai' i 
County Police Department was on duty "staging" with several 
officers in an area near to the CW's parked car. Officer Cabatu testified that he heard a female yell for help and say that "her friend was getting hit by her boyfriend." As Officer Cabatu responded to the call for help, he saw Baker look towards the police officers and then quickly walk away from the scene. 
According to Officer Cabatu, the CW was crying and
 
appeared intoxicated. The CW told Officer Cabatu that she had
 been hit twice, once in the face and once in the arm. Officer
 Cabatu saw a red mark on the CW's face and took photographs of
 her face and arm. Officer Cabatu had the CW fill out a "Domestic
 Violence Statement Form," which the CW filled out and signed. 
The CW wrote: "My boyfriend tried to get my keys in my car and
 hit me in my face and grabbed my keys." According to the answers
 to questions set forth in the form, Baker had hurt the CW with
 his "fist," and the CW felt pain which was described as "mild." 
The CW signed the form under the statement, "I AFFIRM THAT THE
 INFORMATION IN THIS DOCUMENT IS TRUE AND CORRECT." 
The police subsequently located Baker, and Officer
 
Cabatu placed Baker under arrest. Baker waived his Miranda
 rights, signed a waiver of rights form, and made a statement
 regarding the incident to Officer Cabatu. Prior to the
 prosecutor questioning Officer Cabatu about Baker's interview
 statement, Baker's counsel requested that he be allowed to voir
 dire Officer Cabatu on the voluntariness of Baker's statement,
 and the Family Court granted the request. After defense
 counsel's voir dire, the State introduced Baker's waiver of
 rights form. Officer Cabatu testified that Baker stated that:
 (1) Baker and the CW, his girlfriend, got into a verbal argument
 because the CW saw Baker talking to another woman at the bar; (2)
 Baker was trying to get the keys away from the CW while she was
 driving; and (3) Baker "denied any physical contact with anybody
 in the car."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
During Officer Cabatu's direct examination, the
 
prosecutor used Officer Cabatu's police report of Baker's
 
interview statement to refresh the officer's recollection about
 Baker's statement:
 
Q. Would looking at your report regarding the
interview refresh your recollection as to [Baker's]
statement?
 
A. Yes, sir.
 
[Prosecutor]: I'm showing one page from the officer's
report to defense counsel at this time.
 
May I approach?
 
THE COURT: All right.
 [Prosecutor]: Q.  And when your memory is refreshed,
please look up.
 
Officer, is your memory refreshed?
 [Officer Cabatu]: A. Yes, sir.
 
The prosecutor also used the "OBTS" portion of the police report
 
to refresh Officer Cabatu's recollection as to the time of
 Baker's arrest.
 
II.
 
The bench trial began on June 8, 2011, with Officer
 
Cabatu's testimony. The State had subpoenaed the CW to appear on
 that date, but the CW failed to appear and left a voice mail that
 she was sick. The Family Court continued the trial, which
 resumed on August 10, 2011.
 
When the trial resumed, the CW appeared and was called
 
as a witness by the State. The CW denied that Baker had hit her. 
When confronted with her Domestic Violence Statement Form, the CW
 acknowledged that the statement "My boyfriend tried to get my
 keys in my car and hit me in my face and grabbed my keys" was in
 her handwriting and that she had signed the form. However, the
 CW claimed that she did not remember filling out the form and
 that other portions of the form were not in her handwriting. The
 State offered the CW's Domestic Violence Statement Form as
 substantive evidence in light of the CW's recantation, and the
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court admitted it in evidence. On cross-examination, the
 
CW testified that Baker did not hit her intentionally and that
 she did not feel any pain during the incident.
 
III. 
After the State presented its case-in-chief, Baker
 
moved for judgment of acquittal based on the State's failure to
 introduce sufficient evidence that the CW suffered pain, which
 Baker argued was required to establish the charged offense. The
 Family Court denied the motion.
 
Baker testified in his own defense. According to
 
Baker, he and the CW were at a bar, and the CW was "really
 intoxicated and stumbling." When the CW left the bar and got
 into her car, Baker became concerned because he did not want the
 CW to get into an accident. He reached into the car to pull the
 keys from the ignition and a struggle ensued, with the CW biting
 Baker's arm. Baker stated that he did not hit the CW but he "did
 elbow her." The CW's friend, Tara, started screaming, and Baker
 left because he did not "want to deal with her screaming like
 that."
 
On cross-examination, Baker acknowledged that he was
 
intoxicated on the night in question. When cross-examined about
 his statement to the police, Baker asserted that he had not had
 an opportunity to read the police reports regarding his statement
 and had not reviewed the statement with his attorney. Baker
 indicated that he may have hit the CW accidentally.
3
 
The defense also called Chad, a long-time friend of
 
Baker, who said he witnessed the incident. Chad saw Baker go up
 to the CW's car, argue with the CW, then close the door. Chad
 testified that he did not see Baker hit or strike the CW in any
 way. After Baker closed the door to the CW's car, Baker walked
 over to Chad and asked Chad to pick him up at a different
 
3
 The questions posed to Baker were whether he had hit Tara
accidentally, but it appears that Baker was referring to the CW in his
answers.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
location. Chad's car was parked in the same parking lot as the
 
CW's car, and Chad did not know why Baker asked to be picked up
 at a different location.
 
IV.
 
After closing arguments, the Family Court found that
 
the State had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that Baker had
 committed the offense of abuse of a family or household member. 
The Family Court stated that it was relying on the testimony of
 Officer Cabatu and the CW's Domestic Violence Statement Form in
 reaching its decision. The Family Court then proceeded with
 Baker's sentencing.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Baker contends that the Family Court plainly erred in 
failing to ensure that Baker "fully" waived his right to a jury trial. "[W]e review the validity of a defendant's waiver of his/her right to a jury trial under the totality of the circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the defendant's background, experience, and conduct." State v. 
Friedman, 93 Hawai' i 63, 70, 996 P.2d 268, 275 (2000). "Where it 
appears from the record that a defendant has voluntarily waived a constitutional right to a jury trial, the defendant carries the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that his/her waiver was involuntary." Id. at 69, 996 P.2d at 274. 
We conclude, under the totality of the circumstances,
 
that Baker validly waived his right to a jury trial. On February
 23, 2011, the Family Court held a hearing during which Baker's
 counsel represented that Baker had "executed a 'Waiver of Jury
 Trial' form." The Family Court questioned Baker about the form as follows: 
THE COURT: You're Kaolino Baker? 
MR. BAKER: Yes. 
THE COURT: I'm looking at a document, and showing it
to you, entitled "Waiver of Jury Trial." It's two pages. 
Is that your signature on the back?
 
MR. BAKER:  Yes.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: And you signed this on February 23, 2011?
 
MR. BAKER: Yes.
 THE COURT: Do you have any questions about this
document?
 
MR. BAKER: No.
 THE COURT: In the last 24 hours have you had any
alcohol or any drugs or medicine?
 
MR. BAKER: No.
 THE COURT: Is your mind clear?
 MR. BAKER: Yes. 
THE COURT: You speak and understand the English
language?
 
MR. BAKER: Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you have -- you've gone over this
with your lawyer so far?
 
MR. BAKER: Yes.
 THE COURT: Okay. I'm going to hand this back to you
and have you sign this, that you acknowledge that we went
over this in open court and you know what you're doing.
Okay?
 
The "Waiver of Jury Trial" form signed by Baker
 
provides as follows:4
 
1. I waive my right to a jury trial in the following
charge(s): [Abuse of Family or Household Member]
 
PLEASE PLACE YOUR INITIALS IN THE SPACES PROVIDED IF
 YOU UNDERSTAND AND AGREE WITH THE FOLLOWING
 STATEMENTS.
 
2. ___ I understand that I have the constitutional right to
a jury trial. Furthermore, I unde[rstand] that a jury trial
is a trial in the Circuit Court before a judge and a jury
and that I can partic[ipate in] the process of selecting a
jury of twelve (12) citizens from the Third Circuit. This
 jury w[ould hear] the evidence in my case and then decide if
 
4 The first page of the Waiver of Jury Trial form in the record is
truncated on the right side, such that certain words or portions of words at
the right edge of Paragraphs 2 and 3 are missing and cannot be seen. The
 portions of Paragraphs 2 and 3 that cannot be seen on the Waiver of Jury Trial
form in the record are set forth in brackets in the quoted material. The
 words and portions of words included in the brackets are taken from the
recitation of the Waiver of Jury Trial form set forth in Baker's opening
brief.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I am guilty or not guilty. Finally I understand [in] order
for me to be convicted by a jury, their vote must be
unanimous. 
3. ___ I know that if I give up my right to a jury trial,
the trial will be held in this Court be[fore a] judge who
alone would decide if I am guilty or not guilty. I request
that my case be tried [before a] judge.
 
. . . . 
4b. ___ I am satisfied with my attorney, and am entering
this waiver with his her advice.
 
5. ___ I know that the punishment cannot be increased
merely because I want a jury trial. 
6. ___ I am entering this waiver of my own free will after
careful consideration. No promises or threats have been
made to me to induce me to waive my right to a jury trial.
 
Baker's initials appear in the spaces next to
 
Paragraphs 2, 3, 4b, and 5, but do not appear in the space next
 
to Paragraph 6. Baker's signature appears on the form after
 Paragraph 6. The form contains a "CERTIFICATE OF COUNSEL" which
states:
 
 
As counsel for defendant and as an officer of the
 
Court, I certify that I have read and explained fully the
foregoing, that I believe that the defendant understands the
document in its entirety, that the statements contained
therein are in conformity with my understanding of the
defendant's position,
 that I believe that the defendant's
waiver is made voluntarily and with intelligent
understanding of the nature of the charge and possible
consequences, and that the defendant signed the form in my
presence. 
(Emphasis added.) The signature of Baker's counsel appears after
 
the Certificate of Counsel. Baker's signature appears a second
 time on the form after an acknowledgment that "Judge A. Wilson
 questioned me personally in open court to make sure that I knew
 what I was doing and understood this form before I signed it." 
(Parentheses omitted.)
 
Baker argues that his jury trial waiver was invalid
 
because his initials do not appear in the space next to Paragraph
 6 on the form. We disagree. 
The Waiver of Jury Trial form advised Baker of his
 
right to a jury trial and the consequences of his waiver. 
Baker's counsel certified that counsel had fully explained the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contents of the form to Baker and that counsel believed Baker's 
waiver was voluntary and intelligent. Baker stated to the Family Court that he did not have any questions about the waiver form, that his mind was clear, that he understood the English language, and that he had gone over the form with his lawyer. There is nothing in the record to suggest that Baker was pressured or coerced into waiving his right to a jury trial, which is the focus of Paragraph 6 of the form. Moreover, Baker does not identify what aspect of his right to a jury trial or his jury trial waiver he failed to understand or explain why his waiver was involuntary. Under these circumstances, we conclude that Baker's failure to initial Paragraph 6, which appears to simply have been an oversight, did not render his jury trial waiver invalid. See Friedman, 93 Hawai' i at 70, 996 P.2d at 275 
(concluding that the defendant's "mere assertion that he did not possess a 'complete understanding of his jury trial right,' by itself, does not establish that his jury waiver was not voluntary and knowing"). 
II.
 
Although Baker did not specifically argue a "choice of
 
evils" justification defense at trial, he argues on appeal that
 the Family Court erred in finding him guilty because there was
 insufficient evidence to negate such a defense. We disagree and
 conclude that there was sufficient evidence to negate a "choice
 of evils" justification defense. 
We review the sufficiency of the evidence in the light 
most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 
637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). The prosecution disproves a justification defense when the trier of fact believes the prosecution's case and disbelieves the defense. See State v. 
Pavao, 81 Hawai' i 142, 146, 913 P.2d 553, 557 (App. 1996). 
The "choice of evils" justification defense is set
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
forth in HRS § 703-302 (1993), and provides in relevant part:5
 
[c]onduct which the actor believes to be necessary to avoid
an imminent harm or evil to the actor or to another is
 justifiable provided that . . . [t]he harm or evil sought to
be avoided by such conduct is greater than that sought to be
prevented by the law defining the offense charged[.]
 
(Formatting altered.) Baker contends his conduct was justified
 
under HRS § 703-302 because he reasonably believed that his
 actions were necessary to prevent the CW from causing imminent
 harm to herself or others by driving while intoxicated. However,
 when viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, there
 was substantial evidence to negate a "choice of evils" defense. 
For the "choice of evils" defense to apply, Baker must
 
have believed his conduct was necessary to avoid a greater
 imminent harm. In other words, Baker's actual motive for his
 altercation with the CW must have been to prevent the CW from
 causing greater imminent harm to herself or others by driving
 while intoxicated. The State presented evidence that Baker's
 true motive for physically abusing the CW was not to prevent her
 from driving while intoxicated, but because he was angry or upset
 
5
 HRS § 703-302 more fully provides:
 
§703-302 Choice of evils. (1) Conduct which the actor
believes to be necessary to avoid an imminent harm or evil to the
actor or to another is justifiable provided that:
 
(a)	 The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such conduct
is greater than that sought to be prevented by the law
defining the offense charged; and 
(b) 	Neither the Code nor other law defining the offense
provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the
specific situation involved; and 
(c) 	A legislative purpose to exclude the justification
claimed does not otherwise plainly appear. 
(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing
about the situation requiring a choice of harms or evils or in
appraising the necessity for the actor's conduct, the
justification afforded by this section is unavailable in a
prosecution for any offense for which recklessness or negligence,
as the case may be, suffices to establish culpability.
 
. . . .
 
10
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with her.6
 
In addition, Officer Cabatu testified that after the
 
CW's friend yelled for help, Baker looked up towards the police
 
and then quickly left the scene. The evidence also shows that as
 he walked away, Baker asked Chad, whose car was in the same
 parking lot as the CW's car, to pick Baker up at a different
 location. This evidence contradicts Baker's claim that he acted
 to prevent the CW from driving while intoxicated out of a concern
 for her welfare and the welfare of others. Instead, it reflects
 Baker's consciousness of guilt. As the Family Court observed, if
 Baker's true motive was to stop the CW from driving while
 intoxicated, Baker would have welcomed the presence of the police
 and would have wanted to attract their attention so that they
 could assist him in stopping the CW from driving.
7 We conclude
 
that there was sufficient evidence to negate a "choice of evils"
 defense.
 
III.
 
6 Officer Cabatu testified that Baker stated that he had been involved
 
in an argument with the CW earlier that evening, and Chad testified that he
saw Baker arguing with the CW at the CW's car.
 
7 The following took place during Baker's sentencing allocution:
 
[BAKER]: Oh, yeah, we had an argument. That's when she
 
left. But our plan was to catch a taxi to our -- we had a room.
 
THE COURT: So why did you tell [Chad] to meet you at
Huggo's.
 
[BAKER]: Cause I didn't want to be on the top part because
she was in the middle of the road screaming. So I just didn't
want to be -- you know, it's kind of shame -- kind of embarrassing
she was screaming like really loud for no reason. 
THE COURT: Uh-huh. Wouldn't that be something that you
would want because you want the police to come and stop your
girlfriend from driving?
 
[BAKER]: Uh, no.
 
THE COURT: Cause it would attract attention and you could
tell people I'm trying to stop this woman from driving. 
[BAKER]: Yeah, but I mean I didn't --
THE COURT: -- maybe because you were intoxicated as well.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Baker argues that the Family Court violated his rights
 
to a fair trial, due process, and to present a defense by relying
 
on a written police report of Baker's interview statement, which
 had not been admitted at trial, to find Baker guilty. He further
 contends that the Family Court violated his right to due process
 in relying on the same written report of Baker's statement, which
 Baker claims he had no opportunity to review, controvert, or
 supplement, in sentencing Baker.
 
Baker's contention that the Family Court improperly 
relied upon the police report of Baker's interview statement is based on comments made by the Family Court during its sentencing of Baker. As explained below, the Family Court's comments cited by Baker are not sufficient to demonstrate that the Family Court improperly relied upon the written report of Baker's interview statement in finding Baker guilty or that the Family Court violated Baker's due process rights at sentencing. We therefore decline to overturn Baker's conviction and sentence. Our decision, however, is without prejudice to Baker raising his claims, based on a more fully developed record, in a petition pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 
(2006). 
A.
 
After the parties completed their closing arguments,
 
the Family Court found that the State had proven beyond a
 reasonable doubt that Baker had committed the offense of abuse of
 a family or household member. The Family Court explained that in
 reaching this finding, it was relying on Officer Cabatu's
 testimony and the Domestic Violence Statement Form signed by the
 CW. Without recessing the proceedings, the Family Court then
 invited comments on sentencing.
 
During the parties' sentencing arguments, Baker's
 
counsel asserted that Baker's attempt to take the keys away from
 the CW so she could not drive home and the lack of any
 significant injuries to the CW were mitigating factors that the
 Family Court should consider in imposing sentence. The Family
 
12
  8 After further discussion between the Family Court and Baker about
Baker's reason for leaving the scene, the Family Court stated: "Yeah. Okay.
So I will find you guilty and place you on probation for a period of two
years." The Family Court then proceeded to detail the conditions of Baker's
probation.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court then gave Baker the opportunity to speak and the following
 
colloquy ensued: 
THE COURT: Okay, Mr. Baker, do you wish to make any
further statement?
 
[BAKER]: Uh, yes, as far as the -- me trying to leave
the scene, I just left because she was screaming and I just
didn't want to be around it so I told my friend to pick me
up down below. I wasn't running. And like when the cops
found me, I was just sitting down at Ocean's. Not like I
 was gonna dig -- dig out.
 
THE COURT: Hmm-hmm.
 
[BAKER]: So I mean I could easily have ran and got
away, but I just feel like I didn't do anything. I figure
I'll take the keys from her. The cops come and ask me for
the keys, I'll just give it to them and let them deal with
her. That was my plan to take the keys from her and since
she was drunk. And when the cops come for the keys, I'll
just give them the keys and let them decide if she can drive
or not. But it got a little -- I didn't expect them to
wrestle me for it. And once she bit my arm, I just -- I was
over it. I just let go. I had to close the door and that
 was when Tara jumped out of the car started screaming and I
was like -- I just left. I didn't want to be around it. 
THE COURT: I didn't see anything in your statement to
the police about these other factors.
 
[BAKER]: What other factors?
 
THE COURT: At least when Officer Cabatu testified, I
didn't hear -- and maybe I missed it -- I didn't hear your
report that she bit you. 
[BAKER]: I know. He didn't even take pictures of it.
When we were at the station was when I told him. I asked
 him if he was gonna take a picture. 
THE COURT: I did see in his report that you said to
him that she was upset because another woman talked to you
at the bar. That's what you reported to him.
 
[BAKER]: Oh, yeah, we had an argument. That's when
 
she left. But our plan was to catch a taxi to our - we had
a room.
 
(Emphases added).8
 
B.
 
13
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Baker contends that the Family Court's comments during
 
the above colloquy establishes that it improperly considered the
 
police report of his interview statement in finding him guilty. 
We note that while Officer Cabatu testified about the contents of
 Baker's interview statement, the written police report of Baker's
 statement was not introduced in evidence. Therefore, it would
 have been improper for the Family Court to consider the written
 report of Baker's statement, which was not part of the trial
 evidence, in finding Baker guilty.
 
However, we conclude that the record does not establish
 
that the Family Court considered the written report of Baker's
 interview statement in finding him guilty. Prior to the above
 colloquy cited by Baker, the Family Court had already found
 beyond a reasonable doubt that Baker had committed the charged
 offense. In explaining its decision, the Family Court
 specifically stated it was relying upon Officer Cabatu's
 testimony and the CW's Domestic Violence Statement Form, which
 had been admitted in evidence. The Family Court did not mention
 the written report of Baker's interview statement to the police
 in explaining its finding that Baker had committed the charged
 offense.
9
 
"In a bench trial, we presume that the judge was not 
influenced by incompetent evidence." State v. Lioen, 106 Hawai' i 
123, 133, 102 P.3d 367, 377 (App. 2004); see State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 353, 615 P.2d 101, 107 (1980); Harris v. Rivera, 454 U.S. 339, 346 (1981) (per curiam). In addition, "[t]rial judges
 are presumed to know the law and to apply it in making their
 decisions." Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 653 (1990),
 
overruled on other grounds by Ring v. Arizona, 536 U.S. 584
 (2002); see Au-Hoy v. Au-Hoy, 60 Haw. 354, 358, 590 P.2d 80, 83
 (1979); State v. Pascua, No. 30074, 2010 WL 3705993, at *3
 
9
 Although the Family Court did state it was finding Baker guilty after
the colloquy cited by Baker, the record shows that the colloquy was part of
Baker's allocution during the sentencing phase of the proceedings, after the
Family Court had already adjudicated his guilt. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Hawai'i App. Sept. 23, 2010) (SDO). We conclude that the 
comments of the Family Court cited by Baker are insufficient to 
overcome the presumption that the Family Court properly applied the law and was not influenced by incompetent evidence. 
C.
 
Baker contends that the Family Court violated his due
 
process rights by considering the written police report of his
 interview statement in sentencing him because he did not have the
 opportunity to examine, controvert, or supplement the report. We
 conclude that the existing record is not sufficient to support
 Baker's claim of a due process violation or demonstrate that the
 Family Court erred. 
At the outset, we note that although ambiguous, the
 
record suggests that Baker did have the opportunity to examine
 the written report of his statement to the police before
 sentencing. In pretrial discovery, Baker requested a copy of all
 written or recorded statements and the substance of all oral
 statements made by "the Respondent" within the State's possession
 or control. The record does not contain a subsequent motion to
 compel discovery by Baker regarding this request. During the
 direct examination of Officer Cabatu, Baker's counsel requested
 that he be allowed to voir dire the officer regarding the
 voluntariness of Baker's statement, without indicating that he
 did not have the statement. Moreover, the prosecutor used
 Officer Cabatu's written report of Baker's interview statement to
 refresh the officer's recollection as to the contents of Baker's
 statement. The record reveals that at that time, the prosecutor
 showed the written report of Baker's statement to defense counsel
 ("[Prosecutor]: I'm showing one page from the officer's report to
 defense counsel at this time.").
 
We also note that the written report of Baker's
 
interview statement is not part of the record, and we therefore
 are unable to compare the Family Court's comments against the
 written report. Indeed, the State argues on appeal that the
 Family Court's comments cited by Baker do not demonstrate that
 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Family Court had seen the report of Baker's interview
 
statement. Instead, the State asserts in its brief that:
 
The Judge's statements at sentencing about what he saw or
heard in Officer Cabatu's report, is likely a result of
hearing Officer Cabatu testify about the facts and about
what he had in his report, taking notes about the testimony
in June and referring to those notes about Officer Cabatu's
report of events after the trial concluded in August.
 
When the Family Court made its comments at sentencing,
 
Baker did not object on the ground that he had not been given the
 
opportunity to review, controvert, or supplement the written
 report of his interview statement. Baker also did not seek a
 continuance to give him more time to respond to the Family
 Court's comments. The absence of the written report from the
 record also means that we cannot compare Officer Cabatu's
 testimony regarding Baker's statement with the contents of the
 written report. Under these circumstances and based on the
 existing record, we cannot say that the Family Court violated
 Baker's due process rights in sentencing him. 
See State v. Hoang
 
93 Hawai' i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000) ("Where the record is 
insufficient to show that the alleged error occurred, the
 presumption that the arraignment was valid as required by law
 must prevail.") (citing State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 638, 586 P.2d
 250, 259 (1978)).
10
 
D.
 
Although we conclude that Baker failed to establish
 
10 Baker claims that the Family Court could not consider Baker's police
report because, as a general rule, a police report is irrelevant and
unreliable. We reject this claim. A sentencing court is entitled to consider
a broad range of information from a variety of sources in determining a
defendant's sentence. State v. Alexander, 62 Haw. 112, 118, 612 P.2d 110, 114
(1980) ("In evaluating the defendant's character and scope of criminality and
in predicting his [or her] future conduct, the sentencing court . . . 'may
appropriately conduct an inquiry broad in scope, largely unlimited either as
to the kind of information he [or she] may consider, or the source from which
it may come.'" (quoting United States v. Grayson, 438 U.S. 41, 50 (1978))). A
 police report is at minimum relevant to "[t]he nature and circumstances of the
offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant[,]" which a
sentencing court must consider under HRS § 706-606 (1993) in determining the
sentence to impose. Moreover, we note that police reports are routinely
included in presentence reports and relied upon by courts in imposing
sentence. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Family Court erred, we acknowledge that the record is
 
not entirely clear regarding whether, and the extent to which,
 (1) the Family Court and Baker had access to the written report
 of Baker's interview statement and (2) the Family Court
 considered the report in finding Baker guilty and in imposing
 sentence. Our decision in this case is therefore without
 prejudice to Baker raising his claims, based on a more fully
 developed record, in an HRPP Rule 40 petition.
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of 
the Family Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 31, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Audrey E. Stanley
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
17
 