NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000502
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DEREK MARK CAVILLIS, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 15-1-002K (FC-CR. NO. 09-1-0159K))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Derek Mark Cavillis (Cavillis)
 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's1 (Circuit
 
Court) June 7, 2016 Order Denying Rule 40 Petition to Vacate, Set
 
Aside or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner From Custody
 (Order). The Circuit Court denied the petition after holding an
 evidentiary hearing on May 18, 2016.
 
On appeal, Cavillis contends the Circuit Court erred by 
denying his Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 Petition For 
Post-Conviction Relief (Petition) because he received ineffective assistance of counsel at trial in violation of his constitutional rights. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
 raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve
 Cavillis's points on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, this court looks at whether defense counsel's
assistance was within the range of competence demanded of
attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has the burden
 
1
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and must
meet the following two-part test: 1) that there were
specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice.
 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (citations and quotation marks omitted). Here, Cavillis 
does not designate any of the Circuit Court's findings, included in the Order, as points on appeal. Thus, they are binding on this court and the issue is whether, under the facts as found, Cavillis met his burden to show ineffective assistance of counsel. State v. Kekona, 77 Hawai' i 403, 406, 886 P.2d 740, 743 
(1994). 
Cavillis argues his trial counsel was ineffective for
 
"deciding not to present a defense case-in-chief"; that is to
 say, trial counsel decided not to call any of the defense
 witnesses he had subpoenaed. The Circuit Court found that trial
 counsel credibly testified that,
 
he decided not to call witnesses because he believed the
 
only chance of success once the [complaining witnesses']
videotapes were introduced was to appeal and he believed not
calling witnesses would strengthen his chance of prevailing
on appeal. [Trial counsel] also testified that he did not
want to see the child complainants testify again and he
believed that by not putting on a case, the State would have
no chance to call the complainants again in rebuttal.
2
 
The Circuit Court also found "that [trial counsel's] decisions 
were strategic decisions which had a tactical bases [sic] for benefitting [Cavillis's] case." It is well-established that the decision of whether to call witnesses in a criminal trial is normally a matter within the judgment of counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1248 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 70, 837 P.2d 1298, 1307 (1992). 
2
 Trial counsel testified at the evidentiary hearing on the Petition
that, at the end of the State's case in the criminal trial, the trial court
had admitted videotapes of the two complaining witnesses after they had
already testified.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, the Circuit Court found that trial counsel
 
"told [Cavillis] it was up to him if he wants to testify or not"
 
and Cavillis chose not to testify.
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in denying 
Cavillis's Petition because he failed to meet his burden of demonstrating that trial counsel made specific errors or omissions reflecting his lack of skill, judgment, or diligence. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i at 513-14, 78 P.3d at 326-27. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the June 7, 2016
 
Order Denying Rule 40 Petition to Vacate, Set Aside or Correct
 Judgment or to Release Petitioner From Custody entered by the
 Circuit Court of the Third Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 8, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Dean T. Kauka,
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
David Blancett-Maddock,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai' i,
for Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
3
 