NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000433
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FENNY CSASZAR as Parent and Next Friend of
 
CHILD A and CHILD B, Appellant/Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
MED-QUEST DIVISION, and HAWAII MEDICAL SERVICE
ASSOCIATION, Appellees/Respondents-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NOS. 12-1-2825, 13-1-0422, and 13-1-1580)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This consolidated appeal arises from three cases 
brought under the Federal Medicaid Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 1396-1396w-5 
(2012)) (Medicaid) and Hawai 'i's implementing regulations. In 
Hawai'i, Medicaid is administered by Appellee/Respondent-Appellee 
Med-QUEST (Med-QUEST), a Division of the State of Hawai 'i 
Department of Human Services' (DHS), through the QUEST Hawai 'i 
medical assistance program and in cooperation with the federal government.
1 In each of the three cases subject to this appeal, 
Appellant/Claimant-Appellant Fenny Csaszar (Mrs. Csaszar) 
contested Med-QUEST's denial of her request to be reimbursed for 
the costs she accrued when one of her three children, Child C, accompanied Mrs. Csaszar, her husband (Mr. Csaszar), and the 
Csaszars' two other children, Child A and Child B, to Michigan 
1
 QUEST Hawai' i [FAQs], http://www.med-quest.us/FAQ/mqdfaq.html 
(last visited June 9, 2015). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Child A and Child B's medical treatment. Mrs. Csaszar 
appeals from the January 16, 2014 "Order Dismissing Appellant's Appeals Filed November 9, 2012, February 13, 2013, and May 30, 2013 and Affirming the Department of Human Services' Administrative Hearing Decisions Dated October 10, 2012, January 14, 2013, and May 8, 2013," (Order Dismissing) and the January 
16, 2014 Judgment entered in favor of Med-QUEST and Appellee-
Appellee Hawai
'i Medical Service Association (HMSA), and against 
Mrs. Csaszar, both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
2
 (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Mrs. Csaszar contends the circuit court 
erred by affirming three administrative hearing decisions rendered in favor of Med-QUEST and HMSA and against Mrs. Csaszarbecause Child C's round-trip travel between Hawai
'i and Michigan 
was a necessary arrangement under 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(43)(C) (2014) with regard to the medical treatment of Child A and ChildB.
3 Mrs. Csaszar further contends that by refusing to arrange
 
for Child C's travel or reimbursing Mrs. Csaszar for Child C's
 travel costs, Med-QUEST, through HMSA, forced Mrs. Csaszar to
 share the cost of necessary medical treatment for Child A and
 Child B and therefore violated the prohibition against cost-
sharing set forth by 42 U.S.C. § 1396o(a)(2)(A) (2010). Mrs.
 Csaszar's appeal is without merit.
  
 
Mrs. Csaszar argues the circuit court erred in
 
affirming the administrative hearing decisions because: (1)
 
under 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(43)(C), Med-QUEST is required to make
 arrangements for "a paid, non-relative attendant to accompany one
 
of the children to [the UM-CFCC]"
4
 but Med-QUEST never made such
2 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
3 Through the HMSA QUEST health plan, Child A and Child B receive
treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF) at the University of Michigan CF Care
Center (UM-CFCC) on a quarterly basis.
 
4 Mrs. Csaszar, however, implies that she would not request or
accept a non-relative attendant in place of herself or her husband because 
[the Csaszars] are instructed in the care of
Child A and Child B which they must deliver 24/7
in Hawaii [Hawai' i]. A non-relative attendant 
is utterly useless to ensuring that the parents
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arrangements and therefore the "cost of hiring a non-relative
 
attendant . . . has been shifted to Child C's airfare"; (2)
 reimbursing Mrs. Csaszar for Child C's airfare is the lowest cost
 alternative available to Med-QUEST; (3) Med-QUEST's denial of
 Mrs. Csaszar's request to be reimbursed for Child C's airfare
 constitutes prohibited cost-sharing under 42 U.S.C.
 § 1396o(a)(2)(A); and (4) a child's right to childcare is not
 comparable to an adult relative's need for care and therefore
 reimbursing Mrs. Csaszar for Child C's airfare would not result
 in an expansion of the rule to dependent adults. Mrs. Csaszar
 also argues that 42 U.S.C. § 1396d(r)(5) (2013) indicates that
 the applicable federal law is to be interpreted broadly to
 "eliminat[e] barriers to accessing medically necessary care."
 Mrs. Csaszar further argues that each hearing officer erred by
 not addressing "HMSA's breach of the duty to make all necessary
 arrangements for the journey to [UM-CFCC] so that the Csaszar
 family would not be burdened with substantial out-of-pocket
 costs" and "[Mrs.] Csaszar was entitled to reimbursement of the
 costs she incurred to remedy the breach."
 
Med-QUEST contends the circuit court did not err in
 
affirming the administrative hearing decisions because Child C
 was neither in need of necessary medical care nor an attendant to
 Child A or Child B and therefore Mrs. Csaszar was not entitled to
 reimbursement of Child C's out-of-state travel costs. Med-QUEST
 argues that the relevant laws relied upon by Mrs. Csaszar pertain
 to costs associated only with the necessary medical treatment or
 services for the recipient child and do not extend to the out-of­state travel costs of dependent family members. Med-QUEST also
 argues that it was not medically necessary for the entire family
 to travel together; Mrs. Csaszar could have opted to have either
 
4(...continued)
are properly and thoroughly instructed and
thereby able to provide the care at home which
has kept the children relatively healthy and out
of the hospital where they would likely have
spent far more time. . . . [S]ending the parents
as attendants is preferable for implementing the
complex plans for Child A's [sic] and Child B's
individual care plans.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Child A and Child B travel at different times or a non-relative 
attendant travel with Child A and Child B and one parent so that the other parent could stay in Hawai
'i with Child C. 
42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(43)(C) provides that a "State plan
 
for medical assistance must . . . provide for . . . arranging for
 (directly or through referral to appropriate agencies,
 organizations, or individuals) corrective treatment the need for
 which is disclosed by such child health screening services[.]" 
Mrs. Csaszar points to no case law that suggests Med-QUEST's duty
 to arrange for a recipient's corrective treatment under 42 U.S.C.
 § 1396a(a)(43)(C) should extend to the travel arrangements for a
 recipients' dependent family member. 
42 U.S.C. § 1396o(a)(2)(A) provides that "no deduction,
 
cost sharing or similar charge will be imposed under the plan
 with respect to . . . services furnished to individuals under 18
 years of age[.]" We are not persuaded by Mrs. Csaszar's argument
 that the cost-sharing prohibition set forth by 42 U.S.C.
 § 1396o(a)(2)(A) applies to costs associated with the out-of­state travel of a dependent family member such as Child C. 
42 U.S.C. § 1396d(r)(5) provides that "[t]he term
 
'early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment
 services'" includes screening, vision, dental, and hearing
 services, and "[s]uch other necessary health care, diagnostic
 services, treatment, and other [medical assistance]
 measures . . . to correct or ameliorate defects and physical and
 mental illnesses and conditions discovered by the screening
 services, whether or not such services are covered under the
 State plan." This court is not persuaded by Mrs. Csaszar's
 argument that Child C's travel costs qualify as "other necessary
 health care, diagnostic services, treatment, and other [medical
 assistance] measures . . . to correct or ameliorate defects and
 physical and mental illnesses and conditions discovered by the
 screening services, whether or not such services are covered
 under the State plan" under 42 U.S.C. § 1396d(r)(5). 
This court's interpretation of the relevant federal
 
statutory provisions is consistent with the plain language of the
 corresponding state administrative rules. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 17-1737-83 (am 
02/07/05) provides:
 
§17-1737-83 Out-of-state transportation .
 
(a) Out-of-state transportation may be provided to
eligible recipients for covered medical services which are
unavailable in Hawaii [Hawai' i] and with prior authorization
by the department's medical consultant. 
. . . .
 
(e) Out-of-state transportation may be . . . issued
 
to:
 
(1) 	 The recipient when the recipient is expected to
return home in thirty days or less as determined
by the attending physician or medical facility.
. . . .
 
(2)	 Any person accompanying the recipient without
regard to the person's relationship to the
recipient, if an attendant is required
 by the
transportation carrier or recommended by the
attending physician or the medical facility and
authorized by the department's medical
consultant.
 
(f) Other related travel expenses may be allowed with
prior authorization by the department's medical consultant
and may include but not be limited to:
 
(1)	 Cost of meals and lodging for the recipient and
one attendant;
 
(2)	 Taxi or other non-emergency ground
transportation when such transportation is
related to the provision of authorized medical
coverage; and
 
(3)	 Services of an attendant provided the attendant
is unrelated to the recipient.
 
(g) Transportation services shall be available for
those individuals eligible for medical assistance, provided
all the provisions in this section are met. An individual
 who utilizes benefits for other than their intended purpose,
may be referred for potential prosecution of fraud. A
 provider who knowingly and willfully falsifies,
misrepresents, conceals, or fails to disclose material facts
to obtain transportation services for an individual, may be
referred by the department to the Medicaid fraud control
unit for investigation and potential prosecution of fraud.
The department may seek the recovery of monies associated
with the fraudulent act.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
HAR § 17-1739.1-4 (2004) provides:
 
§17-1739.1-4 Authorization of services . (a) The department
shall provide:
 
. . . .
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2)	 Procedures relating to the utilization of and
the payment for care and services available
under the program. Among the procedures the
department may employ shall be a system of
authorization of selected types of costly health
care.
 
(b)	 Authorizations shall insure that:
 
(1)	 Requested services and materials are medically
necessary;
 
(2)	 Any adequate and less expensive alternatives are
considered; and
 
(3)	 Any services and materials provided conform to
currently accepted community standards of the
profession involved.
 
. . . .
 
(e) The department, through its medical consultants,
may place appropriate limits on a Medicaid service based on
such criteria as medical necessity or utilization control
procedures. The department shall pay for health care
services when the department's medical consultants determine
that the services are necessary to the patient's well-being
and the services are provided under standards accepted by
the medical profession. However, no payment shall be made
in a situation where the program rules were violated or when
services furnished did not involve economical or effective
 health care management of the patient.
 
. . . .
 
(g) The following services 
require medical
authorization prior to the service being rendered. 
. . . .
 (7)	 Lodging, meals, and transportation for recipients and
medical attendants to accompany a recipient for
medical purposes, including out-of state and
inter-island transportation by scheduled carrier, air
ambulance, ground ambulance, handicab, or taxi[.]
 
. . . .
 
(h) Services provided without the necessary prior
authorizations are subject to denial of payment.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Mrs. Csaszar is not entitled to reimbursement of Child
 
C's travel costs because Child C was neither a recipient of
 
necessary medical care nor an attendant, HAR § 17-1737-83(e), and
 nothing in the record indicates that Mrs. Csaszar received prior
 authorization for Child C's travel. HAR §§ 17-1737-83(f), 17­1739.1-4(g)(7). Mrs. Csaszar did not meet her burden of
 persuasion under Hawaii Revised Statutes § 91-10(5) (2012 Repl.)
 ("[T]he party initiating the proceeding shall have the burden of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proof . . . [which] shall be a preponderance of the evidence."). 
The circuit court did not err in affirming the administrative
 hearing decisions and therefore we affirm the circuit court's
 Order Dismissing and Judgment.
 Therefore,
  
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 16, 2014 "Order
 
Dismissing Appellant's Appeals Filed November 9, 2012, February
 13, 2013, and May 30, 2013 and Affirming the Department of Human
 Services' Administrative Hearing Decisions Dated October 10,
 2012, January 14, 2013, and May 8, 2013", and the January 16,
 2014 Judgment, both entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 24, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Rafael G. Del Castillo
 
(Jouxson-Meyers & Del Castillo)for Appellant/Claimant-
Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge Heidi M. Rian 
Lila C. KingDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee/Respondent-Appellee Med-Quest Division,Department of Human Services,State of Hawai
'i. 
Charles A. Price
 (Koshiba Price Gruebner & Mau)
for Appellee/Respondent-
Appellee Hawaii Medical Service
Association.
 
7
 