NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000392
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALLEN TAVARES, Defendant-Appellant
and FRANK HAMPP, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1864)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Allen Tavares (Tavares) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered
 
by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court)1 on
 
April 6, 2011, convicting him of Ownership or Possession
 Prohibited of Any Firearm Or Ammunition By a Person Convicted of
 
Certain Crimes, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134­
7(b) and (h) (2011 Repl.). 
Prior to trial, Tavares filed a Motion to Suppress 
Evidence (motion to suppress), seeking to preclude Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) from introducing at trial a 
gun, a magazine clip, cartridges, and a holster that were seized by Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officers on November 30, 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2010, and to preclude testimony as to events that occurred after
 
Tavares' vehicle was stopped and evidence seized that Tavares
 
contends are "fruits of the poisonous tree." On July 9, 2010,
 
the circuit court denied Tavares' motion to suppress. On
 
July 28, 2010, the circuit court filed its "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law and Order Denying [Tavares'] Motion to
 
Suppress Evidence." 
On October 14, 2010, at the close of the State's case
 
at trial, Tavares made an oral motion for judgment of acquittal,
 
arguing that based on the evidence in the light most favorable to
 
the State, the State had failed to show that Tavares had
 
possession or control of the firearm. Tavares also argued that
 
2
the rear seat passenger, Frank Hampp (Hampp),  and the front seat
passenger, Orrin Simer (Simer), had the opportunity to place the
 
weapon under the driver's seat. The court denied the motion. 
Tavares also renewed his motion to suppress, which was denied.
 
On October 15, 2010, Tavares renewed his motion for
 
judgment of acquittal, which the circuit court denied. On the
 
same day, the parties made their closing arguments to the jury. 
The deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) argued, in relevant part,
 
that there was "mechanical stuff under the seat" that would have
 
prevented Hampp from sliding the gun underneath the driver's
 
seat. 
On October 18, 2010, the jury returned its verdict
 
finding Tavares guilty of Ownership or Possession Prohibited of
 
Any Firearm Or Ammunition By a Person Convicted of Certain
 
Crimes, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-7(b)
 
and (h).
 
2
 Evidence in the record reflects that Hampp was an escapee from
Laumaka prison at the time. Tavares claims he did not know Hampp and was
giving him a ride because Hampp happened to be with Simer when Tavares picked-
up Simer to give him a ride.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Tavares contends: (1) the circuit court
 
erred in denying his motion to suppress because the police lacked
 
reasonable suspicion to stop his vehicle; (2) the circuit court
 
erred in denying his motions for judgment of acquittal because
 
there was insufficient evidence that Tavares knowingly possessed
 
the firearm and ammunition; and (3) the DPA committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct during the State's closing argument by
 
arguing facts not in evidence. 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate the Judgment
 
and remand this case to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings.
 
I. Motion To Suppress
 
Tavares argues that the circuit court erred in denying
 
his motion to suppress because he was subjected to an illegal
 
search and seizure when the police stopped his vehicle. In
 
particular, Tavares contends that police officers did not have
 
reasonable suspicion to stop his vehicle. 
We review de novo the circuit court's ruling on the 
motion to suppress. State v. Edwards, 96 Hawai' i 224, 231, 30 
P.3d 238, 245 (2001). 
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that thestatements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfullysecured and that his or her right to be free fromunreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 370, 375, 56 P.3d 138, 143 (2002). 
In addressing this issue, we consider both the record of the 
hearing on the motion to suppress and the trial record. State v. 
Kong, 77 Hawai' i 264, 266, 883 P.2d 686, 688 (App. 1994). 
In determining the reasonableness of discretionary 
automobile stops, we apply the standard set forth in Terry v. 
Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). See State v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai' i 228, 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
237, 74 P.3d 980, 989 (2003). To justify an investigative stop, 
"the police officer must be able to point to specific and 
articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences 
from those facts, reasonably warrant that intrusion." Id. 
(quoting State v. Barnes, 58 Haw. 333, 338, 568 P.2d 1207, 1211 (1977)) (internal quotation marks omitted). In determining 
whether the officer had specific and articulable facts to justify 
an investigative stop, we consider the totality of the 
circumstances measured by an objective standard. State v. 
Eleneki, 106 Hawai' i 177, 192-93, 102 P.3d 1075, 1090-91 (2004). 
The crux of Tavares' argument is that the traffic stop
 
was pretextual because the observations of officer Michael Lucas-
Medeiros (Officer Lucas-Medeiros) and officer Jeffrey Fleigner
 
(Officer Fleigner) were not credible.
 
The circuit court was right in denying Tavares' motions 
to suppress because Tavares did not meet his burden of 
establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that the police 
stopped his vehicle without reasonable suspicion. See State v. 
Wilson, 92 Hawai' i 45, 48, 987 P.2d 268, 271 (1999). Based on 
the evidence in the record, the officers had reasonable suspicion 
to stop Tavares given the decal they observed covering a large 
portion of the passenger side of the windshield of Tavares' 
vehicle. Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 15-19.30(a) 
(1978) states that "[n]o person shall drive any motor vehicle 
with any sign, poster or nontransparent material upon the front 
windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of such vehicle 
which obstructs the driver's clear view of the highway or any 
intersecting highway."  At the hearing on the motion to suppress, 
Officer Lucas-Medeiros testified that as Tavares' vehicle got 
closer to where Officer Lucas-Medeiros' vehicle was parked, 
Officer Lucas-Medeiros could observe a decal on Tavares' front 
windshield. Officer Lucas-Medeiros testified that the decal was 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"probably ten inches wide the whole width of the windshield[.]" 
Officer Lucas-Medeiros testified that the decal was on the middle
 
of the passenger side of the windshield, and it was "dark­
colored" or "black." Also at the hearing on the motion to
 
suppress, Officer Fleigner testified that he noticed a decal on
 
the windshield as the car passed by. He believed that this decal
 
was blocking the driver's view. Pictures depicting the decal on
 
the passenger side of the windshield were entered into evidence
 
and show the decal covering a large portion of the windshield on
 
the passenger side.
 
At trial, Officer Lucas-Medeiros testified that "[a]s
 
the vehicle drove closer, I could observe a large decal on the
 
passenger side of the windshield." He testified that the sticker
 
looked like it was covering the whole passenger side of the
 
windshield and that it was a big sticker. Officer Lucas-Medeiros
 
testified that he stopped Tavares' vehicle because of "[t]he
 
decal which was blocking the passenger side and the cracked
 
windshield[.]" Officer Lucas-Medeiros further testified that the
 
decal was about eight inches wide and probably "18, 20 inches
 
long[,]" and it was blocking approximately 80 percent of the
 
passenger side from the top to the bottom of the front
 
windshield.
 
Tavares cites to People v. White, 132 Cal. Rptr.2d 371,
 
(Cal. Ct. App. 2003), where the court construed a windshield
 
provision similar to ROH § 15-19.30. 132 Cal. Rptr.2d at 374. 
Based on the evidence presented in that case, the court concluded
 
that it was not reasonable for the subject police officer to
 
believe that an air freshener hanging from the rearview mirror
 
may have obstructed or reduced the driver's clear view, and thus
 
the vehicle stop could not be justified on that basis. Id. at
 
375. In White, there was evidence that the air freshener covered
 
5
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
less than .05 percent of the total surface of the car's
 
windshield. Id. at 375.
 
Tavares also cites to People v. Arias, 159 P.3d 134
 
(Colo. 2007), where the Colorado Supreme Court construed a
 
statute similar to ROH § 15-19.30. Arias, 159 P.3d at 138. 
There, an officer testified that he believed that it was legal to
 stop a vehicle solely on the basis that an air freshener was
 
hanging from the rearview mirror; he did not verify the size of
 
the air freshener, its angle of position, or whether it actually
 
obstructed the driver's vision; and he only testified that the
 
air freshener "could have" obstructed the driver's vision. The
 
defendant testified that there were actually three small air
 
fresheners instead of one large one and that they "in no way
 
obstructed his vision." Id. at 138-39. The court in Arias
 
concluded "that the trial court correctly determined that Officer
 
Gray did not have reasonable and articulable suspicion to believe
 
that a crime had been committed at the time he initiated the
 
traffic stop." Id. at 139. 
This case is distinguishable from White and Arias
 
inasmuch as the testimony of Officer Lucas-Medeiros and Officer
 
Fleigner establish that they observed a large decal on the
 
passenger side of the vehicle's windshield, the decal covered a
 
large portion of the windshield, and they believed it was
 
blocking the driver's view. Moreover, photographs of the decal
 
clearly show the size and placement of the decal. In sum, the
 
evidence in this case provides an objective basis for the stop of
 
the vehicle, because it was reasonable for the officers to
 
believe that the decal "obstruct[ed] the driver's clear view of
 
the highway or any intersecting highway." See ROH § 15-19.30. 
Because we conclude that Officer Lucas-Medeiros and
 
Officer Fleigner had reasonable suspicion to stop Tavares'
 
vehicle based on the large decal on the passenger side of the
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
vehicle's windshield, we need not and thus do not reach Tavares'
 
remaining arguments with respect to this point of error.
 
II. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
Tavares argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
convict him of knowing possession of the firearm and ammunition
 
3
pursuant to HRS § 134-7(b),  and thus the circuit court erred in
denying his motions for judgment of acquittal raised at the close
 
of the State's case and at the close of all the evidence. 
When reviewing a motion for judgment of acquittal,
 
we employ the same standard that a trial court applies to
such a motion, namely, whether, upon the evidence viewed in
the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full
recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full play
to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility,
weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact.
 
State v. Smith, 97 Hawai' i 166, 169, 34 P.3d 1065, 1068 (App. 
2001) (citations omitted) (quoting State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai' i 
108, 112-13, 952 P.2d 865, 869-70 (1997)).
 
Tavares contends there was insufficient evidence to
 
support a finding of constructive possession of the firearm and 
ammunition.
 
The law, in general, recognizes two kinds of possession:
actual possession and constructive possession. A person who
knowingly has direct physical control over a thing at a
given time is then in actual possession of it. A person who,
although not in actual possession, knowingly has both the
 
3
 HRS § 134-7(b) states: 
No person who is under indictment for, or has waived
indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit court
for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere of
having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or an
illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control any
firearm or ammunition therefor. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
power and the intention at a given time to exercise dominion
over a thing, either directly or through another person or
persons, is then in constructive possession of it.
 
State v. Foster, 128 Hawai' i 18, 26, 282 P.3d 560, 568 (2012) 
(emphasis added) (quoting State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai' i 87, 110, 
997 P.2d 13, 36 (2000)). As recently reiterated by the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court:
 
"To support a finding of constructive possession theevidence must show a sufficient nexus between the accused and the [item] to permit an inference that the accused hadboth the power and the intent to exercise dominion andcontrol over the [item]. Mere proximity is not enough."
[State v.] Moniz, 92 Hawai' i [472,] 476, 992 P.2d [741,] 745
[2012]. Moniz further established that 
[p]roof of the defendant's knowledge of the presence
of [the items] and the defendant's ownership or right
to possession of the place where the [items] were
found, alone, are insufficient to support a finding of
the exercise of dominion and control. Other
 incriminating circumstances must be present to
buttress the inference of knowing possession and
provide the necessary link between a defendant and
illegal [items].
 
92 Hawai' i at 476-77, 992 P.2d at 745-46. 
Foster, 128 Hawai' i at 26, 282 P.3d at 568 (emphasis added, some 
internal citations omitted). "[M]ere proximity to the [item], 
mere presence, or mere association with the person who does 
control the [item] is insufficient to support a finding of 
possession." Id. at 27, 282 P.3d at 569 (quoting State v. 
Hironaka, 99 Hawai' i 198, 206, 53 P.3d 806, 814 (2002)) (internal 
quotation mark omitted). 
Here, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable
 
to the State and fully recognizing the province of the trier of
 
fact, there was sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case 
that Tavares had the power and intent to exercise dominion and
 
control over the firearm and the ammunition.
 
There is no dispute that Tavares was driving when the
 
vehicle was stopped. After Tavares exited the vehicle and as
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4
Simer was exiting the vehicle through the driver's side,  Officer
Lucas-Medeiros saw the handgun sticking out from under the 
driver's seat, where Tavares had been sitting. In particular, 
Officer Lucas-Medeiros testified that, while standing at the edge 
of the open driver's door, he saw "the silver part of the handle 
with the grooves" and "the black hand grip and the magazine 
inserted into the magazine well." A photograph entered into 
evidence, depicting the handgun before it was removed from the 
vehicle, shows the firearm and magazine on the vehicle's floor, 
protruding out from under the front middle part of the driver's 
seat, and quite visible. This is similar to State v. Brown, 97 
Hawai'i 323, 37 P.3d 572 (App. 2001), where the defendant was 
convicted of possession of burglar's tools. In Brown, this court first held that there was substantial evidence that the 
defendant, Brown, had been driving the subject van. Moreover, 
this court held that "there was ample evidence from which the 
jury could infer that Brown had the power and intent to exercise 
dominion and control over the tools[,]" because a backpack "was 
on the floorboard near the front passenger's seat, open and 
within Brown's reach, with a pair of bolt cutters visibly 
sticking out of the backpack." Id. at 337, 37 P.3d at 586. 
In this case, like in Brown, there was evidence of more
 
than just proximity to the item to support a finding of
 
constructive possession.
5 That is, "[o]ther incriminating
 
4 Simer was instructed to exit via the driver's door because, in order
to maintain control over Hampp, who was in the backseat, the officers did not
want to open the passenger door.
5
 Although proximity alone is not sufficient, proximity is relevant to
the question of whether Tavares had the power and intent to exercise dominion
and control over the firearm and ammunition. See Rivas v. United States, 783
 
A.2d 125, 131 (D.C. 2001) (en banc) ("Lest our holding be misconstrued, we do
not mean to suggest that close proximity to exposed contraband-whether in a
car or in a room-has no bearing on the issue of control. It plainly does.");
State v. Watson, 290 S.W.3d 103, 106 (Mo. Ct. App. 2009) ("Additional
circumstances which will support an inference of knowledge and control include
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circumstances" were present to provide the link between the 
defendant and the illegal items. Foster, 128 Hawai' i at 26, 282 
P.3d at 568 (citation omitted). Here, Tavares was the driver of the vehicle, the firearm and magazine were in close proximity to 
where he had been sitting and easily within his reach, and they 
were plainly visible on the vehicle floor sticking out from under 
the driver's seat. 
Evidence that an item is in plain view, in addition to 
being in close proximity to a defendant, is a factor inferring a 
link between the defendant and the item. State v. Moniz, 92 
Hawai'i 472, 476, 992 P.2d 741, 745 (App. 1999); See also Gray v. 
State, 957 N.E.2d 171, 175 (Ind. 2011) (noting that a defendant's 
proximity to contraband in plain view will support an inference 
of intent to maintain dominion or control); Lampkins v. State, 
685 N.E.2d 698, 700 (Ind. 1997) (proximity to contraband in plain 
view is an additional circumstance supporting the inference of 
intent); State v. Watson, 290 S.W.3d 103, 106 (Mo. Ct. App. 2009) 
(additional circumstances which will support an inference of 
knowledge and control include the contraband being in plain 
view); State v. Echeverria, 934 P.2d 1214, 1217 (Wash. Ct. App. 
1997) ("Given the unchallenged finding the gun was in plain sight 
at Mr. Echeverria's feet and the reasonable inference that he 
therefore knew it was there, a rational trier of fact could find 
Mr. Echeverria possessed or controlled the gun that was within 
his reach."). 
Furthermore, in addition to Tavares being identified as
 
the driver, it is undisputed that the vehicle belonged to him.
 
Evidence that a defendant owns and/or is driving the vehicle
 
5
 (...continued)
the defendant being in close proximity to the drugs seized") (citation
omitted); State v. Kemp, 688 N.W.2d 785, 789 (Iowa 2004) (in a motor vehicle
case where constructive possession is at issue, a court may consider whether
the contraband was found on the same side of the car seat or next to the
 defendant).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
where the contraband is found are also relevant factors to
 
consider when determining whether a defendant has constructive
 
possession of an item. See Burwell v. United States, 901 A.2d
 
763, 767 (D.C. 2006) ("This court, like other courts, has been
 far more ready to sustain an inference of requisite knowledge and
 
intent on the part of the driver than on the part of the
 
passenger, even where, as here, the driver has not been shown to
 
be the registered owner of the vehicle."); Taylor v. United
 
States, 662 A.2d 1368, 1373 (D.C. 1995).
 
Finally, Tavares testified that he would have noticed
 
if Hampp or Simer tried to place the gun under his seat while he
 
was still in the car. The officers' testimony also indicated
 
that during the short time between Tavares exiting the vehicle
 
and the discovery of the gun, they did not observe Hampp or Simer
 
place the gun under Tavares's seat. From this evidence, the jury
 
could have reasonably inferred that the gun belonged to Tavares
 
or that he had placed the gun under his seat.
 
Tavares argues that Simer had the closest connection to
 
the handgun. Based on its serial number, the handgun was
 
identified as having been stolen from the home of police officer
 
Deric Valorosa (Officer Valorosa) in 2004, approximately five
 
years before the incident in this case. During the same
 
burglary, a class ring engraved with Officer Valorosa's name was
 
also stolen. Subsequently, in 2006, Officer Valorosa's class
 
ring was recovered at a pawn shop and the pawn ticket identified
 
Simer as having sold the ring to the pawn shop. Thus, there is
 
some evidence indirectly linking Simer to the handgun, but no
 
direct evidence that Simer was the individual who burglarized
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Officer Valorosa's home or that Simer ever possessed the handgun
 
stolen from Officer Valorosa.6
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has noted that it is 
"especially reluctant to infer constructive possession of 
contraband by one occupant of a vehicle when there is evidence in 
the record explicitly linking the contraband to another 
occupant." Foster, 128 Hawai' i at 30, 282 P.3d at 572 (quoting 
United States v. Crain, 33 F.3d 480, 486 (5th Cir. 1994)) (citing United States v. Mergerson, 4 F.3d 337, 349 (5th Cir. 1993)) 
(emphasis added, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
Unlike in Foster, the evidence in this case does not explicitly 
link Simer to the handgun. Moreover, Crain and Mergerson are 
distinguishable from the instant case. 
In Foster, the defendant was driving a Toyota 4Runner
 
with three other occupants when officers with the Department of
 
Land and Natural Resources (DLNR) stopped the vehicle and
 
observed an ammunition clip "between the driver and passenger on
 
the seat[,]" and a rifle on the floor fronting the rear seat
 
passenger on the passenger's side of the vehicle. Id. at 21, 282
 
P.3d at 563. The evidence showed, inter alia, that prior to
 
being stopped by the officers, Foster had been driving his
 
vehicle, two passengers in the vehicle had handled the rifle and
 
ammunition, and at one point Foster had pulled over and one of
 
6 Officer Alvin Togami (Togami) testified that he did the follow up
investigation of the 2004 burglary of Officer Valorosa's home. One of the
 
items taken in the burglary was a pistol. The serial number on this pistol
matched the one discovered under Tavares' seat. Togami testified that an
engraved class ring was also stolen in the burglary. In 2006, Togami went to
the Waianae pawn shop in order to recover the class ring. He interviewed the
 pawn shop employee, who gave him the original pawn shop ticket for the ring,
which contained the name and signature of Orrin Simer. The ticket also
 contained personal information for Simer, including his height, weight, and
social security number. Togami attempted to contact Simer through his address
and phone number; however there was no such address, and the phone number was
not accepting any calls. Togami made no further efforts to locate Simer.
Although Simer was alleged to have pawned the class ring, Togami did not know
whether Simer was the individual who burglarized the house in 2004. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the passengers, Phillip Malano (Malano), shot at a junk car. Id.
 
at 22, 282 P.3d at 564. Later, when Foster's vehicle was stopped
 
by DLNR officers, Malano threw the rifle to the back seat and it
 
landed on the lap of the back seat passenger on the passenger's
 
side of the vehicle. Id. Both of the back seat passengers
 
kicked the gun to the floor. Id.
 
As noted by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in Foster, 
Here, despite Foster's status as driver and owner of the
vehicle in which the firearm and ammunition were found, no
evidence beyond that status demonstrates that Foster had any
intent to exercise dominion and control over the items; in
fact, the evidence in the record only links the items to
Malano (and Gonsalves, who at some point loaded a number of
bullets into the rifle) from the time Malano entered the
4Runner until the time that the DLNR officers stopped the
4Runner later that night. Although "dominion over a vehicle
in which a firearm is found can lead to an inference of
 constructive possession[,]" that inference fails in the face
of "overwhelming countervailing evidence" linking the
firearm to another passenger.
 
Id. at 30, 282 P.3d at 572 (emphasis added, citation omitted). 
Given the evidence in Foster explicitly linking the rifle and
 
ammunition to Malano, the supreme court held that there was
 
insufficient evidence of intent for a jury to infer that Foster
 
constructively possessed the firearm and ammunition. Id. at 29­
30, 282 P.3d at 571-72. 
In Crain, the Fifth Circuit reversed the defendant's
 
conviction for possession of cocaine for lack of sufficient
 evidence. 33 F.3d at 481. There the defendant was driving a car
 
with two other passengers when the car was pulled over for
 
speeding. Id. at 482. At that point, the front passenger told
 
the defendant and the back seat passenger that he had dope. Id. 
Both the defendant and the back seat passenger claimed that they
 
did not know that the front seat passenger had drugs with him. 
Id. There was evidence that after the back seat passenger
 
refused to hide the drugs, the front seat passenger put the drugs
 under the driver's seat and then sat back in his seat. Id. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officers found drugs under the driver's seat. Id. at 483. The
 
court noted that "while dominion over the vehicle will certainly
 
help the government's case, it alone cannot establish
 
constructive possession of contraband found in the vehicle,
 
particularly in the face of evidence that strongly suggests that
 
someone else exercised dominion and control over the contraband."
 
Id. at 487 (quoting United States v. Wright, 24 F.3d 732, 735
 
(5th Cir. 1994)) (brackets omitted).
 
Here, unlike in Crain, there is no evidence that either
 
Simer or Hampp had exercised dominion or control over the handgun
 
or ammunition. The evidence shows at most that Simer pawned
 
Officer Valorosa's class ring, which had been stolen years
 
earlier along with the handgun.
 
In Mergerson, the Fifth Circuit held that the evidence
 
was insufficient to support a conviction for possession of a
 
firearm by a felon. 4 F.3d at 349. A gun was found under the
 
mattress of a bed in the room that the defendant shared with his
 
girlfriend/co-defendant. Id. at 348. At trial, a pawnshop
 
receipt was admitted as evidence showing that the weapon had been
 purchased by the girlfriend well before the defendant had moved
 
into the residence. Id. The court held that where a residence
 
is jointly occupied, "something else (e.g., some circumstantial
 indicium of possession) is required besides mere joint occupancy
 
before constructive possession is established." Id. at 349. The
 
court went on to note that "the weapon was not in plain view and
 there were no other circumstantial indicia that established that
 
Mergerson even knew of the weapon. Indeed, there was evidence to
 
the contrary - namely, the pawnshop receipt that showed that
 
Sheila Guy was the owner of the weapon." Id. (footnote omitted).
 
In this case, viewing the evidence in the light most
 
favorable to the prosecution, Tavares' close proximity to the
 
handgun, the fact that he both owned and drove the car at the
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
time the handgun was found, the undisputed fact that the handgun
 
was in plain view, and the lack of evidence that either Simer or
 
Hampp exercised dominion or control over the handgun constitutes
 
substantial circumstantial evidence that Tavares had the power
 
and intent to exercise dominion and control over the handgun. In
 
our view and considering the cases that have addressed similar
 
circumstances, the evidence linking Simer to Officer Valorosa's
 
class ring is too attenuated to be evidence "explicitly linking"
 
the handgun to Simer at the time the handgun was discovered in
 
Tavares' vehicle. 
III. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Tavares argues that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct during closing argument when she argued that
 
"[t]here's mechanical stuff underneath the seat" such that, given
 
the thickness of the gun, it would have gotten caught if Hampp
 
had tried to shove it under the driver's seat from the back. 
Defense counsel immediately objected that the DPA was stating
 
facts not in evidence. The circuit court overruled the objection
 
and the DPA went on to argue that the gun "would have gotten
 
stuck. It wouldn't have made it all the way to the front. The
 
only person that could have put it there is the defendant. 
That's why he is guilty."
 
When a defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct, an 
appellate court must decide "(1) whether the conduct was 
improper; (2) if the conduct was improper, whether the misconduct 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct 
was not harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to 
bar reprosecution." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 20, 26, 108 
P.3d 974, 980 (2005). "In order to determine whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error, 
we consider the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness 
or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the evidence against defendant." Id. at 27, 108 P.3d at 981 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "Misconduct of 
a prosecutor may provide grounds for a new trial where there is a 
reasonable possibility that the misconduct complained of might 
have contributed to the conviction." State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai' i 
577, 590, 994 P.2d 509, 522 (2000) (citation omitted). 
"During closing argument, a prosecutor is permitted to 
draw reasonable inferences from the evidence[.]" Id. at 592, 994 
P.2d at 524 (citation and internal quotation mark omitted). 
However, due to the "significant persuasive force" of the 
prosecutor's argument, "the scope of argument must be consistent 
with the evidence and marked by the fairness that should 
characterize all of the prosecutor's conduct." Id. (quoting 
State v. Rogen, 91 Hawai' i 405, 413, 984 P.2d 1231, 1239 (1999)). 
From our review of the record, we conclude that there
 
is no evidence to support the DPA's statements during closing
 argument that there was "mechanical stuff underneath the
 
[driver's] seat" such that the handgun would have gotten caught
 
underneath. The State argues that the DPA properly drew
 
reasonable inferences from the evidence, in particular, four
 
photographs showing the interior of Tavares' vehicle, arguing
 
that the photos showed the mechanical controls of the front seats
 
and "the clearance under the front seats of [Tavares']
 
vehicle[.]" However, although the four photographs the State
 
points to -- exhibits 9, 13, 14 and 15 -- reflect that there were
 
controls on the side of the seats, none of the photos provide a
 
view underneath the driver's seat to infer that there was
 
insufficient clearance for the handgun to be slid from the back. 
Indeed, exhibit 9 shows the handgun partially under the front
 
portion of the driver's seat. Moreover, Tavares provided the
 
only testimony about the clearance under the driver's seat,
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testifying that there was clearance under the seat and that Hampp
 
could have pushed the handgun under the driver's seat.
 
The State further argues that Tavares acknowledged on
 
cross-examination that "if someone placed the gun under his seat
 
while he was in the car, he would have noticed because it would
 
'have to have been in between [his] legs' based on where the gun
 
was located[.]" This testimony by Tavares, however, was in
 
response to a question whether, if someone was in the backseat
 
and leaned forward to put something between Tavares' legs, would
 
he have noticed. This testimony did not address whether there
 
was clearance under the driver's seat.
 
Given the improper statement by the DPA, we consider 
whether it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt standard "requires an examination of 
the record and a determination of whether there is a reasonable 
possibility that the error complained of might have contributed 
to the conviction." Rogen, 91 Hawai' i at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Here, defense counsel's objection was overruled and there was no curative 
instruction. Moreover, the defense theory of the case was that 
either Hampp or Simer could have placed the handgun under 
Tavares' seat and there was evidence that Hampp was lying across 
the back seat when the officers approached. Thus, the question 
of whether Hampp could have pushed or slid the handgun from the 
back under the driver's seat was of great importance to this 
case. The evidence on this point is not strong for either side; 
thus, we conclude that the improper statement by the DPA was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We further conclude, 
however, that the misconduct was not so egregious as to bar re-
prosecution. 
Therefore, Tavares is entitled to a new trial.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Judgment of
 
Conviction And Sentence filed on April 6, 2011 by the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit. We remand for further proceedings
 
consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 28, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Dwight C.H. Lum
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
18
 