NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000948
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF N.F. AND A.F.
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(Case No. FC-S 17-00211)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Appellant DF ( Father) is the natural and legal father
of twins, NF and AF (collectively, the Children ).  Father appeals
from the "Order Concerning Child Protective Act" entered by the
Family Court of the First Circuit  on November 13, 2018, awarding
foster custody over Children to Appellee Department of Human
Services ( DHS).  Children's mother ( Mother) is not a party to
Father's appeal.  For the reasons explained below, we affirm the
family court's order.1
I.
On October 4, 2017, DHS filed a petition for temporary
foster custody over Children.  The family court conducted an
evidentiary hearing on November 13, 2018.  At the conclusion of
the hearing the family court entered the order awarding DHS
foster custody over Children.  This appeal followed.
1The Honorable John C. Bryant, Jr. presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision will not be set aside unless
there is a manifest abuse of discretion.  Thus, we will not
disturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless the
family court disregarded rules or principles of law or
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant and
its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason.
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006)
(citation omitted).  The family court entered findings of fact
and conclusions of law on January 14, 2019.  Father has not
challenged the following findings of fact made by the family
court:
27.  On July 28, 2016, Mother gave birth to a female
child, [EF], at Castle Medical Center, in the City and County
of Honolulu, State of Hawaii [Hawai #i].
28.
  [Father] is the natural and legal father of [EF].
29.  The Children are the natural siblings of [EF].
30.  [EF] was the subject child in a previous Child
Protective Act case under FC-S No. 16-00180.
. . . .
73.  The circumstances surrounding [EF]'s death are
evidence of the reasonably foreseeable substantial risk of
harm to the Children posed by the Parents in this case.
74.
  On the day of [EF]'s death, Father contacted the
Department of the Medical Examiner directly to report that he
had found his daughter unresponsive early that morning in her
bassinet in a van in which they had been living.  The Parents
did not contact emergency services or police and instead
placed the baby in a car seat in a different vehicle and
drove around with the body for several hours before reporting
the death.  [EF]'s body was received approximately 18 hours
after discovery and [EF] was officially pronounced dead at
9:00 p.m. on September 1, 2016.
. . . .
78.  Before presenting themselves at the medical
examiner's office, the Parents drove around with [EF]'s body
in the car and did "errands" which included withdrawing money
from an ATM; waiting at a car repair shop for 2.5 hours until
the shop opened; going to Wal-Mart to obtain phone cards; and
going to Carls Jr. for breakfast.
Father has not challenged the family court's conclusions of law,
which include the following:
8.  The purpose of the Child Protective Act, Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 587A, is to make paramount the
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
safety and health of children who have been harmed, or are in
life circumstances that threaten harm. HRS § 587A-2.
9.  A safe family home is a family home in which the
child's parents or legal custodian can adequately provide for
the child's physical and psychological health and welfare and
thereby adequately protect the child from harm, be it actual,
imminent, or threatened.  In re Doe, 95 Hawai #i 183, 194, 20
P.3d 616[ ], 627 (2001).
10.  When determining whether a child's family is
willing and able to provide the child with a safe family
home, the family court is required to fully consider the Safe
Family Home Factors enumerated under HRS § 587A-7[.]
11.  The Court may look to the past and present
conditions of the home and natural parents so as to gain
insights into the quality of care the children may be
reasonably expected to receive in the future.  In re Doe, 95
Haw[ai'i] at 191.
Father challenges the family court's findings of fact
nos. 72, 75, 79, 81, 82, 83, 96, 110, 112, 114, and 115:
72.  Ms. Xiong's[ ] expert opinion that the Children
were subject to threatened harm was based upon the following
identified safety issues: (a) death of a sibling due to
uncertain circumstances; [(]b) impulsive or uncontrolled
behavior by the Parents; (c) the Parents' histories of mental
health problems; and (d) lack of safe and stable living
arrangements.2
. . . .
75.  The Parents' behavior after [EF] was discovered
unresponsive is evidence of threatened harm to the Children
in this case: A reasonably safe and prudent parent would have
immediately called 9-1-1 upon discovering their newborn child
unresponsive.  Neither Mother nor Father called 9-1-1 at any
point after the discovery.  This evidence is not limited to
threatened harm; it also goes to safety of the family home
and the appropriateness of the service plan.
. . . .
79.  [Father's attorney] asked Ms. Xiong whether, given
the Parents' belief that [EF] was already dead, their
decision to go to the medical examiner's office instead of
the hospital was reasonable.  Ms Xiong replied that a safe
and responsible parent would have taken the child, even if
believed to be already dead, immediately to the medical
examiner's office.
Ms. Xiong had concerns regarding how the Parents would
respond if one or both of the Children suffered a medical
emergency that required immediate attention.  In this regard,
Mother's and Father's behavior is dangerously impulsive and
2Jacqueline Espinueva-Xiong works for DHS as a child and adolescent
protective services specialist, performing the work of a social worker.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
uncontrolled, which is evidence of threatened harm to the
Children.  This evidence is not limited to threatened harm;
it also goes to safety of the family home and the
appropriateness of the service plan.
. . . .
81.  The DHS was unable to contact or locate the
Parents in the two weeks preceding [EF]'s death because they
left paternal grandmother's home and discontinued contact
with the IHBS worker.  Similarly in this case, the Parents
have no verifiable residence and they left the Children at
the hospital without providing the staff with their contact
information.
82.  The Parents have transient and uncertain living
arrangements and a history of becoming unreachable by the DHS
and service providers, which is evidence of threatened harm
to the Children in this case.  This evidence is not limited
to threatened harm; it also goes to the safety of the family
home and the appropriateness of the service plan.
83.  The Parents' [sic] each have a history of mental
health problems and there is an absence of protective
factors, such as monitoring by a mental health professional
or other social services provider, to ensure child safety. 
This is evidence of threatened harm to the Children in this
case.  This evidence is not limited to threatened harm; it
also goes to safety of the family home and the
appropriateness of the service plan.
. . . .
96.  The DHS social worker [Jacqueline] Espinueva-Xiong
was a credible witness, and this Court accepts her testimony
in whole.
. . . .
110.  The Children's physical or psychological health
or welfare have been harmed or are subject to threatened harm
by the acts or omissions of the Children's family.
. . . .
112.  It is contrary to the immediate welfare of the
Children to remain in the family home.
. . . .
114.  Mother is not willing and able to provide the
Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of
a service plan.
115.  Father is not willing and able to provide the
Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of
a service plan.
(Footnote added.)  The family court's findings of fact are
reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard.  Fisher, 111
Hawai#i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360.  A finding of fact is clearly
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or despite substantial evidence in support of the
finding, we are nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made.  Id.  "Substantial
evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion.  Id.
Our review of the record shows that the family court's
findings of fact were supported by substantial evidence.  
Jacqueline Espinueva-Xiong (Xiong) testified at the evidentiary
hearing.  The family court found her to be a credible witness and
accepted her testimony "in whole."  "It is well-settled that an
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the
credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the
province of the trier of fact."  Fisher, 111 Hawai#i at 46, 137
P.3d at 360 (citation omitted).
Xiong testified that she works for DHS as a child and
adolescent protective services specialist, performing the work of
a social worker.  The family court found her qualified to testify
as an expert on child protective or child welfare services.
Xiong interviewed Father at the hospital shortly after Children
were born.  Father told Xiong that he had been diagnosed with
depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.  Xiong spent two
hours with Father at the hospital but could not get a straight
answer from Father about the discharge plan, mental health
issues, domestic violence, where he was going to live, or who
would care for the Children.  Father called his mother [ PGM
(Children's paternal grandmother)] and let Xiong speak with her. 
PGM told Xiong that Father and Mother used to live with her in
the past, but they were no longer welcome there.  Xiong was
concerned about Children's safety because Father and Mother were
homeless.3
3Father has not appealed from the family court's qualification of
Xiong as an expert witness.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Xiong was also concerned about the circumstances
surrounding the death of Children's older sibling, EF.  EF died
when she was about 1 month old.  Xiong testified that Father
blamed "CPS and the FBI" for EF's death.  When EF was born, DHS
agreed to provide Father and Mother intensive home-based services
provided they live with PGM.  After two weeks, Father and Mother
left PGM's home and stopped participating in the intensive home-
based service plan.  DHS was unable to locate Father, Mother, or
EF.  Shortly thereafter, DHS received a call from the office of
the Medical Examiner (ME ).  Xiong's Safe Family Home Report,
dated October 2, 2017, and received in evidence as State's
exhibit 1, reported:
Medical Examiner received a call from [Father] and stated
that [Mother] and [Father] were coming to the office to bring
in their deceased child, [EF].  [Father] reportedly stated
they did not want HPD or the ME office involved and wanted to
bring their child to find out the cause of death.  [Father]
called about 3:30 pm and by 8:30 pm the same day, [Father]
and [Mother] did not arrive at the ME's office.
DHS records indicated per the Medical Examiner, [Mother] had
fed and wrapped the infant before placing the child in a
bassinet; the infant was then found unresponsive in the same
position — the mother woke father up who allegedly performed
CPR and massaged the infant's chest.  The parents then placed
the infant in a car seat of another vehicle, covering the
infant with blanket and trash bag.  The parents then ran
"errands" for the next five hours — withdrew money from ATM;
drove to an auto repair shop where they waited 2 ½ hours
until the shop opened; obtained phone cards from Walmart, and
ate breakfast at Carl Jr's.
[Father] and [Mother] contacted the ME's office at 3:30 pm—
infant was found unresponsive at 2:50 am. 13 hours later,
[Father] stating they would bring the infant but they did not
show up until 9:30 p.m., 6 hours after stating they would
bring in the infant.  The parents reported they were eating
at Zippy's.
The ME's office reported trash bag was covering the infant in
the car seat; the infant appeared to be sweating, lips
discolored and very dark, red marking on right face and nose. 
The mother reportedly did not show emotion, no grief or
crying; the mother seemed as if she had done that before, and
the father did all the talking.
On cross-examination, Xiong explained:
This is a safety concern for me so that if the child
was already dead, I mean, reading it, child was already dead,
that they thought the child was already dead, it took them
several hours to get to the medical examiner's office.  You
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
would think -- you would think that if a child is already
dead, they would have called -- gone to the medical examiner
office right away.  Instead, they had run errands.
This alone -- their behavior alone in that, it would
lead me to think, okay, there's some safety concerns here
that if -- if they would have this behavior and if they would
have -- if the twins are under the care, what happens -- what
happens when there is an emergency?  What happens when the
kids -- emergency for the twins and they're not able to get
to the, let's say, doctor's right away.  And this same
behavior would be the same as when -- if they're taking care
of [the Children].  What if?
. . . .
I mean, I have to take that into consideration,
[counsel], I have to.  We're talking about twins, newborns. 
We're talking about parents that has [sic] not resolved
safety issues from when [EF] was alive, from when [EF] died,
and now I've got twins in my hand.
QWould it be a fair statement to say that you assessed
parents' safety as a unit when you were looking at the twins
as opposed to Mother's safety and Father's safety?
AI look at the whole information, [counsel].  I make
sure that the whole -- I got the whole information for me. 
For me to assess, I don't just assess one single parent.  I
obviously assess the whole entire thing.
I assess Dad, I assess Mom, I assess situation, where
they're gonna go, who's going to be there, who's going to be
taking care of them, who's going to be taking care of the
infants to go to the nurse -- to the hospital, so on and so
forth. I assess that whole situation.
That's including the death of a sibling and what
happened surrounding that -- that -- that day when [EF] had
died.  I mean, I take that whole.  I don't take safety for
granted.  I make sure that, you know, the kids, when they
have to be discharged to their parents, make sure that safety
is in place.
That's just my opinion, [counsel].
Xiong's Safe Family Home Report concluded that Father's "home is
unsafe and temporary foster custody of the child [sic] is needed
to protect the child [sic] from imminent harm."  The conclusion
was 
based upon Father's mental health issue.  It's based upon the
living arrangement, their homelessness.  It's based upon also
the death of a sibling, and it's also based upon their,
parents', behavior, uncontrolled -- uncontrolled behavior.
The family court heard testimony from Elizabeth Brown
(Brown), the DHS social worker who was then handling the
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Children's case.  The parties stipulated, and the family court
qualified Brown as an expert in social work, child welfare and
child protective services.  The family court found her to be a
credible witness and accepted her testimony "in whole."  The
family court made the following findings of fact — none of which
are challenged by Father — based on Brown's testimony:
90.  DHS social worker/case manager Elizabeth Brown
("Ms. Brown") has conducted ongoing assessments to determine
whether the Parents are willing and able to provide the
Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of
a service plan.
91.  In order to facilitate the return of the Children
to the family home, Ms. Brown would first have to assess said
family home as safe.  In order to conduct such an assessment,
Ms. Brown would have to visit the family home.
92.  Ms. Brown has been unable to visit the family home
because the Parents have repeatedly refused, and continue to
refuse to tell Ms. Brown where they are currently living.
93.  Ms. Brown testified that a physical, residential
address is not required, and that homelessness alone is not a
safety concern.  Parents could live in places such as a
shelter or on the beach, provided that the living situation
is assessed as safe.
94.  The Parents' refusal to tell Ms. Brown where they
are living is a barrier to reunification that is of their own
making.
95.  The Parents have been given the opportunity to
engage in the services recommended by the DHS in the
October 2, 2017 and June 25, 2018 service plans.  They have
chosen not to participate in any services except that they
have each submitted to a psychological evaluation.  The
identified safety issues in this case remain unresolved.
The family court heard testimony from John Wingert, a
clinical psychologist.  The family court made the following
findings of fact — none of which are challenged by Father — based
on Dr. Wingert's testimony:
100.  Dr. John Wingert, PhD., was a credible witness,
and the Court accepts his testimony in whole.
. . . .
105.  Dr. Wingert conducted the psychological
evaluation regarding Father on September 26, 2018 and
October 3, 2018.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
106.  Father informed Dr. Wingert that he is unwilling
to participate in a DHS service plan because he does not
regard himself as needing services.
107.  Dr. Wingert determined that Father's
suspiciousness and distrust may cause him to not seek help in
times of need, and that this would impact his parenting and
his addressing the needs of his children.
108.  The psychological evaluations were received in
evidence without objection by any party.
In this case, all of the family court's findings of
fact challenged by Father were supported by substantial evidence
and are corroborated by other findings of fact from which Father
has not appealed.  We are not left with a definite or firm
conviction that the family court made a mistake.
III.
For the foregoing reasons, the "Order Concerning Child
Protective Act" entered by the family court on November 13, 2018,
awarding foster custody over Children to DHS is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 13, 2019.
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9