NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000317
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
ERIC J. MINTON and RICHARD M. STANLEY,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
SIDNEY A. QUINTAL, JOHN C. FUHRMANN,
CITY and COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Defendants-Appellees
and
 
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-2354)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Eric J. Minton and Richard M.
 
Stanley (collectively, Appellants) appeal from the "Judgment
 
Pursuant to the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" entered
 
March 22, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). The circuit court entered judgment in favor of
 Defendants-Appellees Sidney A. Quintal, John C. Fuhrmann, and
 
City and County of Honolulu.
 
I.
 
The Department of Enterprise Services (DES), a
 
department of the City and County of Honolulu (City), manages and
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
leases certain City facilities, including the Neal S. Blaisdell
 
Center (NBC) and the Waikiki Shell Amphitheater (Waikiki Shell). 
The income and revenue received from both the NBC and the Waikiki
 
Shell are substantial, and the City competes with other venues
 
that provide facilities, equipment, and other services for
 
events. The quality and success of events at DES's facilities
 
directly impacts the desirability and requests for these venues
 
by potential lessees, and the City has a substantial interest in
 
maintaining the quality of events held at its facilities.
 
Appellants Minton and Stanley are stagehands with years
 
of experience, including extensive work at the NBC and the
 
Waikiki Shell. On August 31, 2007, the Director of DES
 
(Director) decided to preclude Appellants from working at events
 
held at either the NBC or the Waikiki Shell. The reason for the
 
ban arose from an Aloha Medical Mission (AMM) event held at the
 
NBC on August 18, 2007, which Appellants had worked. As the
 
lessor, the City does not provide personnel for events, but it
 
does refer event promoters to the International Association of
 
Theatrical Stage Employees (IATSE), a union representing theater
 
and stage workers, to make inquiries and arrangements to hire
 
qualified personnel. Both Appellants are members of IATSE and
 
received work through the union; neither were City employees or
 
had any contractual relationship with the City concerning their
 
employment. AMM contacted IATSE and hired stagehands and sound
 
technicians, including Appellants. Appellant Minton's duties for
 
the AMM show were as head carpenter, stage manager, and crew
 
chief in charge of the stage setup, lighting, video, and sound
 
system. Appellant Stanley served as the show's sound technician. 
After the AMM event, the show's promoter emailed IATSE
 
and DES noting that the "sound was very bad" and that he had
 
received many "unfavorable comments from the audience." The
 
Director asked the Auditorium Events and Services Manager for DES
 
(Manager) to investigate the complaint.
 
Based on the Manager's investigation and on complaints
 
received about the stage crew's lack of professionalism and the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
show's sound quality issues, the Director decided to preclude
 
Appellants from future work at events held at either the NBC or
 
the Waikiki Shell. He informed IATSE of his decision in a letter
 
dated August 31, 2007. IATSE's business agent and Appellants
 
wrote to the Director asking him to reconsider his decision, but
 
the Director declined to reverse his decision.
 
On December 13, 2007, Appellants filed a complaint
 
challenging the ban. The circuit court held a jury-waived trial
 
beginning April 14, 2010 and concluding on April 16, 2010. The
 
circuit court ruled in favor of Appellees and against Appellants. 
The circuit court entered its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
 
Law on October 28, 2010 and entered a corresponding "Judgment
 
Pursuant to the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" on March
 
22, 2011. Appellants filed a timely notice of appeal on April 4,
 
2011.
 
On appeal, Appellants raise thirty points of error
 
contending, in essence, that the circuit court erred in entering
 
its judgment for several reasons:
 
(1) the ban on Appellants was not authorized by statute or
 regulation;
 
(2) the ban was a denial of procedural due process; and
 
(3) the ban was arbitrary and capricious.
 
II.
 
A.
 
Appellants contend the ban is invalid because neither
 
the legislature nor the City has made an explicit provision
 
granting the Director of DES the authority to ban persons from
 
working at DES's properties. Revised Charter of the City and
 
County of Honolulu (RCCCH) § 6-702 (2000) outlines the powers,
 
duties, and functions of DES and states in its entirety: "The
 
director of enterprise services shall: (a) Operate and maintain
 
the Neal S. Blaisdell Center and any other auditorium or cultural
 
or entertainment facilities assigned to the department. (b)
 
Perform such other duties as may be required by law."
 
3
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The authority to suspend persons from DES's facilities
 
is inherent and necessarily incidental to the operation and
 
maintenance of those facilities. We interpret RCCCH § 6-702 as
 
conferring upon the director the ability to exclude persons as
 
necessary to the operations and management of the DES's
 
facilities. 
Appellants contend the Director's decision to ban
 
Appellants constituted rule-making and is subject to the
 
requirements of the Hawaif i Administrative Procedure Act (HAPA), 
Hawaifi Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 91 (1993) and of 
RCCCH § 4-105.2 It is well established that decisions on matters
 
relating to "the internal management of an agency and not
 affecting private rights of or procedures available to the
 
public" are not subject to HAPA's restraints on the agency's
 
rule-making power. HRS § 91-1(4) (1993)
3; Sharma v. State, 66
 
2
 RCCCH § 4-105 describes the powers and duties of heads of executive
agencies and states, in relevant part:
 
Section 4-105. Powers and Duties of Heads of Executive 
Agencies --
. . . .
 
3. Each head of an executive agency of city government
may, subject to approval of the mayor or the managing
director, prescribe such rules and regulations as are
necessary for the organization and internal administration
of the executive agency.
 
4. Rules and regulations affecting the public as may
be necessary to the performance of the functions assigned to
executive agencies may be promulgated as authorized by this
charter or by law. Such rules and regulations, after public
notice and public hearing and upon approval by the mayor,
shall have the force and effect of law. Each head of an
 executive agency shall file in the office of the city clerk
not less than three copies of such rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations may be amended or repealed by the
same process required for original promulgation.
 
3
 HRS § 91-1(4) states:
 
§91-1 Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter:
 
. . . .
 
(4) "Rule" means each agency statement of general or
particular applicability and future effect that implements,
interprets, or prescribes law or policy, or describes the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Haw. 632, 637, 673 P.2d 1030, 1034 (1983). RCCCH § 4-105
 
likewise provides that only the promulgation of rules and
 
regulations "affecting the public" require public notice and
 
hearing. We agree with the City that compliance with the rule-
making requirements was not necessary because DES was not acting
 
in a quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial capacity and because the
 
internal management exception applies to DES's actions. Internal
 
management "necessarily includes the custodial management of
 
public property entrusted to the agency." Holdman v. Olim, 59
 
Haw. 346, 355, 581 P.2d 1164, 1170 (1978).
 
B.
 
Appellants argue that DES's action in banning
 
Appellants without adequate notice and opportunity to be heard
 violated Appellants' due process rights.
 
It is well established that "[t]he requirements of 
procedural due process apply only to the deprivation of interests 
encompassed by the [Fifth] Amendment's protection of liberty and 
property" and that "the range of interests protected by 
procedural due process is not infinite." Board of Regents of 
State Colleges v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 569–70 (1972). To invoke procedural due process protections, Appellants must have either a 
property or a liberty interest in being allowed to work at DES's 
facilities. See Applications of Herrick, 82 Hawaif i 329, 342-43, 
922 P.2d 942, 955-56 (1996). 
"To have a property interest in a benefit, a person
 
clearly must have more than an abstract need or desire for it. 
He must have more than a unilateral expectation of it. He must,
 
instead, have a legitimate claim of entitlement to it." Roth,
 
408 U.S. at 577. A property interest protected by the due
 process clause "stem[s] from an independent source such as state
 
organization, procedure, or practice requirements of any
 
agency. The term does not include regulations concerning
only the internal management of an agency and not affecting
private rights of or procedures available to the public, nor
does the term include declaratory rulings issued pursuant to
section 91–8, nor intra-agency memoranda.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
law — rules or understandings that secure certain benefits and
 
that support claims of entitlement to those benefits." Id. 
Although the complaint alleged that the City had
 
deprived Appellants of property rights without due process,
 
Appellants fail to point to any source, state law or otherwise,
 
establishing a property interest in working at DES facilities. 
There is no contract between the City and Appellants or between
 
the City and IATSE for providing work or services at DES's
 
venues, and the fact that Appellants previously worked at DES
 
facilities is not sufficient to establish a claim of entitlement
 
to continued employment opportunities. Appellants acknowledge
 
that as stagehands, they were engaged to work for a particular
 
show only, and their rehiring for future recurring shows was
 
common but not guaranteed and depended on factors such as the
 
types of skills the show required and their availability. Other
 
courts have held that citizens suspended from doing business with
 
the government have no constitutionally protected property
 
interest in obtaining government contracts. See, e.g., Sutton v.
 
U.S. Dep't of Housing and Urban Dev., 885 F.2d 471, 475 (8th Cir
 1989); ATL v. United States, 736 F.2d 677, 683 (Fed Cir 1984);
 
Gonzales v. Freeman, 334 F.2d 570, 574 (D.C. Cir. 1964). We
 
similarly conclude Appellants had no constitutionally protected
 
property interest in continuing to work at DES facilities.
 
Appellants also contend the City deprived them of their
 
protected liberty interests. The liberty concept of the due
 
process clause encapsulates the right to hold private employment
 
and to pursue one's chosen profession free from unreasonable
 
government interference. Greene v. McElroy, 360 U.S. 474, 492
 
(1959). On the other hand, the Supreme Court of the United States
 has also held it "stretches the concept [of due process] too far to
 
suggest that a person is deprived of 'liberty' when he simply is
 
not rehired in one job but remains as free as before to seek
 
another." Roth, 408 U.S. at 575. In Siegert v. Gilley, 500 U.S.
 
226, 233-34 (1991), the Supreme Court stated that neither the
 stigmatizing effect of a governmental action nor the consequent
 
6
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
impairment of future employment opportunities are constitutionally
 
cognizable injuries. To prove constitutional injury, one must show
 
that the government has worked some change in his status under law,
 
sufficient to implicate a liberty interest.4 See Paul v. Davis,
 
424 U.S. 693, 711-12 (1976).
 
The Director denied Appellants the opportunity to work
 
at two public venues, the NBC and the Waikiki Shell, but the
 government's ban in no way proscribes Appellants' rights to
 
practice their profession in the private sector, nor does it
 
impair Appellants' eligibility for public employment at any other
 
venue. Accordingly, we conclude Appellants did not demonstrate
 
that the government's action constrained Appellants' future
 
employment opportunities to a sufficient degree to constitute a
 
status change of due process import.
 
The nature of the private interest impaired and the
 
governmental power exercised distinguishes this case from Greene
 
v. McElroy, on which Appellants rely. In Greene, the
 
government's revocation of the petitioner's security clearance
 
caused him to lose his job and "seriously affected, if not
 
destroyed, his ability to obtain employment in [his] field";
 
consequently, the Supreme Court concluded the state action
 
infringed his constitutional liberty interest. Greene, 360 U.S.
 
at 492. Cf. Cafeteria & Rest. Workers v. McElroy, 367 U.S. 886
 
895-96 (1961) (revocation of short-order cook's permission to
 
work on military base does not implicate liberty interest because
 
she "remained entirely free to obtain employment as a short-order
 
cook or to get any other job," even with same employer at a
 
different facility). As Greene indicates, the standard
 
4
 The District of Columbia Circuit has held that there are two ways
in which government action may result in a change of status sufficient to
establish deprivation of a liberty interest: by action that formally or
automatically excludes the plaintiff from work on a category of future public
contracts or government employment opportunities, or by action that precludes
the plaintiff from so broad a spectrum of opportunities that it interferes
with the right to follow a chosen profession or trade. Taylor v. Resolution
Trust Corp., 56 F.3d 1497, 1506 (D.C. Cir. 1995); Kartseva v. Dep't of State,
37 F.3d 1524, 1527 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants must meet to establish a constitutional injury is
 
high. Because employment options within Appellants' profession
 
remain, we conclude that banning them from two venues did not
 
preclude them from their chosen profession and does not implicate
 
their due process interests.
 
We also reject Appellants' contention that the City's 
actions were arbitrary and capricious. "Due process includes a 
substantive component that guards against arbitrary and 
capricious government action[.]" Herrick, 82 Hawaif i at 349, 922 
P.2d at 962. To establish a substantive due process claim, however, a plaintiff must show a government deprivation of life, 
liberty, or property, and the absence of any claim that a liberty 
or property interest has been impaired is a fatal defect in the 
substantive due process argument. Nunez v. City of Los Angeles, 
147 F.3d 867, 871 (9th Cir. 1998). Because Appellants have asserted no cognizable property or liberty interest, their claim 
based on substantive due process must fail. 
III. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment Pursuant to the
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" entered March 22, 2011
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, November 29, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Charles S. Lotsof 
and Jack F. Schweigertfor Plaintiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Richard D. Lewallen John P. Moran Sherrie K. Sasaki Deputies Corporation CounselCity and County of Honolulufor Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 