 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000333 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
SOUTH POINT INVESTMENT GROUP, LLC, a Hawaii limited liability
company, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,
v. 
DISCOVERY HARBOUR COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, a Hawaii nonprofit
corporation, Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 3CC161000195) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant Discovery Harbour
Community Association
 appeals from the "Judgment on Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Order [sic] Regarding 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant South Point Investment Group, LLC's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed on March 12, 2019" in favor of Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee 
South Point 
Investment Group, LLC, entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on August 22, 2019.
1 The Judgment contained a finding 
"that there is no just reason for delay for [sic] entry of judgment as to one or more but fewer than all claims or parties" under Rule 54(b) of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP). 
For the reasons explained below, we conclude that the circuit court was not authorized to enter the Judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b), and we must dismiss this appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction. 
1 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
South Point filed a Complaint against the Community 
Association on May 25, 2016. The Complaint alleged that South 
Point owned five parcels of land (the Subject Properties) in the 
Discovery Harbour subdivision, located in Ka# u on Hawai# i Island. 
The Subject Properties consist of two 
Commercial Lots  and two or 
three Golf Course Lots.  The Complaint alleged: 2
3. This Complaint seeks, inter alia , a declaration
that the Subject Properties are not a Member [sic] of the
[Community Association] and that the [Community Association]lacks authority to regulate, assess fees against orinterfere with [South Point]'s development of the CommercialLots. 
4. [The Community Association] has interfered with
[South Point]'s development and use of the SubjectProperties by claiming the Subject Properties are members ofthe [Community Association]. 
. . . . 
8. [The Community Association] has attempted to
collect dues and assessments from the Subject Propertiesclaiming that they are Members of the [CommunityAssociation]. 
A 103-paragraph recitation of factual allegations followed. The 
Complaint contained six counts, all for declaratory judgment, each of which "incorporates by reference the allegations made in the preceding paragraphs." The prayer for relief sought: 
A. A declaratory judgment that the [Community
Association] was not lawfully created pursuant to the
Original CC&Rs; 
B. A declaratory judgment that the Subject
Properties are not Members of the [Community Association]because neither the current owners [sic] nor itspredecessors consented to membership; 
C. A declaratory judgment that the Golf Course Lots
are not subject to the Original CC&Rs; 
D. A declaratory judgment that the Golf Course Lots
are not Members of the [Community Association]; 
E. A declaratory judgment that the Commercial Lots
are not residential lots under the 1982 Charter and are therefore not Members of the [Community Association]; 
2 There appears to be some disagreement about whether there are two
or three Golf Course Lots. South Point's complaint alleges that the GolfCourse Lots are "TMK (3) 9-4-001:019 (Lot 825), TMK (3) 9-4-001:021 (Lot 825[sic]), and TMK (3) 9-4-001:022 (Lot 821)[.]" However, the CommunityAssociation refers to a single "Lot 825" without specifying whether thereference is to TMK (3) 9-4-001:019, or to TMK (3) 9-4-001:021, or to both. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
F. A declaratory judgment that the Original CC&Rs
do not contain limitations on the development of the
Commercial Lots and the [Community Association] has noauthority to limit use of the Commercial Lots toresidential; 
G. That the [Community Association] be ordered to
refund [South Point] any and all amounts paid to the[Community Association] as dues or assessments related tothe Subject Properties; 
H. That [South Point] be awarded its attorneys'
fees, costs and other expenses of litigation; and 
I. For such other and further relief as this Court 
deems just and proper. 
The Community Association answered the Complaint and 
filed a Counterclaim. The Counterclaim alleged that the 
Commercial Lots were subject to the Original CC&Rs and sought a 
judgment declaring that South Point, as the owner of the Commercial Lots, was a member of the Community Association and subject to the Original CC&Rs. The Counterclaim did not requestany relief concerning the Golf Course Lots.  
On August 3, 2017, the Community Association filed a 
motion for summary judgment on all claims asserted in the Complaint. The Community Association argued, among other things, that Counts III and IV of the Complaint should be dismissed because both parties agreed the Golf Course Lots were not members of the Community Association, and accordingly there was no "actual controversy" or "antagonistic claims" on that issue to trigger the declaratory judgment statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 632-1. South Point opposed the motion. As to the Golf 
Course Lots, South Point argued: 
In this case, the [Community Association]'s judicial
admission alone will not resolve the controversy. Different 
boards have taken different positions on whether the GolfCourse Lots are subject to the Original CC&Rs and whetherthey are Members of the [Community Association]. See, Aff.of Clara Lemmens and Aff. of Floyd Smithson hereto; Motion,Declaration of Evelyn I. Eklund and Exs. E, F, G, H, I. In addition, the fact that a recent audit was undertaken shouldnot provide the Court with any confidence that thecontroversy is resolved. The 2008 Board Resolution cites to records back to 1972 having been reviewed and yet the GolfCourse Lots were still listed as Members. In 2010, the[Community Association] was placed on notice of [SouthPoint]'s position and yet persisted for a period ofapproximately six years that the Golf Course Lots wereMembers. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Community Association's motion was heard on 
October 4, 2017.3 On October 12, 2017, the circuit court entered 
a written order denying the motion, finding "that there are 
genuine issues of material fact." 
On June 22, 2018, South Point filed its own motion for 
summary judgment on all claims asserted in its Complaint. As to the Golf Course Lots, South Point argued: 
[I]n its Motion for Summary Judgment filed August 3, 2017,
the [Community Association] asked the Court to dismiss allof [South Point]'s claims, including Counts III and IV.[The Community Association] averred that Counts III and IVshould be dismissed because there was no longer a dispute as[the Community Association] admits that the Golf Course Lotsare not subject to the 1972 Declaration and are not membersof [the Community Association]. Because the Court denied [the Community Association]'s Motion for Summary Judgment intotal, there has been no judicial determination relative toCounts III and IV, and the [Community Association] isestopped from disputing that [South Point] should beentitled to judgment on these counts. 
The Community Association opposed the motion. However, as to the 
Golf Course Lots, the Community Association reiterated its position that there was no "actual controversy" or "antagonistic claims" upon which to base a declaratory judgment under HRS § 632-1. 
South Point's motion was heard on November 14, 2018.
4 
On March 12, 2019, the circuit court entered "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Regarding Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant South Point Investment Group, LLC's Motion for Summary 
Judgment, Filed June 22, 2018." The Order granted South Point's motion for summary judgment as to Counts III and IV of the Complaint, but denied the motion as to Counts I, II, V, and VI of the Complaint. The circuit court determined pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) that there was no just reason for delay and directed entry of a final judgment on Counts III and IV of the Complaint. 
The Community Association filed a notice of appeal on 
April 9, 2019. We temporarily remanded this case, pursuant to 
3 The Honorable Harry P.N. Freitas presided. The record does not 
include a transcript of the hearing. 
4 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. The record does not 
include a transcript of the hearing. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Waikiki v. Ho# omaka Vill. Ass'n of Apartment Owners, 140 Hawai# i 
197, 204, 398 P.3d 786, 793 (2017) and State v. Joshua, 141 
Hawai#i 91, 93, 405 P.3d 527, 529 (2017), for entry of a separate 
judgment that comported with HRS § 641-1(a), HRCP Rule 54(b), HRCP Rule 58, and the holding in Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai# i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). The 
circuit court entered the Judgment on August 22, 2019. 
The Community Association's opening brief states five 
points of error. The one we find dispositive contends that the circuit court erred by certifying the Judgment as final under HRCP Rule 54(b). A trial court's decision to enter an HRCP Rule 54(b) certification of finality is reviewed under a dual standard: whether the court was authorized to enter an HRCP Rule 54(b) certification is a question of law reviewed de novo; the court's decision to utilize its authority under HRCP Rule 54(b) is reviewed for abuse of discretion. Elliot Megdal & Assocs. v. 
Daio USA Corp., 87 Hawai# i 129, 132, 952 P.2d 886, 889 (App. 
1998). 
We conclude as a matter of law that the circuit court was 
not authorized to certify the Judgment as final under HRCP Rule 54(b). 
HRCP Rule 54 states, in relevant part: 
(b) Judgment upon multiple claims or involving
multiple parties. When more than one claim for relief is 
presented in an action . . . the court may direct the entryof a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all ofthe claims . . . only upon an express determination thatthere is no just reason for delay and upon an expressdirection for the entry of judgment. 
In Elliot Megdal & Assocs. we noted that HRCP 54(b) is 
substantially identical to Rule 54(b) of the Federal Rules of 
Civil Procedure (FRCP), and that: 
[FRCP] Rule 54(b) is designed to permit an immediate appeal
from an otherwise final decision in a multi-claim . . . action. Under this rule, the power of a lower court toenter a certification of finality is limited to only thosecases where (1) more than one claim for relief is presented. . . and (2) the judgment entered completely disposes of at
least one claim[.] 
Id. at 133, 952 P.2d at 890 (emphasis added) (citing 10 J. Moore, 
W. Taggert & J. Wicker, Moore's Federal Practice ¶¶ 54.21[1] at 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
54-36, 54.22[1] at 54-40 — 54-41, and 54.22[2] at 54–42 (3d ed. 
1997)). 
In this case, the circuit court found that the Golf 
Course Lots were not listed in the Community Association's Supplemental Declaration. Accordingly, the circuit court granted summary judgment as to Counts III and IV of South Point's complaint, which sought declarations that the Golf Course Lots were not members of the Community Association. However, the Complaint's prayer also sought the following relief: 
G. That the [Community Association] be ordered to
refund [South Point] any and all amounts paid to the
[Community Association] as dues or assessments related tothe Subject Properties [.] 
(Emphasis added.) South Point's complaint defined the term 
"Subject Properties" to mean the "Commercial Lots and Golf Course 
Lots" (emphasis added). The circuit court did not completely 
dispose of South Point's claim concerning the Golf Course Lots 
because South Point's claim that the Community Association be ordered to refund all dues or assessments related to the Golf Course Lots has not been decided. The circuit court has not ruled whether the Community Association must refund South Point's dues or assessments related to the Golf Course Lots and, if so, in what amount. Under these circumstances, the circuit court did not have authority to certify South Point's partial summary judgment
5 as final. There being no judgment that resolves all 
claims against all parties or that contains a valid certification 
5 HRCP Rule 56 provides, in relevant part: 
(d) Case not fully adjudicated on motion. If on 
motion under this rule judgment is not rendered upon the
whole case or for all the relief asked and a trial is necessary, the court at the hearing of the motion, byexamining the pleadings and the evidence before it and byinterrogating counsel, shall if practicable ascertain whatmaterial facts exist without substantial controversy andwhat material facts are actually and in good faithcontroverted. It shall thereupon make an order specifyingthe facts that appear without substantial controversy,including the extent to which the amount of damages or otherrelief is not in controversy, and directing such furtherproceedings in the action as are just. Upon the trial ofthe action the facts so specified shall be deemedestablished, and the trial shall be conducted accordingly. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under HRCP 54(b), this appeal is dismissed for lack of appellate 
jurisdiction. Jenkins, 76 Hawai# i at 119, 869 P.2d at 1338. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 13, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
Roy A. Vitousek III,
Ryan M. Hamaguchi,Mallory T. Martin,for Plaintiff/CounterclaimDefendant-AppelleeSouth Point Investment Group, LLC. 
John D. Zalewski,
Jana M. Naruse,for Defendant-Appellant DiscoveryHarbour Community Association. 
Francis L. Jung,
Carol Monahan Jung,for Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellant Discovery HarbourCommunity Association. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
7 