  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO.CAAP-14-0000776
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JUSTINE K. RIVERA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-13-04466)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 Defendant-Appellant Justine K. Rivera appeals1/ from
 
the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment"
 
entered on April 11, 2014 in the District Court of the First
 Circuit, Honolulu Division ("District Court").
2/ Rivera was
 
found guilty of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 Intoxicant ("OVUII"), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
1/
 Rivera's Notice of Appeal does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ("HRAP") Rule 3(c)(2). While the notice claims that 
"[t]he Judgment is attached hereto as Exhibit 'A,'" that exhibit is merely areproduction of the "Printable Calendar View" for Rivera's case. Rivera's Opening Brief is also noncompliant with HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) because nojudgments or orders appealed from are attached. 
Counsel is advised that future noncompliance with these rules may
result in dismissal pursuant to HRAP Rule 30, and/or sanctions pursuant to
HRAP Rule 51. See In re Marn Family Litigation, 132 Hawai' i 165, 169, 319
P.3d 1173, 1177 (2014) (discussing consequences of noncompliance). 
2/
 The Honorable David Lo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
("HRS") § 291E-61(a)(3) (Supp. 2012).3/
 
Rivera's conviction arises out of a traffic stop
 
initiated by Honolulu Police Department ("HPD") Officer Sheldon
 
Vaughn Watts, Jr., who was stopped at a red light directly behind
 Rivera's two-door hatchback vehicle at approximately 4:00 a.m. on
 September 22, 2013 and observed through the car's rear window
 that six people were sitting in the back seat, three of whom were
 "moving around freely" in a manner suggesting that they were
 unsecured by seatbelts. At trial, Officer Watts noted that from
 his vantage point, he was unable to determine whether any of the
 back seat occupants were wearing seatbelts at the time. 
At trial, Officer Watts gave testimony regarding the
 
traffic stop and Rivera moved to "suppress the traffic stop" for
 want of reasonable suspicion. The District Court denied the
 motion, citing "the totality of the circumstances." At the
 conclusion of trial, the court adopted the arguments made by the
 State, denied Rivera's written motions to suppress, and found her
 guilty of OVUII. The court sentenced Rivera on April 11, 2013,
 revoking Rivera's driver's license for one year, ordering Rivera
 to attend substance abuse assessment classes and to perform
 seventy-two hours of community service, and fining Rivera
 $762.00. 
On appeal, Rivera raises four issues with regard to the
 
HPD's use at the police station of the "Use of Intoxicants While
 Operating a Vehicle Implied Consent for Testing" form in securing
 Rivera's consent to a breath test, and a fifth issue regarding
 
3/
 Rivera was initially charged with violating HRS §§ 291E-61(a)(1) &
(3), HRS § 291-3.1(b) (prohibiting open containers) and HRS § 431:10C-104(a)
(requiring motor vehicle insurance), but the District Court only found her
guilty under HRS § 291E-61(a)(3). HRS § 291E-61 states, in relevant part,
that:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
. . . .
 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 291E-61(a)(3).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the constitutionality of the initial traffic stop. Upon careful
 
review of the record and the briefs submitted by the parties and
 having given due consideration to the arguments they advance and
 the issues they raise, we resolve Rivera's fifth point of error
 as follows and reverse:
 
Rivera contends that Officer Watts lacked reasonable
 
suspicion to justify the stop of Rivera's car because the stop
 was premised on an incorrect understanding of the law. We
 conclude that Officer Watts lacked reasonable suspicion to
 justify the stop.
 
Officer Watts' articulated basis for the stop was that
 
(1) the six people he saw in the back seat, some of whom were
 moving, exceeded the three available seatbelts, thereby violating
 the law requiring that all passengers be restrained by seatbelts;
 and (2) the people moving in the backseat obstructed the driver's
 ability to see out the back window, thereby violating the law
 prohibiting obstruction of the driver's view.
 
The laws that Officer Watts relied upon to justify his 
stop are clear and unambiguous. As the State concedes, the seatbelt law does not require passengers to wear a seatbelt if all the seat belt assemblies available or originally installed are already being used to restrain other passengers. See Haw. 
Rev. Stat. § 291-11.6(c)(2) (2007 & Supp. 2012). In addition, the law pertaining to obstructing a driver's view only prohibits overloading that obstructs the driver's view to the front or sides of the vehicle. See Haw. Rev. Stat. § 291C-124 (2007). Thus, Officer Watts' articulated basis for the stop did not establish reasonable suspicion that a traffic violation had been or was about to be committed. State v Heapy, 113 Hawai
'i 283, 
296, 151 P.3d 764, 777 (2007). 
Because the stop of Rivera's car was illegal, the
 
fruits of that stop, including the evidence used to support
 Rivera's OVUII conviction, should have been suppressed.
 Accordingly, we reverse the April 11, 2014 Notice of Entry of
 Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment entered in the District
 Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division. In light of our
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision regarding Rivera's reasonable suspicion claim, we need
 
not address the other issues that Rivera raises on appeal. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 22, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Jonathan Burge
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4
 