NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
NO. CAAP-18-0000801 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
  
EMMA MEYERS, Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant, v. 
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION; KALI WATSON, in his capacity as 
Chairman of the Hawaiian Homes Commission and 
the Director of the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands;  
PATRICIA KAHANAMOKU-TERUYA, RANDY AWO, PAULINE NAMU
‘O, 
ZACHARY HELM, DENNIS NEVES, MICHAEL KALEIKINI, MAKAI FREITAS, 
in their capacities as members of the Hawaiian Homes Commission;  
and the DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS, 
Respondents-Appellees-Appellees. 21
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC17-1-000640) 
 
1  Pursuant to Hawai‘ i Rules of Evidence Rule 201 ( HRE) and Hawai‘ i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1), we take judicial notice that 
Kali Watson is the current Chairman of the Hawaiian Homes Commission and the 
Director of the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands and he is automatically 
substituted as Respondent- Appellee- Appellee in place of Jobie Masagatani. 
 
2  Pursuant to HRE Rule 201 and HRAP Rule 43(c)(1), we take judicial 
notice that Patricia Kahanamoku- Teruya, Randy Awo, Pauline Namu‘ o, Zachary 
Helm, Dennis Neves, Michael Kalei kini, and Makai Freitas are current members 
of the Hawaiian Homes Commission and they are automatically substituted as 
Respondents- Appellees- Appellees in place of Imaikalani P. Aiu, Perry O. 
Artates, Leimana Damate, Gene Ross K. Davis, J. Kama Hopkins, Michael P. Kahikina, Ian B. Lee Loy, and Renwick V.I. Tassill. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
2  MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.)  
    
  
Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant Emma Meyers (Meyers) 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
September 21, 2018 Order affirming the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands' (DHHL) June 27, 2016 Decision and Order.
3  On appeal, 
Meyers appears to challenge the circuit court's jurisdiction.4   
I. 
BACKGROUND 
Briefly, the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act (HHCA) of 
1920 created the DHHL and the Hawaiian Homes Commission 
(Commission) to administer lands set aside for Native Hawaiian 
beneficiaries to lease homesteads.5  HHCA § 202, 207 (2009). 
Mervin Smythe (Smythe) acquired a homestead lease from 
his sister through succession in 2008. 
According to Meyers, she and her husband met Smythe in 
2009.  In 2010, she and her husband moved onto Smythe's 
 
3  The Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided. 
 
4  As discussed below, Meyers's opening brief does not comply with the 
appellate rules.  In her appeal to this court, Meyers filed her opening brief 
as a self- represented party, but her reply brief was filed by counsel.  
Meyers was also represented by counsel during the DHHL contested case and on 
appeal to the circuit court. 
 
5  Pursuant to HHCA § 201 (2009), "'Native Hawaiian' means any 
descenda nt of not less than one- half part of the blood of the races 
inhabiting the Hawaiian Islands previous to 1778." NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
3 homestead in exchange for making repairs to the house there.   
And no one disputes that Meyers and her husband did work on the
property. 6
 
Also according to Meyers, she and four family members 
(her husband, daughter, son, and son-in-law) accompanied Smythe 
to DHHL on June 18, 2012.  There, she and Smythe completed a 
"Homestead Lease Transfer Request." 
On her portion of the request, where it asks 
"Relationship to Lessee(s)," Meyers wrote, "Mother."  Meyers signed the request confirming: 
I agree that it is my responsibility to submit to [DHHL] 
all necessary documentation to substantiate my native 
Hawaiian ancestry and I agree to comply with all other 
requirements imposed by the DHHL, including but not limited 
to a [sic] financial statements indicating cash deposits or 
Lender pre- approval of a mortgage loan to pay off or assume 
all debts attached to the lease.  I understand that this 
request will not be final until approved by DHHL Chairman 
or designee. 
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Eight days later, on June 26, 2012, Smythe passed 
away.  DHHL Homestead Assistant Theresa Loo testified that 
Meyers came into DHHL that day, apprising her of Smythe's 
passing and inquiring about the transfer.  On December 7, 2012, 
DHHL notified Meyers that the transfer request was not processed 
or approved by the Commission, and "[b]ecause the lessee passed 
 
6  In 1986, Meyers applied for a Hawaiian Home Lands homestead lot on 
Maui.  DHHL accepted her application, and her name was added to the Maui 
homestead lot waitlist on September 19, 1986. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
4 away without having named a successor, [DHHL] must dispose of 
the lease as required by section 209(a) of the Act." 
HHCA § 209(a) addresses transfer by succession.7  
Smythe's nieces, Jamie Esprecion and Isette Smythe (together 
Nieces), completed requests to succeed to Smythe's lease as 
blood relatives. 
Meyers requested a contested case hearing.  The 
hearing was held over four days (April 23, 2013, June 18, 2013, August 7, 2013, and December 17, 2013) with numerous witnesses 
testifying.  During the hearing, Meyers admitted she was not 
 
7  HHCA § 209(a) provides, in relevant part, as follows:  
 
Upon the death of the lessee, the lessee's interest 
in the tract or tracts and the improvements thereon . . . 
shall vest in the relatives of the decedent . . . . 
 . . . .   
 
In case of the death of any lessee, except as 
hereinabove provided, who has failed to specify a successor 
or successors as approved by the department, the department may select from only the following qualified relatives of 
the decedent: 
 
      
. . . . 
      
(5)
  If there is no husband, wife, child, grandchild, 
brother, or sister, then from the following relatives 
of the lessee who are native Hawaiian:  father and 
mother, widows or widowers of the children, widows or 
widowers of the brothers and sisters, or nieces and nephews.  
 The rights to the use and occupancy of the tract or tracts 
may be made effective as of the date of the death of the 
lessee. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
5 Smythe's mother, and testified that her indicating as such was a 
"simple mistake." 
On June 27, 2016, the Commission entered its findings, 
conclusions, and decision and order in favor of Nieces.  The 
Commission ordered DHHL to "proceed with the process to transfer 
the interest of [Smythe's lease] by succession from [Smythe], 
deceased, to" Nieces. 
Meyers appealed to the circuit court.  After briefing 
and oral arguments, the circuit court affirmed the Commission's decision.  Meyers timely appealed to this court. 
II. DISCUSSION 
As an initial matter, Meyers's self-represented 
opening brief does not comply with HRAP Rule 28.  There are no points of error, no references to the record on appeal, and no 
argument.  HRAP Rule 28(b) (requiring points of error, record 
citations, and an argument). 
It is, however, a fundamental tenet of our law that 
"pleadings prepared by pro se litigants should be interpreted liberally" in an effort to afford appellate review despite the 
litigant's failure to comply with the appellate court rules.  
Erum v. Llego, 147 
Hawai‘i 368, 380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827-28 
(2020) (citation omitted).  Accordingly, we endeavor to 
"afford[] litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
6 the merits, where possible."  Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai‘ i 
490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012) (cleaned up) (brackets added). 
As far as we can discern, Meyers appears to challenge 
the circuit court's jurisdiction over her appeal from DHHL's 
decision.  In her opening brief, Meyers states she "now 
challenges the Jurisdiction of the Court" and that the 
"Plaintiff and the Court must prove Subject Matter 
Jurisdiction." 
"It is well-settled that every court must determine as 
a threshold matter whether it has jurisdiction to decide the 
issues presented."  Pub. Access Shoreline Hawaii v. Hawai‘ i Cnty. 
Plan. Comm'n, 79 Hawai‘ i 425, 431, 903 P.3d 1246, 1252 (1995) 
(cleaned up).  "Moreover, subject matter jurisdiction may not be 
waived and can be challenged at any time."  Id. 
HHCA § 222(a) (2009) requires DHHL to "adopt rules in 
accordance with chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes [(HRS).]"   
HRS § 91-14(a) (2012) provides for judicial review of final decisions in contested cases: 
Any person aggrieved by a final decision and order in 
a contested case or by a preliminary ruling of the nature 
that deferral of review pending entry of a subsequent final 
decision would deprive appellant of adequate relief is 
entitled to judicial review thereof under this chapter; but 
nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent resort to other means of review, redress, relief, or tr ial de 
novo, including the right of trial by jury, provided by law.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter 
to the contrary, for the purposes of this section, the term 
"person aggrieved" shall include an agency that is a party NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
7 to a contested case proceeding before that agency or 
another agency. 
 
(Emphases added.) 
In light of HRS § 91-14, the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court 
explained that the following are required to establish 
jurisdiction: 
1. "the proceeding that resulted in the unfavorable 
agency action must have been a contested case hearing-i.e., a hearing that was 1) required by law and 2) determined the rights, duties, and privileges of 
specific parties"; 
 
2. "the agency's action must represent a final decision and order, or a preliminary ruling such that deferral of review would deprive the claimant of adequate relief";   
3. "the claimant must have followed the applicable agency rules and, therefore, have been involved in the contested case"; and  
4. "the claimant's legal interests must have been injured-i.e., the claimant must have standing to 
appeal." 
Pub. Access Shoreline Hawaii, 79 Hawai‘ i at 431, 903 P.2d at 1252 
(cleaned up).  We apply this test to determine whether the 
circuit court had jurisdiction over Meyers's appeal.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
8   First, the hearing in this case was a contested case 
hearing.  HRS chapter 91 defines a contested case as "a 
proceeding in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of 
specific parties are required by law to be determined after an 
opportunity for agency hearing."  HRS § 91-1 (Supp. 2017).  The 
Hawai‘i Supreme Court interpreted "required by law" as a hearing 
"specifically mandated by statute, rule, or the due process 
guarantees of the state and federal constitutions."  Bush v. 
Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 76 Hawai‘ i 128, 137, 870 P.2d 1272, 1281 
(1994). 
DHHL's administrative rules define a "contested case" 
to include proceedings "involving the denial or cancellation of homestead leases" as follows: 
"Contested case" means a proceeding in which the legal 
rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are 
required by law to be determined after an opportunity for 
hearing before the commission, and shall include but not be 
limited to proceedings involving the denial or cancellation 
of homestead leases issued by the department, and loan or 
tax delinquencies[.] 
 
Hawai‘i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 10-1-5 (emphasis added). 
Here, Smythe was issued a homestead lease by DHHL.  
After Smythe's death, Meyers attempted to acquire Smythe's lease 
by completing the transfer, and Nieces attempted to acquire 
Smythe's lease by succession.  The Commission held hearings  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
9 accepting testimony and evidence, and rendered a decision in 
favor of Nieces resulting in a denial of a homestead lease to 
Meyers by transfer.  Because the hearing in this case involved a 
denial of a homestead lease, it was a contested case hearing.   
Second, the Commission's action was a final decision 
and order.  A "[f]inal order means an order ending the 
proceedings, leaving nothing further to be accomplished.  
Consequently, an order is not final if the rights of a party involved remain undetermined or if the matter is retained for 
further action."  Mitchell v. State, Dep't of Educ., 77 Hawai‘ i 
305, 307, 884 P.2d 368, 370 (1994) (cleaned up) (brackets 
added). 
The Commission issued findings and conclusions,8 and 
decided that (1) all interests in Smythe's lease "shall be 
transferred by succession pursuant to § 209 of the Act" to 
Nieces, "who have been determined to be qualified heirs as 
required by the Act, and who timely responded to the public 
notice of successors pursuant to HAR § 10-3-63"; and (2) the 
decision "shall take effect immediately," ordering DHHL to  
  
 
8  Meyers did not challenge t he Commission' s findings.  " Unchallenged 
findings are binding on appeal."  Poe v. Hawai‘ i Lab. Rels. Bd., 97 Hawai‘ i 
528, 536, 40 P.3d 930, 938 (2002). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
10   "proceed with the process to transfer the interest of [Smythe's 
lease] by succession from [Smythe], deceased, to" Nieces. 
Based on the Commission's decision and order, there 
was nothing more to be decided.  The Commission found in favor 
of Nieces and ordered Smythe's lease to be transferred to them 
as successors.  There was nothing more Meyers could do before 
the Commission. 
Third, Meyers participated in the proceedings, and 
complied with agency rules.  "Under the third element . . . , [the appellant] must demonstrate that [she] was involved, or 
participated, in the contested case hearing that culminated in 
the unfavorable decision."  Pub. Access Shoreline Hawaii, 79 
Hawai‘i at 433, 903 P.2d at 1254.  "Moreover, appellants seeking 
judicial review under HRS § 91-14 must follow agency rules relating to contested case proceedings properly promulgated 
under HRS Chapter 91."  Id. (cleaned up). 
DHHL's rules were "adopted under Chapter 91, HRS, and 
implement the [HHCA] of 1920, as amended."  HAR § 10-1-1.  
Through her counsel, Meyers requested a contested case hearing, 
and submitted letters that may be construed as a complaint with a statement setting forth facts and alleging a violation.  HAR  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
11 § 10-5-31.9  Meyers and others testified on her behalf throughout 
the hearing.  Meyers's counsel cross-examined witnesses and 
presented closing arguments.     
As such, Meyers followed the agency rules, which were 
promulgated under HRS chapter 91, and participated in the 
contested case hearing.  
Finally, Meyers was aggrieved.  For this element, 
Meyers's interests must have been injured.  Pub. Access 
Shoreline Hawaii, 79 Hawai‘ i at 434, 903 P.2d at 1255.  Smythe 
and Meyers initiated a request for Smythe to transfer his homestead lease to her.  If successful, Meyers would enjoy the benefits of the homestead lease.  Smythe's lease, however, was 
awarded to Nieces, and Meyers was eventually ordered to vacate 
the property. 
 
9  HAR § 10-5- 31 provides, in relevant part, as follows: 
 
(a) Any person or agency including the commission and the 
department may request a contested case hearing and 
shall have the right and full opportunity to assert a claim provided that the claim is based on a law or rule 
over which the commission has jurisdiction. 
 
(b) Such complaint shall be in writing, signed by the complainant and shall contain a short and simple statement of the facts constituting the alleged 
violation and the name and address of the alleged 
violator. 
 HAR §§ 10-5-31(a) and (b) (formatting altered). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
12  Because all elements were met, the circuit court had 
jurisdiction over Meyers's appeal from the Commission's 
decision. 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the reasons discussed above, and with no further 
discernable argument to address, we affirm the circuit court's September 21, 2018 "Order Affirming Hawaiian Homes Commission's 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order Dated June 27, 2016." 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, July 20, 2023. 
 
On the briefs:  
Emma Meyers, 
Self-represented Petitioner-Appellant-Appellant, 
on the opening brief. 
 E. Mason Martin, III, 
for Petitioner-Appellant-
Appellant, on the reply brief.  
Jason W. Hirata, 
Deputy Attorney General Craig Y. Iha, 
Supervising Deputy Attorney 
General, for Respondents-Appellees-Appellees./s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone Associate Judge  
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge