 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000768 12-NOV-2024 08:12 AM Dkt. 106 SO 
NO. CAAP-20-0000768 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
HAWAII CONFERENCE FOUNDATION, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
LINDA KAMAI-KAAIHUE; ANTHONY TAKEMOTO, Defendants-Appellants, 
and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants-Appellees. 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC191000587) 
 
In the Matter of the Dissolution of 
HAUULA CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, a dissolved Hawaiʻi  
nonprofit corporation, also known as 
HAUʻULA CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, UNITED CHURCH OF CHRIST 
(S.P. NO. 1CSP-20-0000050) 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants Linda 
Kamai-Kaaihue and Anthony 
Takemoto (or collectively Defendants) appeal from the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit's1 September 29, 2020 "Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order: (1) Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Plaintiff-Appellee Hawaii Conference 
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.   
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Foundation's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed 
April 22, 2020, and (2) Denying Defendant Linda Kamai-Kaaihue 
and Anthony Takemoto's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed 
July 14, 2020" (Summary Judgment Order) and November 24, 2020 
Stipulated Judgment. 
For background, Hauula-Kahuku Church was incorporated 
on December 18, 1916 by a charter (1916 Charter). Between 1927 
and 1942, the Territory of Hawai‘ i issued three land patents 
granting Hauula-Kahuku Church over 1.7 acres of land in 
Hau‘ula 
(the Property).2 
In March 1976, Hauula-Kahuku Church's name was changed 
to Hauula Congregational Church. In September 1977, Hauula 
Congregational Church was involuntarily dissolved for failure to 
file "annual corporation exhibits" for "at least two years" and "the directors of the corporation [were to] act as Trustees for 
the creditors and stockholders" pursuant to 
Hawai‘i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 416-123 (1976, repealed 1987). Hauula 
Congregational Church was the sole owner of the Property until its dissolution. 
Hau‘ula Congregat
ional Church, United Church of Christ 
was incorporated in June 1997, as a purported "reincorporation" 
2 Two of the grants stated the land was to "be used for church purposes 
only," otherwise it would revert to the Territory or be recoverable "by the 
Territory or its successors in an" ejectment action or other appropriate proceeding. 
2   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Hauula Congregational Church. In September 2008, Hau‘ula 
Congregational Church, United Church of Christ recorded a 
warranty deed in the Bureau of Conveyances granting the entirety of the Property to Hawaii Conference as a tenant in severalty, 
even though there was no document conveying the Property from 
Hauula Congregational Church to Hau‘ ula Congregational Church, 
United Church of Christ. 
On December 10, 2018, Kamai-Kaaihue filed articles of 
incorporation for 
Hau‘ula Kahuku Church with the Department of 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs, noting she was the registered 
agent and listing herself, Takemoto, and Kathleen Takemoto as 
incorporators. Starting in December 2018, Defendants 
purportedly entered the Property, parking vehicles and occupying 
"the church building without" Hawaii Conference's permission. 
In April 2019, Hawaii Conference filed a complaint for 
trespass to land and intentional damage to property in circuit 
court (
Trespass Proceeding), requesting declaratory judgment, 
injunctive relief, and damages. 
About a year later, Hawaii Conference initiated a 
special proceeding in circuit court seeking "Appointment of a 
Receiver for Hau‘ ula Congregational Church" to resolve, inter 
alia, the gap in title to the Property (Special Proceeding). 
The circuit court appointed a receiver, vesting him with "full 
power and authority to execute all instruments and take all 
3   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
actions necessary to resolve unfinished business and wind up the 
affairs of the Church[.]" 
On April 22, 2020, Hawaii Conference moved for partial 
summary judgment in the Trespass Proceeding. 
The following day, 
the receiver recorded a quitclaim deed conveying the Property 
from "Hau‘ula Congregational Church" to Hawaii Conference in the 
Bureau of Conveyances. 
In May 2020, the circuit court consolidated the 
proceedings with the Trespass Proceeding as the primary case. 
Both sides moved for summary judgment. 
At the August 13, 2020 
hearing on the summary judgment motions, the circuit court noted it was granting Hawaii Conference's summary judgment motion as to all counts of the complaint except damages because damages by 
Defendants, if any, had not been proven. On September 29, 2020, 
the circuit court entered its Summary Judgment Order, granting 
in part and denying in part Hawaii Conference's motion and 
denying Defendants' motion. 
Following the Summary Judgment Order, the circuit 
court entered the parties' Stipulated Judgment in favor of Hawaii Conference on all counts with nominal damages of $1.00 
and costs of $7,051.25 taxed against Defendants. The circuit 
court's minutes note that trial was taken off the calendar. 
4   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants timely appealed. Defendants raise nine 
points of error3 while Hawaii Conference contests this court's 
3 Defendants' nine points of error are as follows: 
A. "The trial court erred when it construed the nonprofit 
corporation's charter to mean that the charter prohibits 
the distribution of the dissolved nonprofit 
corporation's land to its members"; 
B. "The trial court erred in refusing to apply Chapter 416, HRS (1976 replacement), which was the law in effect at 
the time of the nonprofit corporation's dissolution, and 
in refusing to fashion a remedy under that law"; 
C. "The trial court erred in refusing to consider [Hawai‘ i] 
judicial precedent on the dissolution of a corporation as guidance in the interpretation and application of the 
'hybrid' statute to the dissolved nonprofit corporation"; 
D. "The trial court erred in holding that the dissolved 
nonprofit corporation continued to exist without end, 
even if more than 40 years had passed since its dissolution in 1977"; 
E. "The trial court erred in applying Chapter 414D, HRS 
(effective July 1, 2002) to the winding up of the 
dissolved nonprofit corporation's affairs and to the distribution of its land"; 
F. "The trial court erred in holding (1) that the former 
Hauula-Kahuku Church was or is a 'public benefit 
corporation,' (2) that the distribution of the dissolved 
nonprofit corporation's land is to be undertaken 
pursuant to section 414D- 245(a)(6 ), HRS and not pursuant
to section 414D- 245(a)(7 ), HRS, (3) that the Plaintiff 
is entitled to the distribution of the [Property] and 
(4) that the Defendants have no interest in the [Property]"; 
G. "The trial court erred when it allowed its receiver to 
deliver a deed for the [Property] without a prior 
hearing, without the trial court's prior approval, without notice to the pool of persons who may be 
interested in the distribution and to the wrong person"; 
H. "The trial court erred by not assembling a proper pool 
of interested persons for the distribution of the dissolved nonprofit corporation's land"; and 
(continued . . .) 
5   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jurisdiction. We address (1) Hawaii Conference's challenge to 
jurisdiction, and consolidate Defendants' nine points of error 
as challenging (2) the application of HRS Chapter 414D (Points 
A-F) and (3) the conveyance of title (Points G-I). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below, and affirm. 
(1) We first address Hawaii Conference's assertion 
this court lacks jurisdiction because the Stipulated Judgment "was actually a judgment entered on consent of the parties and 
is not appealable." 
Contrary to Hawaii Conference's assertion, this court 
has jurisdiction over this case. The Stipulated Judgment stated 
it "finally disposes of all claims and all parties in this case. 
There are no other parties [or] claims remaining, and all other 
claims and parties not addressed in this Judgment, if any, are hereby dismissed." Because the Stipulated Judgment was a final 
judgment that disposed of all claims as to all parties in this 
(. . . continued) 
I. "The trial court erred when it held that the Plaintiff 
owns the [Property] and when it entered its further 
conclusions, orders, writ and judgment based on that 
error." 
(Formatting altered.) 
Defendants also challenge various findings of fact and 
conclusions of law in their points of error but do not make arguments related 
to specific findings or conclusions. Hawai‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 28(b)(7). 
6   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case, and Defendants timely appealed, we have jurisdiction. See
Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright
, 76 Hawai‘i 115, 119, 
869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994); Hawai‘ i Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rules 54(b), 58; and Hawai‘ i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 4(a)(1). 
As Hawaii Conference acknowledged in its memorandum in 
support of its motion to dismiss for lack of appellate 
jurisdiction, following the circuit court's ruling on the 
summary judgment motions, "the parties stipulated to nominal damages of $1.00, and [Hawaii Conference's] entitlement to costs 
of $
7,051.25." Defendants do not raise a point of error related 
to the stipulated damages and costs. 
Instead, Defendants' points of error primarily 
challenge the circuit court's Summary Judgment Order. The record does not show Defendants gave up their right to appeal 
this order. See R2B Invs., LLC v. Reynolds
, 133 Hawai‘i 452, 330 
P.3d 390, No. CAAP-11-0000684, 2014 WL 2007001 at *1, 2, 7 (App. 
May 14, 2014) (Mem. Op.) (indicating agreement to waive right to 
appeal must be express); 
Ueoka v. Szymanski
, 107 Hawai‘i 386, 
396, 114 P.3d 892, 902 (2005). We thus address Defendants' 
contentions. 
(2) 
Defendants contend the circuit court erred in 
applying HRS Chapter 414D (Point E); should have applied HRS 
Chapter 416 (Points A-D); and even if HRS Chapter 414D applied, 
7   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the court should have applied subsection (a)(7), not (a)(6), of 
HRS § 414D-245 (Supp. 2019) (Point F). The gist of Defendants' 
argument is that Kamai-Kaaihue has "an inheritable property 
interest in the dissolved nonprofit corporation's land by, 
through and under her parents" who were members when Hauula 
Congregational Church was dissolved in 1977. Contrary to 
Defendants' contention, the circuit court did not err. 
First, the circuit court did not err in applying HRS 
Chapter 414D. The 1916 Charter stated it was "subject to all existing laws and all laws, whether amendatory, repealing or 
other laws that may here-after be enacted applicable to charters 
or corporations of this character." HRS Chapter 416 was 
repealed in 1987. 1987 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 135, § 208 at 308. 
And HRS Chapter 414D applied to Hawai‘ i nonprofit corporations 
when the circuit court appointed a receiver to wind up Hauula 
Congregational Church's unfinished business. See HRS § 414D-321 
(2004). The church here was a nonprofit corporation. Thus, the circuit court did not err in applying HRS Chapter 414D. 
But, even if HRS Chapter 416 applied in 2020 as 
Defendants contend, it does not support Kamai-Kaaihue's assertion that she inherited a property interest through her 
church-member parents. HRS § 416-124 (1976, repealed 1987) 
provided a dissolved corporation's trustee(s) can distribute the 
entity's remaining assets to its members "if under the charter 
8   
 
  
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the corporation the members are entitled to a distribution of 
the remaining property of the corporation[.]" Here, the 1916 
Charter did not indicate members were entitled to a distribution 
of remaining assets upon dissolution, but instead stated "[n]o 
stock shall be issued nor dividends paid by the corporation." 
And, the bylaws indicated board members were to "serve without 
compensation." Further, neither document indicated membership 
could be transferred or inherited. See generally Wier v. Howard
Hughes Med. Inst., 407 A.2d 1051, 1054-55 (Del. Ch. 1979) 
(stating unless the corporate charter or bylaws of a non-stock 
corporation expressly provide, membership in the corporation 
"may not be transferred or inherited"). Thus, as the 1916 
Charter and bylaws did not provide for transfer of membership or 
distribution of assets upon dissolution, HRS § 416-124 would not 
allow Kamai-Kaaihue to inherit an interest in the Property. 
Finally, HRS § 414D-245(a)(6) and (a)(7) (Supp. 2019) 
explain how a dissolved nonprofit corporation can dispose of its assets if its articles or bylaws do not indicate how assets are 
to be disposed of after dissolution: 
(a) A dissolved corporation continues its corporate 
existence but shall not carry on any activities except 
those appropriate to wind up and liquidate its affairs, 
including . . . . 
(6) If the corporation is a public benefit corporation and 
no provision has been made in its articles or bylaws 
for distribution of assets on dissolution, 
transferring, subject to any contractual or legal 
requirement, its assets to one or more persons 
described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986, as amended, or if the dissolved 
9   
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
corporation is not described in Section 501(c)(3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, to one or more public 
benefit corporations; [and] 
(7) If the corporation is not a public benefit corporation 
and no provision has been made in its articles or 
bylaws for distribution of assets on dissolution, 
transferring its assets to its members or, if it has 
no members, to those persons whom the corporation 
holds itself out as benefiting or serving[.] 
(Emphases added.) A public benefit corporation includes a 
corporation recognized as exempt under Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3): 
"Public benefit corporation" means any corporation 
designated by statute as a public benefit corporation, or 
any corporation that is recognized as exempt under section 
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, 
or that is organized for public or charitable purposes and 
upon dissolution must distribute its assets to a public 
benefit corporation, the United States, a state, or a 
person recognized as exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
HRS § 414D-14 (2004) (emphasis added). 
Again, the 1916 Charter and bylaws did not provide for 
the distribution of assets upon dissolution. Because the entity 
here operated as a nonprofit corporation "organized and operated 
exclusively for religious, charitable" purposes outlined in 26 
U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), its assets would be subject to distribution 
under HRS § 414D-245(a)(6). See 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) (2019) 
(providing that "[c]orporations . . . organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable . . . purposes" are 
"exempt from taxation . . . unless such exemption is denied"). 
HRS § 414D-245(a)(7), on the other hand, applies to corporations 
that are not public benefit corporations. The circuit court 
10   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore did not err in applying HRS § 414D-245(a)(6) as Hauula 
Congregational Church met the definition of a public benefit 
corporation. 
In sum, Defendants did not establish that Kamai-
Kaaihue was entitled to distribution of the Property through her 
church-member parents.  
(3) Defendants also contend the circuit court erred in 
allowing the receiver to deed the Property without notifying and assembling a pool of interested persons. 
The circuit court was vested with authority to appoint 
a receiver to do what was necessary to settle the corporation's 
unfinished business: 
When any corporation organized under the laws of this 
State . . . shall have been dissolved . . . , the circuit 
court, upon application of any creditor, member, or 
director of the corporation, or any other person who shows good cause therefor, and upon a finding that the persons 
responsible for settling the unfinished business and 
winding up the affairs of the corporation either are not 
diligently pursuing such obligations, or cannot be found or 
otherwise are not available, may either appoint one or more 
of  the directors of the corporation to be trustees or 
appoint one or more persons to be receivers of and for the 
corporation, to do all acts that are necessary for the 
final settlement of the unfinished business of the 
corporation. The powers of the trustees or receivers shall be effective for the time period determined by the circuit 
court.  
HRS § 414D-245.5(a) (2004) (emphases added). 
Here, the circuit court's order appointing the 
receiver stated the receiver had "full power and authority to 
execute all instruments and take all actions necessary to 
resolve unfinished business and wind up the affairs of the 
11   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Church, in the name and on behalf of the Church." One bit of 
unfinished business was disposing of Hauula Congregational 
Church's assets. Under HRS § 414D-245(a)(6), the receiver could 
only transfer Hauula Congregational Church's assets to another 
person or entity described in Internal Revenue Code section 
501(c)(3) or to another public benefit corporation. As Hawaii 
Conference was a 501(c)(3) entity, the receiver complied with 
HRS § 414D-245(a)(6) when he deeded the Property to Hawaii Conference. 
As to notice, Defendants acknowledge they received 
notice, but argue there were other church members who may have 
been interested in the Property, as well as the Association of 
Hawaiian Evangelical Churches and the State of Hawai‘i, who 
should have been notified. As discussed, Defendants failed to 
show there was a basis for individuals to inherit an interest in 
the Property through persons who were church members at the time 
of dissolution. And the record in this case indicates the 
Association of Hawaiian Evangelical Churches and the State of 
Hawai‘i were aware of the Special Proceeding to appoint a 
receiver, as the Association of Hawaiian Evangelical Churches 
filed a declaration in the Special Proceeding and Hawaii 
Conference served Clare E. Conners, then-Attorney General for 
12   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State of Hawai‘i, with its application for appointment of a 
receiver. Thus, there was no error regarding notice. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
September 29, 2020 Summary Judgment Order and the November 24, 
2020 Stipulated Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i, November 12, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 Acting Chief Judge 
Michael J. Matsukawa,  
for Defendants-Appellants. /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
 Associate Judge 
Diane D. Hastert,  
Douglas C. Smith, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Gregory W. Kugle, and Associate Judge 
Ross Uehara-Tilton,  
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak 
Hastert), 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
13 