NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001476
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARIE MINICHINO, Plaintiff-Appellant
v.
 
WILLIAM MCKEON, ESQ., SHANNON S. IMLAY, ESQ.
MCKEON IMLAY MEHLING, A LIMITED LIABILITY LAW COMPANY,
PIILANI HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, S & S MANAGEMENT
CONSULTANTS, LLC, BRIAN SHAMADA, BERTRAM J. SUGIMOTO,
and DOES 1-20,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0067(3))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Marie Minichino (Minichino), pro
 
se, appeals from the Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court
 
of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
I. 
Minichino is the trustee of the Gaetano Trust, which
 
held title to Lot #4 in the Piilani Villages Project. The
 Piilani Homeowners Association (Association) pursued a non­judicial foreclosure of a lien for maintenance fees and other
 amounts assessed against Lot #4. In response, Minichino filed a
 
1The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint against the Association, its management company, S & S
 
Management Consultants, LLC (S&SM), and S&SM's General Manager,
 Bertram J. Sugimoto (collectively, Association Defendants), and
 the Association's lawyers, William McKeon and Shannon S. Imlay,
 and their law firm, McKeon Imlay Mehling, a limited liability law
 company (collectively, MIM Defendants). 
Minichino's complaint alleged five counts: (1) Count 1:
 
"Fraud for filing invalid and inaccurate lien against Plaintiffs
 [sic] property"; (2) Count 2: "Fraud for filing an invalid and
 inaccurate foreclosure"; (3) Count 3: "Violation of homeowners
 statutes by not allowing Plaintiff to be on ballet [sic] for
 homeowners assoc vote for board of directors"; (4) Count 4: "Pain
 and suffering and mental distress. Plaintiff has suffered
 harassment by the management and mental distress over invalid
 foreclosure"; (5) Count 5: "Collusion amoung [sic] the parties,
 Defendants have work ed [sic] in conjunction in an attempt to
 illegally steal Plaintiff's home."
2 Minichino's complaint sought
 
an award of two million dollars in damages for the claims alleged
 in her complaint.
 
The Circuit Court granted (1) the MIM Defendants'
 
motion to dismiss the complaint, (2) the Association Defendants'
 motion for summary judgment on the complaint, and (3) motions for
 an order to declare Minichino a vexatious litigant filed by both
 the MIM Defendants and the Association Defendants. The Circuit
 Court also granted the Association Defendants' motion for the
 award of attorney's fees and costs. On September 27, 2013, the
 Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment, which dismissed the
 complaint against the MIM Defendants, entered judgment on the
 complaint in favor of the Association Defendants, declared
 Minichino to be a vexatious litigant under Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) Chapter 634J and imposed pre-filing restrictions
 
2Minichino's complaint did not contain a Count 4, and we
have renumbered her Counts 5 and 6 as Counts 4 and 5,
respectively. The "Brian Shamada" listed in the caption of
Minichino's complaint was apparently never identified.
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pursuant to HRS § 634J-7 (1993), entered judgment on its award of
 
attorney's fees and costs in favor of the Association Defendants,
 and awarded post-judgment interest.
 
II. 
Minichino's opening brief does not comply with the 
requirements of Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28 
(2010). To the extent that her arguments can be discerned, Minichino appears to contend that: (1) the presiding judge should have sua sponte recused himself; (2) the Circuit Court erred in denying Minichino's request for a continuance of the hearing on the MIM Defendants' motion to dismiss; (3) the Circuit Court erred in granting the MIM Defendants' motion to dismiss and the Association Defendants' motion for summary judgment; and (4) the Circuit Court erred in declaring that Minichino was a vexatious litigant and imposing pre-filing restrictions. We affirm.
3 
III.
 
We address the discernible arguments raised by
 
Minichino on appeal as follows:
 
1. Minichino suggests that the presiding judge
 
improperly "made reference to the Plaintiff's reputation" and
 engaged in "prejudicial behavior" and therefore should have sua
 sponte recused himself. Contrary to Minichino's suggestion, our
 review of the record does not reveal any improper reference made
 by the presiding judge to Minichino's reputation or any
 prejudicial behavior by the presiding judge. We conclude that
 there is no merit to Minichino's contention that the presiding
 judge erred in failing to sua sponte recuse himself.
 
2. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying Minichino's belated request to continue the hearing on
 the MIM Defendants' motion to dismiss, which Minichino claimed
 was sought to enable her to obtain counsel. The Circuit Court
 
3Minichino does not challenge the Circuit Court's award of
attorney's fees and costs or its award of post-judgment interest.
We therefore do not address those aspects of the Circuit Court's
Judgment.
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denied the request for a continuance, noting that Minichino was 
the party who had filed suit, that she had ample opportunity to obtain counsel, and that the circumstances surrounding Minichino's filing of the continuance motion showed that the motion was not made in good faith and was a delaying tactic. Based on the reasons provided by the Circuit Court and the record, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Minichino's motion to continue the hearing. See Kam Fui Trust v. Brandhorst, 77 Hawai
'i 320, 324, 884 P.2d 
383, 387 (App. 1994) (applying abuse of discretion standard to trial court's denial of a motion for continuance). 
3. Although Minichino appears to challenge the
 
Circuit Court's decisions to grant the MIM Defendants' motion to
 dismiss and the Association Defendants' motion for summary
 judgment, she provides no basis for this court to conclude that
 the Circuit Court erred in rendering these decisions.
4
 
Accordingly, we reject Minichino's challenge to these decisions.
 
4. Minichino asserts that "attempting to brand [her]
 
a Vexatious Litigant is a violation of the civil Liberties and
 rights of due process according [sic] to any American Citizen and
 as well Any pro se litigant." We construe Minichino's assertion
 
as a challenge to the Circuit Court's declaration that she was a
 
vexatious litigant under HRS Chapter 634J as well as a due
 process challenge to the pre-filing restrictions imposed by the
 Circuit Court pursuant to HRS § 634J-7.
 
We reject Minichino's challenge to the Circuit Court's
 
declaring her to be a vexatious litigant. HRS § 634J-1 (1993)
 defines a "vexatious litigant," in pertinent part, to include a
 plaintiff who does any of the following:
 
(1)	 In the immediately preceding seven-year period has
commenced, prosecuted, or maintained in propria
persona at least five civil actions other than in a
 
4With respect to the Association Defendants' motion for
summary judgment, Minichino failed to include a transcript of the
hearing on that motion as part of the record on appeal.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
small claims court that have been:
 
(A)	 Finally determined adversely to the plaintiff;
. . .
 
. . .
 
(3)	 In any litigation while acting in propria persona,
files, in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings,
or other papers, conducts unnecessary discovery, or
engages in other tactics that are frivolous or solely
intended to cause unnecessary delay[.]
 
The Circuit Court found that of the twenty-five cases 
in which Minichino was a plaintiff in propria persona within the 
last seven years, at least five resulted in a final judgment adverse to Minichino. The Circuit Court also found that in this case, Minichino, "while acting in propria persona, has filed, in bad faith, unmeritorious motions, pleadings, or other papers, and has engaged in conduct and other tactics that are frivolous or solely intended to cause unnecessary delay to this litigation." Minichino has not shown that these findings are clearly erroneous. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in declaring Minichino to be a vexatious litigant pursuant to HRS Chapter 634J. Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai
'i 289, 294­
95, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185-86 (2003) (applying abuse of discretion standard to trial court's determination that plaintiff was a vexatious litigant). 
We also reject Minichino's due process challenge to the 
pre-filing restrictions imposed by the Circuit Court. Pursuant to HRS § 634J-7, the Circuit Court imposed pre-filing restrictions which prohibited Minichino "from filing any new litigation in the courts of the State of Hawai
'i on her own 
behalf without first obtaining leave of the presiding judge of the court where the litigation is proposed to be filed." The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has previously rejected a due process 
challenge to pre-filing restrictions imposed pursuant to HRS § 634J-7. See Ek, 102 Hawai
'i at 297-98, 75 P.3d at 1188-89. In 
Ek, the supreme court held: 
[A] prefiling order does not violate due process rights
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
because it does not deny the vexatious litigant access to
the courts, but operates solely to preclude the initiationof meritless lawsuits and their attendant expenditures oftime and costs. Preventing the filing of a frivolous andvexatious document deprives a litigant of nothing at all,except perhaps the punishment of Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule 11 sanctions. Thus, it does not appear thatEk's due process rights are impacted in this case or infuture cases, as he is only restrained from bringingunmeritorious litigation, which could be restricted in anyevent. 
Ek, 102 Hawai 'i at 298, 75 P.3d at 1189 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, brackets, and footnote omitted). In accordance
 
with Ek, Minichino's due process challenge fails.
 
IV.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment.
 
DATED: February 26, 2016, at Honolulu, Hawai 'i. 
On the briefs:
 
Marie Minichino

 
Defendant-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Jeffrey S. Portnoy

John P. Duchemin
 
(Cades Schutte LLLP) for Defendants-Appellees
William McKeon, Esq., Shannon S.
Imlay, Esq. and McKeon Imlay
Mehling, LLLC 
Matt A. Tsukazaki
 
(Li & Tsukazaki, AAL, LLLC)
for Defendants-Appellees
Piilani Homeowners Association,
S&S Management Consultants, LLC,
and Bertram J. Sugimoto
 
6
 