          
            
            NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000715 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
STEVEN DUDLEY VEGA,
Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 3CPC-18-0000409) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai# i (State) appeals 
from the September 13, 2018 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law 
and Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence (Order 
Granting Motion to Suppress), entered by the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit (circuit court).1 Defendant-Appellee Steven Dudley 
Vega (Vega) was charged with, inter alia, one count of Promoting 
a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243(1) (2014), and one count of 
Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of 
HRS § 329-43.5(a) (Supp. 2018).2 Vega sought to suppress all 
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided. 
2 The record on appeal only contained the record from the circuit
court proceedings, which did not include the complaint filed against Vega. We 
take judicial notice of the complaint filed May 15, 2018, during the initial NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence obtained and resulting from the search of his van on the 
basis that the search warrant did not particularly describe the 
van as a place to be searched. The circuit court granted the 
motion. 
On appeal, the State argues that the circuit court 
erred in: (1) making findings of fact that were based on evidence 
not contained in the record or misstated the evidence presented; 
(2) concluding that the three tarp/tent enclosures and the van 
required separate search warrants and that the search warrant in 
this case did not permit a search of the van; and (3) concluding 
that the information supporting the search warrant could have 
been old, which was an argument that Vega had not raised in his 
motion to suppress. Related to these arguments, the State 
challenges Findings of Fact (FOFs) 11-17 and 21, and Conclusions 
of Law (COLs) 4-6, 8, 10-12, 14, and 16-18. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve this appeal as follows. 
Jurisdiction 
As a preliminary matter, we first address whether this 
court has jurisdiction over this appeal from the Order Denying 
Motion to Suppress. Vega filed a statement contesting 
jurisdiction as allowed by Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 12.1(a). Vega argued that this appeal was invalid as an interlocutory appeal because no application for an interlocutory 
appeal was filed in the circuit court as required under HRS § 
641-17 (2016). 
In his Answering Brief, Vega again raises the 
question of jurisdiction and also challenges the circuit court's stay of proceedings. 
HRS § 641-13(7) (2016) expressly authorizes the State 
to appeal "[f]rom a pretrial order granting a motion for the 
proceedings  against  Vega  in  the  District  Court  of  the  Third  Circuit.   H awai #i 
R
ules  of  Evidence  (HRE)  Rule  201(c)  (2016). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suppression of evidence, including a confession or admission, or 
the return of property," in a criminal matter from the district 
or circuit court, and states that "the order shall be stayed 
pending the outcome of the appeal." The September 13, 2018 Order 
Granting Motion to Suppress is appealable under HRS § 641-13(7). 
The State timely filed its Notice of Appeal on September 18, 
2018, within thirty days after the circuit court's entry of the 
Order Granting Motion to Suppress. We conclude that we have 
jurisdiction to hear this appeal. 
Upon the State's filing of the Notice of Appeal, the 
Order Granting Motion to Suppress was stayed pending the outcome 
of this appeal. HRS § 641-13(7). Vega's contention regarding 
the circuit court's stay of proceedings therefore has no merit. 
Alleged Erroneous Findings of Fact 
The State first argues that FOFs 11-16 rely on evidence 
that was not contained in the record. The State does not dispute 
the factual accuracy of these FOFs but simply asserts that they 
are based on evidence not in the record. In his Answering Brief, 
Vega does not attempt to controvert the State's argument that 
FOFs 11-16 are not supported by evidence in the record. Rather, 
Vega asserts that the facts provided in FOFs 11-16 are irrelevant 
to the circuit court's analysis of the validity of the search 
warrant and suppression of the evidence. 
In FOFs 11-16, the circuit found: 
11. The search occurred on May 14, 2018, during the
early day-time hours, including of the blue van, the windows
to which the police broke in order to gain entry. 
12. Police removed Defendant from the back of the van 
where he had been lying on a mattress. 
13. The police did not see contraband in plain view. 
14. The police proceeded to search the van, including
the removal of the mattress, and found, behind the front
passenger seat, the contraband, the possession of whichDefendant stands charged. 
15. The police did not know and did not seem to have
investigated who the owner of the van was, nor whether itsregistration was current, or if it was otherwise legal or ifit was in running condition. 
3           
     
          
             
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16. It is common knowledge that people often use vans
for sleeping in, whether on a camping trip, or as a place to
live during homeless periods of time. 
FOF 16 reflects a matter of common knowledge, of which 
judicial notice may properly be taken. See State v. Lord, 63 
Haw. 270, 272, 625 P.2d 1038, 1039 (1981); see also HRE Rule 
201(b), (c). 
It appears that these FOFs 11-15 were based on Officer 
Pedro Cacho's testimony given at the preliminary hearing. The 
transcript of Officer Cacho's preliminary hearing testimony was 
entered into evidence as an exhibit for the motion to dismiss 
which was heard on the same day as the motion to suppress. 
Although the transcript was not specifically submitted in support 
of the motion to suppress, its appearance in the record is 
sufficient to constitute substantial evidence in support of FOFs 
11-16 in the Order Granting Motion to Suppress, where the facts 
themselves are not in dispute. 
The State's challenge to FOF 173 and 214 appears to be 
that the findings contradict the testimony of Officer Eric Reyes 
(Officer Reyes) during the hearing on the motion to suppress and 
the affidavit supporting the search warrant. The State 
emphasizes that Officer Reyes was the only witness who testified 
during the hearing on the motion to suppress. 
FOFs 17 and 21 are accurate representations of the 
information provided in Officer Reyes's affidavit in support of 
the search warrant as well as Officer Reyes's testimony. It was 
within the province of the circuit court to assess the 
credibility of the witness. State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i 87, 
101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000). 
These findings are therefore not 
clearly erroneous. 
3 FOF 17 provided: "17. The officers had advance information that the
Defendant occasionally slept in the van." 
4 FOF 21 provided: "21. Information the police had was that Defendant
was staying there, but there was no mention of other persons being, living or
sleeping there, or not." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Suppression of Evidence from Van 
The State next argues that the circuit court erred in 
concluding that: the tarp/tent enclosures and the van were 
separate units; each separate unit, including the van, required a 
separate search warrant; and evidence obtained from the search of 
the van should be suppressed because the search warrant did not 
describe the van with particularity. The State asserts that the 
evidence obtained from the van should not have been suppressed 
because the tarp/tent enclosures and the van did not constitute 
separate residences/units requiring separate search warrants, and 
that the search of the van was within the scope of the search 
warrant. Related to this argument, the State challenges the 
following COLs: 
4. Believing there were three separate tent-tarp
structures on the premises and a van under one of them, the
police had an obligation to establish probable cause forsearch warrants for each of the separate, unattached units. 
5. This particularly applies to the van which was a
completely enclosed, separate unit on the premises securedby a lock and key. 
6. The tarp/tent structures and the van were each a
separate residence, and there was no information providedthat Defendant ever lived or slept in either of the othertwo tarp/tent structures. 
. . . . 
8. Here, the van is a separate unit (as is any
personal mode of transportation). 
The other tarp/tent
enclosures provided no specific access to the van, and therewas no evidence the van was being used in common by anyoneelse on the premises. 
. . . . 
10. In the three search warrants, the van itself was
not particularly described as a place to be searched; ratherit appears in the description of the premises and in theOfficer's affidavit as a place where Defendant may sleep. 
11. That the police believed the Defendant was
sleeping in the van made the van a special place even morelike a separate residence than the other couple oftarp/tents; there is no evidence that the "main" tarpcovered anything other than the van making it less of aseparate enclosure than just a guard to protect the van fromthe weather, as many owners of vehicles and tarps do. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
12. Therefore, there needed to be a separate warrant
more particularly pinpointing the van as a place to be
searched. 
. . . . 
14. The warrants, not being valid for the van, were
used improperly in searching the van after the Defendant wasremoved from the van. 
The State asserts that COLs 4, 10, and 12 are mixed FOFs and COLs 
and were clearly erroneous. The State also argues that COLs 5, 
6, 8, 11, and 14 were wrong as they were based upon facts that 
were not in evidence or they misstated the evidence. 
Case law pertaining to the validity of a search and 
seizure pursuant to a search warrant is well-established: 
The Hawai #i Constitution provides that "[t]he right of the
people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and
effects against unreasonable searches, seizures andinvasions of privacy shall not be violated; and no warrantsshall issue but upon probable cause . . . and particularlydescribing the place to be searched[.]" Haw. Const. art. I,§ 7. 
The particularity requirement ensures that a search
pursuant to a warrant "limit[s] the police as to where theycan search, for otherwise the constitutional protectionagainst warrantless searches is meaningless." State v. 
Anderson, 84 Hawai #i 462, 467, 935 P.2d 1007, 1012 (1997)
(quoting State v. Woolsey, 71 Haw. 638, 640, 802 P.2d 478,479 (1990)). 
A determination regarding whether a warrant
satisfies the particularity requirement must be made "on acase-by-case basis, taking into account all of thesurrounding facts and circumstances." Id. at 468, 935 P.2d
at 1013 (quoting State v. Kealoha, 62 Haw. 166, 170-71, 613P.2d 645, 648 (1980)). While "[t]he cornerstone of such adetermination is the language of the warrant itself," the"executing officer's prior knowledge as to the placeintended to be searched, and the description of the place tobe searched appearing in the probable cause affidavit insupport of the search warrant" is also relevant. Id. 
(quoting State v. Matsunaga, 82 Hawai #i 162, 167, 920 P.2d
376, 381 (App. 1996)). 
State v. Rodrigues, 145 Hawai# i 487, 494, 454 P.3d 428, 435 
(2019) (footnote omitted). 
In the Affidavit for Search Warrant (Affidavit), 
Officer Reyes stated that he received information from three 
sources identifying Vega as a methamphetamine supplier. The 
first source: "related that VEGA typically operates and 
distributes his methamphetamine supply out of the campsite on 
Kahei Road"; "described the campsite as being [] numerous tents 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and tarps in close proximity to each other"; "related that VEGA 
will carry his methamphetamine supply in a waist pack, when 
leaving the campsite; and "related that VEGA periodically sleeps 
in a van parked under the tarp/tent." The second source related 
that: "VEGA lives at the property/campsite (with multiple tents) 
on Kahei Road"; "VEGA also usually conceals/stores his 
methamphetamine in a 'fanny bag' or waist pack"; "VEGA conducts 
his drug transactions at the campsite on Kahei Road." Finally, 
Officer Reyes stated that another Hawai# i Police Department 
Police Officer, Officer John Kahalioumi, provided information from a confidential informant (CI) regarding Vega. 
Officer 
Kahalioumi related that the CI "specifically gave the location of VEGA's residence as being located off of Kahei Road and described 
it as a 'tent campsite'"; "related . . . that VEGA typically 
stores his methamphetamine supply in a 'fanny bag' at the 
campsite"; and "confirmed that there are three 'tent' structures 
that VEGA utilizes on the campsite." 
Officer Reyes also made the following statements in his 
Affidavit: 
Your affiant states that based on the CI statement 
that VEGA occupies/utilizes the three separate tent/tarp
enclosures and the corroborating statements from [the otherinformants] (that there are multiple tent/tarp enclosures onthe property); your affiant believes that VEGA is in controlof all three tent/tarp enclosures and the parked van underthe main tarp/tent enclosure. 
Your affiant further states that two of the three 
tent/tarp enclosures are not visible from Kahei Road; thusmaking a photograph or physical description impossible.Your affiant has attached a photograph of one of thetent/tarp enclosures (the main tent/tarp with the van parkedunderneath) that he is requesting to search. 
The Affidavit requested to search the following 
location: 
The property/campsite known to be occupied by Steven VEGAlocated on Kahei Road, Hawi Hawai #i . . . . The 
property/campsite can be further described as three separatetarp/tent enclosures and in close proximity to each other(approximately 7 feet). 
The main tarp/tent enclosure also
has a van (unknown make and/or model) parked underneath.Refer to Exhibit "A" for a photograph of the main tarp/tentenclosure visible from Kahei Road. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In his motion to suppress, Vega argued that "[t]he 
Affidavit for Search Warrant of the campsite fail[ed] to request 
with particularity a search of the van parked under the tarp. 
Rather, the van [wa]s used as a description of the site, and its 
presence [wa]s merely noted." Vega maintained that the search 
warrant, which adopted the same language of the property 
description as in the affidavit, "fail[ed] to expressly allow 
search of the van[.]" In its opposition to the motion to 
suppress, the State responded that the van, which was described 
as being parked underneath the main tarp/tent enclosure, was 
"clearly identified in the warrant as being an area to be 
searched" and the search warrant provided "specificity that 
describe[d] this campsite to the exclusion of all others." In 
his reply memorandum in support of his motion to suppress, Vega 
asserted that the van itself was a separate residence requiring a 
separate search warrant and also noted that the two other 
tarp/tent enclosures, "if closed all around, could well have been 
separate 'residences.'" 
The circuit court found that the tents and the van 
constituted separate residences or units. In reaching this 
conclusion, the circuit court likened the tent/tarp enclosures to 
a multiple-occupancy dwelling or building and relied in part on 
this court's opinion in Matsunaga, in which we recited that 
"[w]here a search warrant is directed at a multiple-dwelling or 
multiple-office building, the warrant will generally be held 
invalid unless it describes the particular room or sub-unit to be 
searched with sufficient definiteness[.]" 82 Hawai# i at 166-67, 
920 P.2d at 380-81 (emphasis omitted) (citing Annotation, Search Warrant: Sufficiency of Description of Apartment or Room to be 
Searched in Multiple-Occupancy Structure, 11 A.L.R.3d 1330, 1333, 
at § 3 (1967 & Supp. 1995); 68 Am. Jur. 2d Searches and Seizures 
§ 138, at 758-59 (1993 & Supp. 1996); and 1 J. Cook, 
Constitutional Rights of the Accused § 3:3 at 316-19 (2d ed. 1985 
& Supp.1995)). The rationale behind this requirement in 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Matsunaga was to "preclude a search of other units in the 
building occupied by innocent persons" and comply with the 
constitutional mandate of particularity. Id. at 167, 920 P.2d at 
381. 
The circuit court failed to take into consideration 
that, 
[a] search warrant . . . is not defective for failing to
specify a subunit within the designated building if thebuilding "from its outward appearance would be taken to be asingle-occupancy structure and neither the affiant nor otherinvestigating officers nor the executing officers knew orhad reason to know of the structure's actual multiple-occupancy character until execution of the warrantwas under way." Anderson, 84 Hawai #i at 468, 935 P.2d at
1013 (quoting 2 [Wayne R.] LaFave, [Search and Seizure] §4.5(b), at 526-29 [3d ed. 1996]). 
Rodrigues, 145 Hawai# i at 495, 454 P.3d at 436. 
In Rodrigues, the defendant lived in a downstairs 
studio unit of a house. Id. at 491, 454 P.3d at 432. The 
defendant moved to suppress evidence obtained from a search of 
his residence on the basis that the search warrant did not state 
with specificity the subunit in which he resided. Id. at 488, 
454 P.3d at 429. "The circuit court determined that the searched building was a multiple-occupancy building and that the affiant 
officer knew or should have known that the defendant's subunit 
was a separate unit." Id. The search warrant described the 
property as "a three bedroom, 2 bathroom residence that is light colored, and has a white colored rooftop[,]" "located at Puuhalo 
Street in Kailua-Kona, Hawai# i." Id. at 490, 454 P.3d at 431 
(original brackets omitted). In determining whether the search warrant satisfied the particularity requirement, the supreme 
court analyzed "(1) whether the structure would be viewed as a 
multiple-occupancy structure from its outward appearance, and (2) 
whether the affiant or other investigating or executing officers 
knew or had reason to know of the structure's actual 
multiple-occupancy character prior to the commencement of 
execution of the warrant." Id. at 495, 454 P.3d at 436. The 
downstairs unit had a different appearance than the remainder of 
9            
             NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the house, a roof that was not connected to the roof covering the 
rest of the house, and an entrance that was separate from the 
upstairs portion and accessible from a separate street. Id. The 
police officer who both drafted the affidavit and executed the search warrant had personal knowledge, prior to the execution of 
the search warrant, of the details of the downstairs unit and 
that multiple families had been separately living in the 
building. Id. at 496, 454 P.3d at 437. The supreme court held 
that the circuit court's unchallenged findings of fact, which were grounded in the testimony and evidence in the record, 
demonstrated that: (1) the building's outward appearance 
indicated that the defendant's downstairs unit was separate and 
distinct from the upstairs unit; and (2) the police officer who 
both drafted the affidavit and executed the search warrant had 
personal knowledge that the residence was a multi-unit dwelling. 
Id. at 497, 454 P.3d at 438. Thus, the search warrant, which did 
not describe the separate downstairs unit, failed to satisfy the 
constitutional particularity requirement and was invalid. Id. 
In this case, instead of a structural building, the 
property in question was described as a campsite made up of three 
tarp/tent enclosures. The circuit court made no finding that the 
property was in fact a multiple-occupancy dwelling, yet the court 
found that the three tarp/tent structures and the van were 
separate units or residences requiring separate search warrants. 
The circuit court concluded that the van was a "completely 
enclosed, separate unit on the premises secured by a lock and 
key"
5 and that the van was "a separate unit (as is any personal 
mode of transportation)." Vega asserts that the circuit court correctly concluded that the van constituted a separate 
residential unit. The circuit court's conclusion that each 
tarp/tent enclosure and the van itself constituted a separate 
unit or residence appears to have been based primarily on the 
5 We note that there are no facts in the record expressly supporting
the circuit court's finding that the van was secured by a lock and key. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arrangement of the tarp/tent enclosures and the van. 
Physically, the tarp/tent enclosures were separate 
structures with no overlapping parts. However, the tarp/tent 
enclosures were "in close proximity to each other (approximately 
7 feet)" and the van was parked underneath one of the tarp/tent 
enclosures. The information in the affidavit stated that Vega 
utilized the three tarp/tent enclosures as his residence and that 
he would sleep in the van. Based on such information, Officer 
Reyes stated his belief that Vega was "in control of all three 
tent/tarp enclosures and the parked van under the main tarp/tent 
enclosure." Officer Reyes testified that, based on his 
investigation and his sources of information, Vega was the only 
individual that was identified and confirmed to be staying on the 
property and sleeping in the van. There was no evidence 
indicating that there were multiple occupants of the tarp/tent 
set-up. Unchallenged FOF 20, which is binding on appeal, see 
Kelly v. 1250 Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai# i 205, 227, 140 P.3d 
985, 1007 (2006), states: "No one else was found on the property at the time the search warrants were executed, but there is no 
evidence that no one else lived on the property." 
As the proponent of the motion to suppress, Vega bore 
the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that 
the evidence he sought to be excluded was unlawfully secured, and 
that his own Fourth Amendment rights were violated by the search 
and seizure. See Anderson, 84 Hawai# i at 467, 935 P.2d at 1012. 
Vega did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the campsite described in the search warrant was occupied by multiple 
individuals, requiring an analysis of whether the areas of the 
campsite constituted separate units or residences. 
Therefore, 
the circuit court, without finding that the campsite was occupied by multiple occupants, wrongly concluded that each tarp/tent 
structure and the van within the campsite required a separate 
search warrant. In the absence of a finding that other 
individuals occupied the campsite, there was no danger that the 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
search warrant was overbroad as to result in a search of spaces 
occupied by innocent persons. See Matsunaga, 82 Hawai# i at 
166-67, 920 P.2d at 380-81. 
In arguing that the van constituted a separate 
residential unit, Vega seems to assert that he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the van that was separate and apart 
from that of the rest of the campsite. As discussed supra, Vega 
did not prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
campsite housed multiple occupants. The evidence shows that Vega 
used the entire campsite property as his residence. Under such 
circumstances, the van was akin to a locked bedroom in a 
dwelling. Although technically a vehicle, the van was not used 
as a mode of transportation, but as an area to sleep. Indeed, 
the van had not moved for months. Like a locked room in either 
shared or single occupancy dwellings, the fact that the van in 
the tarp/tent enclosure may have had a lock and key did not mean 
the van automatically constituted a separate residential unit. 
See Anderson, 84 Hawai# i at 469, 935 P.2d at 1014 ("[A] locked 
bedroom door does not, by itself, automatically elevate the bedroom to the status of a separate residential unit." (citing 
United States v. Kyles, 40 F.3d 519, 524 (2d Cir. 1994); People 
v. Siegwarth, 674 N.E.2d 508, 511 (Ill. App. Ct. 1996); and State 
v. Hymer, 400 So.2d 637, 639 (La. 1981))). The search warrant 
could nonetheless be valid with respect to the van if "the 
objective facts available to the police officer[] at the time 
[he] obtained the search warrant did not reasonably suggest that 
the [subunit] was a residential unit that was separate and 
distinct from the remainder of the dwelling[.]" Id. Here, the 
facts available to Officer Reyes at the time he obtained the search warrant were that the three tarp/tent enclosures were in 
close proximity to each other, the van was parked under the main 
tarp/tent enclosure, and Vega utilized and was in control of the 
entire campsite. These facts, taken together, suggested no 
obvious distinction between access of the van and access of the 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rest of the campsite. 
The search warrant authorized a search of the 
"property/campsite known to be occupied by Steven VEGA," which 
consisted of three tarp/tent enclosures and the "van (unknown 
make and/or model) parked underneath" the "main tarp/tent 
enclosure." In his affidavit, Officer Reyes stated that two of 
the three tent/tarp enclosures were not visible from the public 
road, making a photograph or physical description impossible. 
Officer Reyes testified that the van could not be identified via 
a license plate or any other description because it was covered 
by the tarps. The search warrant specifically identified the van 
as a part of the campsite, and described the van to the extent 
possible given the factual circumstances. This was not a case 
where the search warrant did not contain any mention of the 
subunit alleged to be wrongly searched. See, e.g., Rodrigues, 
145 Hawai# i at 496-97, 454 P.3d at 437-38; Matsunaga, 82 Hawai# i 
at 167, 920 P.2d at 381. 
We therefore conclude that the search 
warrant was constitutionally valid with respect to the van and the circuit court erred in suppressing the evidence obtained from 
the search of the van on this basis. 
Finally, the State challenges COLs 16-18 by arguing 
that the circuit court erroneously ruled on the issue of the 
staleness of the information supporting the affidavit because 
that issue was not raised in Vega's motion to suppress. The 
State maintains that it was improper for the court to rule on the 
issue because the State was deprived of an opportunity to argue 
its opposition. 
Hawai
#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 47 (eff. 
2000) requires that a motion to the court "be in writing unless 
the court permits it to be made orally" and "state the grounds 
upon which it is made[.]" "The requirement that motions be in 
writing is intended to provide notice to the adverse party of the 
grounds for the motion and its pendency." State v. Kalani, 3 
Haw. App. 334, 339, 649 P.2d 1188, 1193 (1982) (citing 5 Wright & 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Miller, Federal Practice & Procedure: Civil § 1191 (1969)) 
(looking to Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 7(b)(1) for 
guidance in analyzing HRPP Rule 47 for purposes of a pretrial motion to suppress). 
Under HRPP Rule 12(b)(3) (eff. 2007), 
motions to suppress must be raised prior to trial and may be written or oral at the discretion of the judge. Under HRPP Rule 
12(f) (eff. 2007), "[f]ailure by a party to raise defenses or 
objections or to make requests which must be made prior to trial, 
within the [pretrial motion deadline], or within any extension 
thereof made by the court, shall constitute waiver
 thereof, but 
the court for cause shown may grant relief from the waiver." (Emphasis added.) 
Here, Vega's motion to suppress did not present any 
argument based on probable cause or the staleness of the 
information supporting the affidavit; it merely addressed the 
issue of whether the search warrant met the particularity 
requirement in regards to the van. At the suppression hearing, 
the circuit court emphasized the need to look at the "four 
corners" of the search warrant and allowed Officer Reyes to 
testify as to his prior knowledge, indicating that it would be 
addressing the sole issue briefed in the parties' memoranda--the 
validity of the search warrant in terms of its particularity. 
The circuit court never mentioned that probable cause for the 
search warrant was an issue that needed to be addressed. 
Nonetheless, during cross-examination, defense counsel questioned 
Officer Reyes regarding the time period over which he obtained 
the information supporting his affidavit. Then, in COLs 16-18 of 
the Order Denying Motion to Suppress, the circuit court concluded 
that the information supporting the search warrant could have 
been as much as two years old and stale, and on that grounds 
alone, the evidence should be suppressed. 
Because Vega did not raise the issue of staleness of 
the information supporting probable cause in his motion to 
suppress, and Vega did not show cause for his failure to raise 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the issue, the issue should have been waived. The State was not 
provided with notice that the circuit court would be considering 
the issue and the State thus had no opportunity to prepare itself 
to argue and present evidence on it. The State was unfairly 
prejudiced in this regard. Accordingly, the circuit court erred 
in ruling on the issue of staleness and relying on it as a basis 
for suppression. 
Based on the foregoing, the September 13, 2018 Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Motion 
to Suppress Evidence, entered in the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit, is vacated and this matter is remanded for further 
proceedings. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 17, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
15 Kauanoe A. Jackson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
#i,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Frank L. Miller,
for Defendant-Appellee. 