    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001223
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF TS
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 12-00016)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on October 14, 2014, in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
On appeal, Father claims that the Family Court erred by
 
finding that he was not currently willing and able to provide a
 safe family home for his child T.S., he was not given a
 
reasonable opportunity to reunite with T.S., and an attorney was
 
not timely appointed for him.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's points of error as follows: 
There was clear and convincing evidence that Father
 
could not provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of
 a service plan. See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A­
1
 The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
33(a)(1) (Supp. 2014). The Department of Human Services (DHS)
 
first became involved with T.S. based on reports of Father's
 
violent behavior, Mother's drug and alcohol use, and the history
 of verbal and physical abuse between the parents, as discovered
 by or reported to DHS and as set forth in temporary restraining
 orders Mother and Father had against each other. T.S. was placed
 into temporary foster care on January 23, 2012. At a January 23,
 2012 hearing, Father agreed to a service plan dated January 18,
 2012. The service plan required Father, inter alia, to
 participate in the services and treatment required for
 participation in the Family Drug Court Program, undergo a
 substance abuse assessment and recommended treatment, random drug
 tests, a psychological evaluation (after ninety days of
 sobriety), parenting education, and home-based parenting, if
 reunified. 
"Absent compelling reasons, if the child has been in
 
foster care under the department's responsibility for an
 aggregate of fifteen out of the most recent twenty-two months
 from the date of entry into foster care, the department shall
 file a motion to terminate parental rights." HRS § 587A-33(i)
 (Supp. 2014). DHS moved to terminate Father's parental rights on
 January 14, 2014. At a hearing on the Motion to Terminate
 Parental Rights, on October 14, 2014, Father admitted that he
 used meth and relapsed more than two times since January 2012.
 Father was removed from the Hina Mauka drug testing program 11
 times and did not show up for testing twenty-six times. Missed
 testing counted as a positive drug test result, as set forth in
 the service plan. Not only did Father fail to complete required
 services, Father also stated that he would not participate any
 further. Barry Kwock (Kwock), a DHS social worker, testified
 
that additional time for Father would not make a difference
 
because it had been years since T.S. entered foster custody and
 Father stated that he would not participate in any further
 services.
 
Father contends that he was not given a reasonable
 
opportunity to reunify with T.S. Father visited with T.S. until
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he tested positive for drugs in July 2012. Thereafter, while
 
Father was represented by private counsel, the Family Court
 ordered that Father participate in 30 days of drug treatment
 before allowed visitation again. Father did not participate in
 30 days of drug treatment at any time during the course of the
 proceeding. As stated above, Father agreed to a service plan
 dated January 18, 2012. Despite Father's failure to complete
 services since January 2012, in August of 2014, the Family Court
 allowed Father two more months to demonstrate that he wanted to
 reunite with T.S. by showing progress toward completing services. 
Not only did Father fail to engage in services at the time of the
 continued hearing on the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights on
 October 14, 2014, he stated that he would not participate any
 further. Under the circumstances of this case, Father was given
 a reasonable opportunity to reunify with T.S.
 
Father also claims the Family Court abused its 
discretion by not appointing counsel for Father for fouteen months. In In re TM, the supreme court concluded that "in light of the constitutionally protected liberty interest at stake in termination of parental rights proceeding, we hold that indigent parents are guaranteed the right to court-appointed counsel in termination proceedings under the due process clause in article I, section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution." In re TM, 131 Hawai 'i 
419, 436, 319 P.3d 338, 355 (2014)(footnote omitted). The supreme court held that effective upon the filing date of the opinion in In re TM, which was January 6, 2014, the family courts must appoint counsel for indigent parents when a petition for temporary foster custody is granted. Id. 
Father initially retained his own counsel. However,
 
his counsel was allowed to withdraw on December 14, 2012 after
 Father "asked him to cease work" on Father's case. The next time
 Father appeared in court after his counsel withdrew was on July
 8, 2013. The Family Court informed Father that he had the right
 to an attorney and questioned whether Father wanted to proceed
 without an attorney. Father responded, "I'll proceed as long as
 I'm comfortable with what I understand. But, yeah, we'll
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proceed." The Family Court then stated, "[I]f you're not
 
comfortable and would like to have an attorney present, then you
 can let me know." During the same hearing, the Family Court
 stated that if Father did not qualify for a free attorney, that
 he should try to get an attorney who can present his arguments.
 Thus, the record indicates that Father was aware of his right to
 counsel but chose to proceed without counsel. On February 20,
 2014, Father was appointed counsel. There is nothing in the
 record to suggest the Family Court delayed appointment of counsel
 after Father requested it.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's October 14, 2014
 
Order Terminating Parental Rights is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
',i May 26, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada 
for Father-Appellant Chief Judge 
Dean T. Nagaminefor Guardian Ad Litem-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Marissa H. LuningKaiwi N. ChingDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Petitioner-AppelleeDepartment of Human Services 
Associate Judge 
4 