NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000246
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JON RIKI KARAMATSU, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-01669)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise, J., with
Reifurth, J., concurring separately)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Jon Riki Karamatsu (Karamatsu) with operating 
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) (Count 1) and refusal to submit to testing (Count 2). At the time of the charged offenses, Karamatsu was employed as Deputy Prosecuting Attorney. Count 2 was dismissed pursuant to a motion from the State, and the case proceeded to trial on Count 1. 
After a bench trial, the District Court of the First
 
1/
Circuit (District Court)  found Karamatsu guilty as charged of
OVUII, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E­
1/ The Honorable David W. Lo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
61(a)(1) (2007).2/ The District Court sentenced Karamatsu to
 
five days of imprisonment, 72 hours of community service, license
 
revocation for one year, and a $1,000 fine. The District Court
 entered its Judgment on March 2, 2016.
 
On appeal, Karamatsu contends that: (1) there was 
insufficient evidence to show that he operated his truck while impaired; (2) the District Court failed to obtain a valid waiver of his right to testify as required by Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995); (3) the OVUII charge was 
defective for failing to define the term "alcohol"; (4) there was insufficient evidence to prove that he was impaired by "alcohol" under his reading of the term's statutory definition; and (5) the roadblock at which he was stopped was illegal because it failed to comply with statutory requirements. We affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The following evidence was presented at trial. On
 
April 4, 2015, at approximately 1:00 a.m., Karamatsu, who was
 then a Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, encountered a Honolulu Police
 Department (HPD) intoxicant control roadblock on Ala Moana
 Boulevard in the area where it passes over the Ala Wai Canal. 
Karamatsu was driving his Frontier Nissan pickup truck Ewa-bound
 on Ala Moana Boulevard when he encountered the roadblock.
 
Karamatsu was instructed to pull his truck parallel to
 
the curb in the holding area established in the two far right
 lanes. Because there was a car in front on him, Karamatsu could
 not comply with these instructions, and he stopped at an angle to
 the curb. When the car in front of Karamatsu cleared the holding
 
2/ HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides: 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
area, Sergeant Prudencio Dela Cruz (Sgt. Dela Cruz) signaled with
 
his flashlight for Karamatsu to move forward. Sgt. Dela Cruz
 testified that Karamatsu did not move and just stared straight
 ahead.
 
According to Sgt. Dela Cruz, he approached Karamatsu's
 
truck to tell Karamatsu to move forward. Karamatsu was sitting
 in the driver's seat. From a distance of two to three feet, Sgt.
 Dela Cruz detected a strong odor of alcohol coming from the
 truck. Sgt. Dela Cruz observed that Karamatsu "had red,
 bloodshot eyes. He's red. And he was, like, shiny. Shiny
 face."
 
When Sgt. Dela Cruz told Karamatsu to move his truck,
 
Karamatsu just stayed there "like in a daze." Sgt. Dela Cruz had
 to ask Karamatsu to move three or four times before Karamatsu
 moved forward to park along the curb. Sgt. Dela Cruz asked
 Karamatsu if he had had anything to drink, and Karamatsu said 
that he "had a drink earlier in the evening." In speaking with
 Karamatsu, Sgt. Dela Cruz detected "a strong odor coming from his
 mouth or breath."
 
Sgt. Dela Cruz instructed HPD Officer Lynelle Arakawa
 
(Officer Arakawa) to administer field sobriety tests to
 Karamatsu. Officer Arakawa testified that upon approaching
 Karamatsu, she noticed that his eyes were red and glassy, and she
 smelled an odor of alcohol coming from him. Officer Arakawa
 asked Karamatsu if he would perform field sobriety tests, and he
 agreed to do so. On the heel-to-toe test, Karamatsu stood with
 his feet apart while receiving instructions after being told to
 stand with his feet together; attempted to start the test before
 Officer Arakawa had completed her instructions; missed heel-to­toe while performing the test; stopped during the test to ask if
 he was doing it correctly; and did not execute the turn as he had
 been instructed.
 
Officer Arakawa testified that because Karamatsu showed
 
signs of impairment while performing the heel-to-toe test, she
 continued on to the one-leg-stand test. On the one-leg-stand
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
test, Karamatsu put his foot down once and swayed from side to
 
side throughout the test. Based on Officer Arakawa's
 observations of Karamatsu, it was her opinion that Karamatsu
 showed signs of impairment and that he was not able to safely
 operate his vehicle.
 
After the field sobriety tests, Karamatsu agreed to
 
submit to a preliminary alcohol screening (PAS) test, which
 required him to provide a breath sample. Sgt. Dela Cruz
 administered the PAS test, and he instructed Karamatsu to blow
 "as hard as you can" into the machine "like blowing into a
 balloon[.]" Although Karamatsu agreed to participate in the PAS
 test, Sgt. Dela Cruz testified that he had difficulty getting a
 reading because Karamatsu "didn't give [a] sufficient sample" and
 was "messing up the machine[.]" Sgt. Dela Cruz described
 Karamatsu's conduct as follows:
 
But what happened is he didn't give sufficient sample, or he
blew, and then he stopped, and then the machine doesn't have
enough sample to -- to take a reading. And then he would
 blow, pretending he would be blowing and then would -­there's no sample going into the machine. Or he's blocking
the mouthpiece itself with his tongue and pretending he was
blowing. So it -- it took a while . . . until we got a
sample from him.
[3/]
 
II.
 
At the conclusion of the trial, the District Court made 
findings of fact and announced its guilty verdict as follows:
 
Okay. The Court has heard testimony of the State's
two witnesses. Considered stipulation between the parties.
Reviewed the State's Exhibits 1, 2, and 3 and Defendant's
Exhibit H. Considering all the evidence and arguments
between the parties, the Court will make the following
findings:
 
The subject roadblock was properly set up in the city
and county of Honolulu, that it was administered -­administered properly. The roadblocks had adequate
lighting, and the lack of some street lighting was not a
factor -- is not a factor. 
After the defendant was directed into the holding area
and it was time for him to pull forward to the checkpoint
 
3/ When the State asked Sgt. Dela Cruz whether Karamatsu passed the PAS,
the defense objected, and the District Court sustained the objection. The
 results of the PAS were not elicited at trial.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
area, as directed by law enforcement, he remained sitting in
a daze, staring ahead. He had to be asked by Sergeant Dela
Cruz three to four times to move forward, after which
Detective -- Sergeant Dela Cruz detected a strong odor of
alcohol, red, watery eyes, shiny face. Defendant admitted
 to drinking earlier in the evening. And during the
administration of the PAS, Defendant did not comply with the
sergeant's instructions, either, quote, pretending to
perform or blow into it or playing with it, unquote. While
 the defendant did eventually provide a sufficient sample, it
took him a while to do so.
 
With respect to the walk-and-turn, the defendant was
instructed to stand with feet together. Defendant had his
 feet apart. Defendant missed heel-to-toe. Was told not to
 stop. Defendant stopped. Defendant was told to take short,
choppy steps on the turn. Defendant turned on the balls of
 his feet. Defendant was told not to start until directed. 
Defendant started while Officer Arakawa was still giving
instructions.
 
With respect to the one-legged stand, Defendant swayed
throughout the entire 30 seconds and put his foot down.
 
Based on the indicators of impairment under the
walk-and-turn and one-legged stand, coupled with Defendant
not moving forward when directed to do so by law
enforcement, was sitting there, staring with a glaze [sic],
and only did so after being told several times, and with
other indicators of Defendant admitting to drinking, strong
odor of alcohol, red, watery, bloodshot eyes, the Court
finds the defendant was impaired beyond a reasonable doubt
and finds Defendant guilty as charged.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Karamatsu argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
to show that he operated his truck while impaired. We disagree. 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we must
 
view the evidence in the light most favorable to the State. 
State v. Ildefonso , 72 Haw. 573, 576, 827 P.2d 648, 651 (1992).
 
"The test on appeal is not whether guilt [was] established beyond
 
a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to
 support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Eastman,
 
81 Hawai
'i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996). 
Here, there was substantial evidence to support the
 
District Court's findings that Karamatsu operated his vehicle
 while impaired and that Karamatsu was guilty as charged. As
 explained by the District Court in rendering its verdict, this
 evidence included indicators and signs of impairment revealed by
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Karamatsu's performance on the walk-and-turn and one-leg-stand
 
tests; his delayed and inattentive reaction to directions
 provided by law enforcement to move his truck in the roadblock
 holding area; his admitting to drinking; the strong odor of
 alcohol detected on his breath; and his red, watery, bloodshot
 eyes. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support
 Karamatsu's conviction.
 
II.
 
Karamatsu argues that the District Court failed to
 
obtain a valid waiver of his right to testify as required by
 Tachibana. In particular, Karamatsu contends that the District
 Court's "ultimate" Tachibana colloquy was defective because the
 District Court did not engage Karamatsu in a "true colloquy"
 before obtaining his waiver of the right to testify. We reject
 Karamatsu's "true colloquy" claim.
 
A.
 
Just prior to the State calling its first witness, the
 
District Court advised Karamatsu as follows:
 
THE COURT: All right. Mr. Karamatsu, you're familiar
with the 
Tachibana colloquy; correct?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
THE COURT: 
Okay. Nevertheless, I will so advise you
that you have the right to testify on your own -- in your
own defense. Although you should consult with your attorney
regarding the decision to testify, it is your decision, and
no one can prevent you from testifying, should you choose to
do so. If you decide to testify, the prosecutor -­prosecutor will be allowed to cross-examine you.
 
Have you discussed your right to testify with your
attorney?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
THE COURT: 
Do you have any questions regarding your
right to testify?
 
THE DEFENDANT: No.
 
THE COURT: 
You also have a constitutional right not
to testify and to remain silent. If you choose not to
testify, the Court will not hold your silence against you in
deciding your case.
 
Have you discussed your right to not testify with your
attorney?
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
 
THE COURT:  
Do you have any questions regarding your
right not to testify?
 
THE DEFENDANT: No.
 
THE COURT: All right. I will briefly question you
later, and you must tell me at that time whether you will
testify or not testify. 
All right?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Okay.
 
Shortly before the defense rested its case, the
 
District Court engaged in the following "ultimate" Tachibana
  
colloquy with Karamatsu:
 
THE COURT:  . . . . All right. Mr. Karamatsu, as I
discussed with you before the start of trial, you have a
constitutional right to testify in your own defense.
Although you should consult with your attorney regarding the
decision to testify, it is your decision, and no one can
prevent you from testifying, should you choose to do so. If
 you decide to testify, the prosecutor will be allowed to
cross-examine you.
 
You also have a constitutional right not to testify
and to remain silent. If you choose not to testify, the
Court cannot hold your silence against you in deciding your
case.
 
Have you made a decision to testify or remain silent?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: 
Your Honor, could I have just,
like, one or two minutes with him?
 
THE COURT:  Go ahead.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Thank you.
 
. . . . 
THE COURT:  We'll go off record for a minute.
 
(Pause in proceedings.)
 
. . . .
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:
 
Your Honor, I did speak to Mr.
Karamatsu, and I think it's the decision not to testify.
 
THE COURT:  All right. Mr. Karamatsu, before we took
a short recess and you had the opportunity to consult with
your lawyer, I asked you whether or not you made a decision
to remain silent or testify.
 
Have you made a decision?
  
THE DEFENDANT:  
Yes, Your Honor.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT:  And what is your decision?
 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Not to testify, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
And that is your decision; is that
correct?
 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: 
On the advice of counsel?
 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Yes.
 
B. 
Citing the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's decisions in State 
v. Han, 130 Hawai 'i 83, 306 P.3d 128 (2013), and State v. Pomroy, 
132 Hawai 'i 85, 319 P.3d 1093 (2014), Karamatsu argues that the 
District Court did not engage in a "true colloquy" as required by 
Tachibana at the end of the case. Karamatsu argues that "[i]nstead of pausing after each individual right/advisement and ascertaining that Karamatsu understood before proceeding, the court lumped the rights/advisements into two litanies[.]" Karamatsu also asserts that the District Court failed to determine whether Karamatsu properly understood each individual right/advisement. Karamatsu claims that because the District Court failed to engage Karamatsu in a "true colloquy" and confirm that he understood his rights, there "is no basis on the record to determine" whether Karamatsu validly waived his right to testify. Karamatsu argues that because the District Court failed to obtain a valid waiver of his right to testify, he is entitled to have his OVUII conviction overturned. 
We reject Karamatsu's challenge to the validity of his 
waiver of his right to testify. 
In order to determine the 
validity of a waiver of a fundamental right, we "'will look to the totality of the facts and circumstances of each particular case.'" Han, 130 Hawai
'i at 89, 306 P.3d at 134 (citation 
omitted). 
Here the record shows that at the time of the charged
 
incident, Karamatsu was not only a lawyer, but a Deputy
 Prosecuting Attorney. The record also reflects that as a Deputy
 Prosecuting Attorney, Karamatsu reviewed cases and screened them,
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and that he also handled OVUII cases. Under these circumstances,
 
it is apparent that Karamatsu understood and validly waived his
 right to testify. 
III. 
Karamatsu contends that the statutory definition of the
 
term "alcohol" applicable to his OVUII charge is limited to
 alcohol that is the product of distillation of a fermented
 liquid.
4/ Under Karamatsu's reading of the statutory definition,
 
alcoholic beverages such as beer and wine, which are not produced
 through distillation, would not fall within the definition of
 alcohol, and persons who became intoxicated and drove after
 drinking beer or wine could not be prosecuted for OVUII. 
Based on his interpretation of the statutory definition
 
of alcohol, Karamatsu contends that his OVUII charge was
 defective and failed to give him fair notice of the accusation
 against him because the charge did not include a definition of
 alcohol that limited the term to alcohol that is the product of
 distillation of a fermented liquid. He further contends that
 there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction because
 the State did not prove that he became impaired as the result of
 consuming alcohol that was the product of distillation of a
 fermented liquid. We conclude that Karamatsu's restrictive
 reading of the statutory definition of the term alcohol is wrong. 
Accordingly, his arguments that the OVUII charge was defective
 and the evidence was insufficient, which are based on his
 erroneous interpretation of the statutory definition, are without
 merit.
 
4/ At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 291E-1 defined the term
"alcohol" for purposes of the OVUII offense as follows:
 
"Alcohol" means the product of distillation of any fermented
liquid, regardless of whether rectified, whatever may be the
origin thereof, and includes ethyl alcohol, lower aliphatic
alcohol, and phenol as well as synthetic ethyl alcohol, but not
denatured or other alcohol that is considered not potable under
the customs laws of the United States.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This court's decision in State v. Tsujimura, 137 
Hawai'i 117, 366 P.3d 173 (App. 2016), vacated on other grounds, 
No. SCWC-14-0001302, 2017 WL 2361154 (Hawai 'i May 31, 2017), is 
directly on point and refutes Karamatsu's claims. In Tsujimura, 
this court rejected the same argument regarding the statutory definition of the term "alcohol" that Karamatsu raises in this appeal. Like Karamatsu, Tsujimura argued that "the definition of alcohol for purposes of HRS Chapter 291E only includes alcohol that is the product of distillation, such as distilled liquor, and does not include beer or wine, which are not produced through distillation." Tsujimura, 137 Hawai
'i at 120, 366 P.3d at 176. 
We rejected Tsujimura's argument, and we held that: "Contrary to Tsujimura's contention, the statutory definition of alcohol is not limited to alcohol that is the product of distillation, but also specifically includes ethyl alcohol, which is 'the intoxicating agent in beer, wine and other fermented and distilled liquors.'" Id. (citation and brackets omitted). 
On certiorari review, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
recently affirmed this aspect of our decision in Tsujimura. The supreme court stated: 
Contrary to Tsujimura's contention, the statutory meaning of
"alcohol" is not circumscribed to alcohol derived from
 distillation. . . .
 
. . . . [Under the statutory definition,] "alcohol" means
"the product of distillation of any fermented liquid,
regardless of whether rectified, whatever may be the origin
thereof." And "alcohol" also "includes ethyl alcohol, lower
aliphatic alcohol, and phenol as well as synthetic ethyl
alcohol" regardless of whether they are products of
distillation. . . . 
. . . . [T]he meaning of "alcohol" is inclusive of ethyl
alcohol, also commonly known as ethanol, which "is the
intoxicating agent in beer, wine, and other fermented and
distilled liquors." Accordingly, the statutory definition
of "alcohol" includes beer, wine, and other fermented
liquors because these substances contain ethanol.
 
Tsujimura, 2017 WL 2361154, at *6-7 (footnotes omitted).
 
In Tsujimura, we also rejected Tsujimura's claims that
 
were premised on his erroneous reading of the statutory
 
definition of alcohol, namely, his claims that his OVUII charge
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was defective for failing to define the term "alcohol" and that
 
there was insufficient evidence that he had consumed "alcohol" as
 defined by statute. Tsujimura, 137 Hawai
'i at 120-22, 366 P.3d 
at 176-78. These are the same claims raised by Karamatsu in this
 appeal. We conclude that our decision in Tsujimura is
 dispositive. Based on our decision in Tsujimura, which was
 affirmed in pertinent part by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court, we 
conclude that Karamatsu's restrictive reading of the statutory
 definition of "alcohol" applicable to this case is wrong.
5/ We
 
further conclude that Tsujimura's claims regarding the validity
 of the OVUII charge and the sufficiency of the evidence, which
 are predicated on his erroneous reading of the statutory
 definition, are without merit.
6/
  
IV.
 
Karamatsu argues that the roadblock at which he was
 
stopped was illegal because it failed to comply with the minimum
 standards for roadblocks set forth in HRS § 291E-20 (2007).
7/  In
 
5/ Because the statutory definition of alcohol applicable to this case
includes ethyl alcohol, we reject Karamatsu's claim that the OVUII statute
(HRS § 291E-61) would be rendered unconstitutionally vague if, at the time of
his charged offense, the OVUII statute was applied to driving under the
influence of alcoholic beverages such as beer or wine that were not the
product of distillation.
 
6/ We are troubled by the failure of Karamatsu's counsel to cite this
court's decision in Tsujimura in Karamatsu's brief on appeal. At the time Karamatsu's counsel filed the opening brief, this court's decision inTsujimura constituted controlling authority regarding Karamatsu's claimsrelating to the statutory definition of alcohol. Moreover, as the Statenotes, Karamatsu's counsel was also appellate counsel for the defendant inTsujimura before this court and on certiorari review before the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court, and thus Karamatsu's counsel was clearly aware of this court'sdecision in Tsujimura. The Tsujimura appeal was still pending before thesupreme court, and the supreme court had not rendered a decision, at the timeKaramatsu's counsel filed the opening brief in this appeal. 
7/ HRS § 291E-20 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) Every intoxicant control roadblock program shall:
 
(1)	 Require that all vehicles approaching roadblocks be
stopped or that certain vehicles be stopped by
selecting vehicles in a specified numerical sequence
or pattern;
 
(continued...)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
particular, Karamatsu contends that the roadblock failed to
 
satisfy the requirements that: (1) all vehicles approaching the
 roadblock be stopped (or that vehicles be stopped in a specified
 numerical sequence or pattern); and (2) there be proper
 illumination at the roadblock. We disagree.
 
The District Court found that the roadblock was set up
 
and administered properly. There was substantial evidence to
 support the District Court's finding.
 
The State presented substantial evidence that all
 
vehicles approaching the roadblock were stopped. The State
 introduced the "Intoxication Control Roadblock Establishment and
 Operation" Report for the roadblock at issue in this case. The
 Report verifies that: "All motor vehicles approaching the
 roadblock were stopped[,]" and the Report was signed by both Sgt.
 Dela Cruz and Officer Arakawa. Sgt. Dela Cruz, who was in charge
 of the roadblock, testified that every car that approached the
 roadblock was stopped.
 
7/(...continued)
(2)	 Require that roadblocks be located at fixed locations
for a maximum three-hour period;
 
(3)	 Provide for the following minimum safety precautions
at every roadblock:
 
(A)	 Proper illumination;
 
(B)	 Off-road or otherwise safe and secure holding
areas for vehicles involved in any roadblock
stop;
 
(C)	 Uniformed law enforcement officers carrying
proper identification;
 
(D)	 Adequate advance warning of the fact and purpose
of the roadblocks, either by sign posts, flares,
or other alternative methods;
 
(E)	 Termination of roadblocks at the discretion of
 the law enforcement officer in charge where
traffic congestion would otherwise result; and
 
(4)	 Provide for a sufficient quantity and visibility of
uniformed officers and official vehicles to ensure speedy
compliance with the purpose of the roadblocks and to move
traffic with a minimum of inconvenience.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In support of his claim that not all vehicles were
 
stopped, Karamatsu cites the following testimony of Officer
 
Arakawa:
 
[Defense counsel] Q. Okay. Now, Sergeant Sakamoto
isn't directing every vehicle into the holding area;
correct?
 
[Officer Arakawa] A. The -- like if the buses go by,
then I guess they wouldn't fit, so he just checks them over
there.
 
Q. Okay. But do you mean to say that every single
vehicle pulls into the holding area besides buses?
 
A. It's supposed to be every vehicle goes through
that's why.
 
Q. Every vehicle gets stopped, right, by Sergeant
Sakamoto.
 
But every vehicle also gets directed into the holding
area?
 
A. Except the buses and -- oh, the big trucks, too.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Contrary to Karamatsu's contention, Officer Arakawa's
 
testimony does not show that buses and big trucks approaching the
 
roadblock were not stopped. Rather, Officer Arakawa's testimony
 indicates that buses and big trucks were stopped, but were
 checked at a different location ("he just checks them over
 there") than cars, because they were too big to fit in the
 holding area where the cars were being checked. Thus the portion
 of Officer Arakawa's testimony cited by Karamatsu does not negate 
the State's showing that all vehicles approaching the roadblock
 were stopped.
 
Karamatsu presented evidence that the streetlights in
 
the area where the roadblock was established were not working at
 the time Karamatsu was stopped. He claims that this shows that
 the illumination was not proper. However, the District Court
 specifically found that the roadblock "had adequate lighting, and
 the lack of some street lighting was not a factor[.]" We
 conclude that the State presented substantial evidence to show
 that there was proper illumination for the roadblock. Sgt. Dela
 Cruz and Officer Arakawa both testified that the lighting at the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
roadblock was adequate. The State also presented evidence that
 
the roadblock area was illuminated by flares, blue lights from
 police cars, and flashlights held by the officers. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the District Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Alen M. Kaneshiro 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Albert Cook Deputy Attorney Generalfor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
CONCURRING OPINION BY REIFURTH, J.
 
I concur in the result reached by the majority.
 
14
 