NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000684
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANTONIO GANITANO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 15-1-1721)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Antonio Ganitano (Ganitano ) appeals
from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence ( Judgment)
entered against him and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee the State
of Hawai# i (State), which was entered on October 5, 2016, in the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( Circuit Court).1 
After a jury trial, Ganitano was convicted of two
counts of sexual assault in the third degree, in violation of
Hawai#i Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-732(1)(c) (2014).2 
1The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
2HRS § 707-732(1)(c) provides in relevant part:
§ 707-732  Sexual assault in the third degree.   (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the third
degree if:
. . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Ganitano asserts three points of error,
contending that:  (1) the State did not introduce substantial
evidence of Ganitano's age; (2) the complaining witness's ( CW)
testimony was not credible and therefore did not constitute
substantial evidence to support the convictions; and (3) the
deputy prosecuting attorney ( Prosecutor ) committed prosecutorial
misconduct during closing argument, which deprived Ganitano of
his right to a fair trial.  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Ganitano's points of error as follows:
(1) Ganitano contends that:  (1) under the statute for
which he was convicted, Ganitano's age could not have been proven
through circumstantial evidence; and (2) there was not
substantial evidence of his age.  The State contends that there
was sufficient evidence that Ganitano was not less than five
years older than CW.
HRS § 707-732(1)(c) (2014) provides in relevant part:
§ 707-732  Sexual assault in the third degree.   (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the third
degree if:
. . . .
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual contact
with a person who is at least fourteen years old
but less than sixteen years old or causes the
2(...continued)
with a person who is at least fourteen years old
but less than sixteen years old or causes the
minor to have sexual contact with the person;
provided that:
(i) The person is not less than five years
older than the minor; and
(ii) The person is not legally married to the
minor;
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
minor to have sexual contact with the person;
provided that:
(i)The person is not less than five years
older than the minor; and
(ii) The person is not legally married to the
minor; 
(Emphasis added).  
Here, CW testified that she was fourteen years old at
the time of the alleged incidents.  Joven Ramelb ( Joven), CW's
father, testified that Ganitano's daughter was "about the same
age" as Joven's other daughter, Jackelyn Ramelb ( Jackelyn). 
Jackelyn testified that she was twenty-seven years old at the
time of trial, which took place approximately two years after the
alleged incidents.  Joven also testified that he had known
Ganitano for "almost ten years" and that after knowing him for a
"couple of years" he began to work with Ganitano at Royal
Hawaiian Movers.  Further, Jovites Lorenzo ( Jovites), another of
CW's older sisters, testified that Joven and Ganitano had been
friends since Joven and the family lived in Waipahu, which was
when CW was approximately one-and-a-half to two years old. 
Ganitano provides no authority for his assertion that
the age difference may not be proven through circumstantial
evidence, and we find none.  
Based on the evidence adduced at trial, we conclude
that the State introduced credible evidence which was of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support the conclusion that Ganitano was
not less than five years older than CW.  See, e.g., State v.
Grace, 107 Hawai #i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005).  
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) Ganitano next contends that CW's testimony was not
credible and therefore did not constitute substantial evidence
because:  (1) she did not report the August 2 or 3, 2014 incident
until over one year later; (2) she did not call or text her
family members on August 9, 2014, but instead posted on various
social media sites that she was scared and "[c]an somebody please
come over and stay with me," where there was no guarantee that
anyone would read the post; (3) she did not cry out or scream
during the August 2 or 3, 2014 incident, even though a family
member was reportedly at home; and (4) Ganitano's conduct of
staying at the family's home, instead of fleeing, and then
helping Joven put away the groceries was inconsistent with CW's
allegation of sexual assault. 
"In a jury trial, the jury is the trier of fact and,
thus, is the sole judge of the credibility of the witnesses and
the weight of the evidence."  State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai# i 472, 483,
927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996) (citation omitted).  "When reviewing a
jury trial, an appellate court will not pass upon the jury's
decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the
weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the jury
as the trier of fact."  Id. (citation omitted).  Moreover, it is
evident from the verdict that the jury believed CW's testimony
beyond a reasonable doubt.  See id.  
CW testified that the earlier incident was difficult to
talk about because it was more severe and that she reported it to
her sister, but did not feel comfortable speaking to the
interviewer about it.  CW also testified that she was "terrified"
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
about reporting the August 2 or 3 incident and that she did not
want to upset her father, Joven.  Finally, although Joven did
testify that Ganitano helped him with groceries when he returned
on August 9, 2014, such conduct may or may not be evidence of
innocence, and the jury evidently did not find it sufficient to
introduce a reasonable doubt as to Ganitano's guilt.  
In sum, CW's testimony, along with the testimony of the
other witnesses concerning their observations and the
circumstances surrounding the alleged incidents, constituted
credible evidence which was of sufficient quality and probative
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support the
conclusion that Ganitano committed these offenses.  Grace, 107
Hawai#i at 139, 111 P.3d at 34 (citation omitted). 
(3)  Ganitano alleges that certain statements made by
the State during closing arguments constituted prosecutorial
misconduct.  Ganitano did not object to these remarks at trial.  
Therefore, we review Ganitano's allegations of prosecutorial
misconduct for plain error.  See, e.g., State v. Wakisaka, 102
Hawai#i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003) ("If defense counsel
does not object at trial to prosecutorial misconduct, this court
may nevertheless recognize such misconduct if plainly erroneous."
(citation omitted)).  
"[Appellate courts] evaluate [] claims of improper
statements by prosecutors by first determining whether the
statements are improper, and then determining whether the
misconduct is harmless."  State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai #i 10, 14, 250
P.3d 273, 277 (2011) (citation omitted); see also State v.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Schnabel, 127 Hawai #i 432, 452-53, 279 P.3d 1237, 1257-58 (2012)
(determining whether the prosecutor's statements amounted to
misconduct before determining whether the misconduct was
harmless).  If a statement is determined to be improper, then the
following factors are considered in determining whether they were
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt:  "(1) the nature of the
conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3)
the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." 
Wakisaka , 102 Hawai #i at 513, 78 P.3d at 326 (citation omitted).
Ganitano first contends that the following statement of
the Prosecutor, made in closing argument, was improper:
A predator on the prowl.  That's what this defendant
was . . . . He targeted a young girl.  He targeted a girl
who was alone, a girl who was defenseless, a girl who
trusted him, and a girl he knew would not tell.
During closing arguments, a prosecutor is 
permitted to draw reasonable inferences from the evidence
and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence. It
is also within the bounds of legitimate argument for
prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on the evidence
as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the
evidence.  In other words, closing argument affords the
prosecution (as well as the defense) the opportunity to
persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid,
based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable
inferences that can be drawn therefrom.
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai #i 405, 412-13, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238-39
(1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).  
The characterization of a defendant as a "predator" is
not improper where it is supported by the evidence.  See People
v. Thomas, 281 P.3d 361, 385 (Cal. 2012) (references to the
defendant as a "'predator,' a 'depraved predator,' a 'vile, nasty
predator of women,'" were permissible as "'opprobrious epithets
warranted by the evidence'" in a trial for, inter alia, rape,
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
kidnapping and murder); People v. Estevez, No. H021998, 2002 WL
31439824, at *9 (Cal. Ct. App. Oct. 31, 2002) (characterizing the
defendant as a "sexual predator" in opening and closing in a rape
trial was not improper).  Indeed, in the commentary to HRS § 707-
759 (2014), the legislature ( legislature ) used the word
"predator" to describe "persons who seek out minors for sexual
purposes."
Here, the statement that Ganitano was a predator was a
reasonable inference and within the wide latitude that the State
is allowed in discussing the evidence.  See Rogan , 91 Hawai #i at
412, 984 P.2d at 1238.  Moreover, it was supported by the
evidence.  See Thomas, 281 P.3d at 385.  Testimony adduced at
trial established that Ganitano, a much older man who was a
trusted family friend, made sexual contact with CW on two
occasions, when she was just fourteen years old.  We conclude
that the Prosecutor's reference to Ganitano as a predator was not
improper.
Similarly, Ganitano argues that the Prosecutor acted
improperly when she "portrayed CW as scared, defenseless, weak,
vulnerable, and 'prey' for Ganitano."  We reject this argument.  
In State v. Bruce, where the defendants were charged
with, inter alia , promoting prostitution, the prosecutor
commented that the defendants treated the complaining witness
like "a piece of property", and stated:  "[b]ut she's not a piece
of property.  I mean, she's somebody's daughter, she's somebody's
friend, she's a mother, she's a woman, she is a person, and she
deserves to be treated properly."  State v. Bruce , 141 Hawai #i
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
397, 408, 411 P.3d 300, 311 (2017) (emphasis omitted).  The
supreme court recognized that one of the central issues in the
case was "whether McKinley had compelled [the complaining
witness] to engage in prostitution against her will."  Id. at
407, 411 P.3d at 310.  The supreme court held that "when
considered in context, the prosecutor's comments were relevant to
the central issues at trial."  Id. at 407, 411 P.3d at 310
(citation omitted).
Here, there was evidence that Ganitano sexually
assaulted a fourteen-year-old girl, on one occasion when she was
alone in her bedroom, and on a second occasion when she was home
alone babysitting for two younger children.  Noting her weakness,
fear, and vulnerability to an adult friend of the family who was
welcome in her home was within the Prosecutor's wide latitude
allowed in discussing the evidence and helped explain why CW did
not immediately report the first incident after the second
incident occurred.  Particularly in the context of the whole
closing argument, we conclude that the Prosecutor's comments were
relevant to the central issues at trial and were not improper.
Ganitano next contends that the Prosecutor's argument
that the defense "came to court ready to play the blame game"
constituted misconduct.  We reject this contention.  In context,
the Prosecutor's colloquialism referred to the defense's theory
and strategy to convince the jury that CW was not a credible
witness and that her testimony describing the incidents of
alleged abuse were either false or otherwise insufficient to
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
support Ganitano's conviction.  We conclude that this statement
did not constitute prosecutorial misconduct.
Finally, Ganitano argues that the Prosecutor misstated
the law when she argued:  "We have this law, Sexual Assault in
the Third Degree, to protect minors like [CW] who are too scared,
vulnerable, weak, to protect themselves."  As the State contends,
however, if anything, the Prosecutor's comment would be an
alleged misstatement of the purpose of the law, rather than a
mischaracterization of the law itself, as it did not misrepresent
any of the elements of the offense or otherwise misstate the law
that Ganitano was alleged to have violated.  
The legislative history behind HRS § 707-732(1)(c)
includes the following passage regarding the purpose of the
statute:
Your Committee further finds that minors many times get
lured into sexual relations with someone who is
significantly older.  Your Committee believes that this
measure is necessary to protect Hawaii's youth.
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1189, in 2001 Senate Journal, at 1392
(emphasis added).
Based on the legislative history, it appears that the
purpose of the law was, at least in part, to protect minors who
are too vulnerable to protect themselves.  The Prosecutor's
reference to this purpose did not constitute misconduct.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 5, 2016
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 30, 2018.
On the briefs:
Emmanuel V. Tipon,
(Bilecki & Tipon),
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
10