NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000601
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MICHAEL G. SHEEHAN, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
COUNTY OF KAUA 'I, COUNTY OF KAUA 'I PLANNING COMMISSION,
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Appellees-Appellees,
and
 
HUI HO 'OMALU I KA 'AINA, Intervenor-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0161)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
I. Introduction
 
This secondary appeal stems from Appellees-Appellees 
County of Kaua 'i and County of Kaua 'i Planning Commission's 
(collectively, the Planning Commission) revocation of Appellant-
Appellant Michael G. Sheehan's (Sheehan) land use permits due to violations of enumerated permit conditions. Sheehan appeals from a Judgment filed on July 21, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court).
1 The circuit court entered 
judgment against Sheehan and in favor of the Planning Commission and Intervenor-Appellee Hui Ho
'omalu i Ka 'Aina (Hui), affirming 
in its entirety the Planning Commission's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; Decision and Order" (Commission's FOF/COL) 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that revoked four permits which authorized Sheehan to own and 
operate a boatyard at the mouth of the Hanalei River on Kaua 'i. 
On appeal, Sheehan asserts that the circuit court erred
 
by (1) concluding that Sheehan failed to comply with the
 conditions of his permits, thus triggering the Planning
 Commission's authority to revoke; (2) disregarding and ignoring
 the deposition testimony of Planning Director Ian Costa;
 (3) concluding that Sheehan's constitutional rights were not
 violated; (4) affirming the Planning Commission's decision to
 revoke Sheehan's permits because the decision was contrary to the
 reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
 record; and (5) concluding that Hui had standing to intervene. 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm the Judgment.
II. Background
 
Sheehan operated a boatyard on property located on the 
Hanalei River in the County of Kaua
'i (Property) pursuant to four 
2
permits issued by the Planning Commission in 1987:  Special
Management Area (SMA) Use Permit (U)87-8, Use Permit U-87-32,
 Special Permit SP-87-9, and Class IV Zoning Permit Z-IV-87-40
 (collectively, the permits).
3 In its order approving the four
 
permits, the Planning Commission enumerated thirteen (13)
 conditions. Of the thirteen conditions, the following are
 pertinent for this appeal:
 
2 The permits were originally issued to Sheehan and his ex-wife,
Patricia W. Sheehan. Patricia is no longer involved in the operation or
ownership of the boatyard and is not a party to this case. 
3 The circuit court's FOF no. 7 provides
 
[A Special Management Area (SMA)] Use Permit was required
since the property and proposed development are within the
SMA. See ROA at 003236. A Special Permit was required
since portions of the property and proposed development are
located within the State Land Use Agricultural District and
such development and use were not generally permitted in
that district. Id. A Use Permit was required since
portions of the property are zoned Agricultural and Open
Districts and the proposal was not a permitted use in those
districts. Id. A Class IV Zoning Permit was required as a
procedural requirement for issuance of a Use Permit. Id. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2.	 The following conditions be resolved with the Public
Works Department:
a.	 All construction must conform to the
 requirements of the Flood Control Ordinance.
. . . .
 c.	 Submit plans for preliminary review prior to
requiring building permit.
 
. . . .
 
4.	 Approval of these permits shall be on a temporary basis
and shall be reviewed after a one (1) year period by
the Planning Commission. Should the [Department of
Transportation (DOT)] develop a long-range
solution/facility to accommodate the commercial tour
boat operations at another location, the Planning
Commission reserves the right to modify conditions or
revoke the permits.
 
5.	 No new commercial tour boat operations other than those
with existing [Department of Land and Natural Resources
(DLNR)]/DOT revocable permits shall be allowed to use
this facility. A listing of occupants of the proposed
baseyard shall be submitted to the Planning Department
for verification on a yearly basis. Any request for
boat or vessel substitution, additional boats, transfer
of revocable permits, increase in passenger capacity of
commercial tour boat operations shall be subject to the
review of the Planning Commission.
 
6.	 No launching/landing of commercial boats from the river
side of the project site shall be allowed, unless
permitted by the State [DOT].
 
. . . .
 
8.	 The Commission further reserves the right to require
additional parking stalls on site if deemed necessary.
At minimum, 100 parking stalls shall be provided
initially, and need not be paved unless required by the
Planning Commission after the annual review, or sooner
if traffic hazards result.
 
. . . .
 
12.	 The Planning Commission reserves the right to modify or
revoke these permits should unforeseen problems arise
or should the applicant violate conditions of this
approval.
 
In July 2007, in response to complaints from community
 
members, the Kaua 'i County Planning Department (KPD) conducted a 
4
field inspection  of the Property and issued a "Violation Notice"
(July Notice) to Sheehan. 
The July Notice noted violations of
 
4
 From late 2006 through 2007, the KPD conducted numerous field
inspections of the Property. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Conditions 2, 5, 6, and 8, the triggering of Condition 4, and
 
recommended that the Planning Commission issue an order to show
 cause as to why Sheehan's permits should not be modified,
 amended, or revoked. 
Subsequently, the Planning Commission issued an "Order
 
to Show Cause" (OSC) instructing Sheehan to appear at a hearing
 before the Commission.
5 In the OSC, the Planning Commission
 
described the alleged facts that the KPD contended demonstrate,
 
6
by a preponderance of the evidence,  that Sheehan violated
Conditions 2, 5, 6, and 8 of his permits. The OSC provided that 
[In violation of Condition 2, n]o current plans or building
permit applications have been submitted, nor zoning or
building permits issued for the many noted structures
presently existing within the boat baseyard facility. One
 noted structure is being used as a dwelling. The placement
of structures on the boat baseyard property without zoning
and building permits for such structures constitutes a
violation.
 
Staff notes that in October 1998, applicant had submitted
plans and applications for one of the noted un-permitted
storage structures. The [KPD] responded in writing on
12/17/98 that the application was incomplete and required
additional information. This requested information was
never resubmitted.
 
. . . .
 [In regard to Condition 4, s]ince the Governors [sic]
closure of Hanalei Commercial boating permits for access to
the Na Pali Coast, the [DOT], Harbors Division and DOT's
successor, DLNR, Department of Boating and Ocean Recreation
[DBOR], which regulates small boat harbor other than
Nawiliwili and Port Allen, have permitted moorings and ramp
permits at Kikiaola small boat harbor, Port Allen Harbor and
Port Allen small boat harbor for such operators. No permits
for commercial moorings or ramp permits within Hanalei Bay
have been issued to date other than Temporary Mooring
Permits issued to the enjoined commercial boaters, Whitey',
Captain Sundown and Ralph Young. With the provided
 
5 At the hearing, the KPD was the petitioner who held the burden of
demonstrating to the Planning Commission that Sheehan violated the conditions
of his permits. See Rules of Practice and Procedures of the Planning
Commission (1993) (Planning Commission Rules) §§ 1-6-1, -2, -11(b), --18, -19.
6
 Section 1-6-17(b) of the Planning Commission Rules provides
 
(b) Burden of Proof. Except as otherwise provided by
law, the party initiating Commission consideration shall
have the burden of proof, including the burden of producing
evidence as well as the burden of persuasion. The degree or
quantum of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
alternate venues for access to the Napali Coast, the
Commission has the right to amend, modify or revoke the
above referenced permits.
 
. . . .
 [In violation of Condition 5, b]oth [current commercial
operators using the boatyard] and their vessels, along with
tender vessels, are not of the original identified entities
permitted thru DOT issued permits . . . .
 
. . . .
 [In violation of Condition 6, t]he identified commercial
tour boat operators and/or the noted commercial
boats/vessels operating out of the boat yard do not have
commercial mooring or ramp permits issued from the managing
agency DLNR-DBOR. It is also noted that neither the DOT or
 DLNR-DBOR agencies have to date not [sic] extended the
launch and retrieve corridor to the canoe club facility from
the Hanalei River mouth.
 
. . . .
 [In regards to Condition 8, f]ield inspections on site and
review of the approved/permitted plot plan have been
conducted by the Department. Based on the current site
 conditions and implementation of parking stall size
standards, the area being provided for the operation of the
facility provides for much less than the minimum one hundred
(100) parking stalls required.
 
The Planning Commission referred the OSC to a hearing officer. 
Contested hearings were held on fourteen (14) days
 
between March and June 2009. On April 14, 2010, the hearing
 
officer issued his Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
 
7
Recommended Decision and Order  (hearing officer's FOF/COL) which
concluded that the Planning Department met its burden to
 demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that Sheehan
 violated Conditions 2, 5, 6, and 8, that Condition 4 was
 
7 Section 1-6-19(a) of the Planning Commission Rules provides in
pertinent part
 
1-6-19 Post Hearing Procedures for Hearing Conducted
by Hearing Officer. (a) Recommendation of hearing officer:
 
(1)	 Upon completion of taking of the evidence, the
hearing officer shall prepare a report setting
for [sic] the proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law, the reasons therefore, and a
recommended order, and shall submit the report
of the proceeding to the Commission. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
triggered, and that the Planning Commission could revoke the
 
permits pursuant to Conditions 4 and 12.
 
The Planning Commission held a hearing to consider the
 
hearing officer's recommendations.8 At the conclusion of the
 
hearing, the Planning Commission adopted the hearing officer's
 FOF/COL in its entirety. On June 21, 2010, the Planning
 Commission issued its FOF/COL, which in pertinent part concluded
 
20. The Planning Commission, based upon reliable
probative and substantial evidence on the record, concludes
that the Planning Department has met its burden of proving,
by a preponderance of the evidence that [Sheehan] has
violated Condition 2 of the Permits.
 
. . . .
 
23. The various structures on the property, including a
dwelling unit, and storage containers require a building
permit. [Sheehan] does not have such building permit or
approval from the Commission.
 
. . . .
 
30. The placement of two 12' x 8'6" x 40' mini storage
containers and Matson type storage containers, the stock
piling of miscellaneous waste material . . . and the
construction of a wooden frame shed structure, without prior
Planning Commission review and SMA approval, as required by
[Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 205A-29(b) (2001)], has
resulted not only in numerous violations of HRS Section
205A-28 [(2001)] and Section [10.0] of [Kauai's SMA Rules],
but, by necessity, has resulted in the violation of
Condition 2 of the Permit since no required building permits
can be issued by the Department of Public Works without
prior SMA approval. (HRS Section 205A-29(b))
 
. . . .
 
40. The Planning Commission, based upon reliable,
probative and substantial evidence on the record, concludes
that the Planning Department has met its burden of proving,
by a preponderance of the evidence, that the DOT has
developed a long-range solution/facility to accommodate the
commercial tour boat operators at another location and that,
therefore, the Planning commission [sic] may lawfully
exercise its expressly reserved right [under Condition 4] to
modify conditions or revoke the permits.
 
8
 Section 1-6-19(e) of the Planning Commission Rules provides in
pertinent part
 
(e) Commission Action. (1) In the event no statement
of exceptions is filed, the Commission may proceed to
reverse, modify, or adopt the recommendations of the hearing
officer.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
48. The Planning Commission concludes that based upon
reliable, probative and substantial evidence on the record,
that the Planning Department has met its burden of proving
by a preponderance of the evidence that [Sheehan] violated
Condition 5 of the Permits.
 
. . . .
 
52. [Sheehan] violated this provision of Condition 5,
by allowing Hanalei River Enterprises Inc., and/or Lady Ann
Tours, Inc., to use the subject facilities because these
companies are not commercial tour boat operations that had
been issued DLNR revocable permits to operate out of Hanalei
Bay on or before June 24, 1987, when the Sheehan Permits
were issued.
 
. . . .
 
62. However, even, [sic] assuming that Hanalei River
Enterprises Inc. and Lady Ann Tours, Inc. were commercial
tour boat operations with existing DLNR/DOT revocable
Permits as of June 24, 1987, [Sheehan] would have been
required by Condition 5 to submit a request to the Planning
Commission for its review and approval in 2007, by
requesting substitution, additional boats, or transfer of
revocable Permits prior to allowing . . . these vessels to
use the subject boatyard facilities.
 
. . . .
 
64. The Planning Commission, based upon reliable
probative and substantial evidence on the record, concludes
that the Planning Department has met its burden of proving
by a preponderance of the evidence, that [Sheehan] failed to
comply with, and therefore, violated Condition 6 of the
Permits.
 
. . . .
 
78. The Planning Commission concludes that based upon
reliable, probative and substantial evidence on the record,
the Planning Department has met its burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that [Sheehan] has failed to
provide the "minimum, 100 stalls" and therefore violated
Condition 8 of the Permits.
 
. . . .
 
81. [Sheehan's] contention that Condition 8 merely
requires that he provide sufficient "space" for 100 parking
stalls . . . is without merit. Condition 8 specifically
requires a minimum of "100 parking stalls". The Planning
Commission concludes that providing "space and plans for 100
parking stalls" does not satisfy the requirement for
actually providing "100 parking stalls".
 
. . . .
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
83. The Planning Commission, therefore, concludes that
pursuant to its rights expressly reserved in Condition 12 of
the subject Permits, and it's [sic] inherent and impliedauthority as recognized by the Supreme Court of Hawaii in[Morgan v. Planning Dept., Cnty. of Kauai, 104 Hawai' i 173,
86 P.3d 982 (2004)], has the authority to modify or revokethe subject Permits. 
Consequently, pursuant to Conditions 4 and 12, the Planning
Commission revoked Sheehan's permits "[b]ased on [Sheehan's]
 continued violations of and non-compliance with Conditions 2, 5,
 6 and 8, and the fact that there no longer appears to be a need
 to continue this boatyard operation[.]"
 
 
On July 15, 2010, Sheehan filed a Notice of Appeal to
 
the circuit court. 
Besides challenging the Planning Commission's
 
revocation of his permits, Sheehan argued that the decision to
 revoke the permits violated Sheehan's due process and equal
 protection rights, as well as the KPD's own procedures, and the
 hearing officer's decision to allow Hui to intervene violated
 section 1-4-1 of the Rules of Practice and Procedures of the
 Planning Commission (1993) (Planning Commission Rules). 
On May 27, 2011, the circuit court entered its
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order" (circuit court's
 FOF/COL). The circuit court concluded the following:
 
17. Sheehan has not met his heavy burden of making a
convincing showing that the Commission's decision to adopt
the Hearings Officer's Recommendations and to revoke the
Permits was unjust and unreasonable.
 
. . . .
 
19. The Commission's exercise of discretion in revoking
the Permits was not arbitrary or capricious or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
. . . .
 
22. The Hearings Officer's findings of fact, all of
which were adopted by the Commission, were not clearly
erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and substantial
evidence on the whole record.
 
23. The Commission's decision to revoke the Permits was
 
not clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative and
substantial evidence on the whole record.
 
24. This Court is not left with a firm and definite
 
conviction that a mistake has been made.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
36. The Commission did not violate any constitutional
provisions by revoking the Permits.
 
37. The process involved in revoking the Permits did
not violate any constitutional provisions.
 
. . . .
 
49. The Hearings Officer, vested with the discretion
and authority delegated to him by the Commission, properly
permitted the Intervenor to intervene.
 
The circuit court also concluded that, as a matter of law,
 
Sheehan violated Conditions 2, 5, 6, and 8 of his permits,
 Condition 4 was triggered, and the Commission properly invoked
 Condition 12. On July 21, 2011, the circuit court entered its
 Judgment affirming the Planning Commission's FOF/COL in its
 entirety.
III. Discussion
 
Sheehan contends the circuit court erred by affirming
 
the Planning Commission's decision to revoke the permits,
 
concluding the revocation of the permits did not violate
 Sheehan's constitutional rights, and concluding the hearing
 officer's decision to allow Hui to intervene was proper. 
However, in his opening brief, Sheehan fails to
 
challenge any of the circuit court's FOFs beyond an assertion
 that FOF nos. 47-129 do not consider certain deposition
 testimony. Thus, Sheehan does not challenge the accuracy of the
 FOFs, just that the court allegedly did not afford proper weight
 to particular evidence which Sheehan asserts is favorable to him. 
Sheehan also does not challenge any of the Planning Commission's
 FOFs beyond a similar argument that the Commission ignored the
 same evidence allegedly favorable to Sheehan. 
Sheehan asserts that he did not need to specifically
 
challenge any FOFs in his opening brief because he challenged
 some of the hearing officer's FOFs/COLs before the Planning
 Commission, he incorporated those same arguments into his filings
 with the circuit court, and the "vast majority" of the circuit
 court's FOFs merely reiterated the findings of the hearing
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
officer. Despite Sheehan's contentions, Hawai 'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) provides that "[w]here 
applicable, each point [of error] shall also include the following: . . . (C) when the point involves a finding or conclusion of the court or agency, either a quotation of the finding or conclusion urged as error or reference to appended findings and conclusions[.]" Sheehan failed to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C). 
While noncompliance with Rule 28 does not always result 
in waiver of points of error or arguments, Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai
'i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012), Sheehan does not 
indirectly challenge the accuracy of any of the circuit court's or Planning Commission's FOFs. See id. at 497, 280 P.3d at 95 
("Though defendants do not directly cite FOF 104, they argue throughout that adjudication of [one party's] rights affect [another party's] rights, thus challenging the finding of no prejudice stated in FOF 104." (Footnote omitted)). Unchallenged FOFs are binding on this court. Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of 
Water Supply, 97 Hawai
'i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). 
Additionally, Sheehan does not cite or quote any COLs 
from the circuit court or the Planning Commission in his points of error section as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C). However, if the other sections of the opening brief provide the necessary information, this court affords litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits where possible. Marvin, 127 
Hawai
'i at 496, 280 P.3d at 94. In the argument section of his 
opening brief, Sheehan specifically challenges the circuit court's COL nos. 32-34 (regarding Planning Director Costa's declaration), cites to nos. 39 and 44-47 (constitutional challenges) and makes clear reference to nos. 22-30 (violation of conditions), 35-38 (constitutional challenges), and 48-50 (intervenor). In his reply brief, Sheehan confirms his reference 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to these COLs.9 There is no confusion that Sheehan is
 
challenging these COLs as evidenced by the fact that the Planning
 
Commission and Hui were able to sufficiently provide this court
 with a thorough response on the merits. Id. at 497-98, 280 P.3d
 
at 95-96. We therefore review Sheehan's contentions in this
 regard. 
As a secondary appeal, 
[t]he standard of review is one in which this court must
determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in
its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91­14(g) to the agency's decision. This court's review is
 further qualified by the principle that the agency's
decision carries a presumption of validity and appellant has
the heavy burden of making a convincing showing that the
decision is invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in
its consequences.
 
HRS § 91-14(g) (1993) enumerates the standards of
review applicable to an agency appeal and provides:
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse
or modify the decision and order if the substantial
rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced
because the administrative findings, conclusions,
decisions, or orders are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
. . . .
 (3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise
of discretion.
 
. . . .
 
A COL that presents mixed questions of fact and law is
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because
the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and
circumstances of the particular case. When mixed
 questions of law and fact are presented, an appellate
court must give deference to the agency's expertise and
experience in the particular field. [T]he court should
not substitute its own judgment for that of the agency.
 
9
 In his reply brief, Sheehan identifies circuit court's COL nos. 22-29
and 32-50 as the ones he challenged in his opening brief. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Curtis v. Bd. of Appeals, Cnty. of Hawai 'i, 90 Hawai 'i 384, 
392-93, 978 P.2d 822, 830-31 (1999) (emphasis added) (citations 
and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In addition, "[i]f a finding is not properly attacked, 
it is binding; and any conclusion which follows from it and is a correct statement of law is valid." Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. 
United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai
'i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055, 1093 
(1997) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). As such, any conclusions which flow from the circuit court's and the Planning Commission's unchallenged FOFs, and are correct statements of law, are not in error. 
Based on the foregoing considerations, our review is
 
limited to whether Sheehan has demonstrated that the unchallenged
 FOFs do not support violations of the permit conditions such that
 the Planning Commission's conclusions and resulting revocation
 are clearly erroneous; whether Sheehan has demonstrated that the
 revocation violated Sheehan's constitutional rights; and whether
 the hearing officer erred in allowing Hui to intervene.
10
 
A. Violation of Conditions and Revocation of Permits
 
Sheehan contends that the circuit court erred in
 
affirming the Planning Commission's revocation of his permits
 because he did not violate Conditions 2, 5, 6, and 8 of the
 permits, Condition 4 was not triggered, and a conclusion to the
 contrary is counter to the reliable, probative, and substantial
 evidence on the whole record. Specifically, Sheehan argues that
 the circuit court, the Planning Commission, and the hearing
 officer ignored evidence in his favor. 
The circuit court's COL nos. 22-30 provide that (1) the
 
hearing officer's findings of fact were not clearly erroneous;
 (2) the Planning Commission's decision to revoke the permits was
 not clearly erroneous; (3) the circuit court did not have a firm
 conviction that a mistake was made; and (4) that as a matter of
 
10 The Planning Commission did not issue COLs related to Sheehan's
arguments on appeal regarding alleged violations of his constitutional rights
or that the hearing officer erred in allowing Hui to intervene.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
law, Sheehan failed to comply with Conditions 2, 5, 6, and 8,
 
Condition 4 was triggered, and the Planning Commission properly
 invoked Condition 12. 
Condition 12 of the permits reserved "the right to
 
modify or revoke these permits should unforeseen problems arise
 or should the applicant violate conditions of this approval." 
Sheehan's lone argument against the application of Condition 12
 is that the KPD did not assert unforeseen problems had arisen so
 as to trigger Condition 12. However, the plain language of
 Condition 12 provides for the alternative situation where
 Condition 12 can be used to revoke the permits when other
 conditions have been violated. Thus, per Condition 12, if any of
 the Planning Commission's conclusions that Sheehan violated a
 condition of his permits are not clearly erroneous, the
 revocation of the permits was proper.
1. Planning Director Costa's Deposition
 
Sheehan's arguments on appeal depend to a large degree
 
on his contention that the circuit court, Planning Commission,
 
and hearing officer completely ignored Planning Director Costa's
 deposition testimony and instead relied on his oral testimony at
 the hearing. Sheehan contends it was error for the Planning
 Commission and hearing officer not to treat Costa's deposition
 testimony as conclusive evidence which Sheehan alleges
 establishes he did not violate the conditions of the permits. 
Yet, in COL nos. 32-34, the circuit court held that 
32. It would have been improper for the Hearings
Officer to have given greater weight to [Planning Director]
Costa's deposition testimony, which was hearsay and not
subject to cross-examination, than to the testimony of live
witnesses, including that of Costa, who were subject to
cross-examination at the OSC hearing.
 
33. Sheehan opened the door to potentially inconsistent
deposition and hearing testimony by voluntarily calling
Costa as a witness at the OSC hearing after he had deposed
him prior to the OSC hearing.
 
34. Furthermore, Sheehan, by failing to contest Costa's
hearing testimony either during or after the OSC hearing,
waived any objection to and his right to challenge on appeal
Costa's testimony at the OSC hearing that was at odds with
Costa's deposition testimony.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Thus, as an initial issue, we must determine whether the circuit
 
court erred in determining the proper weight afforded Costa's
 deposition. These conclusions of law are not binding on this
 court and are freely reviewable. Nani Koolau Co. v. K & M
 
Const., Inc., 5 Haw. App. 137, 141, 681 P.2d 580, 585 (1984).
 
Sheehan asserts that the circuit court's COL no. 33 is
 
erroneous because he did not assume the risk that Planning
 Director Costa would provide different testimony than his
 deposition and Sheehan was forced to call Costa as a witness
 because the hearing officer ignored the deposition evidence in
 considering Sheehan's motion to dismiss.
11 Sheehan's contentions
 
are unavailing. If Sheehan wanted to simply read the deposition
 into testimony at the contested hearing, section 1-6-17(g) of the
 Planning Commission Rules permitted the admission of prepared
 testimony. Instead, he called Costa to testify. Costa was
 subject to questioning by all parties. Planning Commission Rules
 §§ 1-6-11(b), (i). Sheehan could have impeached his witness with
 the prior deposition. See Planning Commission Rules §§ 1-6­
11(b), (i). COL no. 33 is not in error.
 
Sheehan contends COL no. 34 is erroneous because he has
 
consistently challenged the hearing officer's decision to ignore
 Planning Director Costa's deposition testimony. However, besides
 not objecting to Costa's oral testimony at the contested hearing
 (he called Costa as a witness) and his failure to impeach Costa,
 Sheehan did not assert to the Planning Commission that Costa's
 oral testimony was inadmissible; Sheehan only argued that the
 deposition testimony was a part of Costa's testimony that must be
 considered. At the hearing before the Planning Commission on
 whether to adopt the hearing officer's FOF/COL, Sheehan's counsel
 stated that "[Planning Director Costa's deposition] is testimony,
 
11 In its unchallenged FOFs nos. 30-32, the circuit court found that
Sheehan deposed Planning Director Costa prior to the contested hearings, only
Sheehan's counsel asked questions of Costa at the deposition, Sheehan
voluntarily called Costa to testify at the hearings, and Sheehan did not
attempt to impeach Costa with his prior deposition testimony during the
contested hearings.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
it is probative, it gets the same weight as his testimony at the
 
contested case proceeding. And in fact Mr. Costa's testimony
 doesn't change." (Emphasis added). Thus, any argument that the
 hearing officer should have ignored Costa's oral testimony
 because it was at odds with his deposition is waived. COL no. 34
 is not error.
 
Sheehan further argues that Planning Director Costa's
 
deposition amounts to a party admission binding the KPD to a
 position that Sheehan did not violate the conditions of his
 permits and Condition 4 had not been triggered, thus precluding
 the Commission's conclusion otherwise. Sheehan asserts that
 because the deposition was binding on the KPD, it is not
 
12
hearsay  and it is the KPD's burden to explain any disparity
despite the fact that Sheehan requested deposing Costa and called

 
him as a witness.
 
However, this argument is without merit. 
First, we
 
note that before the circuit court, Sheehan admitted that the
 Planning Commission was not bound by the testimony of Planning
 Director Costa. Sheehan does not dispute COL no. 35 which
 provides that the trier of fact, in this case the hearing
 officer, had the discretion to assess the credibility of
 witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony.
 
Second, we note that before the Planning Commission,
 
Sheehan asserted that Costa's deposition and oral testimony were
 consistent. Plus, review of the deposition reveals that Costa
 specifically denied that he concluded Sheehan was not in
 violation of the conditions of his permits, merely acknowledged
 that some of the evidence submitted appeared to show Sheehan
 complied with certain conditions, and that, in his personal
 
12 Sheehan challenges the notion in COL no. 32 that Costa was not
subject to cross-examination at his deposition, essentially arguing that
Sheehan should not be punished because Hui and the KPD chose not to
cross-examine. But Sheehan only makes this point to claim that neither Hui nor
the Planning Commission can challenge the admissibility of the deposition.
The deposition was taken into evidence by the hearing officer and the circuit
court did not conclude that Costa's deposition was inadmissible. The
 admissibility of Costa's deposition is not at issue.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
opinion, Condition 4 was not triggered. Even if Costa could bind
 
the KPD, his personal conclusion regarding Condition 4 is not
 dispositive regarding the propriety of revocation under Condition
 12.
 
As noted above, Sheehan has waived any argument that
 
Planning Director Costa's deposition should be considered at the
 expense of inconsistent oral testimony. Costa's deposition is
 not presumptively conclusive and binding on the hearing officer,
 Planning Commission, or this court. It is not disputed that it
 was within the hearing officer's and the Planning Commission's
 discretion to weigh the evidence.
2. Condition 2
 
Sheehan argues that the evidence demonstrates he did
 
not violate Condition 2. Condition 2 provides
 
2.	 The following conditions be resolved with the Public
Works Department:
 
a. All construction must conform to the requirements of
the Flood Control Ordinance.
 
. . . .
 c. Submit plans for preliminary review prior to
requiring building permit.
 
Sheehan contends that Costa's deposition provides that,
 
as written, Condition 2 gave authority to the Public Works
 
Department (PWD) to determine compliance. Sheehan argues that he
 was in the process of working with the PWD to resolve any
 relevant issues. Sheehan further asserts that Costa admitted
 during deposition that a letter from the PWD indicating that
 Sheehan was in compliance would satisfy Condition 2. However,
 the entirety of the evidence, even Costa's deposition,
 demonstrates that Sheehan misinterprets the evidence, and that
 the Planning Commission's conclusion that Sheehan violated
 Condition 2 was not clearly erroneous.
 
The Planning Commission and hearing officer concluded
 
that because Sheehan did not currently have permits for the
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13
structures located on the Property,  and could not get building
permits without SMA approval, which Sheehan had not sought from
 
the Planning Commission,14 Sheehan was in violation of Condition
 
2 and could not be in compliance. Therefore, the focus was on
 whether, in the twenty years since issuance of the permits,
 Sheehan had obtained the required building permits, not his new
 effort to comply.
15
 
The text of Condition 2 requires Sheehan to resolve
 
Condition 2a and c with the PWD. However, Planning Director
 Costa testified at the hearing that Condition 2 requires Sheehan
 to obtain a building permit and get the required inspections to
 render the permit process completed to the satisfaction of the
 KPD, not simply begin the process to obtain building permits.
 Coastal Zone Management Inspector Leslie Milnes (CZM Inspector
 Milnes) further testified that all building permit applications
 require review by the KPD. The Planning Commission noted that
 
13 Sheehan does not appear to contest that the structures on the
Property required building permits.
14 The Planning Commission concluded that "[t]he placement of two 12' X
8'6" X 40' mini storage containers and Matson type storage containers, the
stock piling of miscellaneous waste material, including concrete ruble, lumberand meter scrape and the construction a wooden frame shed structure"constituted "development" within HRS Chapter 205A and the SMA Rules andRegulations of the County of Kaua' i (1993) (SMA Rules) and Sheehan's failure
to obtain SMA approval amounted to violations of the SMA Rules. Sheehan asserts that there is no evidence in the record that a second SMA Use Permit was required for the added structures. Notwithstanding Sheehan's contentionsand the accuracy of the Planning Commission's COL that the structuresconstitute "development", the identified structures were not part of theoriginal SMA Use Permit, the County of Kauai's SMA rules require that "[a]nyperson proposing a use, activity, or operation" within an SMA file for anassessment as to whether further SMA review is required, SMA Rules §§ 7.1, .2,.3, and it is undisputed Sheehan did not seek approval before placing thestructures on the Property. Without the requisite determination, no countydepartment may issue other permits. SMA Rules § 10.0. 
15 Sheehan does not dispute that he was warned in 1993 that he needed
to obtain building permits for some of the pertinent structures on the
Property, it was not until five years later that Sheehan applied for the
proper permits from the PWD, he did not complete the process due to his
failure to file sufficient information, and he did not renew pursuit of
applicable permits until 2008, after issuance of the OSC.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
former-Planning Director Avery Youn (Planning Director Youn)16
 
testified that any structure in the flood zone must be cleared by
 
the PWD and then confirmed by the KPD. 
Planning Director Costa's deposition testimony does not
 
refute the above. The deposition testimony cited by Sheehan
 simply acknowledged that the PWD is responsible for deciding
 whether Sheehan complies, and that documents from the PWD
 providing that Sheehan was in compliance with Condition 2 would
 satisfy the condition. However, Costa also testified during his
 deposition that the KPD was not dependent on the PWD's conclusion
 to determine if Sheehan complied. Further, Sheehan did not
 obtain documentation from the PWD that states Sheehan was in
 compliance. Sheehan argues that a January 23, 2009 letter from
 Douglas Haigh, Chief of the Building Department of the PWD,
 states he was in compliance. However, the portion of the letter
 quoted by Sheehan merely provides that the PWD had not issued a
 notice of violation because Sheehan had a pending application due
 to his renewed pursuit of permits. This does not show the PWD
 determined Sheehan was in compliance with Condition 2. 
Sheehan has not demonstrated the Planning Commission's
 
conclusion that Sheehan violated Condition 2 was clearly
 erroneous.
 
3. Condition 5
 
Sheehan contends that the evidence demonstrates he did
 
not violate Condition 5. Condition 5 provides
 
5.	 No new commercial tour boat operations other than those
with existing DLNR/DOT revocable permits shall be
allowed to use this facility. A listing of occupants
of the proposed baseyard shall be submitted to the
Planning Department for verification on a yearly basis.
Any request for boat or vessel substitution, additional
boats, transfer of revocable permits, increase in
passenger capacity of commercial tour boat operations
shall be subject to the review of the Planning
Commission.
 
16 Youn was the Planning Director at the time Sheehan was issued his
permits in 1987.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Planning Commission concluded that Sheehan violated all three
 
clauses of Condition 5: (1) he allowed new commercial tour boat
 operations other than those who possessed DLNR/DOT revocable
 permits at the time of issuance of Sheehan's permits; (2) he
 failed to provide a list of occupants of the boatyard on a yearly
 basis; and (3) he failed to obtain approval of any boat or vessel
 substitution, additional boats, or transfer of permits.
 
Sheehan asserts that his two current occupants (Bali
 
Hai Charters, Inc. and Lady Ann Tours, Inc.) are entities that
 had existing DLNR/DOT revocable permits as required by Condition
 5, and the current owners obtained the original permits through
 transfer of the entity. Also, Sheehan contends that the plain
 language of Condition 5 only requires Sheehan to submit lists of
 occupants on a yearly basis and inform the Planning Commission of
 boat changes or permit transfers subject to the Commission's
 review, not review and approval. 
Sheehan contends that Planning Director Costa testified
 
in his deposition that Sheehan provided documents demonstrating
 compliance with Condition 5 and all that is required to satisfy
 Condition 5 is review, not approval. However, while Costa
 acknowledged Condition 5 only states "review" and not "review and
 approval", Costa testified that when "review" is used, the
 Commission does not just review for no reason, but to approve.
 Planning Director Youn further testified that it was his
 understanding "review" probably means "review and approval." 
This is in line with the use of the word "request" in Condition
 5. 
Sheehan also contends that because Costa testified at
 
the hearing that he was not aware of a procedure by which one
 could file a request for boat or vessel substitution, the
 Planning Commission cannot hold Sheehan's failure to comply
 against him. However, the fact remains uncontested that neither
 Sheehan nor the two occupants attempted to file any documentation
 that could constitute a request for transfer of permits.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Further, even assuming that the permits could be
 
transferred without approval of a permitting agency, there is no
 
evidence that the permits were transferred in this case. Sheehan
 cites his 1987 original list of permitted commercial boat
 operators which identifies Bali Hai Charters and Lady Ann Cruises
 as permittees. However, Sheehan offers no substantive argument
 against, and does not challenge, the circuit court's FOFs that: 
83. According to a list of valid commercial permittees
in operation as of September 30, 1988, Peter Favre was the
permittee for Bali Hai Charters, and Don and Ann Moses were
the permittees for Lady Ann Cruises, Inc. See ROA at
 
003201-003203.
 
84. The DOT has not issued any permits for commercial
vessel operations since October 1, 1998. See ROA at 003201­
003203.
 
85. The entity known as Hanalei River Enterprises, dba
Bali Hai Charters and owned by Sheehan, was not listed as
one of the tour boat operators operating in Hanalei Bay in
the late 1980's [sic]. See ROA at 001048.
 
. . . .
 
89. The entity known as Lady Ann Tours, Inc., dba
Napali Explorer and owned by Mary Kagawa-Garcia, was not
listed as one of the tour boat operators operating in
Hanalei Bay in the late 1980's [sic]. See ROA at 001047­
001048.
 
Sheehan offers no evidence refuting CZM Inspector Milnes's
 
testimony that the original Bali Hai Charters was involuntary
 dissolved in 1991, whereas Sheehan's Hanalei River Enterprises
 was involuntarily dissolved in 2004, reinstated in 2005, and
 subsequently rebranded as Bali Hai Charters the same year.
 Further, Sheehan does not explain the difference in names between
 Lady Ann Cruises (on the first list) and the current occupant,
 Lady Ann Tours. Notably, Sheehan does not cite to any permits
 involved in this case. Sheehan has not demonstrated that the
 Planning Commission's conclusions are clearly erroneous. 
Lastly, Sheehan argues that because he submitted lists
 
in 1988 and 1989 that contained hand-written substitutions of
 permittees, the Planning Commission cannot contend Sheehan is now
 in violation of Condition 5. However, Sheehan cites no authority
 for an estoppel or waiver argument. Whether Sheehan's previous
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
lists from nearly twenty years prior were compliant is irrelevant
 
as the Planning Commission determined his current list was not. 
It is understandable that the Planning Commission would view a
 list that contains no original permittees as violative of
 Condition 5.
 
The Planning Commission did not clearly err in
 
concluding that Sheehan violated Condition 5.
 
Because the Planning Commission was not clearly
 
erroneous in concluding that Sheehan violated Conditions 2 and 5
 of his permits, the Planning Commission did not err in revoking
 the permits under Condition 12 and the circuit court was correct
 in so ruling. We need not review Sheehan's remaining arguments
 regarding alleged violations of other conditions or the
 triggering of Condition 4.
B. Constitutional Claims
 
Sheehan contends that the circuit court erred in
 
concluding that neither the Planning Commission's decision to
 revoke the permits nor the process utilized violated Sheehan's
 due process or equal protection rights. "A COL is not binding
 upon an appellate court and is freely reviewable for its
 correctness." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74
 
Haw. 85, 119, 839 P.2d 10, 28 (1992).
1. Due Process
 
Sheehan asserts his due process rights were violated
 
because he was not given an opportunity to respond before the
 
Planning Commission issued its OSC, the hearing officer denied a
 purported motion for summary judgment despite the clear
 deposition testimony of Planning Director Costa,
17 and his
 
permits were modified without notice or hearing. Sheehan cites
 no legal authority to support his claims, and also fails to
 provide any citation to constitutional provisions, state or
 
17 Sheehan cites no authority to support the notion that a motion for
summary judgment or a motion to dismiss the OSC is an appropriate motion at a
contested hearing before the Planning Commission, or in what circumstances it
should be granted. 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
federal, under which he asserts his rights have been violated, as 
required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) and (8). Failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28 constitutes waiver of the arguments. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7); Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 
92, 111, 176 P.3d 91, 110 (2008) (holding that where an appellant fails to properly raise a point on appeal and does not cite to relevant authority, the court can disregard the argument). 
Even considering Sheehan's arguments, he has not
 
presented a sufficient due process claim. In COL nos. 44-46, the
 circuit concluded that Sheehan's due process rights were not
 violated because he was given ample notice and an opportunity to
 be meaningfully heard. It is unchallenged that Sheehan received
 the July Notice, submitted documents in response to the July
 Notice and the OSC, and participated fully in the contested
 hearing before the hearing officer and the Planning Commission. 
Sheehan does not cite any rule or procedure that the Planning
 Commission has purportedly violated. 
Sheehan has not demonstrated that the Planning
 
Commission violated his due process rights.
2. Equal Protection
 
Sheehan contends that both his state and federal equal 
protection rights were violated because he was treated 
differently than other permittees. Sheehan cites no legal authority to support his claims as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). Failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28 constitutes waiver of the arguments. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7); Kamaka, 117 Hawai
'i at 
111, 176 P.3d at 110. 
Even considering Sheehan's general equal protection
 
claims, Sheehan has not made a meritorious argument. In COL nos.
 38-39, the circuit court concluded that Sheehan did not assert a
 cognizable equal protection claim and failed to present any
 specific, credible evidence of actual differences in any decision
 involving similarly situated permittees. Sheehan acknowledges in
 his opening brief that he must demonstrate he was treated
 differently from similarly situated persons. Mahiai v. Suwa, 69
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Haw. 349, 360-61, 742 P.2d 359, 368 (1987). Sheehan cites only
 
to testimony from Coastal Zone Management Planner Michael Laureta
 that, in Laureta's opinion, the KPD did not respond to Sheehan's
 filings in response to the July Notice and the OSC in the same
 manner as it responded to other permittees. Thus, Sheehan has
 presented no substantive evidence of other similarly situated
 persons who were not subject to an OSC for similar violations or
 whose permits were not revoked in similar circumstances. The
 circuit court was not erroneous.
 
Further, Sheehan does not offer a substantive argument
 
against the following COLs
 
40. Even if Sheehan could show some inconsistency,
"[a] claim that an administrative agency has made different
decisions in different cases, in different years, does not
give rise to a claim for relief on equal protection
grounds." See Seven Star, Inc. v. United States, 873 F.2d
225, 227 (9th Cir. 1989).
 
41. "[M]unicipal decisions are presumptively
constitutional and, therefore, need only be rationally
related to a legitimate state interest, unless the
distinctive treatment of the party involves either a
fundamental right or a suspect classification." Del Monte
 
Dunes v. Monterey, 920 F.2d 1496, 1508 (9th Cir. 1990)
(citations omitted).
 
42. Sheehan's equal protection argument is subject to
the rational basis review because neither a suspect
classification nor a fundamental right is implicated.
 
43. The Commission's decision to revoke the Permits was
 
directly related to the legitimate State interest in
protecting Hawaii's shoreline.
 Sheehan has not demonstrated the Planning Commission
 
violated his equal protection rights.
C. Intervenor
 
Sheehan argues that the circuit court erred in
 
concluding that the hearing officer properly allowed Hui to
 
intervene in the contested hearing. Pursuant to Chapter 4 of the
 Planning Commission Rules, Hui filed a petition to intervene in
 the OSC hearing.
18 Sheehan does not dispute that the hearing
 
18 In its petition, Hui self-identifies that "[o]ur organization was
founded in 1985 to address the impacts of illegal activities on the
traditional, cultural and subsistence practices of the lawai' a and mahi' ai of 
moku Halele' a." 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
officer had the discretion to grant Hui's motion to intervene. 
Instead, Sheehan solely argues that Hui does not possess the
 requisite interest in the proceeding to justify intervention. 
Sheehan contends that the hearing officer erred because
 
Planning Commission Rules § 1-4-1(a) requires that the intervenor
 demonstrate that they will be "so directly and immediately
 affected by the proposed project that their interest in the
 proceedings is clearly distinguishable from that of the general
 public[.]" However, Planning Commission Rules § 1-4-1(b) permits
 "[a]ll other persons" to apply in writing for leave to intervene. 
Thus, assuming arguendo Hui lacked a sufficient interest under
 subsection (a), Hui was not precluded from petitioning to
 intervene by the Planning Commission Rules. Sheehan's contention
 is thus without merit.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons we affirm the Judgment filed
 
on July 21, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 17, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Richard Wilson 
for Appellant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
David J. Minkin Laura S. Lucas (McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon LLP)
for Appellees-Appellees Associate Judge 
Harold Bronstein for Intervenor-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
24
 