     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000137 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
ABIGAIL K. KAWANANAKOA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
KAPIOLANI MARIGNOLI; DUCCIO MARIGNOLI,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-50;DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-50; and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50,
Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-1017) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Abigail K. Kawananakoa 
(Kawananakoa) appeals from the February 3, 2017 Judgment on Order 
Granting Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction (Judgment) 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit 
court).  The Judgment was entered pursuant to the Order Granting 
Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction (Order Granting MTD) entered on the same day. 1
This case arises from a dispute between Kawananakoa 
and Defendants-Appellees Kapiolani Marignoli (Kapiolani) and 
1 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.       
           
        
      
         
          
          
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Duccio Marignoli (Duccio) (collectively, the Marignolis) 
regarding the ownership of a portrait of Kawananakoa's adoptive 
mother, Princess Abigail Kawananakoa (hereafter, the Portrait). 
In her Complaint, Kawananakoa alleged that she is the rightful 
owner of the Portrait and sought, inter alia, its safe return 
from the Marignolis as well as monetary damages. On October 17, 
2016, Kapiolani filed a Motion to Dismiss for Lack of 
Jurisdiction (MTD) pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rules 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(2),2 arguing that the circuit 
court lacked (1) subject matter jurisdiction over the Portrait 
because it is located in Italy and (2) personal jurisdiction over 
Duccio, Kapiolani's son, because he is a resident of Spoleto, 
Italy, who had not purposefully availed himself of the circuit 
court's jurisdiction. Kapiolani further argued that the case 
should be dismissed because Duccio's interest in the Portrait 
rendered him an indispensable party to the action under HRCP Rule 
19 and that he could not be feasibly joined because he is outside 
the jurisdiction of the circuit court. At the hearing on the MTD 
on December 9, 2016, the circuit court agreed with Kapiolani and 
orally dismissed the case with prejudice. The circuit court then 
entered the Order Granting MTD and the Judgment. 
On appeal, Kawananakoa argues that the circuit court 
had subject matter jurisdiction because the Portrait resided in 
Honolulu, Hawai# i for many years prior to Duccio's possession of 
it and the events upon which this dispute is based arose in Hawai# i
. Kawananakoa also argues that the circuit court had 
personal jurisdiction over Duccio on the bases that Duccio: 1) has been in Hawai# i many times on business; 2) uses a Hawai# i 
2 HRCP Rule 12(b) states, in relevant part: 
(b) How presented. Every defense, in law or fact, to a
claim for relief in any pleading, whether a claim,
counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party claim, shall beasserted in the responsive pleading thereto if one is required,except that the following defenses may at the option of thepleader be made by motion: (1) lack of jurisdiction over thesubject matter, (2) lack of jurisdiction over the person[.] 
2            
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
address for conducting business for a non-profit; 3) served on 
the Board of the Friends of Iolani Palace from 2009-2015; and 4) 
was in charge of the 2008 exhibit of the Portrait in Honolulu. 
Based on the Complaint, this action was of both a quasi 
in rem and in personam nature,3 and we construe Kawananakoa's 
arguments on appeal to be that the circuit court had quasi in rem jurisdiction over the Portrait and/or in personam jurisdiction 
over Duccio. See 20 Am. Jur. 2d Courts § 69 ("A decision in 
personam imposes a responsibility or liability on a person directly and binds such individual personally with regard to 
every property he or she possesses, even that over which the 
court has no jurisdiction in rem and which its decision cannot 
directly affect. The alternative to personal jurisdiction is in 
rem jurisdiction or quasi in rem jurisdiction[.]" (footnote 
omitted)); 1 Am. Jur. 2d Actions § 30 ("A proceeding quasi in rem 
has been characterized as an in rem action which affects only the 
interests of particular persons in a certain thing. . . . The 
essential elements of an action quasi in rem are a res over which 
the state can exercise power, and a course of judicial procedure 
the object and result of which is to subject the res to the power 
of the state by the judgment or decree which is entered[.]" 
(footnotes omitted)). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve 
Kawananakoa's points of error as follows. 
I. In Rem and Subject Matter Jurisdiction Over the Portrait 
In her Complaint, Kawananakoa asserted in conclusory 
fashion that the "Court has jurisdiction over the matter" but did 
not allege the location of the Portrait or otherwise provide any 
basis upon which the circuit court's subject matter jurisdiction 
3 Kawananakoa sought an award of possession of the Portrait (quasi in
rem) and monetary damages from the Marignolis (in personam). 
3           
           
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could be gleaned. Kawananakoa also did not respond to 
Kapiolani's assertion of lack of in rem or subject matter 
jurisdiction  in either her Memorandum in Opposition to 
Kapiolani's MTD (Memorandum in Opposition) or during the hearing on the MTD, beyond asserting that the circuit court had to take 
the allegations contained in the Complaint as true. 4
A trial court's dismissal for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction is a question of law, reviewable de novo . . . . 
Our review is based on the contents of the complaint, the
allegations of which we accept as true and construe in thelight most favorable to the plaintiff. Dismissal is improper unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiffcan prove no set of facts in support of his claims whichwould entitle him to relief. . . . When considering a motionto dismiss pursuant to [HRCP] Rule 12(b)(1) the trial courtis not restricted to the face of the pleadings, but mayreview any evidence, such as affidavits and testimony, toresolve factual disputes concerning the existence ofjurisdiction. 
O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai# i 383, 385, 885 P.2d 
361, 363 (1994) (brackets omitted) (emphasis added) (quoting 
Norris v. Hawaiian Airlines, Inc., 74 Haw. 235, 239–240, 842 P.2d 
634, 637 (1992)). 
In this case, the circuit court properly considered 
declarations attached to Kapiolani's MTD and Kawananakoa's 
Memorandum in Opposition. Kapiolani declared that both Duccio 
and the Portrait resided in Italy. Kawananakoa also declared 
that she sent the Portrait to Duccio in 1998 and that he 
currently had possession of it. Thus, it was undisputed that the 
Portrait was located in Italy during the course of this action. 
The circuit court therefore did not have in rem or quasi in rem 
jurisdiction over the Portrait and did not err in its decision in 
this regard. See Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186, 199 (1977) 
(stating that quasi in rem jurisdiction is "based on the court's power over property within its territory"). 
II. In Personam or Personal Jurisdiction Over Duccio 
4 "Quasi in rem jurisdiction is a form of subject matter jurisdiction
based on property located within the state's territory, tangible or intangible[.]"
21 C.J.S. Courts § 38 (footnotes omitted). 
4        
          
            
       
        
           
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"In determining personal jurisdiction, 'the [trial] 
court has discretion to proceed either upon written submissions 
or through a full evidentiary hearing.'" Shaw v. North Am. Title 
Co., 76 Hawai# i 323, 326–27, 876 P.2d 1291, 1294–95 (1994) 
(quoting 2A J. Moore, J. Lucas & G. Grotheer, Moore's Federal Practice ¶ 12.07[2.–2] at 12–69–70 (2d ed. 1993)). 
If the . . . court chooses not to conduct a full-blown 
evidentiary hearing on a pretrial motion to dismiss for lackof personal jurisdiction, plaintiff need make only a primafacie showing of jurisdiction through its own affidavits andsupporting materials, even though plaintiff eventually mustestablish jurisdiction by a preponderance of the evidenceeither at a pretrial evidentiary hearing or at trial and,before the hearing is held, a prima facie showing sufficesnotwithstanding any controverting presentation by the movingparty to defeat the motion. 
Id. (emphasis added) (quoting Marine Midland Bank, N.A. v.
Miller, 664 F.2d 899, 904 (2d Cir. 1981)). In this case, 
although there was a hearing on the MTD, it does not appear that 
there was formal discovery or a "full-blown evidentiary hearing" 
on the MTD. See Maeda v. Pinnacle Foods Inc., 390 F.Supp.3d 
1231, 1242 (D. Haw. 2019) ("Absent formal discovery or an evidentiary hearing, 'this demonstration requires that the 
plaintiff make only a prima facie showing of jurisdictional facts 
to withstand the motion to dismiss.'" (quoting Pebble Beach Co. 
v. Caddy, 453 F.3d 1151, 1154 (9
th Cir. 2006))). 
"Personal jurisdiction exists when (1) the defendant's 
activity falls under the State's long-arm statute, and (2) the 
application of the statute complies with constitutional due 
process." Norris v. Six Flags Theme Parks, Inc., 102 Hawai# i 
203, 207, 74 P.3d 26, 30 (2003). 
"Hawaii's long-arm statute, HRS 
§ 634-35,[5] was adopted to expand the jurisdiction of the State's 
5 HRS § 634-35 (2016) states in relevant part: 
(a) Any person, whether or not a citizen or resident of
this State, who in person or through an agent does any of the
acts hereinafter enumerated, thereby submits such person, and,if an individual, the person's personal representative, to thejurisdiction of the courts of this State as to any cause ofaction arising from the doing of any of the acts: 
5        
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
courts to the extent permitted by the due process clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment." Cowan v. First Ins. Co. of Hawaii, Ltd., 
61 Haw. 644, 649, 608 P.2d 394, 399 (1980). 
Due process requires that a nonresident defendant have
sufficient "minimum contacts" with the forum state "such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'"International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316, 66S.Ct. 154, 158, 90 L.Ed. 95 (1945) (citation omitted)."'[I]t is essential in each case that there be some act bywhich the defendant purposefully avails itself of theprivilege of conducting activities within the forum State,thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws.'"Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475, 105 S.Ct.2174, 2183, 85 L.Ed.2d 528 (1985) (quoting Hanson v.Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253, 78 S.Ct. 1228, 1239, 2 L.Ed.2d1283 (1958)). The determining inquiry is whether "'thedefendant's conduct and connection with the forum State are such that he should reasonably anticipate being haled intocourt there.'" Id. at 474, 105 S.Ct. at 2183 (quoting
World–Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297,100 S.Ct. 559, 567, 62 L.Ed.2d 490 (1980)). There is no "talismanic jurisdictional formula" and the court weighseach case on its facts. Id. at 485–86, 105 S.Ct. at 2189
(citation omitted). 
In Interest of Doe, 83 Hawai# i 367, 373, 926 P.2d 1290, 1296 
(1996) (quoting Shaw, 76 Hawai
#i at 329–30, 876 P.2d at 1297–98). 
There are "two types of personal jurisdiction: 
'general' (sometimes called 'all-purpose') jurisdiction and 
'specific' (sometimes called 'case-linked') jurisdiction." 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Superior Court of California, San 
Francisco County, 137 S.Ct. 1773, 1780 (2017). "A court with 
general jurisdiction may hear any claim against that defendant, 
even if all the incidents underlying the claim occurred in a 
different State." Id. (emphasis in original). 
However, in order
for a state court to exercise specific jurisdiction, the claim must arise out of or relate to the defendant's contacts with the 
forum state. Id.  
A. General Jurisdiction 
"[G]eneral jurisdiction exists where a defendant has 
(1) The transaction of any business within this State; 
(2) The commission of a tortious act within this 
State[.] 
6            
           
             
            
          
             
             
             
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
continuous and systematic contacts with the forum; the exercise 
of jurisdiction in such a case does not offend traditional 
notions of fair play and substantial justice." In Interest of 
Doe, 83 Hawai# i at 374, 926 P.2d at 1297. 
Kawananakoa alleged in the Complaint that the 
Marignolis were residents of Honolulu, Hawai# i.  Through her MTD 
and the attached declaration, Kapiolani controverted the 
assertion as to Duccio and attested that Duccio resides in Italy. 
Kawananakoa did not present affidavits or supporting material to 
dispute this statement. Rather, in her Memorandum in Opposition 
and on appeal, Kawananakoa asserts that the circuit court had 
personal jurisdiction over Duccio on the bases that Duccio: 1) 
has been in 
Hawai# i many times on business; 2) uses a Hawai# i 
address for conducting business for a non-profit; 3) served on the Board of the Friends of Iolani Palace from 2009-2015; and 4) 
was in charge of the 2008 exhibit of the Portrait in Honolulu. 
As exhibits to her Memorandum in Opposition, Kawananakoa 
submitted copies of United States tax returns for Marignoli Di 
Montecorona Foundation, Inc. (Marignoli Foundation), the 
non-profit for which Duccio is listed as President, for the years 
2012, 2013, and 2014. 
The sworn declaration attached to Kawananakoa's 
Memorandum in Opposition did not establish that Duccio had been 
to Hawai# i many times on business, except for his trip to 
Honolulu in 2008 to oversee the exhibit of the Portrait. Additionally, notwithstanding the contrary evidence and 
declarations submitted in Kapiolani's Reply to the Memorandum in 
Opposition (Reply),
6 these assertions and the tax returns do not 
6 Attached to the Reply is the declaration of Robert J. Smolenski, one
of the Honolulu attorneys representing Kapiolani in this case. Mr. Smolenski 
attests, inter alia, that: he is the Secretary and a Director of the MarignoliFoundation; attached to his declaration as an exhibit is an Italian tax codecertificate listing Duccio as the representative of the Marignoli Foundation atits operating office in Spoleto, Italy; the address on the tax returns for theMarignoli Foundation is his office for IRS purposes, but Duccio has never been tohis office; and except for a couple of exceptions, meetings of the directors ofthe Marignoli Foundation have been conducted by telephone conference call, with 
7     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficiently establish that Duccio continuously or systemically 
discharged his duties for the non-profit in this State or that he 
could otherwise be found to be domiciled here. See Bristol-Myers 
Squibb Co., 137 S.Ct. at 1780 ("For an individual, the paradigm forum for the exercise of general jurisdiction is the 
individual's domicile[.]"). Kawananakoa did not assert facts or 
submit affidavits or other supporting materials showing that 
Duccio discharged his duties for the Marignoli Foundation or as a 
board member of the Friends of Iolani Palace in the state of 
Hawai# i continuously or systematically. As a result, Duccio's 
asserted contacts do not appear on their face to be continuous and systematic, nor do they establish that he was domiciled in 
this state. See id.; cf. Perkins v. Benguet Consol. Min. Co., 
342 U.S. 437, 447-48 (1952) (determining that the following activities by the president of a foreign corporation amounted to 
continuous and systematic activities conducted by the foreign 
corporation in the forum state: maintaining an office from which 
he conducted personal and corporate activities, keeping company 
files and holding directors' meetings in the office and at his 
home located in the forum state, carrying on correspondence 
relating to the business, distributing salary checks drawn on two 
active bank accounts in the forum state, engaging a bank in the 
forum state to act as transfer agent, and supervising policies 
dealing with the rehabilitation of the corporation's properties 
in the Philippines from the forum state); Helicopteros Nacionales 
de Colombia, S.A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408, 415-19 (1984) 
(determining that a foreign corporation's contacts with a forum 
state were not continuous and systematic when they consisted of: 
sending its chief executive officer to the forum state for a 
contract-negotiation session; accepting into its New York bank 
account checks drawn on a bank in the forum state; purchasing 
helicopters, equipment, and training services from a company in 
Duccio participating from Spoleto, Italy. 
8          
            
             NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the forum state for substantial sums; and sending personnel to 
the helicopter company's facilities in the forum state for 
training). Based on the foregoing, the circuit court did not err 
in determining that it lacked general jurisdiction over Duccio. 
See Shaw, 76 Hawai# i at 326–27, 876 P.2d at 1294–95. 
B. Specific Jurisdiction 
If a defendant's contacts with the forum are not 
continuous and systematic, the forum may exercise only
specific jurisdiction, and due process requires applicationof the following three-part test: 
(1) The nonresident defendant mustpurposefully direct his activities orconsummate some transaction with the forum or resident thereof; or perform some actby which he purposefully avails himself ofthe privilege of conducting activities inthe forum, thereby invoking the benefitsand protections of its laws; 
(2) the claim must be one which arises out
of or relates to the defendant's forum-related activities; and 
(3) the exercise of jurisdiction must
comport with fair play and substantialjustice, i.e. it must be reasonable. 
In Interest of Doe, 83 Hawai# i at 374, 926 P.2d at 1297. 
Based on our review of the record, Kawananakoa did not 
assert in either the Complaint or Memorandum in Opposition that 
Duccio's possession of the Portrait arose out of or related to 
the contacts he purportedly had with this state.7 Rather, at the 
hearing on the MTD, Kawananakoa recited Duccio's asserted contacts with this state and stated in a conclusory manner that 
"[h]e's clearly availed himself of the -- of the privileges of 
doing business in Hawai[# ]i. So we think he clearly meets both 
general jurisdiction and specific jurisdiction." Kawananakoa thus had not met her burden of establishing specific 
jurisdiction. See Shaw
, 76 Hawai# i at 326–27, 876 P.2d at 
1294–95. 
7 We note that the declarations of Kawananakoa and Kapiolani both
indicate that the Portrait was sent to Duccio in 1998, before Kawananakoa alleges
that he served on the Board of the Friends of Iolani Palace from 2009-2015. 
9       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Duccio as an Indispensable Party 
At the hearing on the MTD, the circuit court agreed 
with Kapiolani that one of the grounds for dismissing the 
Complaint in its entirety was that Duccio was an indispensable 
party under HRCP Rule 19  who could not be feasibly joined due to 
the court's lack of jurisdiction over him, and that the case proceeding against Kapiolani would prejudice Duccio's asserted 
interest in the Portrait. Kawananakoa failed to argue either in 
her Memorandum in Opposition or at the hearing on the MTD that 
Duccio could be feasibly joined or that this case could properly 
proceed without Duccio under HRCP Rule 19. 
Rather, in her Reply 
Brief, Kawananakoa maintains that the circuit court had jurisdiction over Duccio and his indispensability is therefore 
irrelevant. Insofar as Kawananakoa failed to address the issue 8
8 HRCP Rule 19 states in relevant part: 
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible. A person who is
subject to service of process shall be joined as a party in
the action if (1) in the person's absence complete reliefcannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) theperson claims an interest relating to the subject of theaction and is so situated that the disposition of the actionin the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter impairor impede the person's ability to protect that interest or(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to asubstantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwiseinconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest.If the person has not been so joined, the court shall orderthat the person be made a party. If the person should joinas a plaintiff but refuses to do so, the person may be madea defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary plaintiff. 
(b) Determination by court whenever joinder not
feasible. If a person as described in subdivision
(a)(1)-(2) hereof cannot be made a party, the court shalldetermine whether in equity and good conscience the actionshould proceed among the parties before it, or should bedismissed, the absent person being thus regarded asindispensable. The factors to be considered by the courtinclude: first, to what extent a judgment rendered in theperson's absence might be prejudicial to the person or thosealready parties; second, the extent to which, by protectiveprovisions in the judgment, by the shaping of relief, orother measures, the prejudice can be lessened or avoided;third, whether a judgment rendered in the person's absencewill be adequate; fourth, whether the plaintiff will have anadequate remedy if the action is dismissed for nonjoinder. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Duccio's indispensability during the lower court proceedings 
or raise it as a point of error in her Opening Brief on appeal, 
we deem that point waived and decline to review for plain error. 
See Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4); State v. 
Moses, 102 Hawai
#i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003). 
IV. Conclusion 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
February 3, 2017 Judgment on Order Granting Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 30, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
11 George W. Van Buren,and John B. Shimizu,(Van Buren & Shimizu),for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
John P. Duchemin,Janjeera S. Hail,(Cades Schutte),and Robert J. Smolenski,(Smolenski & Wooddell),for Defendant-Appellee. 