NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.NO. CAAP-13-0003776
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
HINCHCLIFF INVESTMENTS LLC, and CLINTON HINCHCLIFF, JR.,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim-Defendants/Appellees,
v.
NIMBLE LAND CORPORATION, a Hawaii Corporation, 
aka NIMBLE LAND, INC. and DENNIS D. SMITH, 
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim Plaintiffs/
Third-Party Plaintiffs/Appellees,
and
TAMARA GOUVEIA and PROPERTY NETWORK, LTD.,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Appellees,
and
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants, 
and
WHEELS OF JUSTICE, LLC, Third-Party Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-223K)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiffs/Appellees Hinchcliff Investments, LLC ( HIL)
and Clinton Hinchcliff, Jr. ( Hinchcliff Jr. ) (collectively
HIL/Hinchcliff) brought this action in the Circuit Court of the
Third Circuit ( circuit court)1 related to the sale of property in
Kona, Hawai #i (the Property ).  The First Amended ComplaintNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2 Hinchcliff Jr. was the buyer of the Property and HIL is an entity
related to Hinchcliff Jr.  Nimble Land was the seller of the Property and
Smith is the individual who formed Nimble Land.  Gouveia and PNL are alleged
to have served as HIL/Hinchcliff's real estate agent and broker in the
purchase of the Property.  While the case was before the circuit court, PNL
was dismissed from the lawsuit.
3  WOJ's opening brief violates Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3), (b)(4), and (b)(7) because the statement of the case,
points of error and argument section of their brief do not provide any record
citations, which alone raises the potential for dismissal of the appeal and/or
waiver of issues sought to be raised.  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt , 80 Hawai# i
225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995).  WOJ also violated HRAP Rule 32(d) thereby
also failing to comply with Hawai# i Electronic Filing and Service Rule 1.6
because they failed to electronically sign the opening brief.  Finally, WOJ
failed to include transcripts from the July 23, 2013 hearing in its record on
appeal thereby failing to comply with HRAP Rule 10.  Because we seek to
address cases on the merits where possible, we address WOJ's arguments to the
extent they are discernable.  80 Hawai# i at 230, 909 P.2d at 558. 
2asserts the following claims against Defendants/Appellees Nimble
Land, Inc. (Nimble Land), Dennis D. Smith (Smith) ( collectively
Nimble/Smith ), Tamara Gouveia ( Gouveia) and Property Network,
Ltd. (PNL):2
Count I : Breach of Contract against Nimble Land
Count II : Negligent Misrepresentation against
  Nimble/Smith
Count III : Rescission against Nimble Land
Count IV : Negligence against Gouveia and PNL 
Count V : Breach of Fiduciary Duty against Gouveia    
  and PNL
Nimble/Smith, HIL/Hinchcliff, and Gouveia reached a
settlement on the claims ( Settlement Agreement ).  Thus, pursuant
to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 663-15.5 (Supp. 2015),
Nimble/Smith filed a "Joint Petition For Determination of Good
Faith Settlement."  The petition was opposed by Third-Party
Defendant-Appellant Wheels of Justice, LLC (WOJ ).  On September
6, 2013, the circuit court granted the petition in its "Order
Granting Defendants Nimble Land, Inc. and Dennis D. Smith's
Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement Filed May 30,
2013 and Joinders" ( Order).
In this appeal,3 Appellant WOJ asserts that the circuit
court erred in granting the Order and raises the following points
of error:NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  Nimble/Smith contend WOJ does not have standing to appeal.  However,
unlike the appellant in Abaya v. Mantell, 112 Hawai# i 176, 145 P.3d 719
(2006), WOJ was named as a party in the case, specifically a third-party
defendant.  Although Nimble/Smith contend that the third-party complaint was
never served on WOJ, the third-party claim was never dismissed.  Thus, WOJ was
a party to the action and met the other requirements for standing.  Id. at
181, 145 P.3d at 724 (citing Kepo# o v. Watson , 87 Hawai# i 91, 95, 952 P.2d 379,
383 (1998)).4
3(1) the circuit court erred in approving the settlement
because it is collusive in reducing the amount that WOJ was to
receive under an arbitration settlement, from $769,120 to about
$195,000;
(2) the circuit court erred in approving the payment of
$195,000 to WOJ under the settlement, which is based on the
Appellees' estimate of WOJ's investment in the property, because
WOJ claims to have invested over $500,000 in the project and that
an evidentiary hearing should have been held; and
(3) the circuit court failed to consider the "totality
of the circumstances" as required under Troyer v. Adams , 102
Hawai#i 399, 77 P.3d 83 (2003).
For the reasons discussed below, we reject WOJ's
arguments and affirm.4
I.  Background
The instant case involves claims related to the sale of
a 22-acre property in Kona, Hawai# i designated as parcel 8, plat
24 on Koloko Drive from Nimble Land to Hinchcliff Jr.  The
Property has been the subject of various other litigation,
including an arbitration proceeding initiated by Nimble Land and
lawsuits initiated by WOJ.  WOJ asserts an interest in the
Property based on a joint venture agreement with Nimble Land.
On December 21, 2004, WOJ and Nimble Land entered into
a joint venture agreement to acquire and develop the Property. 
Nimble Land claims that WOJ failed to meet its obligations under
the joint venture agreement and thus Nimble Land sought
arbitration in December 2006 to resolve the various disputes, as
provided under the joint venture agreement.  In approximately
April or May of 2007, the parties agreed to the Honorable MarieNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Milks, retired, serving as Arbitrator in that proceeding.
 In May 2007, Nimble Land entered into a Deposit Receipt
Offer and Acceptance (DROA ) to sell the Property to Hinchcliff
Jr.  Nimble/Smith claims that Nimble Land was forced to sell the
Property due to the economic duress imposed on Nimble/Smith.  
WOJ, in turn, asserts that Nimble Land entered into the DROA
without WOJ's consent.
After learning of the proposed sale to Hinchcliff Jr.,
WOJ filed a lawsuit on December 17, 2007, in Civil No. 02-01-287K
in the circuit court, against Nimble Land seeking a declaration
that WOJ had an interest in the property ( WOJ Lawsuit).  WOJ also
filed and recorded a Notice of Pendency of Action (NOPA )
regarding the Property. 
On December 26, 2007, Hinchcliff Jr. as buyer executed
an addendum to the DROA which states that: he is aware of the WOJ
Lawsuit; he "accepts the subject property with said pending
litigation"; "Seller [Nimble Land] will not be released from any
liability or obligation to have this document removed from the
subject property"; and "Seller [Nimble Land] agrees to pay all
costs to clear this Title."  The sale of the Property from Nimble
Land to Hinchcliff Jr. appears to have closed in approximately
late December 2007 for a total purchase price of $2.125 million
(which apparently included the payoff or assumption of an
existing loan of over $500,000 related to the Property).
Subsequently, in April 2008, as part of the arbitration
proceeding, Nimble/Smith and WOJ orally set forth settlement
terms before a court reporter on April 3, 2008, and with
Arbitrator Milks present on April 8, 2008 (collectively the
Arbitration Settlement).  The Arbitration Settlement contemplated
the sale of the Property to Hinchcliff Jr. and provided, in part,
that WOJ would receive $769,125 and Nimble Land would receive
$718,125 from the sale proceeds.  The terms placed on the record
also called for: WOJ to execute a release of the NOPA, which was
to be recorded when a Finance Factors loan on the property was
released; and for the parties to that settlement to release eachNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5other from any claims related to the joint venture agreement and
the Property.  The oral settlement terms also provided that
"[e]ach party is to cooperate in the signing of any and all
documents necessary to effectuate the completion or the intention
of this settlement agreement."  However, subsequently, Nimble
Land and WOJ both blame each other for not completing or
finalizing the Arbitration Settlement.  Nimble Land's counsel
asserts in his declaration that after language for the written
Arbitration Settlement was worked out between the respective
counsel, WOJ's principal, Thomas Schmidt (Schmidt ), refused to
sign, and further that WOJ and Schmidt refused to release the
NOPA as called for under the oral Arbitration Settlement.  In
turn, Schmidt asserts in his declaration that since April 2008,
he has been seeking to get the arbitration completed but that
Nimble Land has refused to cooperate and is trying to vacate the
Arbitration Settlement. 
On June 8, 2009, HIL/Hinchcliff initiated the instant
lawsuit.  The First Amended Complaint, filed on December 14,
2009, alleges, inter alia , that: Nimble Land failed to provide
unencumbered title to the Property; Nimble/Smith made
misrepresentations to Hinchcliff Jr., including that Schmidt was
not involved with the Property and that Schmidt would not claim
an interest in the Property; and the sale should be rescinded. 
Claims were also asserted against Gouveia and PNL for breaching
their duties in representing HIL/Hinchcliff in the transaction. 
On December 15, 2011, HIL/Hinchcliff, Nimble/Smith, and
Gouveia reached the Settlement Agreement at issue in this appeal. 
The Settlement Agreement provides, inter alia , that: existing
notes between Nimble/Smith and HIL in the total amount of $1.525
million will be canceled and replaced with a note in the amount
of $689,616.43; payment on the new note will start once title to
the Property is free and clear of specified liens and
encumbrances, including those related to Nimble/Smith, Schmidt,
WOJ, and/or any entity in which Schmidt has an interest;
Nimble/Smith and HIL/Hinchcliff will dismiss claims against eachNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5  Given the claims asserted in this case, it is questionable whether
WOJ was a joint tortfeasor or co-obligor under HRS § 663-15.5.  However, no
party raises this issue and thus we will not address it.
6other; Nimble/Smith are responsible for removing from the
Property's title the NOPA and any interest recorded or claimed in
the property by WOJ, Schmidt, or any entity in which Schmidt has
or claims an interest; HIL will pay $150,000 to WOJ once
interests recorded or claimed against the Property are
extinguished; Nimble Land will pay specified interest to WOJ; and
all claims against Gouveia will be dismissed without prejudice.  
On May 30, 2013, Nimble/Smith filed the "Petition for
Determination of Good Faith Settlement."  HIL/Hinchcliff filed a
joinder to the petition, and WOJ filed an opposition to the
petition.  After a hearing on July 23, 2013, the circuit court
entered the September 6, 2013 Order granting the petition. 
On October 3, 2013, WOJ timely appealed from the Order. 
II.  Discussion 
WOJ contends that the circuit court abused its
discretion because: it approved a settlement that was collusive
in reducing the payment WOJ should receive under the prior
Arbitration Settlement; it approved payment to WOJ in an amount
that does not reflect WOJ's investment in the Property; and it
failed to consider the "totality of the circumstances" under
Troyer.  
HRS § 663-15.5 provides in relevant part:   5
§663–15.5 Release; joint tortfeasors; co-obligors; good
faith settlement. (a) A release, dismissal with or without
prejudice, or a covenant not to sue or not to enforce a
judgment that is given in good faith under subsection (b) to
one or more joint tortfeasors, or to one or more co-obligors
who are mutually subject to contribution rights, shall:
(1) Not discharge any other joint tortfeasor or
co-obligor not released from liability unless
its terms so provide;
(2) Reduce the claims against the other joint
tortfeasor or co-obligor not released in the
amount stipulated by the release, dismissal, or
covenant, or in the amount of the consideration
paid for it, whichever is greater; and
(3) Discharge the party to whom it is given from all
liability for any contribution to any other
joint tortfeasor or co-obligor.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7This subsection shall not apply to co-obligors who
have expressly agreed in writing to an apportionment
of liability for losses or claims among themselves.
. . . 
(d)  A determination by the court that a settlement was
made in good faith shall:
(1) Bar any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor
from any further claims against the settling
tortfeasor or co-obligor, except those based on
a written indemnity agreement; and
(2) Result in a dismissal of all cross-claims filed
against the settling joint tortfeasor or
co-obligor, except those based on a written
indemnity agreement.
In Troyer , the Hawai #i Supreme Court adopted a
"totality of the circumstances" approach for trial courts to
determine if settlements involving joint tortfeasors or co-
obligors are made in good faith.  102 Hawai# i at 425, 77 P.3d at
109.  The supreme court stated:
we conclude that the legislature's goals of simplifying the
procedures and reducing the costs associated with claims
involving joint tortfeasors, while providing courts with the
opportunity to prevent collusive settlements aimed at
injuring non-settling tortfeasors' interests, are best
served by leaving the determination of whether a settlement
is in good faith to the sound discretion of the trial court
in light of the totality of the circumstances surrounding
the settlement.
Id. at 427, 77 P.3d at 111.  We also note that "the good faith of
the parties is substantially a function of their states of mind
and the circumstances of which they are aware at the time of
settlement[.]"  Id. at 430, 77 P.3d at 114.  Moreover, as set
forth in HRS § 663-15.5(b), "[a] nonsettling alleged joint
tortfeasor or co-obligor asserting a lack of good faith shall
have the burden of proof on that issue."  Thus, WOJ had the
burden of proof before the circuit court of showing the
Settlement Agreement was not made in good faith.
Because "the question whether a settlement is given in
good faith for purposes of HRS § 663-15.5 is a matter left to the
discretion of the trial court in light of all the relevant
circumstances extant at the time of settlement[,]" we review the
trial court's good faith determination for abuse of discretion.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6  In its answering brief, HIL/Hinchcliff argue that "WOJ's argument is
premised on a fundamentally false assertion that the amount allocated to
Schmidt is conclusive and binding upon him.  That is not the case."  Further,
HIL/Hinchcliff states that the "dispute between Smith and Schmidt over the
joint venture agreement and Schmidt's failure to abide by the 2008 arbitration
settlement is separate from the Hinchcliff/Smith Settlement."   HIL/Hinchcliff
also states in its answering brief that "[t]o the extent that WOJ has a
legitimate claim to $769,125 from Nimble/Smith, WOJ will still have its claim
for the balance of funds from Nimble/Smith."  Nimble/Smith states in its
answering brief that "Appellee Nimble adopts the arguments submitted by
Appellee Hinchcliff as recited in its Answering Brief."  Thus, it appears that
both HIL/Hinchcliff and Nimble/Smith agree that this Settlement Agreement does
(continued...)
8Troyer, 102 Hawai# i at 434, 77 P.3d at 118.
A.  WOJ's Assertion of Collusion
WOJ claims that the Settlement Agreement only benefits
Hinchcliff Jr. and Nimble Land because under the Settlement
Agreement: the payment owed to WOJ for the Property is reduced to
$150,000 plus interest; Nimble Land is released from its
agreement to pay WOJ $769,125; and Nimble Land is relieved from
its obligation to get the NOPA released.  These arguments lack
merit and are contrary to the record.
First, given the record on appeal, WOJ did not meet its
burden to establish that it has any affirmative rights pursuant
to the Arbitration Settlement under which it claims it is owed
$769,125.  Rather, both Schmidt's declaration and the declaration
of Nimble Land's counsel submitted to the circuit court indicate
that the Arbitration Settlement was never completed, including
that a written agreement was not executed and the NOPA was never
released as contemplated by that settlement (which was essential
to the contemplated sale of the Property to Hinchcliff Jr.).
Second, under the Settlement Agreement in this case and
contrary to WOJ's assertion, Nimble/Smith is still responsible
for removing the NOPA from the Property's title and is
responsible for also removing any interest recorded or claimed by
Schmidt or WOJ.
Third, as asserted by HIL/Hinchcliff and Nimble/Smith,
the Settlement Agreement does not affect WOJ's claimed
contractual rights based on the separate Arbitration Settlement.6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)6
not preclude WOJ from pursuing claims it may have related to the Arbitration
Settlement.
9Moreover, under the Settlement Agreement, HIL's payments under
the new note only start once the Property's title is free and
clear of the specified liens and encumbrances.
In short, the record shows that: the sale of the
Property from Nimble Land to Hinchcliff Jr. required that Nimble
Land clear the NOPA and WOJ Lawsuit from the Property's title;
under the Arbitration Settlement placed on the record, WOJ was to
release the NOPA upon release of a Finance Factor's loan, and the
parties to that settlement were to release each other from any
claims regarding the joint venture agreement or the Property. 
However, the NOPA was never released (even after the Finance
Factor's loan was paid off), the title to the Property has
remained clouded, and the sale to Hinchcliff Jr. has been
impaired.  This Settlement Agreement, in turn, addresses
HIL/Hinchcliff's claims that Nimble/Smith failed to provide clear
title and also that Nimble/Smith made material misrepresentations
to Hinchcliff Jr. related to the Property.  The Settlement
Agreement does not release claims that WOJ may have, but rather
provides for Nimble/Smith to clear the title as specified in the
agreement.
Based on the record, WOJ did not carry its burden to
show collusion between the parties to the Settlement Agreement.
B.  The Amount Allocated to WOJ  
WOJ claims the amount to be paid to WOJ under the
Settlement Agreement incorrectly reflects the amount it has
invested in the Property.  In its opening brief, WOJ fails to
point to any part of the record regarding its claim as to what it
has invested in the Property.  Moreover, although he claims
additional funds were invested by him personally in the Property,
Schmidt's declaration states "WOJ may have about $150,000
invested in [the] property since 2004 (when it was formed)[.]" 
Of note, the joint venture agreement between WOJ and Nimble LandNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10was entered in December of 2004.  Thus, this record does not
suggest that the payment contemplated to WOJ under the Settlement
Agreement ($150,000 plus interest) is somehow unfair or
collusive.
C.  Totality of the Circumstances
Finally, WOJ asserts that the circuit court failed to
consider the totality of the circumstances as set forth in
Troyer.  WOJ contends the Settlement Agreement is unfair in
reducing the amount owed by Hinchcliff Jr. to purchase the
Property, in reducing the amount to be paid to WOJ compared to
what it is owed under the Arbitration Settlement, and in
releasing Nimble Land from its wrongdoing in selling the property
without WOJ's consent and in entering the Arbitration Settlement
which it cannot perform.  These arguments simply rehash WOJ's
argument that this is a collusive Settlement Agreement.  For the
reasons discussed above, we do not agree with WOJ.
Moreover, WOJ fails to point to anything in the record
to suggest that the circuit court failed to consider the totality
of the circumstances in granting the petition for determination
of a good faith settlement.  The petition filed by Nimble/Smith
and the opposition filed by WOJ provided extensive background
regarding the matters asserted by WOJ, including the joint
venture agreement, the oral terms of the Arbitration Settlement
placed on the record, and the declarations of Schmidt, Smith, and
Nimble Land's counsel, John Remis, Jr.  We further note that WOJ
failed to provide a transcript of the hearing regarding the
petition and thus it is unclear what was argued or considered at
the hearing.  See HRAP Rule 10.
We thus conclude that WOJ's assertion that the circuit
court failed to consider the totality of the circumstances lacks
merit.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11III.  Conclusion     
Based on the foregoing, the "Order Granting Defendants
Nimble Land, Inc., Dennis D. Smith's Petition for Determination
of Good Faith Settlement and Joinders" filed on September 6,
2013, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 6, 2017.
R. Steven Geshell
(Thomas P. Dunn, on the briefs) 
for Wheels of Justice, LLC. Chief Judge
Bruce H. Wakuzawa, on the brief
for Hinchcliff Investments LLC
and Clinton Hinchcliff, Jr. Associate Judge
John R. Remis, Jr., on the brief
for Nimble Land, Inc. and
Dennis D. Smith Associate Judge