NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000041
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LEDCOR - U.S. PACIFIC CONSTRUCTION LLC,
now known as LEDCOR CONSTRUCTION HAWAII LLC,
A Delaware Limited Liability Company, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. LISA RENE JOSLIN, Defendant-Appellant, and
COMPLETE MECHANICAL INC., a Hawai 'i Corporation,
JOHN AND JANE DOES 1-50, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50, DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50 and
DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0341(1))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lisa Rene Joslin (Joslin) appeals
 
from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
 
Defendant Lisa Joslin's Motions to Quash Service of Process,
 Vacate the Amended Default Judgment By Clerk Entered Against Her,
 and Vacate the Lien Recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances as
 Document No. 2011-125080, Filed August 26, 2011 (Order Denying
Set Aside), which was filed on January 4, 2012, in the Circuit
 
Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
  
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.	 RELEVANT FACTS
 
On May 26, 2010, Plaintiff-Appellee Ledcor Construction
 
2
Hawaii, LLC (Ledcor)  filed a complaint against Joslin and
3
Complete Mechanical Inc. (CMI).  According to her declaration,
 
Joslin was the Secretary/Treasurer and at times the Vice
 
President of CMI. The complaint alleged that Ledcor, as a
 general contractor, entered into two agreements with CMI, as a
 subcontractor, wherein CMI agreed to provide labor and materials
 to Ledcor. The first contract related to construction on the
 Poipu Beach Hotel and was executed on November 14, 2005, while
 the second related to work on the Nanaikeola Senior Apartments
 and was executed on December 7, 2006. 
On or about May 31, 2008, June 30, 2008, and July 31,
 
2008, as Secretary and Treasurer for CMI, Joslin signed vouchers
 and partial lien releases for the Poipu Beach Hotel project. 
These vouchers/releases read, in relevant part:
 
The undersigned certifies and agrees with respect to the
above-referenced Job as follows:
 
(a)	 We have received payment in full for all labor and
materials furnished by us up to and including the
Certification Date stated below, with the exceptions
of (i) the applicable Retention [and] (ii) the
Progress Payment Now Due.
 
(b)	 We release the Lender, the Owner, the General
Contractor, the owner(s) and Lessee(s), if any, of the
Land on which the Job is located, all sureties, and
Land itself, all improvements constructed on the Land,
and any undisbursed loan proceeds applicable to the
Job, from any and all equitable, statutory or other
liabilities, liens, lien rights and claims (including
mechanics and materialmen's liens and lien rights
under Chapter 507 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes)
which we may now have with respect to the Job on
account of labor or materials furnished by us up to
and including the Certification Date. . . . THIS
RELEASE IS CONDITIONAL, HOWEVER, and shall be
effective only upon payment to us of the Retention, if
any, and the Progress Payment Now Due.
 
(c)	 Except as otherwise disclosed herein, all suppliers to
us of material or labor, or both, with respect to the
 
2
 Ledcor was formerly known as Ledcor-US Pacific Construction LLC.
 
3
 It appears that CMI may be insolvent and that it no longer holds a
contractor's license. CMI did not seek relief from the Default Judgment.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Job have been paid in full for the materials or labor
furnished by them, up to and including the
Certification Date . . . or will be paid promptly
therefore . . . with the proceeds of any disbursement
made pursuant to this voucher, which disbursement will
be received by us for that purpose.
 
In reliance on the representation in paragraph (c),
 
i.e. that CMI's contractors had been, or would promptly be paid
 
in full, Ledcor made payments to CMI directly on or about May 31,
 2008, June 30, 2008, and July 31, 2008. However, as alleged in
 Ledcor's complaint, CMI's subcontractors were not in fact paid. 
As a result, Ledcor subsequently paid an additional amount of
 $106,467.67 to CMI's subcontractors on the Poipu Beach Hotel
 project.
 
On or about June 30, 2008 and July 31, 2008, Joslin

 
signed vouchers/releases for the Nanaikeola Senior Apartments
 project. The relevant language in these vouchers/releases was
 identical to the language quoted above. Again, Ledcor paid CMI
 directly based on the voucher representations and, again, Ledcor
 subsequently made additional payments of $50,969.38 to CMI's
 subcontractors because CMI failed to pay them. 
In the complaint, Ledcor alleged non-disclosure of
 
material facts, fraudulent inducement, intentional and negligent
 misrepresentation, and constructive fraud against Joslin for her
 misrepresentations that the subcontractors had been paid. Ledcor
 also alleged breach of contract claims against CMI. Ledcor
 sought an award of $106,467.67 plus interest against Joslin as
 damages arising out of the Poipu Beach Hotel project, and
 $50,969.38 plus interest as damages arising out of the Nanaikeola
 Senior Apartments project. The complaint also prayed for
 compensatory and punitive damages against CMI in an amount to be
 shown at trial, attorneys' fees, and "such other and further
 relief as th[e] Court deems just and fair in the circumstances." 
On June 7, 2010, process server Gregory White (White)
 
served Robert Joslin (Robert), the husband of Joslin and the
 
President of CMI at the home he and Joslin shared in Wailuku,
 
Maui. White attests that he served Robert with a second copy of
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the complaint and summons for Joslin, as reflected in both
 
White's affidavit and the Return and Acknowledgment of Service
 forms. 
Neither defendant responded to the complaint and an
 
Amended Default Judgment By Clerk (Default Judgment) was entered
 
by the court clerk of the Circuit Court on July 25, 2011, which
 
included the following:
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that Plaintiff
LEDCOR recover from Defendant LISA RENE JOSLIN and Defendant
 COMPLETE MECHANICAL INC., joint and severally, the sum of
$202,814.69, together with costs of court in the sum of
$559.97, and attorneys' fees in the sum of $15,324.60, for a
total sum of $218,699.26
.
 
The sum of $202,814.69 included the principal amount of
 
$157,437.05, for the payments made to the subcontractors, plus
 
pre-judgment interest in the amount of $45,377.64. In support of
 these amounts, Ledcor submitted the declaration of its vice
 president, Eric Tessem (Tessem). Ledcor's request for attorneys'
 
fees and court costs was supported by Tessem's declaration as
 
well as that of Ledcor's counsel, which attached counsel's
 invoices. 
On August 26, 2011, Joslin filed a Motion to Quash Her
 
Service of Process, Vacate the Amended Default Judgment by Clerk
 Entered Against Her, and Vacate the Lien Recorded with the Bureau
 of Conveyances as Document No. 2011-125080 (Motion to Set Aside).
 
Joslin claimed, primarily, that Robert had only been served with
 
one copy of the complaint and summons, that she had never been
 served, and that she only learned of the judgment against her
 when a title search revealed a judgment lien on a property she
 owned. Robert provided a declaration that he was served as
 president of CMI, that he told the process server Joslin was not
 at home, and that the process server told him he would return
 later to serve Joslin. Ledcor's opposition included an affidavit
 by the process server, White, again attesting to service of two
 copies of the complaint and summons, and that Robert refused to
 sign the acknowledgment of service for Joslin.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court entered the Order Denying Set Aside
 
on January 4, 2012. Joslin timely appealed the order.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Joslin raises the following points of error on appeal:4
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in the Finding of Fact
 
(FOF) 4 and Conclusion of Law (COL) 3, both of which provide:
 
"The Court finds that the service of the Complaint and Summons
 
upon [Joslin] was proper, and that accordingly, there is no basis
 to quash service of process as requested by [Joslin]"; 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in entering FOF 2, which
 
states that the Default Judgment was entered against Joslin based
 upon misrepresentations she made to Ledcor;
 
(3) The Circuit Court clerk lacked the authority under 
Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 55(b)(1) to award 
attorneys' fees, pre-judgment interest, and enter the judgment amount, as well as declare Joslin and CMI jointly and severally liable for the full amount of the judgment; thus, the Default Judgment should have been set aside as void under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4); and 
(4) The Circuit Court erred in FOFs 6, 7, 8, and 9 and
 
COLs 5, 6, 7, and 8, which find and conclude that Joslin failed
 to establish all three of the elements necessary to set aside the
 Entry of Default and Default Judgment.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
An order denying a motion to set aside a judgment 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(1) or 60(b)(6) is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. Hawai
'i Hous. Auth. v. Uyehara, 77 
Hawai'i 144, 147, 883 P.2d 65, 68 (1994); Rearden Family Trust v. 
Wisenbaker, 101 Hawai 'i 237, 254, 65 P.3d 1029, 1046 (2003). 
[T]he trial court abuses its discretion if it bases
its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly
erroneous assessment of the evidence. Abuse of discretion
 occurs when "the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds
of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant."
 
4
 To facilitate the discussion herein, Joslin's points of error are
re-ordered.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ranches v. City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 115 Hawai 'i 462, 468, 168 
P.3d 592, 598 (2007) (citations omitted). 
However, a circuit court's determination that a 
judgment is void under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) is reviewed under the 
de novo or right/wrong standard. Wagner v. World Botanical 
Gardens, Inc., 126 Hawai 'i 190, 195, 268 P.3d 443, 448 (App. 
2011). 
"[A] trial court's FOFs are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps. Ret. Sys. of 
the State of Haw., 106 Hawai
'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has] defined 
'substantial evidence' as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (citations and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Service of Process on Joslin
 Joslin argues that the Default Judgment against her is
 
void due to improper service of process of Ledcor's summons and
 complaint. As this court has previously held:
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The determination of whether a judgment is void is not
a discretionary issue. We thus review de novo the circuit
 
court's ruling that the default judgment was void.
 
A judgment is void only if the court that rendered it
lacked jurisdiction of the subject matter, or of the
parties, or if it acted in a manner inconsistent with due
process of law. In order for a trial court to exercise
 personal jurisdiction over a defendant, the defendant must
be served with a copy of the summons and the complaint
pursuant to HRCP Rule 4(d).
 
Wagner, 126 Hawai 'i at 195, 268 P.3d at 448 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted); see also Citicorp Mortgage,
 
Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai 'i 422, 430, 16 P.3d 827, 835 (App. 
2000). 
HRCP Rule 4(d)(1) (2012) provides, in relevant part,
 
that service shall be made as follows: 
Upon an individual other than an infant or an
incompetent person, ... by delivering a copy of the summons
and of the complaint to the individual personally or in case
the individual cannot be found, by leaving copies thereof at
the individual's dwelling house or usual place of abode with
some person of suitable age and discretion then residing
therein[.]
 
Here, on June 7, 2010, Ledcor's process server, White,
 
filed two separate documents entitled Return and Acknowledgment
 
of Service. The first one certified service of the complaint and
 summons on Robert, as President of CMI, on June 7, 2010; Robert
 signed the Return, acknowledging service. The second one
 certified service of the complaint and summons on Robert, for
 Joslin, indicating that service was substitute service on Robert,
 as Joslin's husband, for Joslin, also on June 7, 2010. The second
 Return and Acknowledgment of Service indicated that Robert
 "refused to sign" for Joslin. On December 9, 2010, White filed
 an affidavit, which indicated that he had inadvertently
 misspelled "Joslin" as "Joslyn" on both June 7, 2010 Returns, and
 affirmatively avowed that Robert had agreed to accept service for
 Joslin. 
With Joslin's Motion to Set Aside, on August 26, 2011,
 
Robert submitted a Declaration, in which he averred that, when he
 was served for CMI, Joslin was not at home and "[t]he server
 stated that he would coming [sic] back to serve her whereupon he
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
left the house with the balance of the documents he had been
 
holding." Robert's Declaration arguably implied, but did not
 expressly state, that he only received one copy of the complaint
 and summons. 
With its memorandum in opposition to the Motion to Set
 
Aside, Ledcor submitted a further affidavit of White, which
 averred, inter alia:
 
5. I specifically recall serving ROBERT JOSLIN with
two (2) copies of the Complaint and Summons, one copy for
Defendant LISA RENE JOSLIN, and one copy for Defendant
COMPLETE MECHANICAL, INC. ("Defendant CMI").
 
6. I recall ROBERT JOSLIN advising me that his wife
was on the mainland for some type of cancer treatment, and
also specifically recall that ROBERT JOSLIN accepted service
for Defendant LISA RENE JOSLIN, but refused to sign the
Acknowledgment of Service, and I therefore wrote in his name
and noted "Refused to Sign" on the Acknowledgment of
Service.
 
After considering the parties' submissions and the 
record of this case, including the Return and Acknowledgment of 
Service on Joslin, White's affidavits, and Robert's Declaration, and hearing the arguments of the parties, the Circuit Court denied the Motion to Set Aside. Joslin elected not to order the transcript of the hearing to be included in the record and submits that it is not necessary to her appeal, noting in her reply brief that the transcript merely reflected the arguments of counsel and that no evidence was presented at the hearing on the Motion to Set Aside.
5 Upon review of the record on appeal, we 
cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred in its review of evidence presented and, therefore, will not disturb the Circuit Court's finding and conclusion that Joslin was properly served. See Bartolome, 94 Hawai
'i at 431; 16 P.3d at 836. 
B. FOF 2
 FOF 2 provides, in relevant part, "an Amended Default
 
Judgment has been entered in favor of [Ledcor] and against . . .
 
5
 There is nothing in the record to suggest that Joslin sought to
present evidence (other than by declaration), sought to compel the attendance
of witnesses, and/or otherwise requested an evidentiary hearing.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Joslin] . . . based upon misrepresentations made by [Joslin.]" 
Joslin appears to contend that this is erroneous because,
 pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(b)(2), a default judgment must be based
 on a failure to appear.
6 This argument is without merit. The
 
Default Judgment herein was entered against Joslin based upon
 Joslin's failure to appear. Ledcor's prayer for relief against
 Joslin, as set forth in the complaint, was for damages resulting
 from Joslin's "non-disclosure of material facts and fraudulent
 inducement, and/or intentional or negligent misrepresentation, or
 constructive fraud[.]" "Generally, a default judgment
 constitutes a binding adjudication of all the rights of the
 parties embraced in the prayer for relief which arise from the
 facts stated in the complaint." Matsushima v. Rego, 67 Haw. 556,
 
559, 696 P.2d 843, 845 (1985). Thus, although the Default
 Judgment was based on Joslin's nonappearance, by operation of the
 judgment, it also adjudicated the parties' rights based upon
 Ledcor's prayer for relief which arise from the facts stated in
 the complaint, i.e., that Joslin made misrepresentations to
 Ledcor. 
C. The Clerk's Authority to Enter the Default Judgment
 Joslin argues that the Default Judgment is void, and
 
therefore should have been set aside pursuant to HRCP Rule
 60(b)(4), because the clerk lacked the authority to enter the
 principal amount of the damages award, pre-judgment interest,
 attorneys' fees, and a determination of joint and several
 liability. Before we reach the merits of these arguments, we
 note that Joslin failed to raise these arguments in her Motion to
 Set Aside. Joslin's only argument that the Default Judgment was
 void was based on the alleged insufficiency of service of
 process, which is addressed above. Joslin's argument that she
 was otherwise entitled to relief from the Default Judgment was
 based solely on her request that the Circuit Court exercise its
 
6
 We note that the Default Judgment was entered under Rule 55(b)(1),
not 55(b)(2), as the entry was made by the clerk, not the court. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
discretion to grant relief pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(6). Thus,
 
our analysis here is whether the Circuit Court plainly erred by
 failing to conclude, sua sponte, that the Default Judgment was
 void because the court clerk lacked the authority to enter the
 Default Judgment.
 
In civil cases, the plain error rule is only invoked
when "justice so requires." We have taken three factors
 
into account in deciding whether our discretionary power to
notice plain error ought to be exercised in civil cases: (1)
whether consideration of the issue not raised at trial
 requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will
affect the integrity of the trial court's findings of fact;
and (3) whether the issue is of great public import.
 
U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n v. Castro, 131 Hawai 'i 28, 42, 313 P.3d 717, 
731 (2013) (citations omitted). 
We conclude that if a court clerk entered a default
 
judgment in favor of one party and against another without any
 
legal authority for doing so, even if the matter was not properly
 brought before a reviewing trial court in conjunction with the
 defaulted party's HRCP Rule 60(b) motion, such action might
 affect the integrity of the trial court's findings on that motion
 and might constitute an issue of sufficient public import to
 warrant the exercise of this court's discretion to conduct a
 plain error review. Accordingly, we examine Joslin's arguments,
 notwithstanding her failure to raise them below.
 
Joslin argues, in effect, that the Circuit Court
 
plainly erred because the court clerk lacked the authority to
 enter the principal amount of the damages because Ledcor's claim
 against her was not for a "sum certain or for a sum which can by
 computation be made certain," as is required for a judgment by
 default to be entered by the clerk.
7 Joslin supports her
 
7
 HRCP Rule 55(b) provides:
 
(b) Judgment.  Judgment by default may be entered as
follows:
 
(1) BY THE CLERK. When the plaintiff's claim
against a defendant is for a sum certain or for a sum
which can by computation be made certain, the clerk
upon request of the plaintiff and upon affidavit of
the amount due shall enter judgment for that amount
(continued...)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument by attacking the nature, quantum, and quality of the
 
evidence submitted in and with the Tessem declaration in support
 of Ledcor's Request for Default Judgment. However, these are
 issues that might have been presented as defenses to Ledcor's
 claims and are not directly relevant to the clerk's legal
 authority to enter a default judgment. Indeed, to the extent
 Joslin touched upon any of these issues below, she did so only in
 the context of her purportedly "meritorious defenses" warranting
 relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6). Moreover, the case cited on
 this appeal by Joslin, in support of this particular argument,
 involved a federal district court's entry of a default judgment
 
pursuant to federal parallel to HRCP Rule 55(b)(2), which is
 
inapposite to Joslin's argument that the Default Judgment entered
 by the clerk pursuant to HRCP 55(b)(1) is void under HRCP Rule
 
60(b)(4) because the clerk lacked authority. See KPS & Assocs.,
 
Inc. v. Designs by FMC, Inc.
, 318 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2003). 
The plain language of HRCP Rule 55(b)(1) grants the
 
Circuit Court's clerk the authority to enter the principal amount
 
of a default judgment, if it appears that plaintiff's claim is
 
7(...continued)
and costs against the defendant, if the defendant has
been defaulted for failure to appear and is not an
infant or incompetent person.

(2)
 BY THE COURT. In all other cases the party
entitled to a judgment by default shall apply to the
court therefor; but no judgment by default shall be
entered against an infant or incompetent person unless
represented in the action by a guardian, or other such
representative who has appeared therein, and upon whom
service may be made under Rule 17. If the party
against whom judgment by default is sought has
appeared in the action, the party (or, if appearing by
representative, the party's representative) shall be
served with written notice of the application for
judgment at least 3 days prior to the hearing on such
application. If, in order to enable the court to enter
judgment or to carry it into effect, it is necessary
to take an account or to determine the amount of
 damages or to establish the truth of any averment by
evidence or to make an investigation of any other
matter, the court may conduct such hearings or order
such references as it deems necessary and proper and
shall accord a right of trial by jury to the parties
when and as required by any statute. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for a sum certain or for a sum which can by computation be made
 
certain. Thus, we reject Joslin's argument that the Default
 Judgment is void pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) on this ground. 
The question remains, however, whether the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in otherwise denying Joslin relief from this part
 of the Default Judgment when it denied the Motion to Set Aside. 
Before reaching that issue, however, we address whether
 
the clerk lacked the authority to enter an award of pre-judgment
 interest and attorneys' fees, and a determination of joint and
 several liability. 
In civil cases, HRS § 636-16 (1993) vests the trial
 
court with the authority and discretion to award pre-judgment
 interest, as follows:
 
§ 636-16 Awarding interest.  In awarding interest in
civil cases, the judge is authorized to designate the
commencement date to conform with the circumstances of each
 case, provided that the earliest commencement date in cases
arising in tort, may be the date when the injury first
occurred and in cases arising by breach of contract, it may
be the date when the breach first occurred.
 
See also, e.g., Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 
Haw. 85, 136, 839 P.2d 10, 36 (1992) ("Prejudgment interest, where appropriate, is awardable under HRS § 636-16 in the discretion of the trial court."). Almost by definition, a court clerk's powers are ministerial, involving no exercise of discretionary judicial powers. See Price v. Obayashi Hawaii 
Corp., 81 Hawai
'i 171, 179, 914 P.2d 1364, 1372 (1996) (reserving 
enforcement of rules to judicial officers, rather than court clerks); Ting v. Born, 21 Haw. 638, 643 (Haw. 1913) ("It will be observed that the application is not to be made to a judge or to a judicial tribunal, exercising judicial powers, but to the clerk, a ministerial officer."); accord U.S. v. Rainbolt, 543 F. Supp. 580, 581 (E.D.Tenn. 1982) (in the absence of a statutory provision, pre-judgment interest may only be awarded in the discretion of the court); Combs v. Coal & Mineral Mgmt. Servs., Inc., 105 F.R.D. 472, 474 (1984) ("Rule [55(b)(1)] carefully limits the clerk's authority to those cases where entry of 
12
     
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment is purely a ministerial act, since 'sound policy
 
dictates that the clerk should not be invested with discretionary
 power.'") (citing 10 C
HARLES ALAN WRIGHT, ARTHUR R. MILLER & MARY KAY
 
KANE, FEDERAL PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE § 2683 (2d ed. 1983)). 
Accordingly, we conclude that a court clerk has no 
authority to exercise discretionary powers under HRCP Rule 55(b)(1), as would be necessary to award pre-judgment interest. As noted above, a "judgment is void only if the court that rendered it lacked jurisdiction of the subject matter, or of the parties, or if it acted in a manner inconsistent with due process of law." Wagner, 126 Hawai
'i at 195, 268 P.3d at 448 (citations 
and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis added). We further conclude that, to the extent that the court clerk, in effect, exercised judicial discretion to award pre-judgment interest in favor of Ledcor and against Joslin without legal authority, such action is inconsistent with due process of law. Therefore, the clerk's award of pre-judgment interest in the Default Judgment is void. 
Similarly, we conclude that, without legal authority, 
the court clerk necessarily exercised judicial discretion when it awarded attorneys' fees in favor of Ledcor and against Joslin. Accord Hunt v. Inter-Globe Energy, Inc., 770 F.2d 145, 148 (10
th 
Cir. 1985); Combs, 105 F.R.D. at 475. Moreover, the record of this case is devoid of any legal authority for the award of such fees, and we find none. In TSA International, Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai
'i 243, 263, 990 P.2d 713, 733 (1999) (citations 
omitted), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court set forth general principles 
related to the recovery of attorneys' fees: 
Generally, under the "American Rule," each party is
responsible for paying for his or her own litigation
expenses. A notable exception to the "American Rule,"
however, is the rule that attorneys' fees may be awarded to
the prevailing party where such an award is provided for by
statute, stipulation, or agreement.
 
Unlike Ledcor's breach of contract claims against CMI, 
Ledcor's misrepresentation claims against Joslin sounded in tort 
and not assumpsit. Hawai 'i statutes do not provide general 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authorization to trial courts, much less court clerks, to award 
attorneys' fees to prevailing parties in tort actions. See 
Kamalu v. Paren, Inc., 110 Hawai 'i 269, 275, 132 P.3d 378, 384 
(2006); cf. HRS § 607-14 (providing authority for the court to award reasonable attorneys' fees in assumpsit cases). Accordingly, we conclude that, to the extent that the court clerk, in effect, exercised judicial discretion to award attorneys' fees in favor of Ledcor and against Joslin without legal authority, such action is inconsistent with due process of law. Therefore, the clerk's award of attorneys' fees in the Default Judgment is void. 
Finally, with respect to the issue of joint and several 
liability, the complaint herein prayed for damages against Joslin personally for misrepresentations made to Ledcor and damages against CMI resulting from CMI's alleged breaches of contract. Neither the record on appeal nor Ledcor's brief to this court present any legal authority regarding the determination of whether or not, under Hawai
'i law, Joslin and CMI can and/or 
should be held jointly and severally liable in light of the mixed prayer for relief in this case. Such a determination must be made by judicial decree, rather than a ministerial act. On this record, we conclude that the Default Judgment is void to the extent that it assesses joint and several liability. 
D. HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) Relief
 The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
In general, a motion to set aside a default entry or a
default judgment may and should be granted whenever the
court finds (1) that the nondefaulting party will not be
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party
has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not
the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. The mere
 fact that the nondefaulting party will be required to prove
his case without the inhibiting effect of the default upon
the defaulting party does not constitute prejudice which
should prevent a reopening.
 
BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 77, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150
 
(1976) (citations omitted). As noted above, a trial court's
 denial of a motion to set aside a default judgment is reviewed
 for an abuse of discretion.
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the Motion to Set Aside, Joslin argued that she
 
would be greatly prejudiced if the court failed to set aside the
 
default judgment because she had a meritorious defense, and that
 Ledcor would suffer no prejudice "unless its case is without
 merit." Joslin did not specifically address the third prong of
 the BDM test, instead pointing out that she filed the Motion to
 Set Aside within one day of learning that the judgment lien
 "showed up on a title report" for one of the Joslins' properties,
 which was less than thirty days after the entry of the Amended
 Default Judgment. Joslin's entire argument that she has a
 
8
meritorious defense,  as set forth in the Motion to Set Aside,
was as follows:

 
It is Lisa's contention that each of the five
 
[voucher/release] forms contains language in paragraph (b)
in capital letters as follows: "THIS RELEASE IS
 CONDITIONAL, HOWEVER, and shall be effective only upon
payment to us of the Retention, if any, and the Progress
Payment now due". It is Lisa's contention that Plaintiff
 did not make full progress payments and that payments of
retentions never occurred. (Robert Declaration paragraphs
27 and 28). Therefore Plaintiff had not complied with the
terms of the agreement and Lisa appropriately and legally
signed those forms as a corporate officer. In fact, it is
Lisa's contention that when the relationship between
Plaintiff and CMI ended, Plaintiff owed CMI approximately
$500,000.00 and was a significant cause in CMI's demise and
insolvency.
 
In opposition, on the issue of Joslin's purportedly
 
meritorious defense, Ledcor argued, inter alia, that Joslin had
 
certified that CMI's subcontractors had been paid in full, or
 would be promptly paid with the disbursements made pursuant to
 the vouchers, that Ledcor relied on that representation and made
 the subject payments solely to CMI, rather than CMI and the
 subcontractors jointly, and that Ledcor subsequently was
 obligated to make payments to CMI's unpaid subcontractors. 
Ledcor argued that the conditional release language in
 
paragraph (b) was irrelevant to the issue of Joslin's
 
8
 Although Joslin somewhat expanded on this argument in her reply
memorandum, at no point did Joslin deny certifying the subject
vouchers/releases, which included the representations that all suppliers had
been paid or would be paid with the proceeds of any disbursement made pursuant
to that voucher.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misrepresentations concerning payments to CMI's subcontractors;
 
rather, at most, it would have been potentially relevant to
 whether Ledcor otherwise owed additional payments to CMI, in
 which case the condition to CMI's lien releases would not have
 been satisfied.
 
On the issue of inexcusable neglect, Ledcor argued,
 
inter alia, that Joslin, as well as CMI, had been properly served
 more than a year earlier and, rather than defending against
 Ledcor's claims, neither CMI nor Joslin answered the complaint;
 instead, Joslin elected to disregard the lawsuit.
 
On the issue of prejudice to Ledcor, Ledcor argued that
 
the subject transactions had occurred over three years earlier,
 that Ledcor had paid out substantial amounts based on the
 misrepresentations, that CMI had since been dissolved, was
 apparently insolvent, and was beyond recourse, and that Joslin's
 recent acquisition of a title report strongly suggested an intent
 to transfer the property subject to the judgment lien, and an
 attempt to avoid payment on the judgment lien.
 
The Circuit Court applied the BDM test and entered the
 
following FOFs, which are challenged by Joslin on appeal:
9
 
6. The Court finds that Defendant LISA JOSLIN has
 
failed to establish all three of the elements necessary to
set aside the Entry of Default and the Amended Default
Judgment.
 
7. Defendant JOSLIN has failed to establish that
 
she has a meritorious defense to Plaintiff LEDCOR's claims. 
8. Defendant JOSLIN has failed to establish that
 
her default was not the result of inexcusable neglect or a
wilful act.
 
9. Defendant JOSLIN has failed to establish lack of
 
prejudice to Plaintiff LEDCOR, the non-defaulting party.
 
On the record in this case, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it denied
 
Joslin's Motion to Set Aside. Joslin failed to demonstrate that
 she has a meritorious defense to Ledcor's claims of
 
9
 These FOFs are also entered, nearly verbatim, as COLs 5, 6, 7, and
8.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
misrepresentation. Joslin did not deny certifying that all
 
suppliers had been paid or promptly would be paid from
 disbursements, that such representations were untrue, that Ledcor
 relied on her representations in making payments solely to CMI,
 or that, as a result, Ledcor subsequently was obligated to make
 payments to CMI's unpaid subcontractors; nor did she proffer any
 other evidence or arguments to this effect. Nor did Joslin make
 any argument or offer any evidence that the principal amount of
 the damages, in the sum of $157,437.05, was erroneous because
 Ledcor's claim was not for a "sum certain or for a sum which can
 by computation be made certain." Joslin's general averment that
 Ledcor owed CMI "approximately $500,000" does not leave this
 court with a firm conviction that a mistake has been made. The
 fact that CMI's lien releases were conditional is not directly
 relevant to Ledcor's misrepresentation claims against Joslin,
 notwithstanding that, had CMI defended the action, CMI
 theoretically might have pursued counterclaims against Ledcor.
 
As we have determined that Joslin was properly served,
 
her argument that her default was due to excusable neglect is
 without merit. Joslin offered no other excuse for her neglect in
 responding to the complaint.
10 The fact that Joslin reacted
 
promptly to the discovery of the judgment lien on her real
 property does not excuse her earlier default. 
Finally, the Circuit Court's finding that Joslin failed
 
to establish lack of prejudice to Ledcor is not merely based on
 the fact that Ledcor would be required to prove its case "without
 the inhibiting effect of the default upon the defaulting party." 
See BDM, 57 Haw. at 77; 549 P.2d at 1150. The passage of time,
 the demise of CMI, and Joslin's apparent desire to grant a lender
 a (superior) security interest in the property subject to
 
10
 On appeal, Joslin also argues that the Motion to Set Aside should
have been granted under HRCP Rule 60(b)(1) due to her mistake or excusable
neglect. This argument was not raised in the Circuit Court proceedings, is
not identified in the points of error, does not warrant plain error review,
and therefore, will be disregarded as a separate ground for appellate relief.
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11
Ledcor's judgment lien,  taken as a whole, support the Circuit
Court's determination.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in denying Joslin's Motion to Set Aside as
 
to the principal amount of the damages awarded to Ledcor in the
 Default Judgment.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 4, 2012
 
Order Denying Set Aside is affirmed in part and vacated in part,
 as set forth above; this case is remanded to the Circuit Court
 for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 13, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Tom Pierce 
Joseph A. Wolsztyniakfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Roy T. OgawaKurt K. Leong(Ogawa, Lau, Nakamura & Jew)for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 Robert submitted a declaration that the title report was related
to an attempt to secure a loan.
 
18
 