FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  P ACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000412 14-JAN-2025 07:57 AM Dkt. 115 OP 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
---o0o---
CHAUNTELLE  ACOL,  individually   and  as  Personal  Representative 
of  the  ESTATE  OF  PETER  J.  KEMA,  JR.,  deceased;  ALLAN  ACOL 
and  LINA  ACOL,  Plaintiff-Appellees, 
v. 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  DEPARTMENT   OF  HUMAN  SERVICES, 
Defendant/Crossclaimant-Appellant;  and  PETER  KEMA,  SR.; 
JAYLIN  KEMA,  Defendants/Crossclaim  Defendants-Appellees, 
and  JOHN  DOES  1-10,  Defendants 
NO.  CAAP-21-0000412 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL  NO.  1CC181000052) 
January  14,  2025 
LEONARD,  ACTING  CHIEF  JUDGE,  McCULLEN,  J.,  and 
CIRCUIT  COURT  JUDGE  ASHFORD,  IN  PLACE  OF  HIRAOKA,  WADSWORTH, 
NAKASONE,  and  GUIDRY,  JJ.,  RECUSED 
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  LEONARD,  ACTING  CHIEF  JUDGE 
Years  ago,  many  people  in  Hawai i  asked,  where's  Peter 
Boy?   Underlying  this  appeal  is  the  undisputed  fact  that  Peter  J. 
Kema,  Jr.,  widely  known  (and  referred  to  herein)  as  Peter  Boy,  is 
dead.   This  case  is  a  wrongful  death  action  brought  by  Peter         
         
            
        
       
        
         
          
         
         
         
       
         
   
        
          
         
          
           
        
            
        
       
          
        
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Boy's estate and surviving siblings (the Acols). The complaint 
alleges that Peter Boy's death in 1997 at age six was due to 
neglect and physical abuse inflicted by his parents and 
Defendant-Appellant State of Hawaii's (the State's ) failure to 
timely investigate reports of abuse and to provide appropriate 
services. 
In the proceedings below, the State filed a motion for 
summary judgment, which was denied, and the Acols filed a motion 
for partial summary judgment, which was granted. The State 
appeals pursuant to the June 24, 2021 Order Granting [the 
State's] Motion for Leave to File Interlocutory Appeal and for 
Stay of Proceedings Pending Appeal (Order Allowing Interlocutory 
Appeal) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(Circuit Court).1 
On appeal, the State contends that the Circuit Court 
erred in its summary judgment rulings because: (1) the Acols 
lack standing to bring an action under Hawaii's wrongful death 
statute, and even if the Acols have standing, the Acols' claims 
are untimely and precluded as a matter of law; and (2) the 
applicable statute of limitations runs from the decedent's death 
and the "discovery rule" does not apply in this case. The State 
challenges the Circuit Court's April 26, 2021 Order Denying 
Defendant [State's] Motion for Summary Judgment [(State's MSJ)] 
(Order Denying the State's MSJ) and April 26, 2021 Order Granting 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to the 
1 The Honorable John M. Tonaki presided. 
2         
       
    
 
        
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Affirmative Defense of Statute of Limitations [(Acols' MPSJ)] 
(Order Granting the Acols' MPSJ). 
We  hold  that:   (1)  this  case  should  not  be  dismissed  at 
this  time  due  to  a  lack  of  standing  because  the  Acols  may  be  able 
to  establish  their  standing  to  bring  wrongful  death  claims;  (2) 
Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS)  §  662-4  (2016)  sets  forth  the  limit 
of  the  State's  waiver  of  its  sovereign  immunity  for  tort  claims, 
absent  some  other  clear  and  unequivocally-expressed  waiver  of 
immunity  in  statutory  text;  (3)  the  statute  of  limitations 
applicable  to  the  Acols'  wrongful  death  claim  against  the  State 
pursuant  to  HRS  §  663-3  (2016)  is  within  two  years  from  the  date 
of  death  of  Peter  Boy,  unless  (a)  the  Acols  can  establish, 
pursuant  to  HRS  §  657-20  (2016),  that  any  person  who  is  liable 
for  Peter  Boy's  wrongful  death  fraudulently  concealed  the 
existence  of  the  Acols'  cause  of  action,  in  which  case  (b)  the 
Acols'  action  against  the  State  accrued  when  the  Acols  discovered 
or  should  have  discovered  the  existence  of  the  cause  of  action 
against  the  State,  and  therefore,  may  be  commenced  within  two 
years  after  the  Acols  discovered  or  should  have  discovered  the 
existence  of  the  cause  of  action  against  the  State,  as  set  forth 
in  HRS  §  657-20,  as  limited  by  HRS  §  662-4.   Accordingly,  the 
Circuit  Court  did  not  err  in  denying  the  State's  MSJ  and  erred  in 
granting  the  Acols'  MPSJ. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A.
 Factual Background 
This is an interlocutory appeal from rulings on two 
summary judgment motions. Although not all facts underlying this 
3         
         
        
           
       
    
   
        
          
        
   
         
         
         
        
         
       
            
         
          
          
       
        
           
          
          
            
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case are in dispute, many material facts remain open to 
determination by a trier-of-fact. This "factual" background is 
based on the submissions of the parties, and the facts of this 
case remain subject to establishment and challenge through 
admissible evidence and further argument. 
Plaintiffs-Appellees Chauntelle Acol (Chauntelle ), 
individually and as Personal Representative of the Estate of 
Peter J. Kema, Jr., deceased, Allan Acol (Allan), and Lina Acol 
(Lina) (collectively, the Acols) are the surviving siblings of 
Peter Boy. 
Peter Boy was born in May of 1991 to Defendants-
Appellees Peter Kema, Sr. (Peter Sr.) and Jaylin Kema (Jaylin) 
(the Kemas). Shortly after Peter Boy's birth, the State 
Department of Human Services (DHS) and Child Protective Services 
(CPS) removed Chauntelle and Allan from the Kema household and 
initiated an investigation due to injuries suggesting physical 
abuse by the Kemas. On June 26, 1991, Chauntelle and Allan were 
returned to the Kema household. A Child Protective Act 
proceeding was initiated in the Hilo Division of Family Court of 
the Third Circuit (Family Court) and the Family Court ordered a 
service plan and family supervision by CPS. 
On August 11, 1991, three-month-old Peter Boy was taken 
to Hilo Hospital for treatment for a leg injury. X-rays revealed 
one-month old fractures in his upper arms and the left sixth, 
seventh, and eighth ribs, as well as more recent fractures in 
both legs and the left ankle. As a result of those injuries, 
Chauntelle, Allan, and Peter Boy were removed from the Kema 
4         
          
          
           
         
       
      
          
       
         
         
          
        
  
         
        
                       
     
          
           
         
          
  
       
          
            
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
household and placed in foster care in August 1991. On 
September 13, 1991, Dr. Robert Di Mauro reviewed the x-rays and 
wrote in a letter to Michael Hess (Hess), the DHS worker in 
charge of the investigation: "The appearance and distribution of 
these fractures is characteristic of child abuse." 
On November 14, 1991, a court-appointed psychologist 
filed his evaluation of the Kemas with the Family Court, warning 
that both parents suffered from significant psychological illness 
and that the chance of significant change in the parents' 
behavior was extremely poor. On November 16, 1991, Chauntelle, 
Allan, and Peter Boy were moved from temporary foster custody and 
placed with their maternal grandparents, James Acol and Yolanda 
Acol (Acol Grandparents ). 
On August 19, 1992, Hess wrote a memorandum to his 
supervisor, Claudia Wilcox, warning her that, "These children are 
at extreme risk if they are placed in the care of either parent." 
He urged her to move for permanent custody and termination of 
parental rights without delay. 
On July 25, 1994, DHS returned Peter Boy to the custody 
of the Kemas. In approximately October of 1995, based on the 
report and recommendation of DHS, family supervision of Peter Boy 
and his siblings was revoked and the Family Court case was 
closed. 
In January 1997, the Acol Grandparents reported to 
Constance Santana (Santana ) at the Kona CPS office that they had 
seen Peter Boy with a severe injury to his arm. Santana called 
the Hilo CPS office supervisor Peggy Hilton (Hilton) about the 
5         
            
         
         
           
            
              
    
         
           
           
            
              
          
         
         
            
         
         
  
      
          
         
         
           
           
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
report. Hilton asked Santana not to file the report as a "new 
intake," and advised her that she was closely monitoring the 
Peter Boy case. Per Hilton's instructions, Santana logged the 
report under the existing case file. Hilton did not indicate to 
Santana that the case had been closed in 1995. There is no 
record of any action being taken by the DHS or CPS as a result of 
Santana's January 1997 report. 
On April 4, 1997, Karen DeSoto, MSW, reported to DHS 
that a client of hers, a teenaged cousin to Peter Boy, had 
observed Peter Boy with a broken arm that she believed was caused 
by Peter Sr., who was also allegedly forcing Peter Boy to eat dog 
feces. The report was logged as a new intake. At the time, the 
protocol for addressing an intake report of child abuse was to 
assign the matter for investigation to a CPS worker within 
twenty-four hours of receipt. However, the matter was not 
assigned until June 17, 1997, more than two months later. By the 
time CPS worker Evelyn Au was assigned and initiated an 
investigation, Peter Boy had disappeared. Peter Boy was never 
seen again. 
According to DHS employee Sandy Vitousek (Vitousek ), 
the reason for the delay was chronic short staffing that required 
investigations to be assigned on a priority basis. Vitousek 
stated, "The information received did not warrant a high safety 
factor, given that there was no indication of actual harm, and at 
that time, there was no suspicion of the child being missing. 
The intake was accepted solely on the perceived concerns of a 
6         
        
 
         
        
          
       
        
        
        
       
       
         
        
        
           
         
         
        
          
          
            
         
 
         
          
         
            FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[fifteen-year-old], coupled with a prior CPS history (Case closed 
in 1995)." 
The Kemas claimed that Peter Boy had been taken to 
O ahu  to stay  with a distant relative named "Aunty Rose 
Makuakane." The Kemas continued to assert this claim for the 
next nineteen years. Meanwhile, local law enforcement 
investigated Peter Boy's disappearance, but were unable to obtain 
sufficient evidence to confirm Peter Boy's death or the 
circumstances of his disappearance. The Kemas' Aunty Rose 
Makuakane story, together with two credible witnesses reporting 
seeing Peter Boy alive following his disappearance, complicated 
the investigation. In 1998 and 1999, Hawai i  Police Department  
(HPD) investigators questioned the Acol siblings about the Kemas' 
abuse, particularly the abuse of Peter Boy. Four-and-a-half-
year-old Lina reported that she saw Peter Boy dead based on her 
recollection of an event she witnessed when she was approximately 
three-and-a-half years old. Years later, in April 2001, HPD 
reclassified Peter Boy's disappearance from a missing person case 
to a murder investigation. Lina reported her memories of seeing 
Peter Boy dead, her parents' attempts to resuscitate him, and her 
father driving with her to bury Peter Boy under a tree, to HPD 
and the media at ages seven, twelve, fourteen, twenty, and 
twenty-three. 
In March and April of 2016, prosecutors were able to 
verify that both of the reported sightings of Peter Boy alive 
after his disappearance and the Aunty Rose Makuakane story were 
false. On April 27, 2016, Jaylin and Peter Sr. were indicted for 
7         
           
         
        
        
           
          
  
       
         
        
          
     
       
         
   
         
         
        
           
           
         
       
           
         
          
     
           
             
         
         
     
  
         
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the murder of Peter Boy. Ricky Roy Damerville, a Hawai i
   . . . .  County  
deputy prosecutor assigned to prosecute the Kemas, explained in a 
declaration, inter alia, the difficulties with the case: 
There was no forensic evidence supporting the fact of 
death or the manner of death. The only evidence that [Peter 
Boy] was deceased was the passage of time and the recorded 
statements of [Lina]. 
The weakness [of the prosecution's case] was the 
inconsistent statements of a four and half year old Lina 
Acol, of average cognitive ability about something that she 
witnessed as a three and half year old and Lina's own 
uncertainty whether [Peter Boy] was deceased. 
Jaylin and Peter Sr. pled guilty to reckless 
manslaughter for Peter Boy's death on December 1, 2016, and 
April 6, 2017, respectively . 
On January 11, 2017, upon a petition, the Family Court 
appointed Stephen W. Lane (Lane) as Special Master to investigate 
the circumstance of Peter Boy's death and determine whether 
grounds existed for filing a tort claim on behalf of Peter Boy's 
estate. On April 13, 2017, Lane filed a Special Master's Status 
Report wherein he stated, "I have concluded that there is 
substantial evidence of colorable claims against the [State] 
arising out of the care and treatment of [Peter Boy] and his 
siblings." To support this conclusion, Lane cited to, inter 
alia, the two-month delay by CPS in investigating the April 4, 
1997 report of abuse: 
By the time CPS reacted to the April 4 report in June 
of 1997, it was too late. Peter Boy was dead. It is 
probable that had CPS complied with their own standards and 
protocols and acted on this complaint as the law required, 
Peter Boy would be alive today. 
On November 7, 2017, upon a petition to the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit (Third Circuit Court) for, inter alia, 
8         
         
      
 
         
         
           
         
          
           
       
      
         
  
        
         
     
        
         
            
             
         
         
          
        
         
           
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a determination of death and adjudication of intestacy, the Third 
Circuit determined that Peter Boy was deceased. 
B. Procedural Background 
On January 10, 2018, the Acols filed the Complaint in 
this case, asserting wrongful death claims on their own behalf 
and on behalf of Peter Boy's estate. The Acols allege, inter 
alia, that the State, through its department and agency employees 
(including DHS and CPS employees), breached its duty to the Acols 
and Peter Boy by returning Peter Boy to the Kemas' household and 
by supporting the termination and closure of protective 
proceedings and parental supervision, despite knowledge and 
information about ongoing, severe physical abuse of Peter Boy by 
his parents. 
On February 1, 2018, the State answered the Complaint, 
asserting, inter alia, that this action is barred by the 
applicable statute of limitations. 
On March 2, 2021, the Circuit Court filed orders 
allowing the State's MSJ and the Acols' MPSJ, including exhibits 
to the motions, to be filed under seal. Both motions were filed 
on March 3, 2021, and heard on April 1, 2021. The Acols sought 
partial summary judgment as to the State's affirmative defense of 
statute of limitations. They argued that the Complaint was 
timely because the Acols did not discover Peter Boy's death until 
Jaylin's confession in December 2016, and they discovered their 
colorable claims against the State when they received the Special 
Master's Status Report in April 2017. The State argued that the 
Acols' claims were time barred by HRS § 663-3 because more than 
9         
           
  
        
      
        
         
    
        
       
       
        
       
     
           
       
        
        
                  
        
           
        
        
       
   
  
         
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
two years had passed since Peter Boy's death when the Acols filed 
their Complaint. 
On  April  26,  2021,  the  Circuit   Court  entered   the  Order 
Denying   the  State's   MSJ  and  the  Order  Granting   the  Acols'  MPSJ.  
In  both  orders,
  the  Circuit  Court  found  as  a  matter  of  law  that 
the  Complaint  was  timely  filed  because: 
1. [The Acols'] cause of action did not accrue under 
[HRS] § 663-3 two-year limitations period until 
December 1, 2016 when Jaylin Kema allocuted in court 
as part of her guilty plea and admitted causing the 
death of Peter Boy Kema; 
2. From the time of Peter Boy's disappearance in 1997 
until December 1, 2016, [Jaylin] and [Peter Sr.] 
fraudulently concealed the fact of Peter Boy's death, 
and [HRS] § 657-20 tolled the statute of limitations 
for six years following [Jaylin's] admission of guilt 
as to Peter Boy's death; and, 
3. For a large portion of the 19 years that Peter Boy was 
missing, the [Acols] were minors, either under the 
care of the Kemas themselves, or the Acol grandparents 
and could not be expected under these circumstances to 
bring an action within the two years after 1997 when 
Peter Boy disappeared and it is thought that he had 
died. The reports or multiple recollections of [Lina] 
when she was 3 or 4 years old were inconsistent and it 
would be manifestly unfair to commence the statute of 
limitations period based upon this memory of Lina when 
the relevant government authorities chose not to act 
upon the same memory. 
On  June  24,  2021,  the  Circuit  Court  entered  the  Order 
Allowing  Interlocutory  Appeal.   On  July  13,  2021,  the  State 
timely  filed  a  Notice  of  Appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
The  State   raises  two  points  of  error,  contending  that 
the  Circuit  Court  erred:   (1)  in  denying  the  State's  MSJ;  and  (2) 
by  applying  the  discovery  rule  to  a  wrongful  death  action  and 
granting  the  Acols'  MPSJ.  2 
2 The State's points of error are woefully noncompliant with Hawai i  
Rules
 of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4). Such omissions may result in 
(continued...) 
10         
   
      
      
         
           
            
           
         
           
          
           
        
      
  
       
        
       
  
       
        
       
         
        
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
We  review  orders  granting   or  denying  summary  judgment 
de  novo.   Nuuanu  Valley  Ass'n  v.  City  &  Cnty.  of  Honolulu,  119 
Hawai i  90,  96,  194  P.3d   531,  537  (2008). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect 
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of 
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The 
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the 
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the 
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most 
favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of law 
to be reviewed de novo under the right/wrong standard. 
Our statutory construction is guided by the following 
well established principles: 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give 
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is 
to be obtained primarily from the language contained 
in the statute itself. And we must read statutory 
language in the context of the entire statute and 
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose. 
When  there  is  dou bt,  doubleness  of  meaning,  or 
indistinctiveness  or  uncertainty  of  an  expression  used 
in  a  statute,  an  ambiguity  exists. 
In  construing  an  ambiguous  statute,  the  meaning 
of  the  ambiguous  words  may  be  sought  by  examining  the 
context,  with  which  the  ambiguous  words,  phrases,  and 
sentences  may  be  compared,  in  order  to  ascertain  their 
true  meaning.   Moreover,  the  courts  may  resort  to 
extrinsic  aids  in  determining  legislative  intent.   One 
avenue  is  the  use  of  legislative  history  as  an 
interpretive  tool. 
[The  appellate]  court  may  also  consider  the 
reason  and  spirit  of  the  law,  and  the  cause  which 
induced  the  legislature  to  enact  it  to  discover  its 
true  meaning. 
2(...continued) 
points  of  err or  being  disregarded.   However,  in  the  interest  of  justice,  we 
have  exercised  our  discretion  to  address  the  merits  of  the  appeal.   O'Connor 
v.  Diocese  of  Honolulu,  77  Hawai i  383,  386   n.5,  885  P.2d  361,  364  n.5  (1994); 
Sprague  v.  Cal.  Pac.  Bankers  &  Ins.  Ltd.,  102  Hawai i  189,  196,  74  P.3d  12,  19 
(2003). 
11         
           
      
         
          
            
         
 
         
           
          
            
         
        
          
        
       
       
        
           
         
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lingle v. Haw. Gov't Emps. Ass'n Local 152, 107 Hawai i 178, 183, 
111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005)
 (cleaned up). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The State maintains that the Circuit Court erred in its 
summary judgment rulings and the State is entitled to judgment as 
a matter of law because the Acols lack standing, and even if they 
have standing, their claims are barred by the applicable statute 
of limitations. 
A. Standing 
The State argues that the Acols lack standing to bring 
a wrongful death action for the death of Peter Boy because they 
are not among the enumerated classes of persons who may recover 
under HRS § 663-3. The State further argues that even though the 
issue of standing was not raised in the Circuit Court 
proceedings, standing is a matter of subject matter jurisdiction, 
and therefore the courts lack jurisdiction to rule in the Acols' 
favor. This latter proposition was clarified, and firmly 
rejected, by the Hawai i Supreme Court as follows: 
In Hawai i state  courts, stand ing is a prudential 
consideration regarding the "proper – and properly limited – 
role of courts in a democratic society" and is not an issue 
of subject matter jurisdiction, as it is in federal courts. 
Tax  Found.  of  Haw.  v.  State,  144  Hawai i  175,  188,   439  P.3d  127, 
140  (2019). 
Hawaii's wrongful
 death statute provides: 
§  663-3   Death  by  wrongful  act.   (a)   When  the  death 
of  a  person  is  caused  by  the  wrongful  act,  neglect,  or 
default  of  any  person,  the  deceased's  legal  representative, 
or  any  of  the  persons  enumerated  in  subsection  (b),  may 
maintain  an  action  against  the  person  causing  the  death  or 
against  the  person  responsible  for  the  death.   The  action 
shall  be  maintained  on  behalf  of  the  persons  enumerated  in 
subsection  (b),  except  that  the  legal  representative  may 
12         
          
    
         
          
       
       
    
  
      
        
     
      
      
        
 
      
         
          
        
        
       
          
          
          
        
    
         
       
            
        
       
       
           
          
            
           
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recover on behalf of the estate the reasonable expenses of the 
deceased's last illness and burial. 
(b) In any action under this section, such damages 
may be given as under the circumstances shall be deemed fair 
and just compensation, with reference to the pecuniary 
injury and loss of love and affection, including: 
(1) Loss of society, companionship, comfort, 
consortium, or protection ; 
(2) Loss of marital care, attention, advice, or 
counsel; 
(3) Loss of care, attention, advice, or counsel of a 
reciprocal beneficiary as defined in chapter 
572C; 
(4) Loss of filial care or attention; or 
(5) Loss of parental care, training, guidance, or 
education, suffered as a result of the death of 
the person; 
by the surviving spouse, reciprocal beneficiary, children, 
father, mother, and by any person wholly or partly dependent 
upon the deceased person. The jury or court sitting without 
jury shall allocate the damages to the persons entitled 
thereto in its verdict or judgment, and any damages 
recovered under this section, except for reasonable expenses 
of last illness and burial, shall not constitute a part of 
the estate of the deceased. Any action brought under this 
section shall be commenced within two years from the date of 
death of the injured person, except as otherwise provided. 
HRS § 663-3 (emphasis added). 
Pursuant to HRS § 663-3(a), in her capacity as the 
personal representative of Peter Boy's estate, Chauntelle has 
standing to bring a wrongful death claim under HRS § 663-3. In 
their individual capacities, as Peter Boy's siblings, the Acols 
are not among the specifically enumerated persons (spouse, 
reciprocal beneficiary, child, mother, father) who have standing 
under HRS § 663-3, but they may nevertheless bring suit if they 
are able to establish that they were "wholly or partly dependent 
upon the deceased person," i.e., Peter Boy. See id. The State 
argues that none of the Acols were wholly or partly dependent on 
six-year-old Peter Boy. 
13         
          
        
         
         
          
         
       
        
       
          
 
        
         
          
        
        
   
           
         
          
              
      
         
        
            
          
            
             
           
           
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court has held that HRS § 663-3 is plain 
and unambiguous, and that under this statute, "the surviving 
spouse, children, mother, and father of the deceased and any 
person wholly or partly dependent upon the deceased may recover 
damages for pecuniary injuries and for the 'loss of love and 
affection' caused by the wrongful death of the deceased." 
Lealaimatafao v. Woodward-Clyde Consultants , 75 Haw. 544, 552, 
867 P.2d 220, 224 (1994). The court explained: 
The term "dependent" has been variously construed. 
But as employed in death acts it connotes the existence of 
necessitous want[.] 
Dependency may result from different causes. It may 
result from the lack of physical necessities such as food, 
shelter and clothing. It may result from moral and social 
necessities such as education. Physical, moral and social 
necessities are not confined to the subjects mentioned. 
Others are readily conceivable. 
Id. (quoting Young v. Honolulu Const. & Draying Co., 34 Haw. 426, 
442 (1938)) (emphasis added). The court further clarified that 
claims are not limited to pecuniary injuries, but may also arise 
from a loss of love and affection. Id. at 555, 867 P.2d at 226. 
In most instances where dependency is disputed, 
"dependence that confers standing on [a person] to bring a 
wrongful-death action for the death generally presents a question 
of fact, which should be determined by the trier of fact. The 
fact and degree of dependency on a decedent are matters for 
determination by a jury on proper evidence." See 22A Am. Jur. 2d 
Death § 359. Here, in part because the issue was raised for the 
first time on appeal, there are no factual findings on the issue 
of dependency. In the Complaint, the Acols alleged that as a 
result of the wrongful death of Peter Boy, Plaintiffs sustained 
14         
       
           
     
        
          
         
        
         
           
           
  
        
         
          
   
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"conscious pain and suffering; severe emotional distress and 
mental anguish; the loss of future enjoyment of life; the loss of 
society, companionship, comfort, consortium, and/or protection; 
and the loss of filial care and/or attention." 
We cannot conclude as a matter of law that the Acols 
cannot establish that they were dependent upon Peter Boy for 
physical, moral, or social necessities; therefore, the Acols may 
be able to establish their standing to bring wrongful death 
claims under HRS § 663-3. We reject the State's argument that 
this case should be dismissed on this appeal due to lack of 
standing. 
B. Statute of Limitations 
The State argues that the Acols' claims against the 
State are barred by the applicable statute of limitations, and 
therefore, the Circuit Court erred in denying the State's MSJ and 
granting the Acols' MPSJ. 
We begin with the basic tenets of sovereign immunity. 
[I]t  is  well  established  that  the  State's  liability  is 
limited  by  its  sovereign  immunity,  except  where  there  has 
been  a  clear  relinquishment  of  immunity  and  the  State  has 
consented  to  be  sued. 
   . . . . 
[W]hen  construing  statutes  regarding  sovereign 
immunity,  the  following  principles  apply:   (1)  a  waiver  of 
the  Government's  sovereign  immunity  will  be  strictly 
construed,  in  terms  of  its  scope,  in  favor  of  the  sovereign; 
(2)  a  waiver  of  sovereign  immunity  must  be  unequivocally 
expressed  in  statutory  text;  (3)  a  statute's  legislative 
history  cannot  supply  a  waiver  that  does  not  appear  clearly 
in  any  statutory  text;  (4)  it  is  not  a  court's  right  to 
extend  the  waiver  of  sovereign  immunity  more  broadly  than 
has  been  directed  by  the  [legislature];  and  (5)  sovereign 
immunity  is  not  to  be  waived  by  policy  arguments.  
Taylor-Rice  v.  State,  105  Hawai i  104,  109-10,  94  P.3d  659,  664-
65  (2004)  (cleaned  up). 
15
         
          
         
          
         
       
    
          
         
       
          
           
         
          
         
         
            
   
       
         
           
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The  State   Tort  Liability  Act  waives  the  State's 
immunity  from  money  damages  for  torts  as  follows: 
§  662-2   Waiver  and  liability  of  State.   The  State 
hereby  waives  its  immunity  for  liability  for  the  torts  of 
its  employees  and  shall  be  liable  in  the  same  manner  and  to 
the  same  extent  as  a  private  individual  under  like 
circumstances,  but  shall  not  be  liable  for  interest  prior  to 
judgment  or  for  punitive  damages. 
HRS  §  662-2  (2016). 
The  State  Tort  Liability  Act  also  includes  a  statute  of 
limitation,  which  states: 
§ 662-4 Statute of limitations. A tort claim against 
the State shall be forever barred unless action is begun 
within two years after the claim accrues , except in the case 
of a medical tort claim when the limitation of action 
provisions set forth in section 657-7.3 shall apply. 
HRS § 662-4 (emphasis added). 
This is a hard deadline – the limit of the State's 
waiver of its sovereign immunity for tort claims, absent some 
other clear and unequivocally-expressed waiver of immunity in 
statutory text. See Taylor-Rice ,
 105 Hawai i at 109-10, 94 P.3d 
at 664-65; see also, e.g., Whittington v. State, 72 Haw. 77, 79, 
806 P.2d 957, 957-58 (1991) (holding that extensions for minors 
allowed under HRS § 657-13 (2016) are not applicable to tort 
actions against the State because the State Tort Liability Act 
does not contain an express minority tolling provision). There 
is a single exception – involving HRS § 657-7.3 – that is not 
applicable here. 
Thus, we necessarily consider when the tort claim 
accrues, i.e., when the statute of limitations begins to run 
under HRS § 662-4, as well as other statutory language in and 
applicable to the wrongful death statute, HRS § 663-3. 
16         
   . . . .  But  first  we  must  also  consider  the  State's  argument 
that  pursuant  to  Hawaii's  wrongful  death  statute,  HRS  §  663-3,  a 
wrongful  death  action  must  be  commenced  within  two  years  of  the 
decedent's  death.   As  set  forth  above,  HRS  §  663-3  provides,  in 
relevant  part  here: FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Our  courts  have  interpreted  the  word  "accrues"  under 
HRS  §  662–4  to  mean  that  the  statute  does  not  begin  to  run 
"until  the  plaintiff  knew  or  should  have  known  of  the 
defendant's  negligence."   Waugh  v.  University  of  Hawaii,  63 
Haw.  117,  127,  621  P.2d  957,  966  (1980)  (quotation  marks  and 
citation  omitted).   The  Hawai i  Supreme  Court   later 
interpreted  a  similar  statute  of  limitations,  HRS  §  657–7 
(1993),  to  mean  that  a  claim  against  the  State  "accrues" 
when  the  claimant  "discovers,  or  through  the  use  of 
reasonable  diligence  should  have  discovered,  (1)  the  damage; 
(2)  the  violation  of  the  duty  [to  the  claimant];  and  (3)  the 
causal  connection  between  the  violation  of  the  duty  and  the 
damage."   Hays  v.  City  and  County  of  Honolulu,  81  Hawai i 
391,  396,  917  P.2d  718,  723  (1996)  (citation  omitted) 
(interpreting  HRS  §  657–7.3  (1993)  and  HRS  §  657–7). 
Anderson  v.  State,  88  Hawai i  241,  247,   965  P.2d  783,  789  (App. 
1998)  (footnote  omitted). 
Accordingly,  it  appears  that  in  general,  pursuant  to 
HRS  §  662-4,  the  State  has  waived  its  immunity  from  suit  for 
torts,  including  a  wrongful  death  action,  so  long  as  the  suit  is 
brought  within  two  years  after  the  claim  accrues;  and,  a  claim 
accrues  when  the  claimant  has  knowledge  of  (1)  the  decedent's 
death,  (2)  the  defendant's  wrongful  conduct,  and  (3)  the  causal 
connection  between  the  wrongful  conduct  and  the  death.   We  will 
return  to  this  concept  below. 
§  663-3   Death  by  wrongful  act.   (a)   When  the  death 
of  a  person  is  caused  by  the  wrongful  act,  neglect,  or 
default  of  any  person,  the  deceased's  legal  representative, 
or  any  of  the  persons  enumerated  in  subsection  (b),  may 
maintain  an  action  against  the  person  causing  the  death  or 
against  the  person  responsible  for  the  death[.]  
17         
        
          
    
 
          
          
          
          
        
          
           
          
           
          
         
   
        
         
        
          
      
  
       
        
      
          
        
         
 
 
           
            
             
            
            FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Any action brought under this section shall be commenced 
within two years from the date of death of the injured 
person, except as otherwise provided . 
(Emphasis added). 
The State points to the final sentence of HRS § 663-3 
to argue that the limitations period for a wrongful death claim 
is strictly based on the date of decedent's death, subject only 
to tolling for infancy under the provisions of HRS § 657-13.3 
As noted above, the supreme court held in Whittington 
that the tolling of the statute of limitations for minors allowed 
under HRS § 657-13 is not applicable to tort actions against the 
State, because the State Tort Liability Act does not contain an 
express minority tolling provision. 72 Haw. at 79, 806 P.2d at 
957-58. "Actions brought under HRS Chapter 662, are not actions 
specified in Part I of Chapter 657, and accordingly, the 
3 HRS § 657-13 provides: 
§ 657-13 Infancy, insanity, imprisonment. If any 
person entitled to bring any action specified in this part 
(excepting actions against the sheriff, chief of police, or 
other officers) is, at the time the cause of action accrued , 
either: 
(1) Within the age of eighteen years; 
(2) Insane; or 
(3) Imprisoned on a criminal charge, or in execution 
under the sentence of a criminal court for a 
term less than the person's natural life; 
such person shall be at liberty to bring such actions within 
the respective times limited in this part, after the 
disability is removed or at any time while the disability 
exists. 
(Emphasis added). 
We note that the plain language of HRS § 657-13 recognizes that 
the condition of infancy, for example, does not determine when a cause of 
action accrues. In other words, it recognizes that a cause of action may 
occur when a person is under an enumerated disability. Rather, this statute 
tolls the running of the statute of limitations until after that disability is 
removed. 
18         
         
           
       
            
         
          
          
         
          
         
        
 
         
            
              
              
            
              
            
              
         
            
         
            
             
             
            
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extension  for  minors  allowed  in  HRS  §  657–13  is  not  applicable  to 
actions  against  the  State  brought  under  Chapter  662[.]"   Id.  at 
79,  806  P.2d  at  958  (emphasis  added).   The  same  principle  is  true 
for  actions  against  the  State  brought  under  HRS  chapter  663. 4 
Conversely,  HRS  §  657-20  specifically  applies  to  HRS 
§  663-3,  which  provides  for  a  tort  action  for  wrongful  death.   As 
set  forth  above,  the  State  has  specifically  waived  its  immunity 
for  tort  actions.   HRS  §  657-20  states:  
§ 657-20 Extension by fraudulent concealment. If any 
person who is liable to any of the actions mentioned in this 
part or section 663-3, fraudulently conceals the existence 
of the cause of action or the identity of any person who is 
liable for the claim from the knowledge of the person 
entitled to bring the action, the action may be commenced at 
any time within six years after the person who is entitled 
to bring the same discovers or should have discovered , the 
existence of the cause of action or the identity of the 
person who is liable for the claim, although the action 
would otherwise be barred by the period of limitations. 
(Emphasis added). 
The  Acols   argue  that  HRS  §  657-20  tolled  the  statute  of 
limitations  for  six  years  following  Jaylin's  admission  concerning 
Peter  Boy's  death.   While  an  extension  by  fraudulent  concealment 
is  expressly  made  applicable  to  wrongful  death  claims  under  HRS 
§  663-3,  there  is  no  clear  and  unequivocally-expressed  waiver  in 
4 We recognize that the supreme court has interpreted the 1972 
amendment to HRS § 657-13 to permit the minority tolling provision in HRS 
§ 657-13 to apply to wrongful death actions brought pursuant to HRS § 663-3. 
Hun v. Center Props., 63 Haw. 273, 281-82, 626 P.2d 182, 188 (1981). However, 
that case did not involve a wrongful death action against the State, and 
therefore, it is not dispositive of the issue here. Unlike HRS § 661-5 (2016) 
(the statute of limitations for claims against the State brought under Part I 
of HRS chapter 661), HRS § 662-4 does not provide for an additional period for 
"persons under legal disability" – such as infancy, insanity, imprisonment 
(see HRS § 657-13) – to commence a tort action against the State. 
We further recognize that the one-year tolling provision in HRS 
§ 661-5, for persons under disability, arguably could be applied to a claim 
brought pursuant to HRS § 663-3 because it is a "claim against the State 
founded upon any statute of the State" pursuant to HRS § 661-1(1) (2016). 
However, it is undisputed that the Acols did not commence this action within 
one year of reaching their respective ages of majority. 
19         
             
            
          
          
           
           
         
        
          
          
          
         
           
         
         
            
          
          
           
           
          
        
          
           
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 657-20 or HRS § 663-3 of the absolute bar of tort claims 
against the State set forth in HRS § 662-4, i.e., that a "tort 
claim against the State shall be forever barred unless action is 
begun within two years after the claim accrues." Thus, we 
conclude HRS § 657-20 cannot be construed to toll the time period 
in which an action may be commenced against the State beyond the 
two-year period after the cause of action accrues. 
HRS § 657-20 does, however, state parameters for the 
determination of when the cause of action accrues, i.e., when the 
statute of limitations begins running on a wrongful death claim. 
Specifically, if any person who is liable for a wrongful death 
under HRS § 663-3 fraudulently conceals the existence of the 
cause of action, "the action may be commenced at any time within 
[the permissible number of] years after the person who is 
entitled to bring the same discovers or should have discovered , 
the existence of the cause of action . . ., although the action 
would otherwise be barred by the period of limitations." HRS 
§ 657-20 (emphasis added). Contrary to the State's argument that 
the limitations period in HRS § 663-3 is fixed – running strictly 
from the decedent's date of death – we conclude that if the 
complainant(s) can establish that any person who is liable for a 
wrongful death under HRS § 663-3 fraudulently concealed the 
existence of the cause of action, then the discovery rule set 
forth in HRS § 657-20 applies, even though HRS § 663-3 itself 
does not contain accrual language. 
Accordingly,  we  hold  that  (1)  the  statute  of 
limitations  applicable  to  the  Acols'  wrongful  death  claim  against 
20
         
           
            
          
         
        
          
         
          
           
         
          
             
        
     
        
           
         
         
        
           
          
        
         
        
         
          
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the State pursuant to HRS § 663-3 (Death by wrongful act) is 
within two years from the date of death of Peter Boy, unless (2) 
the Acols can establish, pursuant to HRS § 657-20 (Extension by 
fraudulent concealment), that any person who is liable for Peter 
Boy's wrongful death fraudulently concealed the existence of the 
Acols' cause of action, in which case (3) the Acols' action 
against the State accrued when the Acols discovered or should 
have discovered the existence of the cause of action against the 
State, as set forth in HRS § 657-20, and therefore, may be 
commenced within two years after the Acols discovered or should 
have discovered the existence of the cause of action against the 
State, as set forth in HRS § 657-20, as limited by HRS § 662-4 
(Statute of limitations for tort claims against the State). 
C. The Order Denying the State's MSJ 
The State argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying the State's MSJ. In accordance with the above, we reject 
the State's arguments that the State was entitled to summary 
judgment against the Acols because the Acols lack standing or 
because the Acols' claims were time-barred pursuant to HRS 
§ 663-3 and no discovery rule could be applied to extend the 
statute of limitations more than two years after the date of 
Peter Boy's death. Concerning fraudulent concealment, the State 
argues that (1) there is no allegation that the State 
participated in any act of fraudulent concealment, and (2) 
regardless of any fraudulent concealment of Peter Boy's death by 
the Kemas, "Lina always knew the true circumstances of the Kemas' 
conduct and the death of Peter Boy based on what she witnessed." 
21         
       
           
         
           
        
           
        
         
          
           
        
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding  the  State's  first  argument,  HRS  §  657-20 
plainly  states,  in  relevant  part:  "If  any  person  who  is  liable  to 
any  of  the  actions  mentioned  in  this  part  or  section  663-3, 
fraudulently  conceals  the  existence  of  the  cause  of  action  .  .  ., 
the  action  may  be  commenced  at  any  time  within  [the  applicable 
period]  after  the  person  who  is  entitled  to  bring  the  same 
discovers  or  should  have  discovered[]  the  existence  of  the  cause 
of  action."   (Emphasis  added).   The  plain  and  unambiguous 
language  of  HRS  §  657-20  clearly  extends  the  time  to  commence  an 
action  based  on  the  fraudulent  concealment  of  the  existence  of 
the  cause  of  action  by  any  person  who  is  liable  –  it  does  not 
require  the  complainant  to  establish  that  all  persons  who  are 
liable  engaged  in  the  fraudulent  concealment  of  the  existence  of 
the  cause  of  action. 
Regarding
 the State's second argument, we conclude that 
there are genuine issues of material fact in dispute as to when 
the Acols discovered or should have discovered the existence of 
the wrongful death cause of action. We cannot conclude as a 
matter of law that Lina's varying and inconsistent recollections 
of what she saw when she was three years old, which conflicted 
with other accounts concerning whether Peter Boy was dead, 
constituted knowledge (even by Lina) of the existence of a 
wrongful death cause of action. The statute of limitations runs 
from when the cause of action was discovered or should have been 
discovered. 
"[T]he moment at which a statute of limitations is 
triggered is ordinarily a question of fact." Norris v. Six Flags 
22         
        
      
       
            
         
           
        
 
          
          
          
         
        
          
         
         
          
 
  
        
          
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Theme  Parks,  Inc.,  102  Hawai i  203,  206,  74  P.3d  26,  29  (2003) 
(citing  Blair  v.  Ing,  95  Hawai i  247,  267,  21  P.3d  452,  472 
(2001)).   When  a  discovery  rule  applies,  a  cause  of  action 
accrues  when  the  plaintiff  discovers  or  should  have  discovered 
the  wrongful  act,  the  damage,  and  the  causal  connection  between 
the  former  and  the  latter.   Hays,  81  Hawai i  at  396,  917  P.2d  at 
723.   A  plaintiff's  lack  of  knowledge  regarding  the  legal  duty 
upon  which  they  may  base  a  cause  of  action  does  not  delay  the 
start  of  the  limitations  period.   Id.  at  398,  917  P.2d  at  725.   
Concerning the issue whether the plaintiff, through the use 
of reasonable diligence, should have discovered the 
[wrongful] act, the damage, and the causal connection 
between the two, that issue is for the trier of fact. It 
bears repeating, however, that even when there is no dispute 
as to the facts, it usually is for the jury to decide 
whether the conduct in question meets the reasonable man 
standard. 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows v. Venture 15, Inc., 
115 Hawai i 232, 277, 167 P.3d 225, 270 (2007) (cleaned up). 
On the record in this case, we cannot conclude there is 
no genuine issue of material fact regarding whether the Acols, 
through the use of reasonable diligence should have discovered 
the wrongful acts at issue here, the damage, and the causal 
connection between them more than two years prior to their 
commencement of this lawsuit. Therefore, we conclude that the 
Circuit Court did not err in entering the Order Denying the 
State's MSJ. 
D. The Acols' MPSJ 
The State further argues that the Acols' MPSJ was 
improperly granted. As stated above, the Circuit Court found as 
a matter of law: 
23         
        
      
        
           
  
        
       
       
        
       
     
           
       
        
        
                  
        
           
        
        
       
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. [The Acols'] cause of action did not accrue under 
[HRS] § 663-3 two-year limitations period until 
December 1, 2016 when Jaylin Kema allocuted in court 
as part of her guilty plea and admitted causing the death of 
Peter Boy Kema; 
2. From the time of Peter Boy's disappearance in 1997 
until December 1, 2016, [Jaylin] and [Peter Sr.] 
fraudulently concealed the fact of Peter Boy's death, 
and [HRS] § 657-20 tolled the statute of limitations 
for six years following [Jaylin's] admission of guilt 
as to Peter Boy's death; and, 
3. For a large portion of the 19 years that Peter Boy was 
missing, the [Acols] were minors, either under the 
care of the Kemas themselves, or the Acol grandparents 
and could not be expected under these circumstances to 
bring an action within the two years after 1997 when 
Peter Boy disappeared and it is thought that he had 
died. The reports or multiple recollections of [Lina] 
when she was 3 or 4 years old were inconsistent and it 
would be manifestly unfair to commence the statute of 
limitations period based upon this memory of Lina when 
the relevant government authorities chose not to act 
upon the same memory. 
Regarding  the  Circuit  Court's  first  finding  and 
conclusion,  there  was  at  least  some  evidence  in  the  record  that 
the  Acols  knew  of  the  Kemas'  wrongful  acts  that  caused  Peter 
Boy's  death,  that  Peter  Boy  was  dead,  and  a  reasonable  trier-of-
fact  could  find  that,  through  reasonable  diligence,  the  Acols 
should  have  discovered  the  alleged  wrongful  acts  of  the  State,  as 
well  as  the  causal  connection  between  those  acts  and  Peter  Boy's 
death.  
There  also  appear  to  be  genuine  issues  of  material  fact 
concerning  whether  the  Kemas  fraudulently  concealed  their 
wrongful  acts  causing  Peter  Boy's  death  from  the  Acols,  as  well 
as  Peter  Boy's  death,  in  light  of,  inter  alia,  Lina's 
attestations  concerning  what  she  witnessed  as  a  young  child,  and 
the  other  reports  of  the  extreme  abuse  suffered  by  Peter  Boy.   
The  Circuit  Court's  third  finding  and  conclusion  in  sum 
concludes  that  it  would  be  "manifestly  unfair"  to  bar  the  Acols' 
24
         
         
           
          
         
          
           
          
           
           
         
       
          
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims on statute of limitations grounds based on Lina's memories 
when, inter alia, for many years the State failed to act upon 
Lina's accounts of Peter Boy's death. However, as the supreme 
court has held, sovereign immunity cannot be waived based on 
policy arguments. See, e.g., Taylor-Rice , 105 Hawai i at 110, 94 
P.3d at 665. Nor can the statute of limitations for claims 
against the State be waived or modified on equitable grounds. 
See Okutsu
 v. State, 153 Hawai i 192, 197-99, 528 P.3d 956, 961-
63
 (App. 2023) (holding, inter alia, that HRS § 662-4 cannot be 
waived or tolled by the conduct of the executive branch). 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred 
in granting partial summary judgment in favor of the Acols and 
concluding as a matter of law that the Complaint was timely 
filed. 
V. CONCLUSION 
For  the  reasons   set  forth  above,  the  Circuit  Court's 
April  26,  2021  Order  Denying  the  State's  MSJ  is  affirmed  and  the 
Circuit  Court's  April  26,  2021  Order  Granting  the  Acols'  MPSJ  is 
vacated.   This  case  is  remanded  to  the  Circuit  Court  for  further 
proceedings  consistent  with  this  Opinion. 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai  i,  January  14,   2025. 
On  the  briefs:  /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
Caron  M.  Inagaki, 
Kathy  K.  Higham,  and /s/  Sonja  M.P.  McCullen 
Skyler  G.  Cruz, Associate  Judge 
Deputy  Attorneys  General, 
for  Defendant-Appellant /s/  James  H.  Ashford 
Circuit  Court  Judge 
Randall  L.K.M.  Rosenberg 
Ryan  M.  Kaufman 
(Rosenberg  McKay  Hoffman), 
for  Plaintiffs-Appellees 
25 