NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000020
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
REED K. SHOOK, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 3DTA-16-01050)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Reed K. Shook (Shook) appeals from
a Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered by the
District Court of the Third Circuit (district court),1 on
November 9, 2016.  The district court found Shook guilty of one
count of operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant
(OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-
61(a)(1) and (3).2
1  The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
2  HRS § 291E-61 (Supp. 2016) provides in relevant part:
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty;NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Shook argues that the district court (1)
abused its discretion in admitting, without a sufficient
foundation, (a) Officer Davis's testimony regarding Shook's
performance on the Standardized Field Sobriety Test (SFST), and
(b) the results of Shook's Intoxilyzer results; (2) violated
Shook's constitutional right to testify by conducting an
inadequate colloquy pursuant to Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai #i
226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995); and (3) deprived Shook of his right to
cross-examine Officer Davis.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Shook's
first and second points of error as follows.
A. The district court failed to obtain a valid waiver
of Shook's right to testify, on the record, and
the error was not harmless.
The district court failed to obtain a valid waiver of
Shook's right to testify, on the record, where the Tachibana
colloquy consisted of the following:
THE COURT:  Okay.  So, Mr. Shook, you do have a right
to testify if you want to testify.  No one can prevent you
from testifying.  If you choose to testify the Prosecutor
can cross-examine you.  If you choose not to testify the
Court cannot hold that against you.  You understand?
[Shook]:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  Okay.
After the court denied Shook's motion for judgment of acquittal,
Shook's counsel stated that Shook did not intend to testify.
Here, the district court failed to obtain Shook's
waiver directly from him on the record.  In State v. Staley , 91
Hawai#i 275, 982 P.2d 904 (1999), the trial court failed to
obtain an on-the-record waiver directly from Staley, but instead
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
We note that the Judgment appears to indicate that Shook was convicted
under HRS § 291E-61(a)(2).  This appears to be a clerical error, as Shook was
only charged under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (3).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
relied on the representation of Staley's counsel that Staley
would not be testifying.  Id. at 286-87, 982 P.2d at 915-16.  The
Hawai#i Supreme Court held that by failing to obtain an
on-the-record waiver directly from Staley, the trial court had
failed to obtain a valid waiver of Staley's right to testify as
required by Tachibana .  Id.  Based on Staley, we conclude that
the district court failed to obtain a valid waiver from Shook of
his right to testify.
We further conclude that this error was not harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt.  The State argues that Shook's
testimony at the hearing on Shook's motion to suppress evidence
is indicative of how he would have testified at trial, had he
testified, and such testimony would not have altered the result;
therefore, any deficiency in the colloquy was harmless.  We
disagree.  We cannot tell what Shook's trial testimony would have
consisted of, had he testified, and whether it would have
affected the outcome of the case.  See State v. Hoang , 94 Hawai #i
271, 279-80, 12 P.3d 371, 379-80 (App. 2000) ("In general, it is
inherently difficult, if not impossible, to divine what effect a
violation of the defendant's constitutional right to testify had
on the outcome of any particular case.").  Therefore, we cannot
hold that the defective colloquy was harmless error beyond a
reasonable doubt.
B. The Circuit Court erred in admitting Officer
Davis's opinion that Shook could not drive safely
based on the Officer's assessment of the SFST, but
there was sufficient remaining evidence to support
an HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) conviction.
The district court erred in admitting, without proper
foundation, Officer Davis's opinion that Shook could not drive
safely based on the Officer's assessment of the SFST results.
In State v. Toyomura , 80 Hawai #i 8, 26, 904 P.2d 893, 911, the
Hawai#i Supreme Court held that there was an insufficient
foundation for admission of an officer's opinion that Toyomura
was intoxicated based on his performance on the SFST,
inasmuch as the prosecution elicited no testimony
establishing that (1) the [HGN], "one-leg-stand," and "walk-
and-turn" procedures were elements of the HPD's official FST
protocol, (2) there was any authoritatively established
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
relationship between the manner of performance of these
procedures and a person's degree of intoxication, and (3)
[the officer] had received any specific training in the
administration of the procedures and the "grading" of their
results.
Although any lay person, including a police officer, can have an
opinion regarding sobriety, a police officer may not testify,
without proper foundation, about his opinion on whether an OVUII
defendant is intoxicated based on his performance on the SFST.
Id. at 26-27, 904 P.2d at 911-12.
In this case, Officer Davis did not testify that there
was an authoritatively-established relationship between how the
SFST procedures were performed and a person's degree of
intoxication, or that he had received any specific training in
grading SFST results.  Therefore, his opinion that Shook was
intoxicated based on Shook's performance on the SFST results
should have been inadmissible.  Because the district court
appeared to rely on Officer Davis' opinion, we conclude the error
was not harmless and vacate Shook's conviction under HRS § 291E-
61(a)(1).
However, we hold that the remaining, admissible
evidence is sufficient to support Shook's conviction under HRS §
291E-61(a)(1).  The prosecution introduced evidence that Shook
drove erratically entering the roadblock and had to come to a
screeching halt; that he had slurred speech and red, glassy eyes;
and that his vehicle had a strong odor of alcohol.  An inference
could also be drawn from the Officer's testimony that Shook
displayed all four clues on the one-leg-stand test that Shook
lost his balance, swayed, raised his arms, and hopped.  When
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, there was
sufficient evidence to convict under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).
C. The district court reversibly erred by admitting
into evidence the results of the Intoxilyzer test,
without which the evidence was insufficient to
support the conviction under HRS § 291E-61(a)(3).
The foundation for admission of the Intoxilyzer test
results was inadequate because there was insufficient evidence
that the machine used to test Shook's breath was in proper
working order.  The only evidence adduced on this point was
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Officer Davis's testimony that he believed the machine was
"working" because there was a letter of certification next to it. 
See State v. Davis , 140 Hawai# i 252, 256, 400 P.3d 453, 457
(2017), reconsideration denied, 140 Hawai #i 379, 400 P.3d 580
(2017) (foundation for admission of Intoxilyzer test result
requires proof that the calibration procedure used to test the
accuracy of the Intoxilyzer strictly complied with the Hawai #i
Administrative Rules).  Therefore, Shook's Intoxilyzer test
results should have been inadmissible.  Because the Intoxilyzer
test results were wrongly admitted, the State failed to show that
Shook's breath alcohol concentration exceeded the legal limit. 
Accordingly, we reverse Shook's conviction under HRS § 291E-
61(a)(3).3
Given the foregoing, this court need not address
Shook's remaining point of error, and IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that
the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered by the
District Court of the Third Circuit, on November 9, 2016, is
vacated, and Shook's conviction under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) is
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
Disposition Order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, January 30, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Audrey L. Stanley, 
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
David Blancett-Maddock,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
3We note that in Davis, the supreme court did not reverse Davis's
conviction, but instead remanded the case for a new trial.  Id.  The supreme
court remanded Davis's case for a new trial even though it held, by virtue of
its determination on appeal that Davis's breath test result had been
improperly admitted, that the State had failed to show that Davis's breath
alcohol concentration exceeded the legal limit.  Id.   However, in State v.
Wallace, 80 Hawai #i 382, 414 n.30, 910 P.2d 695, 727 n.30 (1996), the supreme
court held that in determining whether Hawai #i's double jeopardy clause
precludes retrial, the "sufficiency of the evidence is reviewed based only on
the evidence that was properly admitted at trial."  
5