NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000438 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
KURT P. MACCARLEY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
COUNTRYWIDE FINANCIAL CORPORATION, INC.; COUNTRYWIDE
HOME LOANS, INC.; BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION, INC.;
LANDSAFE, INC.; LANDSAFE APPRAISAL SERVICES, INC.;
J
OSEPH MICHAEL MAGALDI, III, Defendants-Appellees, 
and 
DOES 1 through 20, inclusive, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-339) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Kurt P. MacCarley (MacCarley) 
appeals from the "Amended Judgment" filed on April 24, 2017, by 
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (
Circuit Court),  and 
challenges the "Order Granting Defendants Countrywide Financial Corporation, Inc.; Countrywide Home Loans, Inc.; Bank of AmericaCorporation, Inc.; Landsafe, Inc.; and Landsafe Appraisal Services, Inc.'s Motion to Dismiss Second Amended Complaint" (Order Granting Motion to Dismiss SAC) entered on July 13, 2015.1
 
 
1 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This appeal arises from a civil action in which 
MacCarley filed claims against Defendants-Appellees Countrywide 
Financial Corporation, Inc. (Countrywide Financial) and 
Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. (Countrywide Home Loans) 
(collectively Countrywide); Bank of America Corporation, Inc. 
(Bank of America); Landsafe, Inc. (Landsafe); and Landsafe 
Appraisal Services, Inc. (Landsafe Appraisal) (collectively the
Entity Defendants). MacCarley also asserted claims against 
Defendant Joseph Michael Magaldi, III (Magaldi). 
MacCarley's Second Amended Complaint (SAC) asserts, 
inter alia, that after receiving an advertisement from 
Countrywide about a "Dream Loan," he contacted Countrywide's call center and was told he would be pre-approved for a "One-Time Close Loan," which was a single loan for the purchase and construction of property with one set of loan costs and charges. The SAC then alleges that Countrywide's call center persuaded MacCarley to speak with Magaldi, who was described as a real estate agent with "Hawaiian Dream Properties" who had "lots of good deals," but MacCarley was not informed that Magaldi was an employee or agent of Countrywide as a mortgage solicitor/loan officer and home loan consultant. The SAC alleges Magaldi falsely represented to MacCarley that he was being offered the best loans available to him when Countrywide was instead steering MacCarley into a subprime loan calculated to increase revenues to Countrywide; Magaldi persuaded MacCarley to purchase a lot (Property) located in Volcano on Hawai# i Island to build his 
"dream home," by promising the property was a bargain and that MacCarley would have $500,000 in equity because the 5 acre lot could be sub-divided to sell as five separate homes. 
The SAC 
further alleged that when Countrywide recommended Magaldi to MacCarley as a real estate agent, Magaldi provided a real estate license number that belonged to another person which he used on loan documents and agreements, and although Magaldi was employed by Countrywide as a mortgage solicitor he was not licensed as such. The SAC further alleges Magaldi assured MacCarley he could easily get county approval to subdivide the property, which 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
induced MacCarley to make the purchase. The SAC also alleges 
that appraisals were done by Landsafe that were higher than warranted so that MacCarley could afford the deposit amount. The SAC alleges that on July 10, 2006, Magaldi traveled to Los Angeles for the loan closing, documents were not provided to MacCarley and he later learned that rather than the one simple loan he had been promised, there were three extremely complicated loans with their own costs, fees, penalties and interest. The SAC further contends that Countrywide provided MacCarley with another Truth in Lending Disclosure Statement, which he signed with other loan documents on April 22, 2008, which showed his mortgage payments and increases over time. Finally, the SAC alleges that in November 2009, MacCarley obtained a judgment against Magaldi in a lawsuit filed in Civil No. 07-1-0413 in the Circuit Court, for numerous claims. 
The SAC alleges three counts: Breach of Contract (count 
I), Unfair and Deceptive Trade Practices (UDAP) (count II), and 
Injunction (count III). 
On appeal, MacCarley raises three points of error. He 
asserts that the Circuit Court erred in granting the Entity 
Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Second Amended Complaint (Motion to 
Dismiss SAC) by (1) dismissing his UDAP claim for failure to file 
it within the four-year limitations period under Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 480-24 (2008);
2 and (2) dismissing the breach of 
contract claim for insufficient factual pleading. MacCarley also 
2 At the time the underlying action was commenced, HRS § 480-24
provided, in relevant part: 
§480-24 Limitation of actions.  (a) Any action to
enforce a cause of action arising under this chapter shall
be barred unless commenced within four years after the causeof action accrues, except as otherwise provided insubsection (b) and section 480-22. For the purpose of thissection, a cause of action for a continuing violation isdeemed to accrue at any time during the period of theviolation. 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 480-24 has since been amended by deleting subsection(b) and the "subsection (b) and" language in subsection (a). 2016 Haw. Sess.Laws Act 7, § 2 at 7.  
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends the Circuit Court erred in dismissing fraud claims that 
had been asserted in the First Amended Complaint. 
We conclude MacCarley timely filed his UDAP claim 
within the four-year limitations period under HRS § 480-24 (2008); MacCarley sufficiently asserted a claim for "breach of good faith and fair dealing" against Countrywide Home Loans and Bank of America, but not the other Entity Defendants; and that MacCarley abandoned his fraud claims by not seeking to reassert them in his Second Amended Complaint. We thus affirm in part and vacate in part. 
I. UDAP Claim 
In his first point of error, MacCarley contends the 
Circuit Court erred in dismissing his UDAP claim on the basis that this claim was not filed within the four-year statute of limitations period under HRS § 480-24. In addition, MacCarley argues that because the UDAP claim was first filed in federal court in June 2009
3 and later voluntarily dismissed, the 
limitations period for refiling in state court was tolled pursuant to 28 U.S.C.A. § 1367(d) (1990).
4 We do not address 
tolling under 28 U.S.C.A. § 1367(d) because the record shows that 
3 On June 29, 2009, MacCarley filed a complaint in the U.S. District
Court, Central District of California, asserting state and federal claims
against "Countrywide; Landsafe; Bank of America, Angelo Mozilo; Joseph MichaelMagaldi, III[.]" MacCarley asserts that, after that case was transferred tothe U.S. District Court for the District of Hawaii, the case was voluntarilydismissed. 
4 28 U.S.C.A. § 1367 (1990) provides, in relevant part: 
§1367 
Supplemental jurisdiction.  (a)... in any civil
action of which the district courts have originaljurisdiction, the district courts shall have supplementaljurisdiction over all other claims that are so related toclaims in the action within such original jurisdiction thatthey form part of the same case or controversy under ArticleIII of the United States Constitution.... 
.... 
(d)
 The period of limitations for any claim asserted
under subsection (a), and for any other claim in the sameaction that is voluntarily dismissed at the same time as orafter the dismissal of the claim under subsection (a), shallbe tolled while the claim is pending and for a period of 30days after it is dismissed unless State law provides for alonger tolling period. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MacCarley did not argue it below and has thus waived the argument 
on appeal. Stanley v. State, 148 Hawai# i 489, 495 n.13, 479 P.3d 
107, 113 n.13 (2021) (quoting Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 1, 35, 856 P.2d 1207, 1224 (1993) ("[T]he general rule is that an issue which was not raised in the lower court will not be considered on appeal[.]")). 
We review the Circuit Court's ruling on the Motion to 
Dismiss SAC de novo.  Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 
Hawai# i 249, 256–7, 428 P.3d 761, 768–9 (2018), as corrected 
(Oct. 15, 2018) (citing Hungate v. Law Office of David B. Rosen, 139 Hawai# i 394, 401, 391 P.3d 1, 8 (2017)). We adhere to the 
notice pleading standard of review by which a 
Hawai# i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) motion is evaluated, and 
which requires that: 
a complaint should not be dismissed for failure to
state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that theplaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of[their] claim that would entitle [them] to relief.The appellate court must therefore view a plaintiff'scomplaint in a light most favorable to [them] in orderto determine whether the allegations contained thereincould warrant relief under any alternative theory.For this reason, in reviewing a circuit court's orderdismissing a complaint ... the appellate court'sconsideration is strictly limited to the allegationsof the complaint, and the appellate court must deemthose allegations to be true. 
Malabe v. Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Exec. Ctr. by & through 
Bd. of Dirs., 147 Hawai# i 330, 356-57, 465 P.3d 777, 803-04 
(2020) (alterations and ellipsis in original) (quoting Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i at 257, 428 P.3d at 769). 
In the Order Granting the Motion to Dismiss SAC, the 
Circuit Court ruled that: 
As to Plaintiff's unfair and deceptive trade
practices claim, in that the appellate courts of the
State of Hawai #i have not determined whether the 
discovery rule applies to the statute of limitationsset forth in [HRS] § 480-24, this Court will, in theabsence of such a determination, follow the positiontaken by the United States District Court for theDistrict of 
Hawai #i, which has determined that the 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discovery rule does not apply.[]5 Plaintiff has also 
pled insufficient facts as to fraudulent concealment
to toll the statute of limitations. 
(Emphasis added.) In his SAC, MacCarley alleged: 
3. Defendant COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, INC. ...
is and was a subsidiary of COUNTRYWIDE Financial, andengages in the business of originating mortgage loans. 
4. Defendant BANK OF AMERICA (hereinafter
"BOA") is a Delaware Corporation. At all times relevant herein Defendant BOA was an assignee, whichowned and/or purchased the benefits of Plaintiff'sresidential mortgage loan from COUNTRYWIDE Home Loans. 
5. Defendant LANDSAFE, INC. (hereinafter
"LANDSAFE") is a Delaware corporation and at allrelevant times herein, was a subsidiary of COUNTRYWIDEFinancial, and provides loan closing products andservices such as credit reports, appraisals, propertyvaluation services and flood determinations. 
6. Defendant LANDSAFE APPRAISAL SERVICES, INC.
(hereinafter "LANDSAFE APPRAISAL") is a Californiacorporation and is registered to do business in theState of Hawaii. LANDSAFE APPRAISAL offers appraisalservices in connection with mortgage loan closings. 
7. Defendant, JOSEPH MICHAEL MAGALDI III
(hereinafter "MAGALDI"), is a resident of the Islandof Hawaii, State of Hawaii. 
. . . . 
9. The real property in question (hereinafter
"subject property") is a lot located at 19-4034 OldVolcano Road, Volcano, Hawaii. 
10. The subject mortgage loans were entered
into between Plaintiff and Defendant COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, INC., predecessor to Defendant BANK OF AMERICACORPORATION, INC., in California. 
11. In November 2005, Plaintiff received an
advertisement from Defendants COUNTRYWIDE FINANCIAL CORPORATION, INC. and COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, INC(hereinafter referred to collectively as"COUNTRYWIDE") offering a "Dream Loan" to help him tobuild his "Dream Home." 
12. The "dream loan" was in fact Defendant 
COUNTRYWIDE's One-Time Close Loan ("OTC") program thatoffered construction, permanent financing, and a Home 
5 Under the discovery rule, the statute of limitations is triggered
"when the plaintiff 'discovers or should have discovered the negligent act,the damage, and the causal connection between the former and the latter.'"Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai #i 125, 132, 267 P.3d 1230, 1237 (2011) (quoting
Yamaguchi v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 65 Haw. 84, 90, 648 P.2d 689, 693–94 (1982)). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Equity Line of Credit ("HELOC") in one "fast and easy"
loan transaction and provide borrowers like Plaintiffa "low Prime plus 1% interest during construction" and"interest-only option during construction". 
13. ... Defendant COUNTRYWIDE,
[]6 through their
call center operatives, told Plaintiff that he hadsuch good credit scores he would be pre-approved forany [One-Time Close ( OTC)] loan, and that the OTC loan
was a single loan which dealt with the purchase andconstruction of the property with only one set of loancosts and charges for one loan. 
14. In fact, there was not "one loan
transaction" but three, each with its own costs, feesand penalties, and further, Plaintiff was chargedneither a "low Prime plus 1% interest duringconstruction" nor an "interest-only option duringconstruction" but a higher interest rate which was notdisclosed to him until long after the closing.... 
15. Defendant COUNTRYWIDE, through their call
center operatives, in November 2005, persuadedPlaintiff to speak to Defendant MAGALDI in Hawaii, whowas described by them as a real estate agent with"Hawaiian Dream Properties" and someone who had "lotsof good deals". Plaintiff was not informed that Defendant MAGALDI was an employee or agent ofDefendant COUNTRYWIDE as a COUNTRYWIDE MortgageSolicitor/Loan Officer and Home Loan Consultant. 
16. Defendant COUNTRYWIDE told Plaintiff he 
qualified for a Prime Loan, since he had creditexcellent scores with the three reporting agencies ofrespectively 741, 783 and 791; however, COUNTRYWIDEencouraged its brokers like MAGALDI, through financialincentives, to move Plaintiff into the subprimecategory. The commission on a subprime loan was .50%of the loan's value, while the commission on loans inthe next highest category was a mere .20% of theloan's value. 
17. Defendants through their agent, MAGALDI,
falsely represented to Plaintiff from November 2005through April 2006 that they were offering the bestloans available to Plaintiff when, in fact, DefendantCOUNTRYWIDE and its agents steered Plaintiff, apotential prime borrower, into a subprime OTC loanthat was calculated to increase Defendants' income and Defendant COUNTRYWIDE earned additional funds of approximately $40,250.00 through undisclosed fees andpenalties that produce significant amounts of revenueto COUNTRYWIDE but that were not disclosed to Plaintiff. 
18. When Plaintiff contacted MAGALDI he was 
persuaded to purchase the subject property and to 
6 As set forth in Paragraph 11 of the SAC, "COUNTRYWIDE" is the
collective name for Countrywide Home Loans and Countrywide Financial in theSAC. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
construct his "dream home" thereon by express promises
that the property was a "bargain" and that on the dayhe purchased the property he would already have around$500,000 in equity since the 5 acre lot could besub-divided to sell as 5 separate homes. Defendant MAGALDI then purported to act as Plaintiff's realestate agent, as well as his loan broker, and later ashis construction supervisor. However, unknown toPlaintiff, but known to the other named Defendants,Defendant MAGALDI did not have a license for any ofthese positions. Defendant COUNTRYWIDE never disclosed this fact to Plaintiff. 
19. ... Defendant MAGALDI used a "false" real 
estate license number on every loan document andagreement involved in the transaction and DefendantCOUNTRYWIDE never disclosed this fact to Plaintiff. 
20. At the time Defendant MAGALDI was employed
by Defendant COUNTRYWIDE as a "mortgage solicitor",and so acted in relation to the OTC loan taken out byPlaintiff, Defendant MAGALDI was not licensed as amortgage solicitor since Defendant MAGALDI receivedhis mortgage solicitor's license on April 4, 2007,almost a full year after the closing. 
21. Within two months prior to the signing of
the loan in July 2006, Plaintiff was contacted byChristy Maddage, an underwriter with DefendantCOUNTRYWIDE in Plano, Texas, who stated that shediscovered that Defendant MAGALDI had appeared onPlaintiff's documents as the real estate agent and hadnotified her superiors. 
22. Plaintiff later learned that Shawn Kelly,
branch manager of Defendant COUNTRYWIDE Honoluluoffice, had demanded that Defendant MAGALDI surrenderhis real estate license since it was against theCOUNTRYWIDE Lotus Notes Employee Handbook to be a loanofficer with COUNTRYWIDE and have a real estate license, but Defendant MAGALDI threatened to quit andDefendant COUNTRYWIDE failed to discipline DefendantMAGALDI. 
23. Defendant COUNTRYWIDE, as Defendant
MAGALDI's employer, failed to closely review theprofessional licenses allegedly claimed to be held byDefendant MAGALDI and closely supervise DefendantMAGALDI's representations to Plaintiff and othercustomers. 
24. Defendant MAGALDI assured Plaintiff that 
the process of sub-dividing the 5 acre lots into fiveseparate pieces was a simple administrative processand that Defendants COUNTRYWIDE and MAGALDI could getthe matter approved by the county easily. 
25. Based upon the above representations,
Plaintiff was induced into agreeing to make thepurchase because he was promised he could build hishome on one plot of land and then sell the front fourplots of land at a profit to finance his retirement. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
26. Because Plaintiff could not afford to make 
a deposit of twenty percent (20%) of the purchase
price, Defendant COUNTRYWIDE and MAGALDI persuaded himthat if there was a high enough appraisal value alower deposit could be acceptable. 
27. Defendants COUNTRYWIDE and MAGALDI then 
hired Defendant LANDSAFE, a subsidiary of DefendantCOUNTRYWIDE, to provide an appraisal for the subjectproperty. 
28. Defendant LANDSAFE is registered with the
State of Hawaii Department of Commerce and ConsumerAffairs ("DCCA") as a foreign corporation and employsreal estate appraisers that must be registered withthe Professional and Vocational Licensing Division("PVL") of DCCA and shall comply with the HawaiiRevised Statutes, the Administrative Rules and theUniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practices("USPAP"). 
29. On or about July 6, 2006, the appraisal was
done by Maylyn H.M. Stake, SLA #603, and a former highschool girlfriend of MAGALDI. Defendant LANDSAFE provided an appraisal value for the subject propertyof $1,150,000. 
30. In March 2008, appraiser William Wallace
with Defendant LANDSAFE provided a second appraisalwhich found a "true" value of $700,000. 
31. Plaintiff believes that Defendant LANDSAFE 
was agreed to and/or induced to make both appraisalshigher than was warranted and violated its duty tocomply with the Hawaii state law and USPAP, especiallyAdvisory Opinion No. 19. 
32. Defendants MAGALDI and COUNTRYWIDE also 
failed to disclose the community of Volcano's extremeopposition to sub-dividing and building in theforested area and COUNTRYWIDE is in a position to beknowledgeable since its Kona office is nearby.Defendants COUNTRYWIDE and MAGALDI were well aware of or should have known that about such opposition andthe extreme difficulty in getting approval tosub-divide and develop the subject property. 
33. On July 10, 2006, MAGALDI traveled to Los
Angeles to have the loan closing documents signed andprior to that date, none of the documents or specificterms contained therein had been disclosed to Plaintiff. Plaintiff signed with Defendant MAGALDI onthat date in Los Angeles, California. Defendants have never provided a signed original of the PromissoryNote and despite having promised that Plaintiff wouldpay no interest for the first three years of the loanhave charged an excessive and undisclosed amount ininterest charges. Plaintiff also later learned that he was signing up, not as he had been expresslypromised by Defendants COUNTRYWIDE and MAGALDI, forone simple loan, but three extremely complicated loanseach with their own costs, fees, penalties andinterest charges. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
34. The construction loan portion provided for
a floating rate of interest and Plaintiff was unable
to lock in a permanent rate of interest before thirty(30) days from the date construction was completed. 
35. Plaintiff went to the Island of Hawaii in 
late February or March 2007 after signing said loandocuments in Los Angeles July 2006. 
36. After completing construction of the home,
Defendant COUNTRYWIDE provided Plaintiff with anotherTruth in Lending Disclosure Statement that Plaintiffsigned on April 22, 2008  as well as other loan 
documents, showing that his mortgage payments wouldcommence on June 1, 2008 at $4,025.00 with an AnnualPercentage Rate of 5.364% and increase to $5,368.39 onJune 1, 2018 for 239 months. 
37. On or about November 16, 2009, Plaintiff
secured a judgment against Defendant MAGALDI in anaction brought in the Circuit Court of the ThirdCircuit for the State of Hawaii, Civil Case number07-1-0413, for breach of contract, breach of thecovenant of good faith and fair dealing, breach offiduciary duty and loyalty, unjustenrichment/detrimental reliance and HRS Chapter 480Violations, while acting as ... Kurt MacCarley'smortgage broker while employed by CountrywideFinancial on the Island of Hawaii, defamation,Negligent and Intentional Infliction of EmotionalDistress, Fraud, Negligence/Gross Negligence,Negligent Misrepresentation and Conversion in theprincipal amount of $359,200.00 together withattorneys' fees and costs awarded in the amount of$22,512.70. A true and correct copy of said documentis attached hereto as Exhibit 'A' and incorporatedherein by reference. 
(Emphases added.) 
Based on the foregoing, the alleged conduct that 
constitutes the basis for the UDAP claim commenced in November 
2005, and is alleged to have continued through April 22, 2008. MacCarley filed his initial complaint on November 16, 2010, approximately two-and-a-half years after April 22, 2008, and filed his First Amended Complaint on March 5, 2011, less than three years after April 22, 2008.  Viewing the allegations in 
the light most favorable to MacCarley, the events on April 22, 2008, and the amounts MacCarley was then required to pay after 
7
7 The initial Complaint did not contain allegations about the events on
April 22, 2008, but the First Amended Complaint contained the same allegations
regarding the April 22, 2008 events as set forth in the Second AmendedComplaint. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
construction of his home was completed, were part of an alleged 
continuing violation constituting the UDAP claim and the UDAP claim was asserted within four years of those alleged events. Malabe, 147 Hawai# i at 338, 465 P.3d at 785; Reyes-Toledo, 143 
Hawai# i at 257, 428 P.3d at 769 ("The appellate court must . . . 
view a plaintiff's complaint in a light most favorable to him or her in order to determine whether the allegations contained therein could warrant relief under any alternative theory."); HRS § 480-24 ("For the purpose of this section, a cause of action for a continuing violation is deemed to accrue at any time during the period of the violation."); see also Robert's Waikiki U-Drive, Inc. v. Budget Rent-A-Car Systems, Inc., 491 F. Supp. 1199, 1227-29 (D.Haw. 1980). 
We thus conclude the Circuit Court erred in dismissing 
the UDAP claim as untimely under the applicable statute of limitations. 
II. Breach of Contract Claims 
In his second assertion of error, MacCarley contends 
the Circuit Court erred in dismissing the breach of contract claim as insufficiently pled because claims for "breach of good faith and fair dealing" and "breach of a fiduciary duty" were adequately pled in the SAC. 
Paragraph 10 of the SAC alleges that the "subject 
mortgage loans were entered into between [MacCarley] and [Countrywide Home Loans], predecessor to [Bank of America]." The SAC further alleges that "[a]t all times relevant herein [Bank of America] was an assignee, which owned and/or purchased the benefits of [MacCarley's] residential mortgage loan from Countrywide Home Loans." There are no allegations of a contract between MacCarley and any other party. Therefore, dismissal of the breach of contract claim against all Entity Defendants, except Countrywide Home Loans and Bank of America, was proper. 
We thus focus on the claims in count I with respect to 
Countrywide Home Loans and Bank of America. In count I, entitled "Breach of Contract," the SAC at paragraph 39 alleges that "[t]he 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acts of Defendants constitute a breach of contract, breach of 
good faith and fair dealing, and breach of fiduciary duty and have caused [MacCarley] to suffer financial damages in an amount to be proven at trial." 
MacCarley does not dispute that he failed to allege a 
breach of any contract provision. See Au v. Au, 63 Haw. 210, 
221, 626 P.2d 173, 181 (1981) (concluding that because count for breach of agreement of sale fails to specify what provisions of the agreement were breached, appellees did not have fair notice of what appellant's claim is or the grounds upon which it rests); Kohala Agriculture v. Deloitte & Touche, 86 Hawai# i 301, 307 n.7, 
949 P.2d 141, 147 n.7 (App. 1997) (noting that in a breach of contract claim a complaint must cite the contractual provision allegedly violated). Instead, his arguments on appeal focus on his claims for "breach of good faith and fair dealing" and "breach of fiduciary duty". 
Thus, to the extent the Circuit 
Court dismissed the "breach of contract" claim, MacCarley does not challenge that aspect of the dismissal and we affirm as to dismissal of that claim. 
With respect to MacCarley's claim for breach of good 
faith and fair dealing, dealing in good faith is a principle of contract law. 
As determined by the Hawai# i Supreme Court in Best 
Place, Inc. v. Penn America Insurance Co., 82 Hawai# i 120, 920 
P.2d 334 (1996): 
The obligation to deal in good faith is now a
well-established principle of contract law.Restatement (Second) Contracts § 205 (1979)provides that "[e]very contract imposes uponeach party a duty of good faith and fair dealingin its performance and its enforcement." In Hawai #i Leasing v. Klein, 5 Haw.App. 450, 456,
698 P.2d 309, 313 (1985) [sic], the IntermediateCourt of Appeals (ICA) explicitly recognizedthat parties to a contract have a duty of goodfaith and fair dealing in performing contractualobligations. 
Best Place, 82 Hawai# i at 124, 920 P.2d at 338 (alteration in 
original). 
The implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing 
mandates that "neither party will do anything that will deprive 
the other of the benefits of the agreement." Id. at 123-24, 920 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d at 337-38 (citations omitted). "[G]ood faith performance 
emphasizes faithfulness to an agreed common purpose and consistency with the justified expectations of the other party." Joy A. McElroy, M.D., Inc. v. Maryl Grp., Inc., 107 Hawai# i 423, 
436, 114 P.3d 929, 942 (App. 2005) (citation omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court dismissed the breach of 
contract claim as insufficiently pled as follows: 
Plaintiff's breach of contract claims pled facts
indicating that the contract was betweenPlaintiff and Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. butPlaintiff has alleged insufficient facts tostate breach of contract claims for relief against Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. Plaintiffhas also pled insufficient facts to state claimsfor relief against the other Defendants merelybecause of a business relationship between themand Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. 
MacCarley contends he was promised the best loan 
available, that he could subdivide a five-acre property and sell 
it as five separate homes, that he would pay low interest, and that he would be getting a single loan with one set of loan costs and charges. MacCarley contends that none of these promises were kept. We further note that the SAC alleges that Countrywide persuaded MacCarley to contact Magaldi and that although Magaldi purported to be a real estate agent, he was an employee or agent of Countrywide. 
Viewing the allegations in the SAC in the light most 
favorable to MacCarley, we cannot say that MacCarley can prove no set of facts to support a claim for breach of good faith and fair dealing. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing this claim as part of count I against Countrywide Home Loans and Bank of America. 
With respect to the breach of fiduciary duty claim, 
MacCarley contends that a realtor owes a client a fiduciary duty and that Magaldi acted as both his real estate agent and loan broker. The SAC, however, does not allege any contract between MacCarley and Magaldi, nor does it allege that any defendant owed MacCarley a fiduciary duty. Further, Entity Defendants point to 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 case law establishing that commercial lenders have no fiduciary 
duties to borrowers. See McCarty v. GCP Mgmt., LLC, No. 10-00133 
(JMS) (KSC), 2010 WL 4812763, at *5 (D. Haw., Nov. 17, 2010) ("Lenders generally owe no fiduciary duties to their borrowers."); Nymark v. Heart Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 283 Cal.Rptr. 53, 54 n.1 (Cal. Ct. App. 1991)("The relationship between a lending institution and its borrower-client is not fiduciary in nature."); Idaho First Nat. Bank v. Bliss Valley Foods, Inc., 824 P.2d 841, 853 (Idaho 1991) ("[A] borrower-lender situation does not create a fiduciary relationship"). Thus, even when viewing the allegations in the SAC in a light most favorable to MacCarley, we conclude that dismissal of the breach of fiduciary duty claim was proper. 
Thus, with regard to count I in the SAC, the Circuit 
Court erred in dismissing the claim for "breach of good faith and fair dealing" against Countrywide Home Loans and Bank of America. However, the dismissal of the other claims in count I was proper.
III.  Fraud Claim 
In his third assertion of error, MacCarley contends the 
Circuit Court erred in granting the Entity Defendants' motion to dismiss a fraud claim that was asserted in the First Amended Complaint for failure to plead with sufficient particularity. MacCarley asserts that if the Circuit Court had not erred in granting in part and denying in part the Entity Defendants' motion to dismiss the First Amended Complaint, he never would have filed the SAC, which excluded the fraud claim. 
In our view, MacCarley waived his fraud claim when he 
did not seek to reassert it in the Second Amended Complaint. On June 22, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order dismissing counts I (fraud), II (misrepresentation), and III (UDAP) in the First Amended Complaint, but not counts IV (breach of contract), V (unjust enrichment), and VI (injunction). Subsequently, on January 5, 2012, the Circuit Court dismissed MacCarley's action and entered an "Order of Dismissal" because no pretrial statement had been filed. 
14    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a few years, on July 9, 2014, MacCarley filed a 
"Motion to Set Aside Order for Dismissal (Rule 12(Q))(Initial 
Complaint 11-16-2010) Filed January 5, 2012" (Motion to Set 
Aside). The Motion to Set Aside requested that the Circuit Court 
reinstate the case, "subject to the filing of a pretrial 
statement and a motion to amend the complaint for a second time" and attached "Plaintiff's Pretrial Statement" (Pretrial 
Statement). The Pretrial Statement asserted only three claims 
for relief: 1) "Breach of Contract"; 2) "Unjust Enrichment"; and 
3) "Injunction". MacCarley's Pretrial Statement did not seek to assert a claim for fraud. The Circuit Court granted the Motion to Set Aside by order dated October 13, 2014. On October 27, 2014, MacCarley filed a "Motion for Leave to File Second Amended Complaint," in which he sought to plead only breach of contract and UDAP claims, and a request for an injunction.
8 
Given this record, we reject MacCarley's third point of 
error. MacCarley could have reasserted a fraud claim in the Second Amended Complaint, but he failed to do so. "[A]n amended petition supercedes the original petition and renders the original petition of no legal effect." Beneficial Hawaii, Inc. 
v. Casey, 98 Hawai# i 159, 167, 45 P.3d 359, 367 (2002) (citing 
Wight v. Lum, 41 Haw. 504, 506-07 (1956)); see also Young v. Univ. of Hawai# i, No. 20-CV-00231-DKW-RT, 2020 WL 4612380, at *5 
(D. Haw. Aug. 11, 2020) (citing Lacey v. Maricopa Cnty., 693 F.3d 896, 928 (9th. Cir. 2012) (en banc) (stating that claims dismissed with prejudice need not be re-alleged in an amended complaint to preserve them for appeal, but claims that are voluntarily dismissed are considered waived if not re-pled)).
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the "Amended Judgment" entered 
on April 24, 2017, by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, is vacated to the extent that it dismissed: the UDAP claim on statute of limitations grounds; and the claim against Countrywide 
8 The Second Amended Complaint was filed on November 25, 2014. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Home Loans and Bank of America for "breach of good faith and fair 
dealing." The Amended Judgment is otherwise affirmed. 
This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further 
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 14, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge Keith M. Kiuchi,for Plaintiff-Appellant 
Patricia J. McHenry,
Nicholas M. McLean, Defendants-Appellees 
16 