NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000439
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CITI PROPERTY HOLDINGS, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL K. TANIGUCHI; PATRICIA-ANN U. MOORE,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
JOHN AND MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-386)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Michael K. Taniguchi (Taniguchi)
 
and Patricia-Ann U. Moore (Moore) (collectively Appellants)
 
appeal from a Judgment, filed on January 24, 2014 in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court ) and entered pursuant
to Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b). 
Appellants contend that the circuit court erred when it
 
(1) granted Plaintiff-Appellee Citi Property Holdings, Inc.'s
 (Citi) motion for summary judgment and for writ of ejectment; and
 (2) granted Citi's motion to dismiss Appellants' counterclaims. 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate and remand.
 
I. Brief Background
 
On February 8, 2007, Appellants Taniguchi and Moore 
signed an Adjustable Rate Note in favor of Accredited Home 
Lenders, Inc. for a property located in Keaau, Hawai 'i (the 
Property). On March 30, 2007, a Mortgage was recorded on the Property with the State of Hawai
'i Bureau of Conveyances (Bureau 
of Conveyances). 
On March 2, 2010, an Assignment of Mortgage was
 
recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances in which Mortgage
 Electronic Registration Systems Inc. (MERS) granted, assigned,
 and transferred the mortgage on the Property to Citigroup Global
 Markets Realty Corp. (Citigroup). On July 21, 2010, an
 Assignment of Mortgage was recorded with the Bureau of
 Conveyances in which Citigroup granted, assigned, and transferred
 the mortgage on the Property to Citi.
 
On January 6, 2011, Citi conducted a non-judicial
 
foreclosure sale on the Property. On January 11, 2011, Citi's
 attorney filed a "Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under
 Power of Sale."
2 The Affidavit states, inter alia, that the
 
Property was sold to Citi for $159,200.00, which was the highest
 bid at the sale. On January 28, 2011, a Quit Claim Deed was
 recorded with the Bureau of Conveyances, which conveyed the
 Property from Citi, as the foreclosing mortgagee, to Citi, as the
 purchaser at the non-judicial foreclosure auction.
 
On May 31, 2013, Citi filed a Complaint for Ejectment
 
in this case against Taniguchi and Moore. On July 10, 2013,
 Taniguchi and Moore filed counterclaims against Citi. On August
 1, 2013, Citi filed "Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim
 
2
 On February 25, 2011, Citi's attorney filed an "Amended Morgagee's
Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of Sale." [JROA doc. 20 at 87] The
 
amended affidavit corrected a clerical error. The original affidavit stated
that a public auction sale was conducted on December 10, 2010 when in fact the
public auction was conducted on January 6, 2011.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Filed July 10, 2013" (motion to dismiss).3
 
On November 7, 2013, Citi filed a motion for summary
 
judgment and writ of ejectment.
 
On November 15, 2013, the circuit court filed an "Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim Filed July
 
10, 2013" (Order Dismissing Counterclaims). 
On January 24, 2014, the circuit court filed an "Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment, And for Writ of
 Ejectment Filed November 7, 2013." On January 24, 2014, the
 circuit court also filed the HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment and a Writ
 of Ejectment.
II. Discussion
 
A. Summary Judgment
 
Appellants Taniguchi and Moore contend that the circuit
 
court erred when it granted summary judgment because Citi did not
 
have standing to bring a non-judicial foreclosure and ejectment
 action. Taniguchi and Moore also contend that the circuit court
 considered inadmissible evidence when it granted summary
 judgment.
 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of 
summary judgment de novo. Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 
136 Hawai
'i 227, 240, 361 P.3d 454, 467 (2015). "Summary 
judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. (citations and brackets omitted). "The 
moving party has the initial burden of 'demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact.'" (citation omitted). "Only with the satisfaction of this initial showing does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to respond 'by affidavits or as 
3
 Citi moved to dismiss Taniguchi and Moore's counterclaims based on
the principles of res judicata because prior to this action, a Complaint filed
by Taniguchi and Moore against Citi was dismissed with prejudice by the UnitedStates District Court for the District of Hawai' i. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
otherwise provided in [Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)] 
Rule 56[,] ... setting forth specific facts showing that there is 
a genuine issue for trial." Id. at 240-41, 361 P.3d at 467-68 
(citation, emphasis, and brackets omitted, ellipses in original). 
To maintain an ejectment action, the plaintiff must (1)
 
"prove that he or she owns the parcel in issue, meaning that he
 or she must have the title to and right of possession of such
 parcel" and (2) "establish that possession is unlawfully withheld
 by another." Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468 (citation, internal
 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). When a party receives
 title to a property through a non-judicial foreclosure sale, the
 strength and validity of the title "is unavoidably intertwined
 with the validity of the foreclosure sale." Id.
 
In Kondaur, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court recently 
clarified that "the duties set forth in [Ulrich v. Security Inv. Co., 35 Haw. 158 (Haw. Terr. 1939) ] remain viable law and are applicable to non-judicial foreclosures of real property mortgages." Id. at 229, 361 P.3d at 456. As stated in Kondaur: 
Ulrich requires mortgagees to exercise their right to
non-judicial foreclosure under a power of sale in a manner
that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to
demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for the
property. In instances where the mortgagee assumes the role
of a purchaser in a self-dealing transaction, the burden is
on the mortgagee, or its quitclaim transferee or non-bona
fide successor, to establish its compliance with these
obligations. Its failure to do so would render the
foreclosure sale voidable and could therefore be set aside
 at the timely election of the mortgagor. 
Id. at 240, 361 P.3d at 467 (citations and footnotes omitted). 
Therefore, where the mortgagee is also the purchaser in a non­judicial foreclosure sale, the mortgagee has the "burden to prove
 in the summary judgment proceeding that the foreclosure 'sale was
 regularly and fairly conducted in every particular.'" Id. at
 
241, 361 P.3d at 469 (citation omitted). "A prima facie case
 demonstrating compliance with the foregoing requirements [shifts]
 the burden [to the mortgagor] to raise a genuine issue of
 material fact." Id. at 242, 361 P.3d at 469. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5In Kondaur , the supreme court vacated summary judgment
and writ of possession in favor of plaintiff Kondaur Capital
Corp. (Kondaur) because the duties in Ulrich  were not met.  In
addressing Kondaur's summary judgment motion, the supreme court
stated that the Affidavit of Sale regarding the non-judicial
foreclosure in that case failed to "provide any averments as to
the fairness and regularity of the foreclosure sale or as to
whether [the mortgagee] conducted the foreclosure sale in a
diligent and reasonable manner[,]" the document did not speak to
why the foreclosure sale was conducted on a different island than
where the property was located, and, although the document
identified the purchase price, it did not "make any declaration
concerning the adequacy of this price."  Id. at 242–43, 361 P.3d
at 469–70. The court further stated that the "mortgagee's minimal
adherence to the statutory requirements and terms of the mortgage
under which the foreclosure sale is conducted ... does not
establish that the foreclosure sale similarly satisfied the
Ulrich requirements."  Id. at 243, 361 P.3d at 470.
As a result, because Kondaur never met its initial
burden of showing that the foreclosure sale was conducted in a
manner that was fair, reasonably diligent, in good faith, and
would obtain an adequate price for the property, the summary
judgment burden never shifted to the mortgagor to raise any
genuine issue of material fact.  Id.   Thus, the supreme court
vacated the summary judgment and remanded for further
proceedings.  Id. at 244, 361 P.3d at 471. 
Kondaur is dispositive in the instant case.  Here, Citi
was the foreclosing mortgagee and the purchasing highest bidder
at the non-judicial foreclosure sale.  Thus, pursuant to Kondaur
and Ulrich, Citi had the initial burden to establish that the
non-judicial foreclosure sale was conducted in a manner that was
fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to demonstrate
that an adequate price was procured for the property.  See also
JPMorgan Chase Bank, Nat'l Ass'n v. Benner, 2016 WL 1092490, --
Hawai#i --, -- P.3d -- (App. 2016).  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Like in Kondaur, the Mortgagee's Affidavit of
 
Foreclosure Under Power of Sale (Affidavit of Foreclosure) in
 
this case, prepared by Citi's attorney, was the only document
 submitted to show the manner in which the sale was conducted.
 First, as Appellants argue, there is no affidavit or declaration
 supporting the admissibility of the Affidavit of Foreclosure (and
 some other exhibits) submitted by Citi with its summary judgment
 motion. Thus, for this reason alone, it appears that Citi failed
 to meet the requirements of HRCP Rule 56, and summary judgment
 was not warranted. Second, similar to the affidavit in Kondaur,
 the Affidavit of Foreclosure does not attest to anything
 concerning the adequacy of the purchase price. Thus, even if the
 Affidavit of Sale was admissible, Citi would not have satisfied
 its initial burden of showing that the foreclosure sale was
 conducted in a manner that was fair, reasonably diligent, in good
 faith, and would obtain an adequate price for the property. 
Because Citi did not satisfy its initial burden for
 
summary judgment, the burden never shifted to Taniguchi and Moore
 to raise a genuine issue of material fact. The grant of summary
 judgment for Citi was in error.
B. Motion to Dismiss
 
Appellants also contend on appeal that the circuit
 
court erred when it dismissed their counterclaims. However, in
 their Notice of Appeal, Appellants did not appeal from the Order
 Dismissing Counterclaims. Rather, they only appealed from the
 Order Granting Summary Judgment, which was made final by the HRCP
 Rule 54(b) Judgment filed on January 24, 2014.
 
The HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment did not resolve or address
 
in any way the dismissal of Appellants' counterclaims.
 
Moreover, the record on appeal for this case does not 
contain a final judgment on the Order Dismissing Counterclaims. Therefore, under Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Flemming & Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 869 P.2d 1334, (1994), there is no final judgment in 
the record from which Appellants Taniguchi and Moore could have properly appealed the dismissal of their counterclaims. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In sum, we lack appellate jurisdiction to review the
 
circuit court's Order Dismissing Counterclaims.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed on January
 
24, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is vacated. 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 proceedings consistent with this order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 2, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Melodie Aduja,
for Defendants-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Karyn A. Doi,(Leu Okuda & Doi),for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
7
 