 
       
           
         
     
NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  RE PORTS  AND  PACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals 
CAAP-23-0000520 
17-JUN-2025 
09:12 AM 
Dkt. 56 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000520 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I  
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,   v. 
MICHAEL  FEGAN,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU  DIVISION 
(CASE  NO.  1DTA-22-02181) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By:   Leonard,  Acting  Chief  Judge,  Hiraoka  and  Wadsworth,  JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant  Michael  P.  Fegan  (Fegan)  appeals 
from  the  August  9,  2023  Notice  of  Entry  of  Judgment  and/or  Order 
and  Plea/Judgment  (Judgment)  entered  by  the  Honolulu  Division  of 
the  District  Court  of  the  First  Circuit  (District  Court).   After 
a  bench  trial,  Fegan  was  convicted  of  Collisions  Involving  Damage 
to  Vehicle  or  Property  in  violation  of  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes 
(HRS)  §  291C-13  (Supp.  2024)  (Collisions  Involving  Damage),  and 
ordered  to  pay  fines  and  fees  totaling  $237. 
1 
Fegan
 raises a single point of error, contending that 
the District Court erred in finding that the evidence it found to 
be credible proved Fegan guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of 
1 The Honorable Harlan Y. Kimura presided.          
 
  
 
 
     
          
         
           
          
         
        
         
          
         
        
        
          
         
         
       
         
       
         
         
          
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violating  the  material  elements  of  the  requirement  to  provide 
information  after  an  accident  under  HRS  §  291C-13. 
Upon  careful  review  of  the  record  and  the  briefs 
submitted  by  the  parties,  and  having  given  due  consideration  to 
the  arguments  advanced  and  the  issues  raised,  we  resolve  Fegan's 
point  of  error  as  follows: 
Fegan  argues  that  there  is  not  substantial  evidence  in 
the  record  that  he  failed  to  remain  at  the  scene  until  he 
provided  the  information  required  by  HRS  §  291C-14  (Supp.  2024).  
Fegan  further  argues  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  Fegan  failed 
to  satisfy  HRS  §  291C-14(b). 
HRS
 § 291C-13 states: 
§  291C-13   Collisions  involving  damage  to  vehicle  or 
property.   The  driver  of  any  vehicle  involved  in  a  collision 
resulting  only  in  damage  to  a  vehicle  or  other  property  that 
is  driven  or  attended  by  any  person  shall  immediately  stop 
the  vehicle  at  the  scene  of  the  collision  or  as  close 
thereto  as  possible,  but  shall  forthwith  return  to,  and  in 
every  event  shall  remain  at,  the  scene  of  the  collision 
until  the  driver  has  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  section 
291C-14.   Every  stop  shall  be  made  without  obstructing 
traffic  more  than  is  necessary.   For  any  violation  under 
this  section,  a  surcharge  of  up  to  $100  may  be  imposed,  in 
addition  to  other  penalties,  which  shall  be  deposited  into 
the  trauma  system  special  fund. 
(Emphasis added.) 
HRS § 291C-14 states in relevant part: 
§ 291C-14 Duty to give information and render aid. 
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in a collision 
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to 
any vehicle or other property that is driven or attended by 
any person shall give the driver's name, address, and the 
registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving, 
and shall upon request and if available exhibit the driver's 
license or permit to drive to any person injured in the 
collision or to the driver or occupant of or person 
attending any vehicle or other property damaged in the 
collision and shall give the information and upon request 
exhibit the license or permit to any police officer at the 
scene of the collision or who is investigating the collision 
and shall render to any person injured in the collision 
reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making 
of arrangements for the carrying, of the person to a 
physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical 
treatment if it is apparent that treatment is necessary, or 
if the carrying is requested by the injured person; provided 
that if the vehicle involved in the collision is a bicycle, 
2          
          
  
          
        
        
        
       
      
         
         
       
   
 
       
  
        
         
   
         
 
    
       
          
         
    
      
          
        
        
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the driver of the bicycle need not exhibit a license or 
permit to drive. 
(b) In the event that none of the persons specified is 
in condition to receive the information to which they 
otherwise would be entitled under subsection (a), and no 
police officer is present, the driver of any vehicle 
involved in the collision after fulfilling all other 
requirements of section 291C-12, 291C-12.5, or 291C-12.6, 
and subsection (a), insofar as possible on the driver's part 
to be performed, shall forthwith report the collision to the 
nearest police officer and submit thereto the information 
specified in subsection (a). 
(Emphasis added.) 
Thus, the elements of a violation of Collisions 
Involving Damage are: 
(1) the defendant was driving a vehicle that was 
involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a 
vehicle or other property; 
(2) the vehicle or property was driven or attended by 
another person; 
(3) the defendant did not 
(a) immediately stop at the scene of the 
accident, or at a location as close thereto as possible and 
forthwith return to the scene that would not have obstructed 
traffic more than is necessary; 
or 
(b) provide the information required by section 
291C-14 to the other driver and any police officer at the 
scene, or, in their absence, forthwith report the accident 
to the nearest police officer and provide that information 
to the officer. 
State  v.  Baker,  146  Hawai i  299,  307–08,   463  P.3d  956,  964–65 
(2020). 
Here,  the  complaining  witness  (CW)  testified  that  while 
driving  with  his  two  children,  Fegan's  vehicle  collided  with  and 
caused  damage  to  CW's  vehicle.   CW  testified  that  after  the 
collision,  Fegan  exited  his  vehicle,  approached  CW's  vehicle  and 
"banged  on  my  window,"  "telling  me  to  come  out,  be  a  man,  to  not 
fucking  call  the  cops,  be  a  man  about  this,  handle  this  on  our 
own."  
3
          
        
         
          
            
      
       
              
           
            
             
          
           
        
         
          
         
         
         
        
         
            
         
         
        
        
        
         
          
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW testified that Fegan did not provide his name, 
address, and registration during this exchange. CW denied that 
Fegan had "his paperwork in his hand" when he approached CW's 
vehicle, and testified "I was very clear in what I saw. There 
was no paper in his hands." 
CW stated after witnessing Fegan's actions, "there's no 
way I'm getting out of my car" and "I was still on the phone with 
911" and "[t]hey told me, definitely don't get out of your car, 
the police are on their way." CW testified that when Fegan "saw 
that I wasn't coming out of my car, he pulled down his truck bed, 
sat on the bed, and just stared me down aggressively, still 
cussing me out, while my two kids were in my backseat." 
Fegan testified that he tried to provide his name, 
address, and registration, but CW did not receive any information 
because CW "never exited his vehicle to exchange said paperwork." 
The District Court stated: "[i]t gets down to the 
issue of credibility," and found that although Fegan testified he 
"attempted" to provide his information "but it was not received," 
CW testified that "no information required by 291C-13 was 
provided by Mr. Fegan" and that "the information required by 
291C-14, . . . insurance, name, and so forth, was not provided." 
The District Court found that CW "is credible and not 
the defendant," and found "beyond a reasonable doubt, based upon 
credibility, that [Fegan] violated 291C-13" and did not "provide 
the information required by 291C after the accident." 
Construing the evidence in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, there is substantial evidence to find that Fegan did 
not provide his identifying information to CW, as required by HRS 
4          
        
         
          
        
   
        
         
       
         
         
            
           
         
        
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 291C-13, and the District Court resolved any conflicting 
testimony and issues of witness credibility against Fegan. See 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai i 149, 157–58, 166 P.3d  322, 330–31 
(2007) (setting forth standard for review of challenge to 
sufficiency of the evidence). 
While Fegan contends that, under HRS § 291C-14(b), he 
did not have to provide the required information (i.e., name, 
address, vehicle registration, and driver's license) because CW 
was not "in condition to receive the information," the District 
Court found Fegan's testimony that he attempted to provide the 
information – "but it was not received" – was not credible. See 
State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai i  85, 90,  976 P.2d 399, 404 (1999) 
("appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence") 
(cleaned up). 
For  these  reasons,  the  District  Court's  August  9,  2023 
Judgment  is  affirmed. 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai i,  June  17,  2025.  
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
David  A.  Fanelli, 
for  Defendant-Appellant. /s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
Loren  J.  Thomas, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, /s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate  Judge  
5
 