NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000256
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARSIAN ALIWIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 10-1-0221)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Marsian Aliwis appeals from a
 
February 27, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  for two counts of assault
in the first degree pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
707-710 (1993).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 
appeal is without merit.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Aliwis contends there was insufficient evidence that he
 
caused "serious bodily injury" to the victim in each count and
 
that he did so intentionally or knowingly. "'Serious bodily
 
injury' means bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of
 
death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or
 
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
 
member or organ." HRS § 707-700 (1993).
 
The standard of review for sufficiency of the evidence
is well established; namely, whether, upon the evidence
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in
full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full play
to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility,
weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact.
 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai' i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(block quote format changed) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai' i 
409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)). 
The complaining witness in count 1 (CW 1), testified
 
that while talking on his cell phone he "noticed [Aliwis] arguing
 
with his wife." "[A]s soon as I pressed the hang up button," CW
 
1 testified that he was stabbed in the shoulder. "[I]t felt like
 
a thud, like a punch" followed by "sharp pain." CW 1 turned and
 
punched Aliwis, after which he remembered "going to the ground
 
and [Aliwis] stabbing me in [my left] leg . . . [on the] outer
 
thigh closer to the knee." CW 1 "remember[ed] looking down at
 
[his] leg and trying to hold [his] pants together to keep [his]
 
leg together so [he would not] bleed as much." CW 1 added, "I
 
remember I could stick my hand in it . . . it was pretty deep."
 
After leaving the hospital, CW 1 suffered weakness to
 
his left leg and "couldn't walk for about two months without the
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support of [his] crutches." With regard to the injury to his
 
right shoulder, CW 1 said the impairment lasted a "month to a
 
month and a half." When the deputy prosecutor asked "[d]id you
 
experience any weakness in your right shoulder, right arm
 
following this incident?" CW 1 stated:
 
Um yeah. Like I couldn’t like maneuver it as good. . . . I
could move my forearm and down, but -- like my upper arm I
couldn't like move it around too much. . . . Lift it, rotate
it, move it back and forth, whatever.
 
CW 1 said he has a "permanent scar" on his shoulder shaped like a
 
"crescent moon" and a scar on his left thigh. He displayed both
 
scars to the jury.
 
Aliwis stabbed the complaining witness in count 2 (CW
 
2), as CW 2 came to the aid of CW 1. CW 2 "went to run up to
 
[Aliwis] and try grab the knife then [Aliwis] stabbed [CW 2]" in
 
the right shoulder. CW 2 said Aliwis stabbed him again in his
 
left shoulder.
 
CW 2 testified he has permanent scars on his right and
 
left shoulders and displayed his scars to the jury. Because of
 
this assault, CW 2 also has pain and limited movement in his both
 
his right and left arm.
 
Another witness, observed CW 1's right shoulder was
 
"sliced . . . kinda wide open[]" and his leg was "really . . .
 
sliced open . . . [l]ike real bad." This witness took off his
 
"sweater . . . [and] inside shirt . . . to form a tourniquet." 
The jury also heard testimony from several Honolulu
 
Police Department police officers describing the extent and
 
severity of the wounds CW 1 and CW 2 suffered. Officer Mochizuki
 
saw that "[CW 1] had a deep flesh wound, a gaping wound on his
 
right shoulder. And he also had a very deep cut on his left
 
upper thigh, and the cut appeared to hit the bone. It was very
 
deep." Officer Uno also saw that CW 1's "left thigh had a pretty
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
good size cut on it," and that CW 2 had "cuts on both left and
 
right shoulder areas." 
The testimony of Susan Steinemann, M.D. (Dr.
 
Steinemann), CW 1's treating physician, provided additional
 
corroboration of the extent and severity of the injuries he
 
suffered. Dr. Steinemann testified that she treated CW 1 for
 
injuries that were consistent with having been inflicted by a
 
knife. Dr. Steinemann said CW 1 complained of pain "[a]t the
 
site his lacerations which were his right shoulder, left leg, and
 
his penis." 
With regard to any "sensory deficits" CW 1 experienced,
 
Dr. Steinemann answered, 
with the degree and depth of his wounds, one would expect
him to have numbness in the area of the skin surrounding the
wound certainly more distal; in other words, more towards
the fingers and more towards the foot, because the nerves
generally run from the inside to the outside of the body
.
 
Dr. Steinemann explained to the jury that the "major
 
laceration" to CW 1's right shoulder was "about three
 
inches . . . [and went] through the skin, the thin layer of fat,
 
and into what we call the muscle, the muscle belly . . . [to an]
 
estimate[d] depth of two to three inches." She testified that,
 
that muscle is "responsible for lifting the elbow out to the
 
side." Dr. Steinemann said,
 
[CW 1] . . . would be expected to have pain with motion of
his arm and maybe some limitation of motion of that arm for
a variable time period. I would estimate at least a couple
weeks but could extend two months and sometimes more
 permanently. 
In response to defense counsel's question, "So what kind of
 
limitations on the use of the arm would happen? Would he be 
able - - you said lifting his arm would be difficult?", Dr.
 
Steinemann replied, in relevant part,
 
[A]s you might expect with a wound that goes through the
muscle itself, all of those severed fibers scar and
sometimes don’t heal completely, so there can be some long
term weakness of that muscle.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Steinemann also explained to the jury that the
 
major laceration to CW 1's left thigh was "about ten inches" in
 
length and went "down quite deep down through the muscle belly
 
through some vessels through skin nerves and almost down to the
 
bone. . . . [T]o reach the bone [was] about half of the diameter
 
of his leg . . . at least four inches."
 
The testimony of William Andrew Wilson, M.D. (Dr.
 
Wilson), CW 2's treating physician, provided additional
 
corroboration of the extent and severity of the injuries CW 2
 
suffered. Dr. Wilson said CW 2 had "wounds on both of his upper
 
extremities which were actually hemorrhaging." With regard to 
CW 2's right shoulder, Dr. Wilson "observed a [12] centimeter
 
laceration -- a laceration's a deep cut –- um, that went full
 
thickness -- I described it as "full thickness" -- into the
 
muscle belly." And that the wound "had gone all through three
 
layers of the skin through the fascia and actually into the
 
muscle."
 
With regard to CW 2's left shoulder, Dr. Wilson said
 
the laceration "had varying degrees of thickness . . . [and] was
 
also a very deep cut [10 centimeters long]" that left the muscle
 
belly exposed and actively bleeding. Dr. Wilson testified that
 
the injury to CW 2's right and left shoulders were major
 
lacerations that would leave permanent scarring.
 
Aliwis did not deny stabbing CW 1 and CW 2, claiming in
 
fact that he did so in self-defense. Therefore, and in light of
 
the evidence described above there is sufficient evidence that
 
Aliwis intentionally or knowingly inflicted serious bodily
 
injuries to both CW 1 and CW 2 that caused permanent scarring and
 
protracted impairment of the function of CW 1's leg and arm, as
 
well as CW 2's arm and shoulders.
 
Therefore,
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the February 27, 2012
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 13, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Harrison L. Kiehm
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Donn Fudo
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 