NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000163
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOE ANTONIO also known as JOSE ANTONIO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0751)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joe Antonio aka Jose Antonio
 
(Antonio) appeals from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's
 
(circuit court)1
 October 20, 2010 "Judgment Guilty Conviction and
Sentence" against Antonio for Murder in the Second Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5 (1993),
2
 
and Carrying or Using a Firearm in the Commission of a Separate
 Felony in violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011),
3
 following a bench
1 The Honorable Joel E. August presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-701.5 states in relevant part:
 
[§707-701.5] Murder in the second degree.  (1) Except
as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the offense
of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally
or knowingly causes the death of another person.
3
 HRS § 134-21 states in relevant part:
 
[§134-21] Carrying or use of firearm in the
commission of a separate felony; penalty.  (a) It shall be
unlawful for a person to knowingly carry on the person or
have within the person's immediate control or intentionally
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trial. This case arises from Antonio's fatal shooting of his
 
son, Jose Antonio, Jr. (JR).
 
Antonio raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1) the State failed to adduce sufficient evidence to establish
 that Antonio used a semiautomatic firearm, and thus the circuit
 court erred in imposing a twenty year mandatory minimum sentence
 pursuant to HRS § 706-660.1(3)(a) (1993); (2) the circuit court
 erred in permitting Dr. Kathy Long (Dr. Long) to testify because
 she was not a percipient witness, nor was she an expert witness
 pursuant to HRE Rule 702, and alternatively, her testimony was
 beyond the scope of rebuttal and was not based on reliable
 information; (3) the circuit court erred in striking a portion of
 Dr. Anthony Manoukian's (Dr. Manoukian) testimony that pertained
 to the injuries that could occur if the force necessary to break
 particle board is applied to someone's face, as this testimony
 was relevant to Antonio's theories of self-defense and that he
 was under an Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance (EMED);
 (4) the circuit court erred in convicting Antonio of Murder in
 the Second Degree because the shooting was justified by self-
defense or mitigated because Antonio was under EMED and there was
 insufficient evidence to support the verdict; and (5) Antonio's
 waiver of his right to a jury trial was invalid because the
 interpreter was not adequately sworn in, and the circuit court's
 colloquy was prejudicially inaccurate.
 
We affirm for the reasons discussed below.
 
3 (...continued)
use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged in the
commission of a separate felony, whether the firearm was
loaded or not, and whether operable or not; . . .
 
. . .
 (b)	 A conviction and sentence under this section shall be
 
in addition to and not in lieu of any conviction and
sentence for the separate felony; provided that the
sentence imposed under this section may run
concurrently or consecutively with the sentence for
the separate felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Sufficient Evidence Antonio Used a Semiautomatic Firearm
 
Antonio argues that the State failed to adduce 
sufficient evidence to establish that he used a semiautomatic 
firearm in causing the death of JR, and therefore the circuit court erred in imposing a twenty year mandatory minimum sentence pursuant to HRS § 706-660.1(3)(a). On appeal, sufficiency of the evidence is reviewed in the light most favorable to the State, and the issue is whether there is substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. See State v. Kaulia, 128 Hawai
'i 479, 496, 291 P.3d 377, 394 (2013). 
HRS § 706-660.1(4)(c) (1993) defines "[s]emiautomatic
 
firearm" as "any firearm that uses the energy of the explosive in
 a fixed cartridge to extract a fired cartridge and chamber a
 fresh cartridge with each single pull of the trigger."
 
Sergeant Barry Aoki (Officer Aoki) provided the only
 
testimony regarding semiautomatic firearms. Antonio argues that
 Officer Aoki's testimony establishes that the spring of the gun
 used by Antonio is used to chamber the fresh cartridge, not the
 energy of the explosive, whereas the definition of "semiautomatic
 firearm" requires that "the energy of the explosive in a fixed
 cartridge" be used to "chamber a fresh cartridge with each single
 pull of the trigger." Thus, Antonio argues, there is
 insufficient evidence that the pistol fired by Antonio was in
 fact a "semiautomatic firearm" pursuant to HRS § 706-660.1(4)(c). 
Antonio's argument is unpersuasive. When asked his understanding
 of what a semiautomatic firearm is, Officer Aoki responded in
 relevant part that "[t]he firearm will cycle using the forces
 from the fire cartridge to cycle an action to automatically
 reload and get another cartridge ready to fire another bullet to
 trigger." (Emphasis added.) Officer Aoki testified about the
 firearm used in the shooting as follows: 
Q. Once the first bullet is discharged - - if the
magazine has more than one bullet in it, once the first
bullet is discharged from the chamber, what happens to the
next bullet? 
A. The gun uses the power from the fired cartridge to
cycle so the slide will move to the rear pulling out the
empty casing, kicking it out or ejecting it, and when the
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
slide comes forward again, it will push a live cartridge
into the chamber getting it ready to fire again. 
Q. And as a result of that action, what do you call
this firearm? 
A. That will be a semiautomatic firearm. 
Officer Aoki specifically testified that the subject
 
gun operated in the semiautomatic mode: 
Q. What other test did you perform? 
A. On this pistol? 
Q. Yes. With regards to checking multiple rounds? 
A. Okay. During my test firing session with this gun
on the last string, I loaded two cartridges into the
magazine to see if it will fire in the semiautomatic mode.
So the first - - after the magazine was inserted into the
gun, the slide was put forward. Live cartridge was in the
chamber. It was aimed at the target. Pressed the trigger.
It fired that shot. The empty casing was ejected. 
And the other - - second cartridge in the magazine was
fed into the chamber all under the power of the fired
cartridge. 
Q. What does that indicate to you? 
A. It indicates to me that this gun fires in the
semiautomatic mode. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On redirect, Officer Aoki testified as follows: 
Q. Sergeant, when counsel - - defense counsel - - was
asking you about what happens when a bullet is fired from
the firearm - - remember him asking you those questions
regarding that?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. Would you agree that, that all starts with
the energy of the explosive force of the bullet? 
MR. PHILIP LOWENTHAL: Well, wait. Wait. Foundation,
and I think a matter of physics. That's an open question. 
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule the objection. 
THE WITNESS: Yes.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Officer Aoki's testimony constitutes substantial
 
evidence that the pistol in question "uses the energy of the
 
explosive in a fixed cartridge to . . . chamber a fresh cartridge
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
with each single pull of the trigger[,]" HRS § 706-660.1(4)(c),
 
and thus Antonio's argument is without merit.
II. Dr. Long's Testimony
 
Antonio argues that Dr. Long's testimony constituted 
improper lay testimony, and that Dr. Long was not qualified to 
give testimony as an expert. "Generally, the decision whether to admit expert testimony rests in the discretion of the trial court." Barcai v. Betwee, 98 Hawai
'i 470, 479, 50 P.3d 946, 955 
(2002). 
The circuit court allowed Dr. Long to render opinions 
without formally designating her as an expert. 
The Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court recently held that the plain language of HRE Rule 702
4
 does not require the circuit court to formally qualify a
witness as an expert before receiving the witness's expert testimony into evidence. State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai
'i 206, 
225, 297 P.3d 1062, 1081 (2013); see Barbee v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 119 Hawai
'i 136, 154-55, 194 P.3d 1098, 1116-17 (App. 2008) 
(holding that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in allowing a witness to give expert testimony but denying a request to qualify the witness as an expert before the jury). 
The plain language of HRE Rule 702 suggests that, to
testify as an expert witness, one need only possess the
requisite "knowledge, skill, experience, training or
education" to offer an opinion on a subject requiring
"scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge[.]"
It does not indicate that the trial court must formally
qualify a witness as an expert in front of the jury before
the witness's testimony can properly be admitted.
 
Metcalfe, 129 Hawai 'i at 225, 297 P.3d at 1081 (brackets in 
original). In sum, "nothing in the HRE would preclude the trial 
court from declining to qualify a witness as an expert in front of the jury, so long as the requisite foundation for the witness's testimony is established." Id. at 226, 297 P.3d at 
1082. Any concerns about not formally designating a witness as 
HRE Rule 702 states that "[i]f scientific, technical, or other
specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence
or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may testify thereto in
the form of an opinion or otherwise."
 
5
 4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an expert are even less when the case involves a bench trial,
 
like this case.
 
As in Metcalfe, the evidence in this case satisfied the
 
foundational requirements for expert testimony set forth in HRE
 Rule 702. See id. In order to provide expert testimony pursuant
 
to HRE Rule 702,
 
(1) the witness must be qualified by knowledge, skill,
experience, training or education; (2) the testimony musthave the capacity to assist the trier of fact to understandthe evidence or to determine a fact in issue; and (3) theexpert's analysis must meet a threshold level of reliability
and trustworthiness. See State v. Torres (Torres I), 122
Hawai'i 2, 31, 222 P.3d 409, 438 (App.2009) (citations
omitted), affirmed and corrected on other grounds  by, State 
v. Torres (Torres II), 125 Hawai' i 382, 262 P.3d 1006
(2011). 
Id. at 227, 297 P.3d at 1083.
 
Dr. Long's qualifications were presented at trial and
 
based on that testimony the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in allowing her to provide expert testimony in the
 area of social sciences, particularly in the area of Filipino
 culture. Her testimony was offered to address how operative
 beliefs within the Filipino culture affect relationships within
 the home.
 
When asked what training she has in the area of
 
Filipino culture, Dr. Long testified as follows: 
Well, the training is specifically through my doctoral degree
creating my dissertation, developing my dissertation in immigrant
battering. And my training has been through working in many
different areas that deal specifically with Filipino immigrants,
and being a program supervisor over at the Family Peace Center who
we are the only agency that provide Filipino speaking battering
program services. 
As part of her doctoral dissertation, Dr. Long conducted a vast
 
literature review in Filipino culture. A portion of Dr. Long's
 dissertation concerned the core values of the Filipino culture. 
Dr. Long testified that she has been involved in the
 
Filipino rural program for the past four or five years, and that
 she is on the advisory board. The Filipino rural program focuses
 on Filipino culture and addressing the Filipino immigrant needs
 based on their cultural traditions and practices. When asked
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
whether she considers herself an expert in Filipino culture, Dr.
 
Long stated: 
I do. I do, sir. And above and beyond my formal education
on this, you know, my father and my grandfather are sakadas
and we were born and raised in the Filipino culture and its
traditions and practices. And we lived in the Kumu kumu
 
camp on Kauai. These beliefs were ingrained.
 
 
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
determining that Dr. Long was qualified by education, work
 
experience, and her family experience to testify as an expert in
 Filipino culture. 
Antonio next argues that Dr. Long's testimony was
 
unreliable. Antonio points out that Dr. Long only reviewed
 Dr. David Randall's (Dr. Randall) deposition in rendering her
 opinions. Furthermore, Antonio argues that Dr. Long failed to
 indicate that her process in reaching her opinion was accepted or
 standard practice in her field. However, Antonio cites to no
 authority to suggest that Dr. Long was required to review
 additional materials before testifying, or that she was required
 to explicitly state in her testimony that the process in reaching
 her opinion was accepted or standard practice in her field. 
Before testifying, Dr. Long reviewed Dr. Randall's deposition
 transcript and an email that included the areas that Dr. Randall
 submitted that he would be discussing.
5 The purpose of Dr.
 
Long's testimony was to directly rebut Dr. Randall's testimony
 that Antonio's cultural expectation of respect from his family
 was reasonable and contributed to Antonio's EMED. Further, as to
 whether Dr. Long should have reviewed other material in rendering
 her opinion, Antonio was free to cross-examine Dr. Long and
 challenge the weight that should be given to her opinions.
 
5
 The circuit court qualified Dr. Randall, a clinical psychologist, as
an expert in the field of clinical psychology and forensic psychology.
Dr. Randall gave his professional opinion that at the time that Antonio shot
JR, he was exposed to "extremely unusual and overwhelming stress[,]" and as a
result of that stress, Antonio had an extreme emotional reaction to that
stress that caused him to lose control, and his reason was overwhelmed by
strong, intense feelings that he was experiencing at the time and leading up
to the offense. Dr. Randall identified ten chronic stressors leading up to
the incident. Chronic stressor number six was Antonio's cultural expectation
of respect from his family.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Antonio also contends that Dr. Long's testimony was
 
outside the scope of rebuttal, asserting:
 
The State offered her as an expert in Filipino culture, and
the circuit court limited her testimony to opinions about
certain values within the Filipino culture and how it might
affect the family dynamic. Dr. Long, however, opined on
irrelevant matters outside the scope regarding domestic
violence and the Antonio family's cultural practices, e.g.,
the family practiced utang ng loob, Antonio was not
upholding the expectation as a father, his breakdown caused
the "inevitable," Antonio's actions were not consistent to
Hiya, Antonio was "motivated by a loss of control over his
son" as recognized in domestic violence, and that Antonio
chose to live outside the traditional values.
 
We disagree. The circuit court sustained Antonio's objections as
 
to Dr. Long's testimony concerning domestic violence.
 Furthermore, to the extent that Dr. Long discussed utang ng loob,
 and stated that Antonio was not upholding the expectation as a
 father, it was within the scope of rebuttal inasmuch as it
 directly rebutted Dr. Randall's opinion that Antonio's cultural
 expectation of respect from his family was a reasonable stressor
 in the context of Antonio's EMED defense.
 
III. Dr. Manoukian's Testimony
 
Antonio argues that the circuit court erred in striking
 
a portion of Dr. Manoukian's testimony in which Dr. Manoukian
 
opined that the force it takes to punch a hole in particle board
 can cause serious injuries if applied to the face. Antonio
 argues this testimony was relevant to his defenses of self-
defense and EMED manslaughter. On the evening of the shooting,
 there were several confrontations between Antonio and JR, and at
 one point JR punched a hole in a hallway closet door. Antonio
 contends this added to his fear that JR would physically hurt him
 and thus the stricken portion of Dr. Manoukian's testimony was
 relevant to his self-defense and EMED defenses.
 
Before Dr. Manoukian offered his testimony, the State
 
objected that Dr. Manoukian was not familiar with the material
 that JR punched. The circuit court responded, "[w]ell, let's see
 what foundation is laid." At the end of the defense case, the
 State again raised the issue and asked the circuit court to
 strike Dr. Manoukian's testimony regarding injuries that could
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
result from a punch to the face, because it was not relevant and
 
there was no "tie in" by the defense. Antonio argued that it was
 relevant because it provided an objective aspect to Antonio's
 fear of serious bodily injury from JR. The circuit court granted
 the State's motion, stating:
 
THE COURT: Well, the Court's going to grant the
motion. The Court has already heard from the witness about
his statement of fears based upon what he observed, and I
think that, you know, in terms of some kind of analysis
about protective force, if you will, I think that becomes
more important than anything Dr. Manoukian may have said
about what the possibilities would be for someone being
harmed by that. 
So the Court's going to grant that motion.
And that will be Dr. Manoukian's comments be stricken with
 regard to the issue that, that force could cause an injury
to somebody's face.
 
Dr. Manoukian testified as an expert witness and "the 
decision whether to admit expert testimony rests in the 
discretion of the trial court." Barcai, 98 Hawai 'i at 479, 50 
P.3d at 955. One of the factors for allowing expert testimony is that "the testimony must have the capacity to assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue." Metcalfe, 129 Hawai
'i at 227, 297 P.3d at 1083. As the trier of 
fact in the bench trial, the circuit court's explanation of its ruling indicates that Dr. Manoukian's stricken testimony was not helpful given the other evidence in the case. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion. 
There was no testimony that Antonio was afraid of JR
 
inflicting the types of injuries discussed by Dr. Manoukian or
 that Antonio believed that a punch to the face by JR could result
 in serious bodily injury. Antonio also fails to demonstrate that
 Dr. Manoukian's stricken testimony was an integral part of his
 self-defense or EMED defenses. Antonio was able to testify
 extensively as to his reasons for using deadly force, as well as
 his fears that JR would hurt him. Moreover, with respect to
 Antonio's EMED defense, Antonio was able to provide his
 testimony, his daughter's (daughter) testimony, and the testimony
 of his expert, Dr. Randall. Given all of the other evidence in
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the case, we cannot say that the circuit court's striking of
 
Dr. Manoukian's limited expert testimony about injuries to a face
from a punch was an abuse of discretion.
 
IV. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
Antonio challenges the sufficiency of evidence, arguing
 
that the circuit court erred in convicting him of Murder in the
 Second Degree because the shooting was justified as self-defense
 or was mitigated because he was under EMED.
 
In reviewing the legal sufficiency of the evidence on
appeal, the test is whether, viewing the evidence in the
light most favorable to the State, substantial evidence
exists to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.
Substantial evidence is evidence of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
reach a conclusion.
 
Kaulia, 128 Hawai 'i at 496, 291 P.3d at 394 (citations, internal 
quotation marks and ellipses omitted).
 
Further, "unchallenged factual findings are deemed to
 
be binding on appeal[.]" Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water
 
Supply, 97 Hawai 'i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). The circuit 
court's unchallenged findings regarding the events on the evening
 
of the shooting are as follows:
 
6. On December 16, 2008, Defendant had the day off
from work. JR came home from work at Safeway in the
afternoon and, consistent with his typical endeavors, went
into his bedroom to play video games. In connection with
 playing these video games, JR ran a cord on the floor from
his bedroom across the cottage to the living room.
 
7. That afternoon, Zenaida received a telephone
call. As a result of that call, Zenaida accused Defendant
of having an extramarital affair and of planning to take
another woman with him to the Philippines during his pending
vacation. This argument between Defendant and Zenaida took
place in their bedroom, and was loud enough to be heard by
JR and [daughter], who were in other parts of the cottage.
 
8. After this argument, Defendant left the home.
When Defendant returned to [home], he joined friends and
relatives at a table in the garage on the property.
Defendant drank two or three beers in the garage and then
went to the cottage to retrieve food for the gathering in
the garage.
 
9. When Defendant was in the cottage, he noticed
the video game cord on the floor running from the living
room to the children's bedroom door. Defendant instructed
 [daughter] to tell JR to remove the cord. Defendant then
 went back to the garage and stayed there for several hours.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10. When Defendant returned to the cottage to eat
his dinner, he noticed that the video game cord was still on
the floor. Defendant asked JR to remove the video game
cord, but JR did not do so.
 
11. Defendant then unplugged the cord, coiled it,
and placed it near the children's bedroom. Defendant then
 went back to the kitchen to continue eating.
 
12. JR then approached Defendant and said, "give me my
money now, fucka." JR had never before used profane language to
Defendant.
 
13. At that time, Defendant, who owed JR $1,400, gave him
about $600 in cash and told JR that he would give him the balance
the next day. JR threw the money back at his father. Defendant
 then slapped JR in the face with an open hand. Zenaida intervened
 and separated them.
 
14. An argument ensued. During the argument, JR picked up
and then lowered one end of the living room couch.
 
15. While walking to his bedroom, JR punched the hollow
closet door adjacent to Defendant's bedroom. JR's fist went
 through the door and left a hole. At this time, JR was crying.
JR then said to Defendant, "You are hurting us. You are hurting
my Mom." Defendant attempted to hug JR, but JR pushed him away.
JR continued to say that Defendant was hurting the family.
 
16. Defendant then told JR to leave the house. In
 
response JR demanded full repayment of his money.
 
17. Defendant left the house and attempted to withdraw
money from an ATM, but was unable to do so. Defendant called his
 wife, who told him that she had already withdrawn money from their
account.
 
18. Defendant returned home after 10:00 p.m., at which
time [daughter] was on the computer, JR was in his bedroom, and
Zenaida was in her bedroom, which she shared with Defendant.
 
19. Defendant met with Zenaida in their room. Zenaida
 
gave Defendant some of the cash that she had earlier withdrawn.
Defendant went into the children's bedroom, placed the money on
top of the bed, and turned to leave. JR indicated to Defendant
 that he was not accepting the money.
 
20. Defendant returned to his bedroom and called for
 
[daughter]. Defendant then asked [daughter] to go with him to the
house of his sister in Kihei. [Daughter] declined.
 
21. Approximately twenty minutes later, Defendant Antonio
left his room to get something to drink from the kitchen.
 
22. On the way to the kitchen, Defendant again noticed the
video game cord on the floor between the children's bedroom and
the living room. Defendant then pulled the cord with enough force
to break the cord and then yelled, "I told you I didn't want to
see this cord here." JR, still in his bedroom, began swearing.
 
23. Defendant then went back into his own bedroom and
 
unlocked his gun safe in the closet of his bedroom, removed a Colt
.45 caliber semiautomatic pistol, and inserted a magazine loaded
with .45 caliber ammunition.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
24. Defendant is the registered owner of that Colt .45
caliber pistol, serial number FG42893, which was entered in
evidence as State's Exhibit S-3.
 
25. Defendant concealed the Colt .45 caliber pistol in the
waistband of his shorts and then covered the firearm with his
 shirt.
 
26. Defendant exited the cottage through the front door.
Defendant left the solid door open but closed the screen door. He
 stood outside the house near the door. No exterior light was
shining in the area.
 
27. While Defendant waited outside, JR came out of his
bedroom and asked Zenaida where Defendant was. JR then
 aggressively exited through the screen door, and Defendant took
the gun from his waistband.
 
28. Defendant did not see a weapon in JR's hands but
testified that he felt JR's hands near his neck or upper chest.
6
 
29. Within a few seconds of JR passing through the front
door, Defendant discharged all seven of the rounds of ammunition
in his Colt .45 caliber pistol in the direction of JR.
 
30. There were a total of five gunshot wounds found on the
body of JR. One bullet entered JR's neck below and slightly
behind JR's ear from a distance of approximately 12 to 18 inches.
This shot broke JR's cervical vertebrae and severed his spinal
cord, killing JR almost instantly.
 
31. The other gunshots resulted in a wound across JR's
chest, a gunshot wound to JR's left hand, a bullet fragment wound
to JR's jaw, and two gunshot wounds through JR's left thigh.
 
32. One of the bullets fired by Defendant went through the
bottom of the screen door, and another bullet went through the
solid front door and into the house.
 
33. Immediately after being struck by the first bullet JR
fell to the ground adjacent to the front door. Police found
 bullet projectiles and ammunition shells around the living room
entrance to the Antonio residence. Seven spent .45 caliber
casings were found at the scene.
 
34. Immediately after shooting JR, Defendant dropped the
pistol near JR's body and re-entered the cottage where he
retrieved his vehicle keys and cellular telephone.
 
35. Defendant then walked out the front door past JR's
body, got into his truck, reversed, and drove down the street in a
normal fashion. At some point, Defendant pulled his truck over to
the side of the road, stopped, and made several telephone calls
from his cellular telephone to relatives and to his alleged
girlfriend.
 
6
 In a footnote in his opening brief, Antonio points out that this FOF
is incorrect because Antonio testified that JR only had one hand grabbing
Antonio's neck area. We agree that this FOF should indicate that Antonio
"felt one of JR's hands near his neck or upper chest."
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
36. Defendant then drove to the police station in Wailuku,
where he surrendered and gave a coherent account of the shooting.
 
Related to Antonio's claim of self-defense, HRS § 703­
304(2) (1993 and 2013 Supp.) provides that the use of deadly 
force is justifiable "if the actor believes that deadly force is necessary to protect himself against" inter alia death or serious bodily injury. Self-defense is not an affirmative defense and therefore the State has the burden of disproving the defense beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Lealao, 126 Hawai
'i 460, 
470, 272 P.3d 1227, 1237 (2012). The circuit court concluded that the State had met its burden to disprove Antonio's claim of self-defense. The issue on appeal is thus whether there is sufficient evidence to support the circuit court's conclusion. 
There are two prongs for assessing a claim of self-
defense.
 
The first prong is subjective; it requires a
determination of whether the defendant had the requisite
belief that deadly force was necessary to avert death,
serious bodily injury, kidnapping, rape, or forcible sodomy.
 
....
 
If the State does not prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant did not have the requisite belief that
deadly force was necessary, the factfinder must then proceed
to the second prong of the test. People v. Goetz, 68 N.Y.2d
96, 114, 506 N.Y.S.2d 18, 29, 497 N.E.2d 41, 52 (1986).
This prong is objective; it requires a determination of
whether a reasonably prudent person in the same situation as
the defendant would have believed that deadly force was
necessary for self-protection. Id.
 
State v. Culkin, 97 Hawai 'i 206, 215, 35 P.3d 233, 242 (2001) 
(quoting State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai 'i 429, 433, 886 P.2d 766, 770 
(App. 1994). Thus, the factfinder must "consider whether the use 
of force was both subjectively necessary and objectively reasonable to determine if self-defense is applicable." Metcalfe, 129 Hawai
'i at 232, 297 P.3d at 1088. "The 
reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the use of such protective force was immediately necessary shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the defendant's position under the circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonably believed them to be." State v. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Augustin, 101 Hawai 'i 127, 128, 63 P.3d 1097, 1098 (2002) (block 
quote format altered). 
Considering the unchallenged factual findings by the
 
circuit court, and also viewing the evidence in the light most
 
favorable to the prosecution as we are required to do, there is
 substantial evidence supporting the circuit court's conclusion
 that the State met its burden of disproving Antonio's claim of
 self-defense. Antonio and JR got into several confrontations on
 the evening of the shooting, and JR demonstrated that he was very
 upset with Antonio, including lifting a couch and punching the
 closet door. However, JR never threatened to hurt Antonio or
 initiated any physical touching of Antonio prior to going out the
 screen door. The evidence further suggests that Antonio did not
 fear for his life or fear that he was in danger of serious bodily
 injury from JR. Antonio testified that he became fearful of JR
 when JR lifted the couch, yet after that incident Antonio left
 the house, went to the bank, and then returned home. Also after
 the couch incident, Antonio considered leaving to go to his
 sister's house, but did not go when his daughter said she did not
 want to leave with him.
 
The evidence also indicates that after already having
 
prior confrontations with JR, including the couch incident,
 Antonio broke the video game cord and yelled at JR. JR began
 swearing in his bedroom, but there is again no evidence that he
 threatened to hurt Antonio. Nonetheless, Antonio went to his
 room, retrieved the firearm and concealed it in the waistband of
 his shorts. With JR still in his bedroom, Antonio then went
 outside with the firearm and stood in the dark, leaving the solid
 door open. According to Antonio, a couple minutes later JR
 kicked the screen door open and used one hand to grab Antonio's
 neck area, and said "What do you want, fucka?" In response,
 Antonio told JR "fuck you." Antonio testified he brought the gun
 out from his waist when JR let go of his neck. After the
 shooting, Maui Police Department (MPD) evidence specialist
 Vincent Soukie (Soukie) processed Antonio at the police station
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for gunshot residue and testified that he did not observe any
 
injuries on Antonio. The circuit court determined that the State
 had satisfied its burden of showing that a reasonable person in
 Antonio's position would not believe that deadly force was
 necessary to protect himself against death or serious bodily
 injury. There is substantial evidence to support the circuit
 court's conclusion.
 
Similarly, there was substantial evidence to support
 
the circuit court's rejection of Antonio's EMED defense. 
HRS § 707-702(2) (2013 Supp.) provides that:
 
In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in the first
and second degrees it is an affirmative defense, which
reduces the offense to manslaughter or attempted
manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the time the
defendant caused the death of the other person, under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for
 which there is a reasonable explanation. The reasonableness
 of the explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint of
a reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendant
believed them to be.
 
(Emphasis added.) Effective in 2003, HRS § 707-702(2) was
 
amended to inter alia establish EMED is an affirmative defense. 
See 2003 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 164. "Establishing [EMED] as an
 affirmative defense requires the defense to prove by a
 preponderance of the evidence that the defendant suffers from
 [EMED]." HRS § 707-702 supp. cmt.; see also Conf. Comm. Rep. No.
 56, in 2003 Senate Journal, at 973, 2003 House Journal, at 1722.
 
In its relevant conclusions of law, the circuit court
 
concluded:
 
14. Defendant did prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that he was under the influence of extreme mental
 
or emotional disturbance and experiencing significant loss
of self control at the time he caused the death of Jose
 Antonio, Jr.
 
15. Defendant failed to prove by a preponderance of
the evidence that there was a reasonable explanation for his
extreme mental or emotional disturbance and loss of self
 control at the time he caused the death of Jose Antonio, Jr.
 
Because we are reviewing for sufficiency of the
 
evidence on appeal, "the test is whether, viewing the evidence in
 
the light most favorable to the State, substantial evidence
 exists to support the conclusion of the trier of fact[,]" and
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[s]ubstantial evidence is evidence of sufficient quality and 
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to reach a conclusion." Kaulia, 128 Hawai
'i at 496, 291 P.3d at 394 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
There is substantial evidence supporting the circuit
 
court's conclusion as the fact finder that Antonio did not prove
 by a preponderence of the evidence that there was a reasonable
 explanation for his EMED. The evidence shows, among other
 things, that there was a family dispute, that Antonio's actions
 were to a great degree the subject and cause of the dispute, that
 the dispute and interactions between the family members on the
 day of the shooting occurred over many hours, that Antonio
 initiated physical contact by slapping JR, that after at least a
 twenty minute lull Antonio further aggravated the situation by
 breaking the video game cord, after which JR began to swear, that
 Antonio then retrieved his firearm, concealed it in his
 waistband, went and stood outside, and then shot JR after JR came
 through the screen door. There is sufficient evidence to support
 the circuit court's conclusion rejecting Antonio's EMED defense.
V. Waiver of Jury Trial Through Interpreter
 
The circuit court held two hearings and conducted two
 
colloquies to address Antonio's waiver of his right to a jury
 
trial. At the first hearing, there was no interpreter, but at
 the second hearing an interpreter assisted Antonio. Antonio did
 not challenge his jury trial waiver in the circuit court. On
 appeal, he argues that his waiver was invalid for two reasons:
 (1) the circuit court failed to properly administer the oath to
 the interpreter; and (2) during the second hearing, the circuit
 court provided incorrect information that unduly influenced
 Antonio's decision to waive his right to a trial by jury.
 Referring to the second point, Antonio states in his opening
 brief that "[b]ut for the erroneous statement, the second
 colloquy was adequate." 
Because it presents a question of constitutional law,
 
the validity of a criminal defendant's waiver of his right to a
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury trial is reviewed under the right/wrong standard. State v. 
Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai 'i 465, 468-69, 312 P.3d 897, 900-01 
(2013). "[W]here it appears from the record that a defendant has 
voluntarily waived a constitutional right to a jury trial, the defendant carries the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that his/her waiver was involuntary." Id. at 
469, 312 P.3d at 901 (citations, quotation marks and brackets omitted). Moreover, "the waiver of a right to a jury trial is reviewed under the totality of the circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the defendant's background, experience, and conduct." Id. at 470, 312 P.3d at 902 (citation, internal 
quotation marks and emphasis omitted). 
At a November 2, 2009 hearing, without the aid of an
 
interpreter, Antonio indicated that he intended to waive his
 right to a trial by jury. Antonio indicated that before coming
 into court, he had sufficient time to talk to his attorneys about
 his decision to have a trial by judge. The court explained to
 Antonio in detail the process of a jury trial and the rights that
 would be afforded to him at a jury trial. Antonio indicated that
 he understood. Antonio indicated that his attorneys had
 explained to him all of the different rights that he has with
 regard to the differences between a judge trial and a jury trial. 
The court revisited the issue of jury waiver at a
 
second hearing on April 21, 2010, where Antonio had the
 assistance of an interpreter. At the beginning of the hearing,
 the following exchange occurred: 
THE COURT: Good morning. The Court will also note the
 
presence of the interpreter, Mr. Peros. If we could have
 
the interpreter sworn in please. 
THE CLERK: Do you solemnly swear - ­
THE COURT: No, no, it's a different oath. 
MS. MENDES: The interpreter one. 
THE CLERK: Oh, the other side. I'm sorry.
(At which time the interpreter was sworn to interpret from
Ilocano into English and English into Ilocano to the best of
his ability.)
 
THE COURT: Ilocano. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE CLERK: Ilocano. 
THE INTERPRETER: Yes, I do. 
THE COURT: Thank you. The interpreter has sort of
been sworn. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
At this hearing, the court again explained, this time
 
through an interpreter, the process of a trial by jury, the
 
rights that Antonio would have if he were to choose a jury trial,
 and that in a trial by judge only the judge would decide if he
 was guilty or innocent. Through the interpreter, Antonio
 indicated that he understood what the court was advising him,
 that he had spoken with his attorney about his decision to have a
 trial by a judge instead of a trial by a jury, and that he
 understood his discussions with his attorney. 
Antonio first argues that the interpreter was not
 
properly sworn in, and points to the circuit court's comment that
 "[t]he interpreter has sort of been sworn." (Emphasis added.) 
It is unclear from the record why the circuit court stated that
 the interpreter was "sort of" sworn in, but Antonio fails to
 demonstrate that his waiver was involuntary because of the way
 the interpreter was sworn in. Antonio does not demonstrate that
 a flawed oath was read to the interpreter or that the interpreter
 somehow did not faithfully interpret the proceedings.
7
 
Even if the record reflected that the interpreter was
 
improperly sworn, Antonio cites to no authority that indicates
 that the failure to properly swear an interpreter per se results
 in an invalid waiver of the defendant's rights to a jury trial.
 "Where the incompetence of the interpreter is claimed by a
 defendant to have deprived him of a fair trial, the crucial
 question is: Was the testimony as presented through the
 interpreter understandable, comprehensible, and intelligible, and
 
7
 Antonio also does not dispute the circuit court's finding of fact in
support of the verdict that "Defendant speaks and understands the English
language, however at all relevant and critical stages of these proceedings the
defendant was given the benefit of an interpreter who was fluent in English
and Ilocano."
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if not, whether such deficiency resulted in the denial of the
 
defendant's constitutional rights?" State v. Casipe, 5 Haw. App.
 
210, 214, 686 P.2d 28, 32 (1984). As further explained in
 Casipe, "[t]here is a rebuttable presumption that an interpreter
 in the course of performing his official duty has acted
 regularly." Id. at 214, 686 P.2d at 33. In this case, Antonio
 
provided no evidence to rebut the presumption that the
 interpreter acted regularly.
 
Antonio also argues that the circuit court provided
 
misinformation when it instructed Antonio that "[a]nybody who
 knows anything about you or your family or this case would not be
 permitted to sit as a juror." Even if we assume that this
 statement is not entirely correct, we consider the totality of
 the circumstances, and Antonio has not demonstrated that he did
 not knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily waive his right to a
 jury trial. In this case, the circuit court's colloquy at the
 second hearing included the four-part colloquy from United States
 v. Duarte–Higareda, 113 F.3d 1000 (9th Cir. 1997) that the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has advised be given. See State v. 
Friedman, 93 Hawai 'i 63, 69, 996 P.2d 268, 274 (2000) (advising, 
but not requiring, trial courts to include in jury waiver colloquy that "(1) twelve members of the community compose a jury, (2) the defendant may take part in jury selection, (3) a jury verdict must be unanimous, and (4) the court alone decides guilt or innocence if the defendant waives a jury trial.") (citation omitted). 
Moreover, the circuit court recognized that Antonio's
 
ability to understand English was in question and addressed it. 
The circuit court held the second hearing as to jury waiver and
 utilized the services of an interpreter. Moreover, unlike in
 Gomez-Lobato where the court only asked the defendant questions
 about his executing a jury waiver form, the circuit court in this
 case directly discussed with Antonio the rights that he would be
 giving up. During this hearing, Antonio also directly responded
 to questions about medications he was taking, thus indicating
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he understood English. Further, during the same hearing,
 
while determining whether Antonio would need an interpreter for
 trial, Antonio's own counsel stated that Antonio "speaks and
 understands English well," but was concerned if he had to testify
 at trial. Moreover, the circuit court elicited information about
 Antonio's background speaking English, with Antonio directly
 telling the court that he had been working at Maui News for
 eighteen years, and that he spoke English at work but mostly
 Ilocano at home.
 
Given the totality of the circumstances, Antonio has
 
not demonstrated that his jury waiver was involuntary. The
 circuit court thoroughly explained to Antonio his right to a jury
 trial with the assistance of an interpreter. Even assuming the
 challenged statement by the circuit court was incorrect, Antonio
 has not shown that it affected his waiver.
 
VI. Conclusion
 
We therefore affirm the October 20, 2010 "Judgment
 
Guilty Conviction and Sentence" entered by the Circuit Court of
 
the Second Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 14, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa
Deputy Public Defender(Office of the Public Defender) 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Maui(Department of the
Prosecuting Attorney) 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
20
 