NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable David W. Lo presided.
2HRS § 291E-61 provides, in relevant part:
§ 291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty;
(continued...)NO. CAAP-15-0000449
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHRISTINA DOO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-01061)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Christina Doo ( Doo) appeals from
the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment"
entered on May 22, 2015 in the District Court of the First
Circuit1 (district court ).  Doo was convicted of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant ( OVUII) in violation
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 291E-61(a)(1)/(b)(1) (Supp.
2015).2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)2
. . . .
(b) A person committing the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant shall be
sentenced without possibility of probation or suspension of
sentence as follows:
(1) For the first offense, or any offense not
preceded within a five-year period by a
conviction for an offense under this section or
section 291E-4(a):
(A) A fourteen-hour minimum substance abuse
rehabilitation program, including
education and counseling, or other
comparable program deemed appropriate by
the court;
(B) One-year revocation of license and
privilege to operate a vehicle during the
revocation period and installation during
the revocation period of an ignition
interlock device on any vehicle operated
by the person;
(C) Any one or more of the following:
(i) Seventy-two hours of community
service work;
(ii) Not less than forty-eight hours and
not more than five days of
imprisonment; or
(iii) A fine of not less than $150 but not
more than $1,000;
(D) A surcharge of $25 to be deposited into
the neurotrauma special fund; and
(E) A surcharge, if the court so orders, of up
to $25 to be deposited into the trauma
system special fund[.]
2On appeal, Doo argues that:
(1) the charge against her was deficient because it did
not include the definition of "alcohol";
(2) she was not informed of her right to testify, as
articulated in Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai #i 226, 900 P.2d 1293
(1995);
(3) the district court abused its discretion in denying
her oral motion to continue to obtain additional discovery;
(4) Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai #i (State)
presented insufficient evidence to support Doo's convictionNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3because Honolulu Police Department ( HPD) Officer Alan Lu (Officer
Lu) lacked a present recollection of her performance on the
standardized field sobriety test ( SFST); and
(5) there was insufficient evidence to support Doo's
conviction because the State failed to establish the relationship
between her performance on the SFST and whether she was "under
the influence of alcohol in the amount sufficient to impair her
normal mental faculties or ability to care for herself and guard
against casualty."
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Doo's
points of error as follows:
(1) Doo argues that the OVUII charge was fatally
defective because it did not include the statutory definition of
"alcohol" and therefore, failed to provide Doo with notice of the
nature and cause of the charges against her.  Specifically, Doo
contends that beer and wine do not meet the statutory definition
of "alcohol" because they are not the products of distillation
and therefore, "the charge should have defined that term to
provide adequate notice to Doo that she could have only been
convicted of OVUII if the State proved that she had driven under
the influence of 'alcohol' as that term is specifically defined
by HRS § 291E-1, and not other beverages which were not the
products of distillation."
At the time the State filed its complaint against Doo,
the term "alcohol" was defined as 
the product of distillation of any fermented liquid,
regardless of whether rectified, whatever may be the origin
thereof, and includes ethyl alcohol, lower aliphatic
alcohol, and phenol as well as synthetic ethyl alcohol, but
not denatured or other alcohol that is considered not
potable under the customs laws of the United States.
HRS § 291E-1 (2007 Repl.) (emphasis added). 
Reviewing a nearly identical argument to the one that
Doo raises, this court has previously rejected the argument that
a charge is deficient for failing to define "alcohol."  See StateNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4v. Tsujimura , 137 Hawai# i 117, 366 P.3d 173 (App. 2016).  The
plain language of HRS § 291E-1 defines "alcohol" to include
"ethyl alcohol."  See id.  at 120, 366 P.3d at 176.  Because ethyl
alcohol is the intoxicating agent in beer and wine, Doo's claim
that the definition is restricted to alcohol produced by
distillation, and does not include beer or wine, is without
merit.  Id.   Furthermore, because the statutory definition of
"alcohol" is consistent with the common meaning of alcohol,
"there was no need for the State to define the term 'alcohol' in
[a] OVUII charge in order to give [a defendant] fair notice of
the charge against him [or her.]"  Id. at 121, 366 P.3d at 177. 
Therefore, Doo's challenge to the sufficiency of the charge
against her is without merit.
(2) Doo argues that the district court's ultimate
Tachibana  colloquy was defective.  The State agrees that the
district court's ultimate Tachibana  advisement was deficient and
concedes that the district court's error was not harmless.
In Tachibana , the Hawaii Supreme Court held that 
in order to protect the right to testify under the Hawai# i
Constitution, trial courts must advise criminal defendants
of their right to testify and must obtain an on-the-record
waiver of that right in every case in which the defendant
does not testify.#
Tachibana , 79 Hawai #i at 236, 900 P.2d at 1303 (footnote
omitted).  The supreme court noted that "the ideal time to
conduct the colloquy is immediately prior to the close of the
defendant's case."  Id. at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304.  The supreme
court also stated that the trial court's colloquy must advise the
defendant
[(1)] that he or she has a right to testify, [(2)] that if
he or she wants to testify that no one can prevent him or
her from doing so, . . . [(3)] that if he or she testifies
the prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him or
her[, and (4)] that he or she has a right not to testify and
that if he or she does not testify then the jury can be
instructed about that right.
Id. at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (brackets in original
omitted);  see State v. Pomroy, 132 Hawai# i 85, 91, 319 P.3d 1093,
1099 (2014) (summarizing the requirements of the Tachibana
colloquy).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5Here, the following colloquy occurred:
THE COURT: All right, Ms. Doo, as I said at the outset
you have the right to remain silent. If you remain silent I
will not hold that against you. And if you testify, the
prosecutor has the opportunity to cross examine you; you
understand?
[DOO]: I understand.
THE COURT: Have you made a decision to remain silent
or to take the stand?
[DOO]: I remain silent.
THE COURT: That is your decision?
[DOO]: That is my decision.
The district court's ultimate colloquy did not advise
that Doo had the right to testify and that no one could prevent
her from doing so.  See Tachibana , 79 Hawai #i at 236 n.7, 900
P.2d at 1303 n.7.  Furthermore, district court's statement that
Doo "ha[d] the right to remain silent" was insufficient to
satisfy the requirement that Doo be advised that she had the
right not to testify.  See State v. Chong Hung Han , 130 Hawai #i
83, 93 n.8, 306 P.3d 128, 138 n.8 (2013) (emphasizing that the
trial court "should advise a defendant that he or she has the
right not to testify" because "a defendant could be confused if a
court states simply 'you have the right to remain silent' without
using the accompanying phrase, 'you have the right not to
testify'" (emphasis in original)).  Given the errors in the
district court's ultimate Tachibana  colloquy, the district court
failed to elicit from Doo an on-the-record waiver of her right to
testify.
"Once a violation of the constitutional right to
testify is established, the conviction must be vacated unless the
State can prove that the violation was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt."  Tachibana, 79 Hawai #i at 240, 900 P.2d at
1307.  "It is inherently difficult, if not impossible, to divine
what effect a violation of the defendant's constitutional right
to testify had on the outcome of any particular case."  Pomroy,
132 Hawai #i at 94, 319 P.3d at 1102 (brackets omitted) (quotingNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Doo also challenges the district court's prior-to-trial Tachibana
colloquy. Because we hold that Doo did not intelligently, knowingly, and
voluntarily waive her right to testify following the district court's ultimate
Tachibana colloquy, we need not address Doo's challenges to the district
court's prior-to-trial Tachibana colloquy.  See Pomroy, 132 Hawai# i at 92, 319
P.3d at 1100; see generally State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai
#i 292, 297, 12 P.3d 1233,
1238 (2000) (holding that trial courts, "prior to the start of trial, shall
(1) inform the defendant of his or her personal right to testify or not to
testify and (2) alert the defendant that, if he or she has not testified by
the end of the trial, the court will briefly question him or her to ensure
that the decision not to testify is the defendant's own decision" (brackets
omitted) (quoting Tachibana, 79 Hawai# i at 237 n.9, 900 P.2d at 1304 n.9)).
Furthermore, because we hold that Doo's conviction is vacated and
remanded for a new trial, we need not address Doo's point of appeal
challenging the denial of her oral motion to continue to obtain additional
discovery.
6State v. Hoang , 94 Hawaii 271, 279, 12 P.3d 371, 379 (App. #
2000)). 
The State concedes in its answering brief that it
"cannot make a good faith argument that the district court's
error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because the record
indicates that Doo told the [police] officers she was on her
speaker phone when she drove over the cones, she was taking
Valium, and being treated for anxiety."  The State posits that
"[s]uch testimony by Doo may have created reasonable doubt as to
whether she was 'under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental faculties or
ability to care for the person and guard against casualty.'"
(Brackets in original omitted.)  We agree with the State's
position. 
Because the district court's violation of Doo's
constitutional right to testify was not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt, Doo's conviction must be vacated and remanded
for a new trial.3  See Han, 130 Hawai# i at 95, 306 P.3d at 140
(vacating and remanding the case where "the [trial] court's error
in failing to obtain [a] knowing, intelligent, and voluntary
waiver of Petitioner's right to testify was not harmless").
(3) Doo challenges the sufficiency of the evidence
adduced to support her conviction because Officer Lu lacked a
present recollection of Doo's performance on the SFST and becauseNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4The Hawai# i Supreme Court has previously maintained that
"challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence must always be decided on
appeal because the double jeopardy clause bars retrial of a defendant once a
reviewing court has found the evidence at trial to be legally insufficient to
support a conviction."  State v. Davis, 133 Hawai# i 102, 118, 324 P.3d 912,
928 (2014) (internal citation omitted).
7the State failed to lay a proper foundation for Officer Lu to
testify about Doo's SFST performance.4
"[Hawai#i Rules of Evidence ( HRE)] Rule 612 [(1993)]
provides that a witness may use a writing to refresh his memory
for the purpose of testifying."  State v. Espiritu , 117 Hawai #i
127, 137, 176 P.3d 885, 895 (2008). "[W]hen a writing is used to
refresh a witness's recollection, the witness should testify from
'a memory thus revived,' resulting in testimony from present
recollection, not a memory of the writing itself."  State v.
Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai# i 138, 144, 906 P.2d 624, 630 (App. 1995). 
"If the writing does not refresh the witness's memory, the
witness may not testify regarding the contents of the writing
unless the writing is itself admitted into evidence."  Espiritu,
117 Hawai #i at 137, 176 P.3d at 895 (citing Dibenedetto , 80
Hawai#i at 144, 906 P.2d at 630).  "Thus, where a witness never
perceived the matters described or where the writing does not
reawaken recollection of past perception, [HRE] Rule 612 does not
permit a witness to simply read into evidence the contents of the
writing."  Espiritu, 117 Hawai #i at 137, 176 P.3d at 895 (quoting
State v. Ferrer , 95 Hawai #i 409, 432, 23 P.3d 744, 767 (App.
2001)). 
Here, Officer Lu testified that he could not recall any
physical observations he had about Doo other than her slurred
speech and her breath that smelled like alcohol.  Officer Lu
indicated that looking at his police report would help to refresh
his recollection about his observations of Doo.  After reviewing
his report, Officer Lu indicated that his recollection was
refreshed and he continued to testify.  Officer Lu testified
that, in addition to his observations about Doo's speech and
breath, he also observed that Doo's "eyes appeared glassy and her
movements were slow."  Based on the circumstances of this caseNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5To the extent that Doo's opening brief may be interpreted as
challenging the State's second attempt to refresh Officer Lu's recollection,
we hold that Doo's argument is without merit.  A review of the record
indicates that the district court sustained Doo's objection to the State's
second attempt to refresh Officer Lu's recollection.  Therefore, Officer Lu
testified about Doo's SFST performance without having his memory refreshed.
8and given that Officer Lu testified that his recollection was
refreshed after reviewing his report, it was proper for Officer
Lu's observations about Doo to come in under HRE Rule 612's "past
recollection refreshed" exception.  But see Dibenedetto , 80
Hawai#i at 145, 906 P.2d at 631 (holding that a police officer's
testimony relating to defendant's field sobriety test should have
been stricken where, after the police officer reviewed a police
report to refresh his recollection, the State failed to elicit
testimony from the police officer that his recollection about the
test was in fact refreshed).5  
Next, Doo argues that the district court erred in
relying on Officer Lu's testimony about the results of Doo's SFST
performance because "[Doo] did not stipulate that Officer Lu was
qualified to grade the results of the SFST and opine whether Doo
had passed or failed[.]"  Specifically, Doo contends that Officer
Lu's statement, "If . . . I determine that the person failed the
[SFST] it's an indicator that the person is under the influence
of an intoxicant and is unable to drive a vehicle -- operate a
vehicle safely[,]" was inadmissible.  However, Officer Lu's
statement did not offer an opinion specific to whether Doo passed
or failed the SFST, as Doo suggests on appeal.  Therefore, Doo's
argument is without merit.
Even without considering Officer Lu's challenged
statement, we conclude that the State produced sufficient
evidence to support Doo's OVUII conviction.  It is well
established that
evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed, even if it could be
said in a bench trial that the conviction is against theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6We note that, on appeal, Doo concedes that "Officer Lu
was . . . free to offer his direct observations as to Doo's performance on the
SFST."
9weight of the evidence, as long as there is substantial
evidence to support the requisite findings for conviction,
the trial court will be affirmed.
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
And as trier of fact, the trial judge is free to make
all reasonable and rational inferences under the facts
in evidence, including circumstantial evidence.
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai #i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996)
(brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Pone , 78 Hawai #i 262, 265,
892 P.2d 455, 458 (1995)).
The State adduced evidence that, as the HPD police
officers set up a sobriety check point, Doo ran over the police
officers' cones and activated flares causing the police officers
to yell for her to stop.  Officer Lu testified that Doo then
continued to drive toward him and he had to "get out of the way"
because he felt that she was "going to hit [him] with the truck"
if he did not move.  The evidence adduced at Doo's bench trial
showed that when Doo was pulled over, her breath smelled strongly
of alcohol; her voice was slurred; her eyes were red, glassy, and
watery; and her movements were slow.
Moreover, Officer Lu testified that when he
administered the SFST to Doo, she did not perform the heel to toe
portion of the test as instructed, raised her arms from the side
of her body, and did not turn the way she was instructed to turn.
Also, during the one-leg-stand portion of the test, Officer Lu
testified that Doo swayed, raised her arms, and put her foot
down.6
Based on the evidence adduced at trial, the State
adduced substantial evidence to support Doo's conviction for
OVUII under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1).  See e.g., State v. Gatson, 108
Hawai#i 308, 310-11, 119 P.3d 616, 618-19 (App. 2005) (holding
that there was sufficient evidence to support defendant's HRS
§ 291E-61(a)(1) conviction where the State adduced evidence thatNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10the defendant did not perform the SFST as instructed and had a
flushed face, "a little bit red" eyes, breath that smelled of an
alcoholic beverage, and unsteady balance).
Therefore,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Notice of Entry of
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" entered on May 22, 2015
in the District Court of the First Circuit is vacated and
remanded for a new trial consistent with this disposition.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 23, 2016.
On the briefs:
Alen M. Kaneshiro
for Defendant-Appellant.
Sonja P. McCullen
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge