NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000685
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
IN THE INTEREST OF SL and NL
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NOS. 09-12368 and 09-12369)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother (Mother) and Cross-Appellant Father
 
(Father) appeal from the Order Terminating Parental Rights, in
 
FC-S No. 09-12368, entered on June 21, 2011 in the Family Court
 
of the First Circuit (family court).1 Mother also appeals from
 
the Order Terminating Parental Rights, in FC-S No. 09-12369,
 entered on June 21, 2011 in the Family Court of the First
 
Circuit.
2
 
In FC-S No. 09-12368, Mother's and Father's parental
 
rights to their child SL were terminated. In FC-S No. 09-12369,
 
Mother's parental rights to her child NL were terminated.
 
On appeal, Mother argues that there was not clear and
 
convincing evidence that she was not willing and able to provide
 
a safe family home for her children, SL and NL, with the
 
assistance of a service plan and is able to provide a safe family
 
1
 The Honorable Linda Martell presided.
 
2
 The Honorable Linda Martell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
home, with the assistance of a service plan, in the foreseeable
 
future.
 
On appeal, Father argues that there not clear and
 
convincing evidence that he was not willing and able to provide a
 
safe family home for SL, with the assistance of a service plan
 
and is able to provide a safe family home, with the assistance of
 
a service plan, in the foreseeable future.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mother's and Father's points of error as follows:
 
(1) There was clear and convincing evidence that
 
Mother was not presently willing and able to provide her children
 
with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 
plan and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would
 
become willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with
 
the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of
 
time, which shall not exceed two years from the children's entry
 
into foster care. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 587A-33
 
(Supp. 2011).
 
At the time of the termination of parental rights
 
hearing, a DHS social worker identified Mother's current safety
 
issues as her long history of substance abuse, multiple
 
unsuccessful attempts at treatment, birth of a child in the
 
middle of this proceeding, problematic relationships,
 
intermittent homelessness, and domestic violence. 
Mother admitted that she had a long history of using
 
illegal drugs beginning at age 10. Mother completed several drug
 
treatment programs. However, she relapsed into drug use each
 
time, once on the very day she graduated from drug court. Mother
 
had a total of 7 children, four with Father. Mother had her
 
parental rights terminated for her four oldest children. Of the
 
three remaining, two are the subject the instant proceeding and
 
one was born during the instant proceeding. Mother was involved
 
in domestic violence with Father on more than one occasion, the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
last of which prompted DHS to initiate this case. Mother was
 
also involved in a violent situation with the father of her
 
newest child during the pendency of this case. The DHS social
 
worker opined that Mother would have even more difficulty caring
 
for SL and NL with the addition of her newborn child and that
 
Mother could not adequately care for three children. The DHS
 
social worker also testified that Mother had a pattern of
 
completing most of the service plans, regaining custody of her
 
children, and then relapsing into drug use. Therefore, there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that Mother could not currently
 
provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 
plan. 
The DHS social worker also opined that it would take
 
Mother at least another year to address her safety issues. The
 
children were placed into foster care on December 23, 2009. The
 
termination of parental rights hearing was held on June 21, 2011. 
Mother was projected to resolve her safety issues by June 2012
 
at the earliest, more than two years from the date the children
 
first entered foster custody. Therefore, there was clear and
 
convincing evidence that it was not reasonably foreseeable that
 
Mother would become willing and able to provide a safe family
 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 
reasonable period of time, which shall not exceed two years from
 
the children's entry into foster care.
 
(2) There was clear and convincing evidence that
 
Father was not presently willing and able to provide his child
 
with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 
plan and that it was not reasonably foreseeable that Father would
 
become willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with
 
the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of
 
time, which shall not exceed two years from the child's entry
 
into foster care. HRS ยง 587A-33.
 
A DHS social worker stated that Father's safety issues
 
were a long history of substance use, a relatively short period
 
of recent sobriety, numerous children with Mother, none of whom
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
are in their care, domestic violence, an unstable living
 
arrangement, and unstable employment.
 
Our review of the testimony reveals that Father has had
 
a long history of using illegal drugs starting at age 28. Father
 
actively participated in Mother's relapse into drug use. Father
 
tested positive for drug use multiple times even when the
 
children were placed in family supervision. Father has seven
 
children, six of whom were born drug exposed. DHS proposed
 
services for Father on two prior occasions but he had never
 
participated in drug treatment until after the initiation of this
 
case. Father denied being involved in domestic violence despite
 
Mother having initially filed a temporary restraining order
 
against him. Father has a problem with openness because DHS had
 
difficulty finding out where he works, where he lives, who his
 
girlfriend is, and he refused to provide consent for his doctor
 
to share information with DHS. Father was also resistant to
 
assistance by DHS aides concerning child care and could not
 
demonstrate the ability to set appropriate boundaries with SL 
The DHS social worker also stated that Father had a pattern of
 
completing most of the service plans, regaining custody of the
 
children, and then relapsing into drug use. Therefore, there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that Father could not currently
 
provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 
plan. 
The DHS social worker also opined that it would take
 
Father at least another year to address his safety issues. 
Father admitted that he only began services with a service
 
provider one month prior to the termination of parental rights
 
hearing and that he was currently working on some issues. The
 
children were placed into foster care on December 23, 2009. The
 
termination of parental rights hearing was held on June 21, 2011. 
Father was projected to resolve his safety issues by June 2012
 
at the earliest, more than two years from the date the children
 
first entered foster custody. Therefore, there was clear and
 
convincing evidence that it was not reasonably foreseeable that
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father would become willing and able to provide a safe family
 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 
reasonable period of time, which shall not exceed two years from
 
the child's entry into foster care.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, in FC-S No. 09-12368, and Order terminating
 Parental Rights, in FC-S No. 09-12369, entered on June 21, 2011
 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, October 31, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Wilfred S. Tangonan,
for Father-Cross-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Mother-Appellant.
 
Mary Anne Magnier and
Eric J. Alabanza,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
5
 