 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND   PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000709 14-NOV-2024 07:53 AM Dkt. 49 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000709  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
MICHAEL MCCLURG and TROPICAL DREAM,  
a general partnership, Petitioners-Appellants,   
v.  
JENNIFER CAULFIELD and LEE PICHÉ,  Respondents-Appellees,  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD  CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 3CCV-21-0000262)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Petitioners-Appellants  Michael McClurg and Tropical 
Dream  (collectively McClurg)  appeal from the  "Order Granting 
Respondent[-Appellee] Jennifer Caulfield's  [(Caulfield )]  Motion 
to Dismiss Filed September 23, 2021 and Denying [McClurg's] 
Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment Filed October 21, 2021"  1
1 The record reflects that McClurg, Caulfield, and Lee Pich é 
(Piché) entered into a general partnership, under the partnership name 
"Tropical Dream ." Pursuant to the terms of the Partnership Agreement, 
McClurg holds a 50% interest in the partnership, and Caulfield and Pich é, who 
were married at the time they entered into the partnership and are now 
divorced, hold an undivided 50% interest. McClurg brought this lawsuit on 
behalf of himself and Tropical Dream.   
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
   
 
     
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Order), filed on November 23, 2021 , and the Final Judgment 
(Judgment ), filed on November 26 , 2021, by the Circuit Court of 
the Third Circuit ( circuit court ). 2 
McClurg contends on appeal that the circuit court 
erred by granting Caulfield's motion to dismiss, and denying his 
cross-motion for summary judgment . 3 Upon careful review of the 
record and relevant legal authorities , and having given due 
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by 
the parties, we resolve McClurg's contentions as follows: 
(1) At the outset, we address McClurg's contention 
that the circuit court erred by not converting Caulfield's HRCP 
Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss to a motion for summary 
judgment . "[A] motion seeking dismissal of a complaint is 
transformed into a [n] [HRCP] Rule 56 motion for summary judgment 
when the circuit court considers matters outside the pleadings." 
Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy , 144 Hawaiʻi 224, 236, 439 P.3d 176, 188 
(2019) (citation omitted). 
The record reflects that declarations signed by 
counsel, and McClurg and Pich é, were filed in support of and in 
2 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided. 
3 McClurg sets forth four points of error on appeal, contending 
that the circuit court erred by: (1) " [f]ailing [t]o [t]reat [Caulfield's 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) ] [m]otion [t]o [d]ismiss 
as [a] [m]otion [f]or [s]ummary [j]udgment"; (2) granting Caulfield's motion 
to dismiss; (3) "failing to grant [McClurg's] [c]ross-[motion for summary 
judgment] on procedural grounds, in light of [Caulfield's] refusal to file an 
opposition"; and (4) denying McClurg's cross -motion for summary judgment. 
2   
 
 
 
      
     
 
 
   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opposition to Caulfield's motion to dismiss . These declarations 
presented "matters outside the pleadings." See id. We find 
that the circuit court 's apparent consideration of the se 
declaration s effectively converted the motion to dismiss to an 
HRCP Rule 56 motion for summary judgment, and we therefore 
review the circuit court 's ruling accordingly in section (2) 
infra. See Lumford v. Yoshio Ota, 144 Hawaiʻi 20, 25, 434 P.3d 
1215, 1220 ( App. 2018) (finding that because "the court did not 
expressly state that it was excluding matters outside the 
pleadings in making its decision on the Motion to Dismiss . . . 
the [c]ircuit [c]ourt properly treated the Motion to Dismiss as 
a summary judgment motion and [it will] consider the [c]ircuit 
[c]ourt's ruling in [that] light"). 
(2) McClurg contends that the circuit court erred by 
granting Caulfield's  motion to dismiss.   We review the circuit 
court's ruling de novo.   State Farm Fire &  Cas. Co. v. Pac.  
Rent-All, Inc., 90 Hawaiʻi 315, 322, 978 P.2d 753, 760 (1999) 
(reviewing "the challenged motions to dismiss [de novo] pursuant 
to the standard relating to summary judgment" where "the parties 
presented various matters outside of the pleadings to the 
circuit court").   The court applies the following standard,  
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to jud gment as a matter of law. A 
3   
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion . 
Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55—56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285—86 
(2013). 
The Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has recognized that, 
If there is an enforceable agreement to arbitrate, the 
court's power is limited by [Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)] 
Chapter 658. The court cannot act except as allowed by that 
Chapter. The court can compel the parties to arbitrate 
under HRS § 658 -3. It can name the arbitrator under HRS § 
658-4. It can compel witnesses to attend under HRS § 658 -7. 
In addition, the court can confirm, modify, or vacate a 
final award under HRS §§ 658-8, -9, and -10. However, under 
HRS § 658 -5, the court cannot try or decide iss ues or 
controversies that are referred to or are referable to the 
arbitrator. 
Bateman Constr., Inc. v. Haitsuka  Bros., Ltd., 77 Hawai ʻi 481, 
484, 889 P.2d 58, 61 (1995) (emphasis added).  4
HRS § 658A-6 (2016) instructs that, 
(a) An agreement contained in a record to submit to 
arbitration any existing or subsequent controversy 
arising between the parties to the agreement is valid, 
enforceable, and irrevocable except upon a ground that 
exists at law or in equity for the revocation o f a 
contract. 
4   HRS chapter 658  was repealed in 2001, and replaced with  HRS 
chapter 658A  (Uniform Arbitration Act).  2001 Haw. Sess. Laws  Act 265, §§ 1,  
5 at 810- 20.   Although Bateman Constr., Inc.  references HRS chapter 658, the 
legal principles set forth above, including that courts cannot decide issues 
or controversies referable to arbitration, apply to arbitration clauses 
governed by HRS chapter 658A.   See  United Pub .  Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, 
AFL-CIO v. City &  Cnty. of Honolulu, Bd. of Water Supply, No. 27945, 2010 WL 
706522, at *3 n.4 ( Haw. App.  Feb. 25,  2010) (mem. op.) ("HRS Chapter 658A is 
similar in many respects to the repealed HRS Chapter 658, and therefore 
certain decisions under HRS Chapter 658 remain instructive.")  
4   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) The court shall decide whether an agreement to 
arbitrate exists or a controversy is subject to an 
agreement to arbitrate. 
"[I]n order to be valid and enforceable, an 
arbitration agreement must have the following three elements: 
(1) it must be in writing; (2) it must be unambiguous as to the 
intent to submit disputes or controversies to arbitration; and 
(3) there must be bilateral consideration." Siopes v. Kaiser 
Found.  Health Plan, Inc., 130 Hawaiʻi 437, 447, 312 P.3d 869, 879  
(2013) (citation omitted).  
The parties do not dispute the existence of the 
Partnership Agreement, which incorporates the following 
arbitration clause,  
XI. SETTLING DISPUTES 
All Partners agree to enter into mediation before filing 
suit against any other Partner or the Partnership for any 
dispute arising from this Agreement or Partnership. All 
Partners agree to attend one session of mediation before 
filing suit. The Partners agree that any and all disputes, 
claims or controversies arising out of or relating to this 
Agreement shall be submitted to the American Arbitration 
Association, or similar dispute resolution service, for 
mediation, and if the matter is not re solved through 
mediation, then it shall be submitted to the American 
Arbitration Association, or similar dispute resolution 
service, for final and binding arbitration. Judgment on the 
Award may be entered in any court having jurisdiction. If 
the dispute is not settled after one session of mediation 
and if the arbitration process does not resolve the 
dispute, the Partners are free to file suit. Any law suits 
will be unde r the jurisdiction of the state of Hawaii. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The record reflects that the written arbitration 
agreement referenced above unambiguously provided that "any and 
5   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
all disputes, claims or controversies arising out of or relating 
to" the Partnership Agreement shall, if not resolved through 
mediation, "be submitted to the American Arbitration 
Association, or similar dispute resolution service, for final 
and binding arbitration." The Partnership Agreement was signed 
by all three partners --McClurg, Pich é, and Caulfield --and 
memorialized their agreement to make "initial contributions" 
towards the building of "a custom home" that they would sell and 
to "share the net p rofits sale of the house [,]" pursuant to the 
terms of the agreement. 
At present, the parties agree that a dispute exists 
between McClurg and Caulfie ld. McClurg appears to contend that 
the partnership property was sold for a loss after accounting 
for construction expenses and costs, there are no net profits to 
distribute, and judicial dissolution of the partnership is 
appropriate. Caulfield appears to contend that she is entitled 
to 25% of the net profit of the sale of the property, which is 
being held in escrow by Title Guarant y, and that an accounting 
is necessary to dete rmine the calculation of the partnership's 
profit. Pursuant to the Partnership Agreement, to which 
Caulfield was a signatory, Caulfield shares an undivided 50% 
6   
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
partnership interest with Pich é. 5 She disputes the distribution 
of the partnership assets; the arbitration clause of the 
Partnership Agreement reflects the agreement between the three 
partners that all partnership "disputes, claims or 
controversies" must be referred to arbitration before any 
partner may file suit . 
We conclude that the circuit court was not wrong in 
ruling as a matter of law "that the [partnership] dispute that 
[was] before [it] [was] a dispute that was intended to be 
covered by the [P]artnership [A]greement" and, as such, needed 
to be submitted for arbitration before it could be adjudicated 
by the court. 
(3) McClurg contends that the circuit court erred by 
failing to grant McClurg's cross -motion for summary judgment on 
"procedural grounds ." McClurg appears to argue that the circuit 
court should have granted McClurg's cross -motion for summary 
judgment because Caulfield "did not file an opposition to the 
5 Caulfield and Pich é, who were married when the Partnership 
Agreement was executed, divorced in March 2018. Caulfield contends that , 
pursuant to the divorce agreement, she holds a 25% interest in the 
partnership . McClurg appears to contend that Caulfield, pursuant to the 
terms of the Partnership Agreement, holds an undivided 50% interest with 
Piché, and, as such, Caulfield cannot independently (without Pich é's 
agreement) invoke the arbitration provision. McClurg cites no legal 
authority for this proposition. We find that, whether Caulfield's interest 
is properly characterized as a 25% interest or an undivided 50% interest, 
Caulfield possessed, as a signatory and named partner to the Partnership 
Agreement, a partnership interest that was governed by the arbitration 
clause. 
7   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[c]ross-[motion for summary judgment] or respond by affidavit or 
otherwise, setting forth specific facts showing that there are 
genuine issues for trial." Because the circuit court denied 
McClurg's cross -motion for summary judgment without reaching the 
merits, as discussed infra in section (4), we conclude that 
McClurg's contention lacks merit. 
(4) McClurg contends that the circuit court erred by 
denying his cross -motion for summary judgment . At the hearing 
on Caulfield and McClurg's respective motions, the circuit court 
informed the parties that " [it was] not reaching [McClurg's] 
cross-motion for summary judgment , because [it was] granting 
[Caulfield's] motion to dismiss without prejudice ." Consistent 
with the above, the circuit court's Order stated that 
"[McClurg's] Cross Motion for Summary Judgment is DENIED WITHOUT 
PREJUDICE." 
The record reflects that the circuit court summarily 
denied McClurg's cross -motion for summary judgment after ruling 
that this dispute, pursuant to the Partnership Agreement, must 
first be submitted for arbitration. The circuit court thus 
declined to address the merits of McClurg's cross -motion for 
summary judgment on the basis that the lawsuit was not properly 
before the court at that time. We conclude that the circuit 
8   
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court was not wrong in denying McClurg's cross -motion for 
summary judgment , without prejudice, on this basis. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Order, filed 
November 23, 2021 , and Judgment , filed November 26 , 2021. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, November 14, 2024. 
On the briefs:  
 /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
David H. Lawton,  Acting Chief Judge  
for Petitioners-Appellants.   
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Robert Goldberg,  Associate Judge  
for Respondent-Appellee.  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
9 