NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000546
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
ALLAN H. ABIHAI, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 15-1-0405)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Allan H. Abihai (Abihai) appeals
from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered on
June 14, 2017 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
court).1  The State of Hawai #i (State) charged Abihai with one
count of Escape in the Second Degree pursuant to § 710-1021 of
the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS).2  Abihai was found guilty as
charged.  The circuit court sentenced Abihai to a term of
imprisonment of five years.
On appeal, Abihai contends that his trial counsel's
1The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
2§ 710-1021 Escape in the second degree.   (1) A person
commits the offense of escape in the second degree if the person
intentionally escapes from a correctional or detention facility or
from custody.
(2) Escape in the second degree is a class C felony.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
errors and omissions in failing to obtain relevant evidence from
witnesses substantially impaired his choice of evils defense and
deprived him of his constitutional right to effective assistance
of counsel; and the circuit court erred in denying Abihai credit
for time served at sentencing.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
I. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
In his first point of error, Abihai contends that he
was denied his right to effective assistance of counsel,
guaranteed by article I, section 14 of the Hawai# i Constitution
and the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution.
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel,
[the appellate court] looks at whether defense counsel's
assistance was within the range of competence demanded of
attorneys in criminal cases.  The defendant has the burden
of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and must
meet the following two-part test:  1) that there were
specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.  To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense.  A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice.
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513–14, 78 P.3d 317, 326–27
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote
omitted).
Abihai claims that his trial counsel's errors and
omissions in not presenting relevant questions and obtaining
relevant evidence from witnesses substantially impaired his
choice of evils defense by failing to show that Abihai was in
fear for his life and physical safety, and therefore
"cumulatively resulted in a denial of [Abihai's] right to a fair
trial . . . and his right to assistance of counsel . . . ."
Specifically, Abihai contends that his counsel rendered
ineffective assistance when he failed to: (1) question the FBI
task force officer and the Assistant U.S. Attorney about any
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
requests made by Abihai to be transferred to Kulani Correctional
Facility from Laumaka Work Furlough Center (Laumaka) in exchange
for his testimony in the federal trial against the USO family
gang, and/or any deals made regarding the same; (2) question the
FBI task force officer as to the safety procedures and
precautions taken to protect Abihai from people knowing about
Abihai's meetings with the officer or Abihai's potential
testimony against the USO family gang; and (3) point out that
Abihai's federal trial testimony could have also been used
against a Laumaka Adult Correction Officer, who was an authority
figure who also allegedly posed a potential threat to Abihai's
safety.
The choice of evils defense Abihai claims was impaired
by his trial counsel's ineffective assistance is governed by HRS
§ 703-302.  The choice of evils defense is further limited in a
prosecution for escape:
§ 703-302  Choice of evils.   (1) Conduct which the actor
believes to be necessary to avoid an imminent harm or evil
to the actor or to another is justifiable provided that:
(a) The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be prevented by the
law defining the offense charged;
(b) Neither the Code nor other law defining the
offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the
specific situation involved; and
(c) A legislative purpose to exclude the justification
claimed does not otherwise plainly appear.
(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing
about the situation requiring a choice of harms or evils or
in appraising the necessity for the actor's conduct, the
justification afforded by this section is unavailable in a
prosecution for any offense for which recklessness or
negligence, as the case may be, suffices to establish
culpability.
(3) In a prosecution for escape under section  710-1020 or
710-1021 , the defense available under this section is
limited to an affirmative defense  consisting of the
following elements:
(a) The actor receives a threat, express or implied,
of death, substantial bodily injury, or forcible sexual
attack;
(b) Complaint to the proper prison authorities is
either impossible under the circumstances or there exists a
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
history of futile complaints;
(c) Under the circumstances there is no time or
opportunity to resort to the courts;
(d) No force or violence is used against prison
personnel or other innocent persons;  and
(e) The actor promptly reports to the proper
authorities when the actor has attained a position of safety
from the immediate threat.
(Emphasis added.)  Accordingly, HRS § 703-302(3) is the
applicable subsection regarding Abihai's choice of evils defense
given that he was prosecuted under HRS § 710-1021.
In order to prevail on his claim that his choice of
evils defense was impaired due to his trial counsel's ineffective
assistance, Abihai must meet his burden of establishing, among
other things, that his HRS § 703-302(3) choice of evils defense
was indeed potentially meritorious.  We conclude that Abihai has
failed to do so.  Among other reasons, we find it particularly
noteworthy that Abihai does not assert, and there is no evidence
in the record, that he "promptly report[ed] to the proper
authorities when [he] [had] attained a position of safety from
the immediate threat" after escaping from Laumaka, which is
required for a HRS § 703-302(3) defense claim to be meritorious. 
See HRS § 703-302(3)(e).  In fact, the evidence shows just the
opposite––that Abihai failed to show up for his work furlough
assignment on June 9, 2014, never once contacted the Laumaka case
manager, and was not arrested until June 29, 2014.
Accordingly, Abihai has failed to establish that his
trial counsel was ineffective.
II. Denial of Credit for Time Served
In his final point of error, Abihai contends that the
circuit court erred in denying him credit for time served from
the date he was taken back into custody after escaping, June 29,
2014, to and including the date he was sentenced on his escape
conviction on June 14, 2017.
HRS § 706-671(3) (2014) provides:
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, when a
defendant is convicted for a crime committed while serving a
sentence of imprisonment on a separate unrelated felony
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
conviction, credit for time being served for the term of
imprisonment imposed on the defendant for the separate
unrelated felony conviction shall not be deducted from the
term of imprisonment imposed on the defendant for the
subsequent conviction.
In the instant case, prior to escaping from Laumaka,
Abihai had been serving a life sentence of imprisonment for
separate unrelated felony convictions.  After being taken back
into custody on June 29, 2014, Abihai continued to serve time on
his life imprisonment sentence for his prior felony convictions
unrelated to his escape conviction.  Therefore, pursuant to HRS §
706-671, the circuit court properly did not deduct Abihai's time
served from June 29, 2014 to June 14, 2017 from his five-year
term of imprisonment imposed for his subsequent escape
conviction.
Based on the foregoing, the "Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence" entered on June 14, 2017 in the Circuit Court of the
First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 19, 2018.
On the briefs:
David L. Williams,
Deputy Attorney General,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Harrison L. Kiehm,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5