NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000405
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ROGER W. EGUCHI-BRYANT,
Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
PROSERVICE HAWAII/ALL TREE SERVICES, INC.,
Employer-Appellee, Self-Insured
and
 
SEABRIGHT INSURANCE COMPANY,
Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2009-415(H) (1-07-01072))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Claimant-Appellant
 
Roger W. Eguchi-Bryant (Roger) appeals from the Labor and
 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board's (LIRAB) Decision and Order
 
entered January 9, 2013 and LIRAB's Order Denying Motion to
 
Reopen entered March 13, 2013.
 
While employed as a climber by Employer-Appellee, Self-
Insured Proservice Hawaii/All Tree Services, Inc. (Employer),
 
Roger sustained a work related injury to his head, neck, left
 
elbow, upper-mid-low back, left knee, and psyche after a log
 struck him on December 20, 2007; Employer accepted liability for
 the injury. On appeal, Roger contends LIRAB erred by concluding
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he was not entitled to total temporary disability (TTD) benefits
 
from November 20, 2009 through June 1, 2010.1
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Roger's
 appeal is without merit.
 
Appellate review of LIRAB's decision is governed by
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14(g) (2012 Repl.), which
 
provides:
 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the decision and
order if the substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions,
decisions, or orders are:
 
(1)	 In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
 
(2)	 In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
 
(3)	 Made upon unlawful procedure; or
 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
 (5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6)	 Arbitrary or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law (COLs) are
 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions
 
regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3).
 
A COL is not binding on an appellate court and is 
freely reviewable for its correctness. Thus, the court reviews COLs de novo, under the right/wrong standard. Tam v. Kaiser 
Permanente, 94 Hawai
'i 487, 494, 17 P.3d 219, 226 (2001). 
Roger contends LIRAB clearly erred by finding
 
Employer's September 23, 2009 letter was a "warning letter" to
 
1
 The issue involves Roger's placement in two alternate light duty
work assignments, Pearl Harbor Memorial Fund (Memorial Fund) and Habitat for
Humanity (Habitat), both non-profit organizations. The light duty work was
arranged by Employer.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
terminate TTD benefits. LIRAB described the September 23, 2009
 
letter as warning letter regarding employment termination:
 
9. By letter dated September 23, 2009, Employer
informed [Roger] that the alternate light duty location
informed them about his "persistent and unrelenting verbal
comments about [his] injury and [his] light duty assignment
have caused an unpleasant work environment for other
volunteers/co-workers on the premises. The alternate light
duty location has requested that you not return." Employer
stated that they would proceed with securing another
alternate light duty location.
 
[Roger] was informed that it was his "first warning
that failure to adhere to [Employer's] Rules of Conduct
policy (attached for [his] reference) will result in
immediate termination.["]
 
10. [LIRAB] finds that Employer's letter was a
warning letter and indicated that [Roger] would be given
another chance to participate in Employer's efforts to
return him to temporary modified duty work.
 
Roger maintains "the warning letter by [Employer] did not give
 
any warnings by [Insurance Carrier-Appellee Seabright Insurance
 Company] to [Roger] that his TTD might be terminated if [Roger]
 continued to act inappropriately at the next alternate light duty
 work site." However, Roger provides no authority for the
 proposition that a employment termination "warning letter" must
 also warn an employee of possible TTD benefits termination. 
Roger contends LIRAB erred as a matter of law by
 
concluding he was not entitled to TTD benefits from November 20,
 2009 through June 1, 2010 because the Employer's TTD benefits
 termination notice (TTD Notice) did not comply with HRS § 386­
31(b) (1993). Under HRS § 386-31(b), an employer may terminate
 
TTD Benefits if a claimant is able to resume work, provided that
 the employer must "notify the employee and the director in
 writing of an intent to terminate such benefits at least two
 weeks [before] the date when the last payment is to be made." 
This notice must (1) "give the reason for stopping payment" and
 (2) "inform the employee that the employee may make a written
 request to the director for a hearing if the employee disagrees
 with the employer." HRS § 386-31(b). Roger contends the TTD
 Notice did not satisfy HRS § 386-31(b) because it did not give
 the reason for stopping payments. This contention has no merit. 
The TTD Notice provided that Employer terminated Roger's TTD
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
benefits because his actions at his alternate light duty work
 
placements constituted a refusal to work and this refusal
 resulted in his termination from Employer. The TTD Notice also
 provided that benefits would be terminated two weeks from the
 date of the notice and provided the procedure for challenging the
 termination of benefits. Consequently, the TTD Notice complied
 with HRS § 386-31(b).
 
Roger contends LIRAB clearly erred by finding the 
light duty work provided by Employer was reasonable and
 appropriate because both alternate light duty assignments were
 volunteer positions at non-profit organizations and thus, the
 positions did not constitute "employment" under workers'
 compensation law and as a result. Since the assignments did not
 constitute employment, there was no light duty work offered for
 Roger to refuse. This contention relies on the definition of
 "employment" under HRS § 386-1 (Supp. 2013), which excludes
 unpaid service for non-profits:
 
§386-1 Definitions.
 
. . . 
"Employment" means any service performed by an
individual for another person under any contract of hire or
apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written, whether
lawfully or unlawfully entered into. It includes service of
public officials, whether elected or under any appointment
or contract of hire, express or implied.
 
"Employment" does not include:
 
(1)	 Service for a religious, charitable,
educational, or nonprofit organization if
performed in a voluntary or unpaid capacity;
 
(2)	 Service for a religious, charitable, educational, or
nonprofit organization if performed by a recipient of
aid therefrom and the service is incidental to or in
 return for the aid received[.] 
Assuming the definition of employment may be used as urged by
 
Roger's position, the contention has no merit. While Roger's
 light duty assignment included work at non-profit organizations,
 it was not in a voluntary or unpaid capacity. Roger was paid by
 Employer to render services to the Memorial Fund and Habitat:
 
Q. [Roger's Counsel] Let me clarify one thing. As far
 
as pay he'll work four hours but still get his full TTD
benefits? Is that how it works?
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. [Manager of Claims for Employer] We pay them for
working -- they are doing volunteer work for the volunteer
[organization]. But [Employer] is paying them for the hours
to be there. And then the claim pays for the rest.
 
Roger relatedly contends the purpose of the light duty
 
positions was not to get him hired by those charitable
 
organizations and as a result, the positions did not constitute
 reasonable and appropriate employment. Roger provides no
 authority for this contention.
 
Roger contends LIRAB clearly erred by finding the
 
alternate light duty work provided by Employer was reasonable and
 appropriate because the right to accept or reject the volunteer
 remained with the non-profit organization. Roger continues that
 the "unreasonableness and inappropriateness of this arrangement,
 surfaces where the non-profit organization, before using the
 volunteer, decides to not use the volunteer and then the employer
 construing the non-profit organization's decision to not use the
 volunteer as the volunteer's rejection of the modified duty work
 offer." Essentially, Roger disagrees with LIRAB's finding that
 his actions constituted a refusal to return to work, contending
 there are no reliable, probative and substantial facts to show he
 behaved inappropriately to warrant a termination of TTD benefits. 
This contention lacks merit.
 
Roger's October 20, 2008 functional capacity evaluation
 
(FCE), and subsequent work releases leading up to November 5,
 
2009, issued by Roger's treating physician, provided Roger was
 
capable of light duty work and could lift 25 pound from the waist
 up.
2 Two representatives of Employer stated Memorial Fund
 
requested Roger not return because Roger's persistent comments
 about his injury created an unpleasant work environment. A
 Habitat employee testified (1) that Habitat did have work that
 fit within Roger's work restrictions: "[Roger] could probably
 sort things. You know, we had tons of nuts and bolts[;]" (2)
 that this task would allow Roger to both sit and stand as needed
 
Notably, LIRAB found the light duty work offered by the Memorial
Fund and Habitat were within Roger's physical capabilities under the 2008 FCE
and Roger does not challenge this finding. To the contrary, Roger admits the
positions were within his capabilities per the 2008 FCE.
 
5
 2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for comfort; (3) that Roger stated he could not lift from the
 
waist up; and (4) the purported inability to lift from the waist
 up precluded Roger from any work at Habitat.
 
Before each light duty work assignment, Employer
 
informed Roger to follow the Rules of Conduct policy, which
 required courteous and professional behavior, and that failing to
 do so would be considered a refusal to work and result in
 termination of his employment. Roger appears to contend that
 because he did not act rude, the characterization of his actions
 as inappropriate is false and misleading. However, Employer's
 Rules of Conduct Policy required employees to act courteously and
 professionally. The record shows that Roger complained
 excessively at the Memorial Fund and contradicted his medically
 established physical capabilities at Habitat. As such, LIRAB's
 findings that Roger's actions were inappropriate under the
 circumstances, i.e., uncourteous and unprofessional, and
 constituted a refusal to work, are supported by reliable,
 probative, and substantial evidence.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 9, 2013 Decision
 
and Order and the March 13, 2013 Order Denying Motion to Reopen
 both entered by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board
 are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 16, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Joseph P.H. Ahuna, Jr.
Joseph P.K. Ahuna, III
David K. Ahuna (Law Offices of Joseph P.H.
Ahuna, Jr.)
for Claimant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Beverly S.K. Tom
(Kessner Umebayashi Bain &Matsunaga)
for Employer-Appellee, Self
Insured and
 Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 