NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000635
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CAFFERY TODD SHEATHER, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1PC161000184)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Caffery Todd Sheather (Sheather )
was convicted by a jury on two counts of Sexual Assault in the
Third Degree in violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(b) (2014) .  He
appeals from the orders of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(a) denying his motion to dismiss the indictment, (b) denying his
motion to compel discovery or in the alternative to dismiss the
indictment, and (c) denying his oral motion for mistrial.  For
the reasons explained below, we affirm the Judgment of Conviction
and Sentence entered on July 17, 2018.1
I.
On February 3, 2016, Sheather was indicted on three
counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree.  Sheather moved to
1HRS §707-732(1)(b) provides:
A person commits the offense of sexual assault
in the third degree if . . . [t]he person knowingly
subjects to sexual contact another person who is less
than fourteen years old or causes such a person to
have sexual contact with the person[.]NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
dismiss the indictment.  The circuit court denied the motion.
Sheather moved to compel discovery from the State.  The circuit
court denied the motion.   Jury trial began on April 23, 2018.  
On April 25, 2018, Sheather moved for a mistrial.  The circuit
court denied the motion.  On April 26, 2018, the jury found
Sheather guilty on two of the counts.  He was sentenced to two
five-year terms of incarceration, to run concurrently.  This
appeal followed.4 32
II.
A. Motion to Dismiss
A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss an
indictment is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  State v. Chong,
86 Hawai# i 282, 288 n.2, 949 P.2d 122, 128 n.2 (1997).
Sheather contends that the circuit court abused its
discretion by denying his motion to dismiss the indictment
because the State failed to present clearly exculpatory evidence
to the grand jury.  "[W]here evidence of a clearly exculpatory
nature is known to the prosecution, such evidence must be
presented to the grand jury."  State v. Bell, 60 Haw. 241, 245,
589 P.2d 517, 520 (1978) (citation omitted).5
2The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.  During the hearing on
Sheather's motion to dismiss, the circuit court announced its decision and
directed the State to prepare a written order denying the motion.  The record
on appeal does not contain a written order.
3The circuit court's minutes of the hearing on Sheather's motion to
compel discovery indicate that the circuit court directed the State to prepare
a written order denying the motion.  The record on appeal does not contain a
written order.
4The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided.
5The Bell court stated:
Clearly exculpatory evidence may be manifested,
for example, by a witness whose testimony is not
directly contradicted by any other witness and
who maintains that the accused was nowhere near
the scene of the crime when it occurred.  Also,
where it has become apparent to the prosecution,
for example, that a sole eyewitness testifying
as to the perpetration of the crime has perjured
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In this case, the 11-year-old complaining witness ( CW)
testified before the grand jury.  She was to spend the weekend
with her school friend JS  and JS's family.  Sheather is JS's
father.  CW and JS shared a bedroom.  After CW went to sleep, she
was awakened by Sheather touching her vagina with his finger,
both over and under her underwear.  He was kneeling on the ground
next to CW's bed.  She pretended to be asleep, because she did
not want Sheather to know that she knew what he was doing.  She
rolled away from him and pretended to stretch, and he tapped her
and asked her if she was having a bad dream.  He walked out of
the room.  He returned, and again touched her vagina with his
finger, both over and under her underwear.  She rolled away
again, and stretched and made sleeping noises.  She thought
Sheather left, but when she peeked she saw him "on all fours,
like, trying to hide . . . trying to crawl under a table."  He
woke her up, asked her if she was having a bad dream, and hugged
her.  CW testified that when Sheather hugged her, "he grabbed my
butt."
Sheather contends that the clearly exculpatory evidence
that should have been presented to the grand jury was testimony
from JS, who was also eleven years old.  JS gave a statement to a
police detective.  She said that she and CW went to sleep at
11:00 or 11:30.  At about 4:00, CW started kicking off her
blanket and mumbling in her sleep.  This woke JS up.  Her father
(Sheather) came into the room and tried to calm CW down.  She and
CW went back to sleep.
At the hearing on Sheather's motion to dismiss, the
circuit court stated:
In looking at the totality of the evidence
presented before the Court, and mainly the exhibits
which are A, the Grand Jury transcript . . . .
As well as Defense Exhibit B, which is a taped
interview of the other minor female witness in the
room[.]
5(...continued)
himself before the grand jury, that perjury must
be revealed to the grand jury.
60 Haw. at 245, 589 P.2d at 520.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . .
Court makes specific findings as follows:
1.The testimony, or the lack of testimony,
at Grand Jury by witness JS is not clearly
exculpatory.
2.The Court finds no misconduct on the part
of the prosecution in its presentation of its case to
the Grand Jury.
And since there was not any clearly exculpatory
evidence to be presented to the Grand Jury, they were
not obligated to present merely conflicting testimony.
That being the Court's ruling, Court will deny
the motion to dismiss the indictment.
We hold that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion and
correctly applied the law.
The Hawai#i Supreme Court has stated:
The function of a grand jury to protect against
unwarranted prosecution does not entail a duty
to weigh the prosecution's case against that of
the defense, or even to determine that the
prosecution's case is supported by competent
evidence.
On the other hand, an indictment that is the
result of prosecutorial misconduct or other
circumstances which prevent the exercise of
fairness and impartiality by the grand jury may
be successfully attacked.
Chong, 86 Hawai#i at 289, 949 P.2d at 129 (cleaned up) (quoting,
expressly approving, and adopting Justice Kidwell's concurrence
in Bell, 60 Haw. at 256-57, 589 P.2d at 526).  Accordingly,
"evidence should be considered clearly exculpatory . . . only
when the prosecution could not in good faith rely on other
evidence."  Bell, 60 Haw. at 257, 589 P.2d at 527 (Kidwell, J.,
concurring).  The State in this case relied upon the testimony of
CW to obtain the indictment.  The State had no obligation to
offer conflicting testimony from JS to the grand jury.
B. Motion to Compel Discovery
The circuit court's discovery orders are reviewed for
abuse of discretion.  State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai#i 462, 477-78,
946 P.2d 32, 47-48 (1997).
Sheather contends that the State failed to turn over a
recording of a conversation between a Children's Justice Center
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
employee named Nancy Tolentino and a Honolulu police detective
named Darrien Thornley "in which they discussed their doubt as to
the complaining witness's veracity in her [Children's Justice
Center] interview."  The alleged recording is not part of the
record on appeal.  The minutes of the January 4, 2017 hearing
indicate that Tolentino and Detective Thornley were both called
as defense witnesses.  After their testimony, the minutes
indicate "defense recognizes that there is nothing to compel. 
The court stated that the State made complete discovery to the
defense.  Defense [sic] was given a chance to put on his
witnesses to see if there was any further discovery."  The
transcript of the January 4, 2017 hearing is not part of the
record on appeal, but the minutes indicate that the circuit court
denied the motion to compel.   We hold that the circuit court did
not abuse its discretion because, based upon the record before6
us, the evidence sought by Sheather did not exist.
C. Motion for Mistrial
The denial of a motion for mistrial is within the sound
discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a
clear abuse of discretion.  State v. Pasene, 144 Hawai#i 339,
365, 439 P.3d 864, 890 (2019).
CW's father (Father ) testified at trial.  In response
to questions by the State, he testified that the morning after
the alleged incident, he and CW's mother (Mother ) took CW to CW's
pediatrician.  Father waited in the waiting area while Mother and
CW met with the pediatrician.  A female police officer arrived
and took Father's statement.  Father and the police officer then
went into the pediatrician's office.  Father testified:
Q. And were you there when [CW] came to interact
with the officers?
A. I was, yes.
Q.
 And did you notice [CW]'s demeanor when she
came to interact with the officers?
A. Yes, [CW]'s demeanor changed quite
dramatically when we entered [the pediatrician]'s
6Again, the record on appeal contains no written order.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
office.  And when she talked to the police officer,
she became very emotional, started crying.  I believe
at one point she kind of buried herself into my chest
and just didn't want to talk about it.  So that's when
-- that was the first time I saw her react to the
situation was when we were at [the pediatrician]'s
office, and specifically I noticed that when she was
-- when the female police officer was talking to her
about the specifics.
Q. So you said a little earlier that you could
-- you know your daughter –-
A. Uh-huh.
Q. -- her demeanor?
Did you notice a change in [CW]'s demeanor after
this happened?
A. Yes.  [CW] is a, prior to this event, fairly
outgoing person.
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I'm going to object, Your
Honor, to relevance.  And if we need to approach for
my specific objection, I would request that we be
allowed to do that.
THE COURT: Your objection's overruled and your
request is denied.
BY [DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]:
Q. You may answer the question.
A. Her demeanor prior to -- was very different. 
Outgoing young woman, slept pretty well, was
comfortable around lots of people, had certainly spent
time -- times with the Sheather family almost
immediately after this event and continued to this day
--
THE COURT: Okay. Let me -- hold on here.
Counsel, if you could approach.
. . . .
(Bench discussion on the record.)
THE COURT: We're up at the bench outside of the
presence of the jury.
My impression of that question it was going to
generate a response with respect to her demeanor that
day at the doctor's office and how it transformed. 
This is getting into almost a postevent manifestation
behavior.  [State], what's your position?
And [Defense Counsel], why don't you put your
position on first.
(Underscoring added.)  Sheather's attorney objected to relevance
and "lack of foundation that a change in behavior is either
consistent or inconsistent with a report of sexual abuse."  The
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circuit court agreed and said it would strike the response. 
Sheather's attorney asked the circuit court to declare a
mistrial.  The court responded:
THE COURT: . . . The striking of the testimony,
the jury will be ordered to disregard the testimony
should be sufficient. . . . That'll be emphasized in
the jury instruction as well, and I trust they will
follow this instruction.
. . . .
(Bench conference concluded.)
THE COURT: With regard to the last question
posed by the prosecution and the response by [Father],
that question and response is stricken and you are to
disregard that.  You are not to consider the question
or the answer at all in your consideration [sic].
The jury was instructed:
You must decide the case solely on the evidence
and the law.  You must not be influenced by any
personal likes or dislikes, prejudice, passion, pity,
or sympathy.  The oath that you took at the beginning
of the case demands of you a just verdict, unaffected
by anything except the evidence, your reason and
common sense, and the law as I give it to you.
. . . .
Objections are not evidence.  Attorneys may
object when they believe an objection is appropriate. 
You should not be influenced by the question,
objection, or by my ruling on the matter.  If an
objection was sustained, you must disregard the
question and any answer that may have been given.
Sheather's only trial objection was to relevance.  He
argues, for the first time on appeal, prosecutorial misconduct. 
"If defense counsel does not object at trial to prosecutorial
misconduct, this court may nevertheless recognize such misconduct
if plainly erroneous."  State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513,
78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003).  "We will not overturn a defendant's
conviction on the basis of plainly erroneous prosecutorial
misconduct, however, unless there is a reasonable possibility
that the misconduct complained of might have contributed to the
conviction."  Id. (cleaned up); see also Pasene, 144 Hawai#i at
365, 439 P.3d at 890 ("Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct
are reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
standard, which requires an examination of the record and a
determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the error complained of might have contributed to the
conviction.") (citations omitted).  In reaching this
determination, we consider the following factors: (1) the nature
of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and
(3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the
defendant.  Pasene, 144 Hawai# i at 365, 439 P.3d at 890.
"Under the first factor, we consider the nature of the
challenged conduct in relation to our criminal justice system
generally and the special role of the prosecutor specifically." 
Pasene, 144 Hawai# i at 365, 439 P.3d at 890 (cleaned up).  In
this case, Sheather did not object to relevance when the
prosecutor asked Father about [CW's] demeanor when she met with
the police officer at the pediatrician's office.  There was no
motion to strike Father's response that "[CW]'s demeanor changed
quite dramatically" when Father and the police officer entered
the pediatrician's office, and CW "became very emotional, started
crying . . . she kind of buried herself into my chest and just
didn't want to talk about it."  When the prosecutor asked the
follow-up question, "Did you notice a change in [CW]'s demeanor
after this happened?" the circuit court's "impression of that
question [was] it was going to generate a response with respect
to [CW's] demeanor that day at the doctor's office and how it
transformed."  It was not until after Father started answering
the question that Sheather objected.  The prosecutor's conduct
was not egregious.
Under the second factor, after the circuit court
overruled Sheather's objection and Father began describing a
change in CW's personality, the court immediately called a bench
conference, struck the question and Father's testimony, gave a
curative instruction to the jury, and reiterated the curative
instruction while instructing the jury on the law.  The first
curative instruction was prompt, and the curative jury
instruction reinforced the first instruction.
Under the third factor, the evidence against Sheather
was strong.  CW's trial testimony was consistent with her grand
jury testimony.  JS also testified at trial; she did not remember
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
much about the incident, but she was asked by the State about her
interview at the prosecutor's office:
[BY DPA]: . . . Do you remember doing that
interview --
A. Yes.
Q. -- at my office saying that later that
morning you woke up because [CW] was having a
nightmare, and when you look toward [CW], you saw your
father kneeling or standing next to [CW]'s bed?  Do
you remember saying that in that interview?
A. Yes.
On redirect, JS testified:
[BY DPA]: Okay.  And when I asked you about the
meeting that we had with our investigator or with the
people from my office, you said that you do remember
telling our investigator that day that, when you woke
up and looked, you saw your dad standing or kneeling
right by [CW]'s bed, you remember that, right?
A. Yes.
Q. And that you said today that you do remember
saying?
A. Yes.
CW's pediatrician also testified at the trial.  CW had been her
patient since CW was born.  Mother brought CW in to her office
the morning after the incident:
[BY DPA]: And can you describe what [CW]'s
behavior or demeanor was like when you first observed
her that day?
A. When she first came in to the office and I
greeted her, she seemed withdrawn, probably a little
fearful, hiding behind her mom a little bit.
Q. Okay. And at some point did you, I guess,
focus your attention on [CW] and talk to [CW]?
A. Yes.
Q. And can you just tell us a little bit about
that?
A. Well, routinely, when a child comes in, I'll
always greet them, ask them how they're doing and why
they're there in the office.  So that day was same
thing.  "Hi, sweetie, how are you?"  She said, "Fine." 
And then I asked her, "Why are you here today?"  And
she started crying.
. . . .
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Q. . . . What did she say had happened that
caused her to be there that day?
A. So she said that she had been invited to a
birthday party for her best friend and it was a
sleepover at the Ko #olina Hotel.  In the middle of the
night, her uncle -- she awoke to her uncle stroking
her thigh and she stopped talking, and then I asked
her if he touched any other places on her body.  And
at first she was reluctant to answer, so I drew a
picture of her private area.  She indicated her
private area.  And I drew a picture of a -- a general
picture of a female anatomy and I asked her to point
if he had touched her in any other places, and she
pointed to her vagina.  And then I asked her if it was
over her panties or under, and she stated it was
under.  And then -- and then I examined her.  And,
generally, when I examine a child, I'll do the whole
examination -- head, ears, everything.  And I told her
since we were concerned about her private areas, I
would have to examine her privates.  So I stepped out
while she undressed and was draped, and then I
examined her privates.
Because the deputy prosecuting attorney's conduct was
not egregious, because the circuit court promptly gave a curative
instruction and later gave an appropriate jury instruction, and
because of the strength of the evidence against Sheather, we
decline to recognize plain error in the circuit court's denial of
Sheather's motion for a mistrial.
I
II.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence entered by the circuit court on July 17,
2018.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 15, 2019.
On the briefs:
Jacob G. Delaplane,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
10Dwight K. Nadamoto,
Brian R. Vincent,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.