FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–
 
EDMUND CHRISTIAN, Petitioner-Appellant,
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
CAAP-11-0000147
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(SD 10-1-001; CR NO. 5DTA-08-00048)
 
NOVEMBER 27, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Petitioner-Appellant Edmund Christian (Christian) was
 
charged by complaint with Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence
 
of an Intoxicant (OVUII). On June 24, 2008, he pleaded no
 contest to the OVUII charge. On that same day, he was sentenced
 to a fine of $700 and various fees and assessments. Christian
 did not appeal his OVUII conviction or sentence.
 
Over two years after his judgment of conviction became 
final, Christian sought to collaterally attack his conviction. On August 23, 2010, he filed a Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 40 (2006) "Petition to Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Prior Judgment/Conviction" (Rule 40 Petition), alleging for the FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
first time that his OVUII charge was insufficient. Christian 
relied upon the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's 2009 decision in State v. 
Wheeler, 121 Hawai 'i 383, 219 P.3d 1170 (2009), which held that 
an OVUII charge which tracked the language of the statute prescribing the offense, but failed to allege that the offense was committed "upon a public way, street, road, or highway" (public-road element), was defective. Christian argued that his OVUII charge was similarly defective for failing to allege the public-road element, that the defect in the charge was jurisdictional, and therefore his judgment of conviction was a nullity. The District Court of the Fifth Circuit (District 
1
Court)  denied Christian's Rule 40 Petition, and Christian
appealed.
 
We hold that the rule announced in Wheeler does not 
apply retroactively to cases on collateral review. In determining the extent to which a newly announced judicial rule should be given retroactive effect, we consider "(a) the purpose of the newly announced rule, (b) the extent of reliance by law enforcement authorities on the old standards, and (c) the effect on the administration of justice of a retroactive application of the new standards[.]" State v. Jess, 117 Hawai
'i 381, 401-02, 
184 P.3d 133, 153-54 (2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Applying these factors, we conclude that the new rule announced in Wheeler -- that charging the OVUII offense in the language of the statute is insufficient and that an OVUII charge is defective unless it specifically alleges the public-road element -- should not be applied retroactively to defendants seeking relief on collateral review. Moreover, even if Wheeler applies retroactively to Christian's Rule 40 Petition, we conclude that given the heightened interest in finality that attaches to cases on collateral review, Christian must demonstrate exceptional circumstances to merit relief on his belated challenge to the sufficiency of his charge. Because 
1The Honorable Trudy K. Senda presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Christian cannot rely on the Wheeler rule, and because he does
 
not show exceptional circumstances meriting relief, we affirm the
 denial of his Rule 40 Petition. 
BACKGROUND
 
On February 20, 2008, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai
'i (State) charged Christian by written complaint with (1) 
OVUII as a highly intoxicated driver, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3) and (b)(2) (2007) (Count I); and (2) Disobedience to Police Officer, in violation of HRS § 291C-23 (2007) (Count II). The State's OVUII charge tracked the language of the offense statute and did not allege the public-road element required under Wheeler -- that Christian had operated or assumed actual physical control of his vehicle "upon a public way, street, road, or highway." The State charged Christian in Count I as follows: 
On or about the 16th day of January, 2008, in the
County of Kauai, State of Hawaii, [Christian] did,
while under the influence of an intoxicant,
operate or assume actual physical control of a
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair his normal mental
faculties or ability to care for himself and guard
against casualty and/or with 0.8 or more grams of
alcohol per two hundred ten liters of breath
thereby committing the offense of Operating a
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant in
 violation of Sections 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (3) of
the Hawaii Revised Statutes. [Christian] is
subject to sentencing in accordance with Section
291E-61(b)(2) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes,
where [Christian] was a highly intoxicated driver
as defined in Section 291E-1 of the Hawaii Revised
 Statutes at the time this offense was committed.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Pursuant to a plea agreement, Christian entered a no
 
contest plea to the OVUII charge in Count I, and Count II was
 
dismissed with prejudice. The District Court accepted
 Christian's no contest plea and sentenced him to pay a $700 fine
 plus fees and assessments. The District Court entered its
 Judgment on June 24, 2008. Christian did not challenge the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
sufficiency of the OVUII charge at trial or appeal his
 
conviction.
 
On August 23, 2010, Christian filed his Rule 40
 
Petition in the District Court. In his Rule 40 Petition,
 Christian relied upon Wheeler in arguing that his conviction
 should be vacated. On January 31, 2011, the District Court
 denied Christian's Rule 40 Petition pursuant to its "Findings of
 Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying HRPP Rule 40 Petition
 for Post-Conviction Relief" (Order Denying Rule 40 Petition). 
The District Court concluded that:
 
[T]he Wheeler court recognized that different principles
apply when the issue of sufficiency of the charge/complaint
are first raised in a post-conviction setting and that under
2
the "Motta/Wells[ ] post-conviction liberal construction
rule," the court will liberally construe charges challenged
for the first time on appeal. In the instant case, this
court concludes that the "presumption of validity" for
charges challenged subsequent to a conviction would require
a showing by [Christian] of prejudice.
 
Christian timely appealed from the District Court's Order Denying
 
Rule 40 Petition.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
HRS § 291E-61(a) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty; 
. . . [or] 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 291E-1 (2007), in turn, defines the term
 
"operate" as used in HRS § 291E-61 to mean "to drive or assume
 
2See State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90-91, 657 P.2d 1019,
1019–20 (1983); State v. Wells, 78 Hawai 'i 373, 381, 894 P.2d 70,
78 (1995). 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
actual physical control of a vehicle upon a public way, street,
 
road, or highway[.] (Emphasis added.) 
In Wheeler, the supreme court concluded that the common 
understanding of the term "operate" did not give fair notice of the term's statutory definition, which included the geographical requirement that the OVUII offense occur "upon a public way, street, road, or highway" as an essential element of the offense. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i at 391-95, 219 P.3d at 1178-82. The supreme 
court therefore held that charging in the language of the offense statute and using the term "operate" in Wheeler's OVUII charge, without also specifically alleging the public-road element included in the term's statutory definition, rendered Wheeler's OVUII charge deficient. Id. 
Relying on Wheeler, Christian argues in this appeal 
that his OVUII charge is similarly deficient because the State failed to specifically allege the public-road element. Christian further argues, relying on State v. Cummings, 101 Hawai
'i 139, 
142-43, 63 P.3d 1109, 1112-13 (2003), that the deficiency in his OVUII charge was a jurisdictional defect that rendered his conviction a nullity. 
The State concedes that Christian's charge was
 
deficient under the "new standard" announced in Wheeler, but
 argues that we should not apply the Wheeler rule retroactively to
 cases on collateral review. We agree. 
We further conclude that prior to Wheeler, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court had implicitly held that Christian's OVUII charge was sufficient by directing the entry of judgment based on the same charging language. See State v. Ruggiero, 114 Hawai'i 227, 
240-41, 160 P.3d 703, 716-17 (2007); State v. Kekuewa, 114 Hawai
'i 411, 425-26, 163 P.3d 1148, 1162-63 (2007). Indeed, in 
State v. Walker, 126 Hawai 'i 475, 273 P.3d 1161 (2012), the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court acknowledged that Wheeler announced a new 
charging rule when Wheeler held that the public-road element was not encompassed within the term "operate," but must be specifically alleged. The Walker court stated that "[t]he 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
current essential elements that the State must include in an
 
OVUII charge differ from those required in 2007 at the time of
 the Ruggiero and Kekuewa decisions" and that "post-Wheeler, OVUII
 charges must now allege the attendant circumstance that the
 defendant operated a vehicle 'on a public way, street, road, or
 highway.'" Id. at 490, 273 P.3d at 1176. 
As explained below, the Wheeler charging rule does not
 
retroactively apply to Christian's collateral attack of his OVUII
 conviction. Under cases existing prior to Wheeler, Christian
 cannot show that he is entitled to collaterally attack his
 conviction based on the failure of his OVUII charge to
 specifically allege the public-road element. Moreover, Christian
 does not satisfy the increased burden that we conclude is
 properly placed on a defendant who challenges the sufficiency of
 his or her charge for the first time on collateral review.
 Accordingly, we affirm the District Court's Order Denying Rule 40
 Petition.
 
II.
 
We review the denial of Christian's Rule 40 Petition, 
which was based on the District Court's conclusions of law, de novo. See Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 493, 
496 (2007). 
A. 
We first consider whether the Wheeler charging rule 
should be applied retroactively to Christian's Rule 40 Petition. In Jess, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court discussed the analytical 
framework for deciding whether, and to what extent, a new rule announced in a judicial decision should be applied retroactively. The Jess decision announced a new charging rule which required the State to allege aggravating extrinsic facts as well as aggravating intrinsic facts in a charging instrument when seeking an extended term of imprisonment. Jess, 117 Hawai
'i at 400-01, 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
184 P.3d at 152-53.3 In determining whether the new rule should
 
be given retroactive effect, the supreme court stated that
 
although retroactive application of judicial decisions is
 generally assumed, "such application is not automatic, because
 the Constitution neither prohibits nor requires retrospective
 effect." Id. at 401, 184 P.3d at 153 (internal quotation marks
 
and citation omitted). 
The supreme court concluded that it was "free to apply
 
decisions with or without retroactivity[.]" Id. (internal
 
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). It described
 the options regarding the extent to which a new judicial rule
 could be given retroactive effect as follows: (1) purely
 prospective effect, under which the new rule only applies to
 future cases and does not apply to the parties in the law-making
 decision or to conduct or events occurring before that decision;
 (2) limited or pipeline retroactive effect, under which the new
 rule applies to the parties in the decision and all cases on
 direct review or not yet final on the date of the decision; or
 (3) full retroactive effect, under which the new rule applies
 "both to the parties before the court and to all others by and
 against whom claims may be pressed[.]" Id. (internal quotation
 
marks and citation omitted). In deciding which retroactivity
 option is appropriate, the court "weigh[s] the merits and
 demerits of retroactive application of the particular rule in
 light of (a) the purpose of the newly announced rule, (b) the
 extent of reliance by law enforcement authorities on the old
 standards, and (c) the effect on the administration of justice of
 a retroactive application of the new standards[.]" Id. at 401­
02, 184 P.3d at 153-54 (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted).
 
B.
 
3Previously, the State had been required to allege
aggravating intrinsic facts, but not aggravating extrinsic facts,
when seeking an extended term of imprisonment. See Jess, 117 
Hawai'i at 400-01, 184 P.3d at 152-53. 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A threshold question is whether Wheeler announced a new 
rule because "[i]t is only when the law changes in some respect 
that an assertion of nonretroactivity may be entertained[.]" James B. Beam Distilling Co. v. Georgia, 501 U.S. 529, 534 (1991). We conclude, in light of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's 
pre-Wheeler decisions in Ruggiero and Kekuewa, that Wheeler announced a new rule regarding whether charging in the language of the OVUII offense statute would be sufficient to charge a first-time OVUII offense. 
Ruggiero was charged with OVUII in language that, as
 
relevant to our analysis, is indistinguishable from the language
 used in Christian's OVUII charge. Ruggiero's OVUII charge, which
 was quoted in the supreme court's opinion, alleged:
 
That on or about the 10th day of March, 2004,
in the Division of Wailuku, County of Maui, State
of Hawai
'i, ADAM M. RUGGIERO did operate or assume
actual physical control of a vehicle while underthe influence of an intoxicant meaning that he wasunder the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental facultiesor ability to care for himself and guard againstcasualty, thereby committing the offense ofOperating a Vehicle Under the Influence of anIntoxicant in violation of Section 291E–61 of the Hawai
'i Revised Statutes. 
Ruggiero, 114 Hawai 'i at 229 n.3, 160 P.3d at 705 n.3 (brackets 
omitted). As with Christian's OVUII charge, Ruggiero's charge 
alleged the statutorily defined term "operate," but did not specifically allege the public-road element. Ruggiero was convicted of the OVUII charge and given an enhanced sentence as a repeat offender. Id. at 229–31, 160 P.3d at 705–07. On appeal, 
Ruggiero challenged his enhanced sentence as a repeat offender. The supreme court concluded that Ruggiero's prior OVUII conviction was an elemental attendant circumstance and therefore Ruggiero could not be sentenced as a repeat offender because his prior conviction had not been alleged in the charge and proven at trial. Id. at 293, 160 P.3d at 715. 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The supreme court then went on to consider whether
 
Ruggiero could be sentenced as a first-time offender. The court
 
held that Ruggiero could be sentenced as a first-time offender
 because his OVUII charge could "reasonably be construed" to
 charge OVUII as a first offense. Id. at 240, 160 P.3d at 716.
 
The court stated:
 
the complaint can reasonably be construed to charge the
crime of [OVUII] as a first offense, in violation of HRS §
291E–61(a) and (b)(1). It plainly states the elements set
forth in HRS § 291E–61(a) ("operates or assumes actual
physical control of a vehicle") and –61(a)(1) ("while under
the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair
the person's normal mental faculties or ability to care for
the person and guard against casualty").
 
Id. (emphasis added; brackets omitted). The court accordingly
 
remanded the case to the trial court for entry of a judgment of
 conviction for OVUII as a first offense and resentencing in
 accordance therewith. Id. at 241, 160 P.3d at 717.
 
Like Ruggiero, Kekuewa was charged with OVUII in
 
language that, for purposes of our analysis, is indistinguishable
 from Christian's OVUII charge, in that Kekuewa's charge alleged
 the statutorily defined term "operate," but did not specifically
 allege the public-road element. Kekuewa's charge, which was
 quoted in the supreme court's opinion, alleged that:
 
on or about the 15th day of April 2004, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, island of Oahu, you did
operate or assume actual physical control of a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to
 impair your normal mental faculties or the ability to care
for yourself and guard against casualty thereby violating
Section 291E–61 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes for your
second offense.
 
Kekuewa, 114 Hawai 'i at 415, 163 P.3d at 1152 (emphasis added; 
emphasis in original omitted). The supreme court affirmed this 
court's determination that Kekuewa could not be convicted as a repeat offender because his charge failed to sufficiently allege the attendant circumstance of his prior conviction. Id. at 423, 
163 P.3d at 1160. The supreme court, however, stated that the charge against Kekuewa set forth the essential elements of OVUII as a first offense. Id. at 426, 163 P.3d at 1163. The supreme 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court therefore held that this court should have remanded the
 
case for entry of a judgment of conviction and resentencing for
 OVUII as a first offense, instead of reversing Kekuewa's
 conviction. Id. at 425-26, 163 P.3d at 1162-63.
 
C.
 
As noted in Wheeler, Ruggiero and Kekuewa did not 
challenge the sufficiency of their charges on the specific ground that the charges failed to alleged the public-road element and thus the supreme court's opinions in Ruggiero and Kekuewa did not establish clear precedent on this question for stare decisis purposes. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i at 399, 219 P.3d at 1186. 
Nevertheless, by quoting the charges in Ruggiero and Kekuewa and then directing entry of judgment of conviction on the charges for OVUII as a first offense, the supreme court implicitly held and concluded that the charges in Ruggiero and Kekuewa were sufficient to charge OVUII as a first offense. Indeed, in Ruggiero, the supreme court stated that "the complaint can reasonably be construed to charge the crime of [OVUII] as a first offense, in violation of HRS § 291E–61(a) and (b)(1)." See 
Ruggiero, 114 Hawai
'i 240, 160 P.3d at 716. Moreover, if the 
sufficiency of a charge is jurisdictional, then the supreme court should not have directed the entry of judgment of conviction on the charge if the charge was insufficient. 
Accordingly, Ruggiero and Kekuewa implicitly approved
 
the charging language used in those cases and provided persuasive
 authority that such language, which used the terms of the offense
 statute without specifically alleging the public-road element,
 was sufficient to charge OVUII as a first offense. We therefore
 conclude that Wheeler announced a new rule for purposes of
 determining whether the decision should be applied retroactively. 
See Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 301 (1989) ("[A] case announces
 a new rule if the result was not dictated by precedent existing
 at the time the defendant's conviction became final."). 
III.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has already rejected the 
option of giving purely prospective effect to the Wheeler rule, 
and it has thus far given the Wheeler rule limited or pipeline retroactive effect. The supreme court applied the announced charging rule to Wheeler and also applied the Wheeler rule to cases pending on direct review. The question presented by Christian's Rule 40 Petition is whether the Wheeler rule should be given "full retroactive effect" and apply to cases on collateral review. By "Wheeler rule," we mean the holding that an OVUII charge is deficient if it charges in the language of the offense statute (HRS § 291E-61(a)) without specifically alleging the public-road element. 
Applying the factors set forth in Jess for determining
 
the extent to which a newly announced rule should be given
 retroactive effect, we conclude that limited or pipeline
 retroactive effect is sufficient and that full retroactive effect
 would be inappropriate. As noted, the factors to consider are: 
"(a) the purpose of the newly announced rule, (b) the extent of
 reliance by law enforcement authorities on the old standards, and
 (c) the effect on the administration of justice of a retroactive application of the new standards[.]" Jess, 117 Hawai
'i at 401­
02, 184 P.3d at 153-54 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The purpose of the Wheeler rule is to ensure that
 
defendants charged with OVUII receive fair notice of the public-
road element so they can adequately prepare their defense. This
 purpose is furthered by applying the Wheeler rule to Wheeler and
 cases on direct appeal, which the supreme court has already done. 
There does not appear to be a compelling need to apply the
 Wheeler rule retroactively to cases that are already final. It
 would be unusual for an OVUII prosecution to arise from the
 operation of a vehicle on a non-public road. In addition,
 although pre-Wheeler, the State routinely charged OVUII by
 tracking the offense language without alleging the public-road
 element, there is no indication that the State, the trial court,
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
or the defendants were generally unaware of the State's
 
obligation to prove the public-road element, or that defendants
 driving on non-public roads were being convicted of OVUII. 
Moreover, as discussed below, the other factors in the
 retroactively analysis strongly weigh against giving the Wheeler
 rule full retroactive effect and applying it to cases on
 collateral review. 
The second factor is the extent of reliance by law
 
enforcement authorities on the old standards. The significant
 number of appeals involving charges filed pre-Wheeler, in which
 the State charged in the language of HRS § 291E-61(a) and did not
 specifically allege the public-road element, indicates that the
 State's reliance on the language of the OVUII charges implicitly
 approved by the supreme court in Ruggiero and Kekuewa was high. 
Indeed, it appears that in cases filed after Ruggiero and
 Kekuewa, the State routinely charged in the language of the
 offense statue without specifically alleging the public-road
 element.
 
The third factor, the effect on the administration of 
justice of a retroactive application of the new standards, weighs heavily against giving Wheeler full retroactive effect. OVUII is a frequently charged offense that is aimed at deterring conduct presenting a grave risk to public safety -- driving while impaired by alcohol or drugs -- and it appears that the State's standard practice was to charge the OVUII offense without alleging the public-road element. The public-road element was added to the offense of OVUII through statutory amendments in 2000 that resulted in the repeal of the former law and the enactment of HRS § 291E-61. See Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i at 392 
n.11, 219 P.3d at 1179 n.11 (explaining the origin of the public-road element). Prior to the 2000 amendment, the former OVUII law did not require proof of a public-road element. Id. As the 
State argues, applying Wheeler retroactively to cases on collateral review "would impose a heavy burden on the judicial system because potentially all OVUII convictions, going back to 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2000, when the present version of HRS § 291E-61(a) was enacted,
 
could be vacated." (Emphasis in original.)4 Moreover, giving
 
the Wheeler rule full retroactive effect would place at risk
 OVUII convictions that have long been final, even where the
 defendant was not prejudiced by the failure to specifically
 allege the public-road element in his or her OVUII charge.
5
 
Weighing the applicable factors, we conclude that full
 
retroactive application of Wheeler to cases on collateral review
 is not warranted. The State's reasonable reliance on Ruggiero
 and Kekuewa in charging the OVUII offense, and the significant
 disruption to the administration of justice that would result if 
OVUII convictions that had already become final are subject to
 wholesale invalidation, convinces us that giving the Wheeler rule
 limited or pipeline retroactive effect is sufficient and
 appropriate.
 
IV.
 
Even if the asserted deficiency in Christian's charge
 
is properly characterized as a jurisdictional defect, that would
 not require applying the Wheeler rule retroactively to
 Christian's collateral attack of his conviction. In United
 States v. Cuch, 79 F.3d 987 (10th Cir. 1996), the federal court
 of appeal for the Tenth Circuit considered whether a United
 States Supreme Court decision affecting the federal court's
 jurisdiction to try the defendants for criminal offenses should
 be applied retroactively on collateral review. Prior to the
 Supreme Court's decision in Hagen v. Utah, 510 U.S. 399 (1994),
 
4It appears that although enacted in 2000, the effective
date of the new HRS § 291E-61 was January 1, 2002, see Wheeler,
121 Hawai 'i at 392 n.11, 219 P.3d at 1179 n.11, and so all
convictions based on OVUII after January 1, 2002, could be atrisk. 
5For purposes of this discussion, we assume the retroactive
application of the Wheeler charging rule without considering the
effect of the Motta/Wells liberal construction standard or the
imposition of a higher standard for collateral review, which we
discuss infra.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Tenth Circuit had held that the lands on which defendants had
 
committed their crimes were part of the Ute Indian Tribe's Uintah
 Reservation. Cuch, 79 F.3d at 988. However, in Hagen, the
 
Supreme Court determined that the lands in question were not part
 of the Unitah Reservation. Id. The effect of the Hagen
 
decision, if applied retroactively to the defendants'
 prosecutions, would be that the State of Utah, not the federal
 government, had jurisdiction over crimes committed on the lands
 where defendants had committed their crimes. Cuch, 79 F.3d at
 
988.
 
The Tenth Circuit held that "based on principles of
 
finality and fundamental fairness[,]" the retroactive application
 of subject matter jurisdiction rulings could be limited so that
 they would not apply to invalidate criminal convictions on
 collateral review. Id. at 990-91. It stated that in Gosa v.
 
Mayden, 413 U.S. 655 (1973), the United States Supreme Court
 refused to retroactively apply its prior decision -- that
 constitutional restraints deprived military courts of
 jurisdiction to try individuals for non-service related crimes -­to invalidate convictions on collateral review. Cuch, 79 F.3d at
 
990. The Tenth Circuit further stated that the Supreme Court has
 
emphasized that "'the principle of finality . . . is essential to
 the operation of our criminal justice system'" and that
 [c]onsequently,
 
"the interest in leaving concluded litigation in a
state of repose . . . may quite legitimately be
found by those responsible for defining the scope
of the writ [of habeas corpus] to outweigh in
some, many, or most instances the competing
interest in readjudicating convictions according
to all legal standards in effect when a habeas
petition is filed."
 
Id. at 991 (ellipsis points in original; brackets omitted)
 
(quoting Teague, 489 U.S. at 306, 309 (1989)). The Tenth Circuit
 noted that "[t]his overriding interest in finality is a primary
 factor distinguishing collateral review from direct review for
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
due process purposes." Id. at 991 n.8. The Tenth Circuit held
 
that the retroactive application of the Hagen decision to the
 
defendants' collateral attack was not warranted and affirmed the
 denial of the defendants' claims on collateral review. Id. at
 
995.
 
V.
 
Applying the law pre-Wheeler to Christian's Rule 40 
Petition, we conclude that he is not entitled to relief. In Walker, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court acknowledged that Wheeler had 
effectively changed the law regarding OVUII charging as it had existed under its 2007 decisions in Ruggiero and Kekuewa. The court stated that "[t]he current essential elements that the State must include in an OVUII charge [post-Wheeler] differ from those required in 2007 at the time of the Ruggiero and Kekuewa decisions." Walker, 126 Hawai
'i at 490, 273 P.3d at 1176. It 
further stated that "post-Wheeler, OVUII charges must now allege the attendant circumstance that the defendant operated a vehicle 'on a public way, street, road, or highway.'" Id. 
If the Wheeler rule is not retroactively applicable to 
Christian's Rule 40 Petition, we conclude that Ruggiero and Kekuewa would provide persuasive authority that Christian's OVUII charge was sufficient. In addition, because Christian did not object to the sufficiency of his charge during his trial proceedings, he would at least have to overcome the liberal construction standard. See State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90-91, 
657 P.2d 1019, 1019–20 (1983); State v. Wells, 78 Hawai
'i 373, 
381, 894 P.2d 70, 78 (1995). Under this standard, Christian has the burden of (1) showing prejudice from the defective charge or (2) that the charge "cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime." State v. Merino, 81 Hawai
'i 198, 212, 915 P.2d 672, 
686 (1996) (block quote format and citation omitted). 
Here, Christian does not argue that he was prejudiced
 
by the failure of his OVUII charge to allege the public-road
 element. In Ruggiero, the supreme court stated that Ruggiero's
 OVUII charge, which is substantively the same as Christian's
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
charge, "can reasonably be construed to charge the crime of 
[OVUII] as a first offense[.]" Ruggiero, 114 Hawai 'i at 240, 160 
P.3d at 716. Thus, applying the law as it existed pre-Wheeler to Christian's Rule 40 Petition, we conclude that he is not entitled to relief. 
VI.
 
In any event, given the interest in the finality of
 
criminal judgments challenged on collateral review, even assuming
 arguendo that Wheeler is applied retroactively to Christian's
 Rule 40 Petition, we conclude that he is not entitled to relief. 
The significant interest in the finality of judgments become even
 more compelling once the time and opportunity for a direct appeal
 has passed. "[T]he tardier the challenge, the more liberally and
 aggressively have indictments been construed so as to save them." 
United States v. Richardson, 687 F.2d 952, 962 (7th Cir. 1982). 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that a liberal 
construction standard applies when a defendant waits to challenge his conviction for the first time on direct appeal. See Motta, 
66 Haw. at 90-91, 657 P.2d at 1019–20; Wells, 78 Hawai
'i at 381, 
894 P.2d at 78. Under this liberal construction standard, a charge that would fail to pass muster if timely challenged in the trial court can nevertheless be found to be sufficient if challenged for the first time on direct appeal. Id. The Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court, however, has not specifically addressed how a challenge to the sufficiency of a charge raised for the first time on collateral review should be evaluated. 
Given the heightened interest in the finality of
 
judgments applicable to cases challenged on collateral review, we
 conclude that a higher burden should be placed on a defendant
 challenging the sufficiency of his or her charge for the first
 time on collateral review. Under this higher burden, we conclude
 that Christian must show exceptional circumstances in order to
 obtain relief. We adopt the standard applied by federal
 appellate courts in the Fifth and Eighth Circuits:
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"The sufficiency of an indictment or information is not open
to collateral attack after conviction unless it appears that
the circumstances are exceptional, that the questions raised
are of 'large importance,' that the need for the remedy
sought is apparent, and that the offense charged was one of
which the sentencing court manifestly had no jurisdiction."
 
United States v. Prince, 868 F.2d 1379, 1384 (5th Cir. 1989)
 
(brackets omitted) (quoting Keto v. United States, 189 F.2d 247,
 251 (8th Cir. 1951). Under this standard, we conclude that
 Christian has not shown that the deficiency in his OVUII charge
 entitles him to relief on collateral review. 
A. 
In Teague, the United States Supreme Court recognized
 
the importance of finality to the criminal justice system. The
 Court stated:
 
Without finality, the criminal law is deprived of much of
its deterrent effect. The fact that life and liberty are at
stake in criminal prosecutions shows only that conventional
notions of finality should not have as much place in
criminal as in civil litigation, not that they should have
none. If a criminal judgment is ever to be final, the
notion of legality must at some point include the assignment
of final competence to determine legality.
 
Teague, 489 U.S. at 309 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and
 
citations omitted; emphasis in original). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has applied finality 
principles in civil cases to reject collateral attacks on
 judgments. In Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai
'i 128, 254 
P.3d 439 (2011), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court rejected the 
plaintiff's argument that her divorce decree was void under
 Hawai
'i Family Court Rules Rule 60(b)(4) because "her marriage 
was bigamous and therefore violated prohibitory law, and that the
 marriage was therefore void ab initio pursuant to HRS § 1-6." 
Id. at 143, 254 P.3d at 454. The supreme court explained:
 
Assuming arguendo that the question of whether a
marriage is valid goes to the family court's jurisdiction to
enter a divorce, [the plaintiff's] challenges to the family
court's jurisdiction would have been relevant had she raised
them in the divorce proceedings or in a direct appeal.
However, on a Rule 60(b)(4) motion, the principle of
finality narrows the scope of review. Because the family
court had "power to adjudicate the issues in the class of
suits to which the case belongs," i.e., divorce proceedings,
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
its judgment is not subject to collateral attack pursuant to
HFCR Rule 60(b)(4).
 
Id. (emphasis added; footnote and citations omitted). 
Accordingly, the supreme court upheld the family court's denial
 of the plaintiff's motion under Rule 60(b)(4). Id. at 144, 254
 
P.3d at 455. 
The strong interest in the finality of criminal
 
judgments, particularly after the opportunity for direct appeal
 has passed, also underlies the provision in HRPP Rule 40 that
 generally precludes a criminal defendant from raising an issue in
 an HRPP Rule 40 petition that the defendant failed to raise on
 direct appeal. HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides, in relevant part,
 that
 
an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have been
raised . . . on appeal . . . and the petitioner is unable to
prove the existence of extraordinary circumstances to
justify the petitioner's failure to raise the issue. There
 is a rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a
ruling or to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding
failure.
 
B.
 
Federal courts have imposed stringent standards when a
 
defendant challenges the sufficiency of an indictment or
 
information on collateral review. As noted, the Fifth and Eighth
 Circuits have applied the following test:
 
The sufficiency of an indictment or information is not open
to collateral attack after conviction unless it appears that
the circumstances are exceptional, that the questions raised
are of 'large importance,' that the need for the remedy
sought is apparent, and that the offense charged was one of
which the sentencing court manifestly had no jurisdiction.
 
Prince, 868 F.2d at 1384 (quoting Keto, 189 F.2d at 251). In
 
justifying this test, the Eighth Circuit explained:
 
The orderly administration of criminal justice demands
that a defendant who is dissatisfied with the form or
 
substance of an indictment or information filed against him
shall make that known to the trial court at or before the
 time when sentence is imposed, and shall appeal from any
judgment which he contends is based upon a defective
indictment or information. It would create an intolerable
 
situation if defendants, after conviction, could defer their
attacks upon indictments or informations until witnesses had
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
disappeared, statutes of limitation had run, and those
charged with the duty of prosecution had died, been
replaced, or had lost interest in the cases.
 
Keto, 189 F.2d at 251 (emphasis added).
 
We conclude that the test applied by the Fifth and
 
Eighth Circuits fairly balances the interest in finality with the
 
interest served by permitting a defendant to collaterally attack
 his or her conviction and sentence. Accordingly, we adopt this
 test in evaluating challenges to the sufficiency of a charge
 raised for the first time on collateral review. 
C.
 
Applying this test to Christian's Rule 40 Petition, we
 
conclude that Christian failed to satisfy the test. Here,
 Christian's circumstances are not exceptional. Christian does
 not claim that he suffered any prejudice from the failure of his
 OVUII charge to specifically allege the public-road element. 
Indeed, he does not contend that he was driving on a non-public
 road or that the State's failure to allege the public-road
 element affected the preparation of his defense in any way. He
 does not maintain that he was actually innocent of the OVUII
 offense. He was not sentenced to incarceration and he is not in
 custody. For these same reasons, Christian has not shown that
 the question he raises regarding the sufficiency of his OVUII
 charge are of large importance or that the need for the remedy he
 seeks, the voiding of his conviction, is apparent. 
Finally, we conclude that Christian failed to show that 
the offense charged was one of which the sentencing court
 manifestly had no jurisdiction. Even assuming that a deficient
 
6
charge is jurisdictional,  Christian failed to show that his
6In State v. Cummings, 101 Hawai 'i 139, 142-43, 63 P.3d
1109, 1112-13 (2003), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court concluded that a
charge that failed to adequately allege an essential element
contained "a substantive jurisdictional defect." We note that a number of federal and state courts "have abandoned the view that an insufficient charge constitutes a jurisdictional defect."State v. Apollonio, 130 Hawai
'i 353, ---, 311 P.3d 676, 691 & n.5
(continued...)
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
charge was so deficient that the trial court manifestly had no
 
jurisdiction. As noted, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated in 
Ruggiero that a charge, which was substantively the same as
 Christian's charge, could "reasonably be construed to charge the
 crime of [OVUII] as a first offense[.]" That statement, combined
 with the liberal construction standard applicable where a 
defendant fails to challenge the sufficiency of his or her 
charge in the trial court and the heightened interest in finality
 where the charge is challenged for the first time on collateral
 review, convinces us that Christian's charge was not so deficient
 that the trial court manifestly lacked jurisdiction. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the District
 
Court's Order Denying Rule 40 Petition. 
On the briefs:
 
Daniel G. Hempey
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
Tracy Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kaua
'i 
for Respondent-Appellee 
6(...continued)
(2013) (Recktenwald, C.J., concurring and dissenting) (citingcases). Moreover, in Wheeler, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court did not
characterize the failure to allege the public-road element as ajurisdictional defect, and other recent supreme court decisionshave indicated some uncertainty over whether defects in a chargeshould be viewed as jurisdictional. See State v. Nesmith, 127 
Hawai
'i 48, 66, 276 P.3d 617, 635 (2012) (Acoba, J. concurring
and dissenting) (describing majority opinion); Apollonio, 130Hawai
'i at ---, 311 P.3d at 688-91 (Recktenwald, C.J., concurring
and dissenting). In any event, Cummings involved a charge thatwas objected to as insufficient during trial and was challengedas insufficient on direct appeal, and Cummings therefore did notaddress the issue raised here of the challenge to the sufficiencyof a charge raised for the first time on collateral attack. 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
21
 