 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR   PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-18-0000893 10-MAY-2024 07:52 AM Dkt. 88 SO 
NO. CAAP-18-0000893  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
EBBTIDE, LLC., an Oregon limited liability company,  
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,  
v.  
HAWAIIAN EBBTIDE HOTEL, INC.,  a  Hawaii corporation,  
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee  
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
HONOLULU DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 1RC181005026)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By:   Nakasone, Presiding Judge, McCullen and  Guidry, JJ.)  
This is a summary possession case. Defendant-
Appellant/Cross-Appellee Hawaiian Ebbtide Hotel, Inc. ( HEH) 
appeals from three post-judgment orders entered by the District 
Court of the First Circuit's ( district court): (1) October 16,   
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2018 Order Granting Defendant [HEH's] Motion to Reconsider and 
to Set Aside Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession, 
Filed September 24, 2018, and Oral Motion to Dismiss ( Order); 
(2) October 30, 2018 Order Denying [HEH's]  Motion for Attorneys'  
Fees and Costs ( Attorneys'  Fees Order ); and (3) November 8, 2018 
Order Denying HEH's Motion to Reconsider and/or Set Aside Denial 
of [HEH's]  Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs ( Order Denying 
Reconsideration ).  Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Ebbtide, 
LLC (Ebbtide) cross-appeals from those same three post-judgment 
orders.  21 
HEH argues three points of error on appeal, all which 
relate to the district court's denial of attorney's fees. HEH 
argues that the district court erred in denying HEH's: (1) 
motion for fees and costs; (2) first motion to reconsider/set 
aside its denial o f HEH's motion for fees and costs; and (3) 
second motion to reconsider /set aside its denial of HEH's motion 
for fees and costs.3 Ebbtide raises one point of error on 
1 The Honorable Michael K. Tanigawa presided. 
2 Ebbtide filed its complaint for summary possession, in August 
2018, seeking, inter alia , a judgment terminating its lease agreement with 
HEH (the Lease), and a writ of possession removing HEH from the subject 
property. The operative Lease was the Amended and Restatement of Lease, 
entered into on December 21, 2000. The district court entered its Judgment 
for Possession and Writ of Possession in Septembe r 2018. HEH subsequently 
filed its Motion to Reconsider and to Set Aside Judgment for Possession and 
Writ of Possession. 
3 HEH's Notice of Appeal did not designate the November 23, 2018 
Order Denying Defendants' [Second] Motion to Reconsider and/or Set Aside 
(continued . . .) 
2   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal, arguing that "[t]he District Court erred in its [] Order 
in holding that it lacked jurisdiction over the case and thus 
granting HEH's Motion to Set Aside Judgment for and Writ of 
Possession." 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve HEH 
and Ebbtide's points of error as follows:4 
(1) Ebbtide contends that the district court erred in 
concluding that it lacked jurisdiction over Ebbtide's summary 
possession action. Ebbtide filed its complaint pursuant to 
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 666-1 (2016),5 which gives the 
3  (. . .continued)  
Court Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Reconsider and/or Set Aside Denial 
of Defendant's Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs, as an order being 
appealed. We therefore decline to address HEH's third point of error. 
Chun  v. Bd. o f Trs. of Emps.  Ret. Sys. of the State of Haw ., 92 Hawaiʻ i 432, 
448, 992 P.2d 127, 14 3  (2000)  (ruling that because appellants "did not, in 
.  . . their notices of appeal, designate the . . . order as an order from 
which an appeal was being taken, they have not properly appealed it .").  
4 We review the point of error raised in Ebbtide's cross -appeal 
first. 
5   HRS § 666 -1 states,  
Whenever any lessee or tenant of any lands or tenements, or 
any person holding under the lessee or tenant, holds 
possession of lands or tenements without right, after the 
termination of the tenancy, either by passage of time or by 
reason of any forfeiture, under the conditions or covenants 
in a lease, or, if a tenant by parol, by a notice to quit 
of at least ten days, the person entitled to the premises 
may be restored to the possession thereof in [the] manner 
hereinafter provided. 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
district court authority to grant summary possession on the 
termination or forfeiture of a lease. 
Pursuant to HRS § 604-5(d)  (2016), "the district 
courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor actions in 
which the title to real estate comes into question[.]" Id. In 
Queen Emma Found. v. Tingco, 74 Haw. 294, 845 P.2d 1186 (1992), 
the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court clarified that "HRS chapter 666, the 
summary possession statute, was enacted to provide an expedient 
remedy to restore a landlord to the possession of his premises 
when it is clear that the tenant holds nothing more than a 
possessory interest  in the property." Id.  at 304, 845 P.2d at 
1190-91 (emphasis added).  
In determining whether a lease involves a question of 
title, as opposed to a mere possessory interest , the Tingco 
court considered, inter alia , the "anticipated [] long-term 
relationship between lessor and lessees, that enabled and 
required lessees to build their residences" and construct 
"improvements" on the leased land, and that "provide[d] the 
lessees with the right to assign and mortgage the lease without 
the approval and consent of the lessor." Id. at 301, 845 P.2d 
at 1189. 
The district court, applying the Tingco factors, 
determined, 
4   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with respect to the issue of jurisdiction, I think I do 
have to decide that. 
I find that –-I looked not only at the term of the 
lease, but the –-I mean the duration of the lease, but the 
specific terms of the lease, and, honestly , the ability to 
mortgage without consent makes it seem very much like 
something more than just a possessory interest. 
I do not think that there was a conveyance of title 
of any kind, but the mortgage without consent was I think 
for me the tipping point in addition to the duration of the 
lease. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: The motion to dismiss is granted without 
prejudice, since it's just based upon the jurisdiction of 
the court, not the merits of the case itself.  
We review the district court's jurisdictional ruling 
de novo, as a question of law, under the right/wrong standard. 
Lingle v. Haw. Gov't  Emps.  Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, 
107 Hawaiʻ i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005). Applying this 
standard, we conclude that the district court was not wrong in 
determining that it lacked jurisdiction because the record 
reflects that the Lease conveyed to HEH more than a mere 
possessory interest in the subject property.  
The Lease granted HEH the right to "assign, mortgage, 
pledge, encumber or in any manner transfer [the] lease" without 
Ebbtide's prior written consent, subject to certain enumerated 
conditions. Moreover, HEH was permitted to and, in some cases, 
required to perform "improvements" on the subject property.6 
6   Section 6, Maintenance and Repair of Improvements  of the Lease 
provides, in pertinent part,  
(continued . . .)  
5   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, it appears that, as in Tingco, HEH had "marketable 
property interests" in the subject property.7 Tingco, 74 Haw. at 
301, 845 P.2d at 1189. 
We conclude that the district court was not wrong in 
determining that the Lease conveyed to HEH more than a mere 
possessory interest in the subject property, such that the 
district court lacked jurisdiction over Ebbtide's summary 
possession action. 
6 (. . .continued) 
(b) [HEH] shall undertake structural alterations to 
the Improvements only for the purpose of keeping the 
Improvements in good condition and repair or for the 
purpose of erecting new Improvements of equal or higher 
fair market value as the existing Improvements . . . 
(Emphasis added.) 
Section 14, Surrender of the Lease, provides, in pertinent part, 
Upon the expiration or earlier termination of the term of 
this Lease, all Improvements then located on the Premises 
shall, with the Premises, be vacated and surrendered free 
of all liens by Lessee to Lessor and shall become the 
property of Lessor . . . it nevertheless being understood 
that upon expiration or termination, title to the 
Improvements shall automatically vest in Lessor by 
operation of law and no Lessee's execution of a bill of 
sale or assignment requested by Lessor shall in any manner 
be deemed a condition precedent to the automatic vesting of 
title. 
(Emphasis added.) 
7   We note that the dispositive issue is whether HEH held property 
rights in the land "beyond mere possession," not whether the Lease was 
specifically a long -term lease of residential property. Tingco, 74 Haw. at 
301, 845 P.2d at 1189.  
6   
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) HEH contends that the district court erred in 
denying attorneys' fees to HEH. In its Attorneys' Fees Order, 
the district court stated, 
Motion for fees and costs is premature. Dismissal was 
without prejudice. No determination was made on the merits 
and therefore there is no prevailing party. 
We review the district court's denial of attorneys' fees under 
the abuse of discretion standard. Chun v. B d. of Trs. of Emps.' 
Ret. Sys. of the State of Haw ., 106 Hawaiʻi 416, 431, 106 P.3d 
339, 354 (2005). 
As the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has instructed,  
[u]sually the litigant in whose favor judgment is rendered 
is the prevailing party. Thus, a dismissal of the action, 
whether on the merits or not, generally means that 
defendant is the prevailing party. There is no requirement 
that the judgment in favor of the prevailing party be a 
ruling on the merits of the claim.  
Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawaiʻi 46, 49, 961 P.2d 611, 614 (1998) 
(cleaned up). See  also  Sheehan v. Grove Farm Co., Inc., 
114  Hawaiʻi 376,  395  163 P.3d 179, 198  (App. 2005) ("The holding 
of Wong  is clear on its face: any dismissal, regardless of 
basis, generally renders the defendant the prevailing party for 
purposes of awarding costs (and attorneys' fees).").  8
(continued . . .) 
7 8   In Oahu Publications, Inc. v. Abercrombie, 134 Hawai ʻi 16, 
332  P.3d 159 (2014), the Hawai ʻi Supreme Court affirmed the general principle 
that "the litigant in whose favor judgment is rendered is the prevailing 
party[,]" and "[t]here is no requirement that the judgment in favor of the 
prevailing party be a ruling on the merits." Id.  at 24, 332 P.3d at 167 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Wong, 88 Hawai ʻi at 49, 961 P.2d 
at 614). On the facts before it, however, the court concluded that the 
appellee was not a "prevailing party" on appeal where the appeal was 
dismissed without prejudice to the appellant filing another appeal after a    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pursuant to the controlling caselaw, we conclude that 
the district court abused its discretion in declining to address 
HEH's fees motion on the erroneous basis that there was no 
prevailing party. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district 
court's October 16 , 2018 Order Granting Defendant [HEH's] Motion 
to Reconsider and to Set Aside Judgment for Possession and Writ 
of Possession, and we vacate the district court's October 30, 
2018 Attorneys' Fees Order and November 8, 2018 Order Denying 
Reconsideration. We remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, May 10, 2024.  
On the briefs: 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Dallas Walker Presiding Judge 
for Defendant -Appellant/ 
Cross-Appellee /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
Randolph R. Slaton 
Kristi L. Arakaki /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
for Plaintiff -Appellee/ Associate Judge 
Cross-Appellant 
8 (. . .continued) 
flaw in the judgment was corrected. Id. at 25-26, 332 P.3d at 168 -69. The 
court reasoned that "the ICA's dismissal of the first appeal did not finally 
resolve the . . . case," and "[t]he [appellant] was free to file a second 
appeal once the circuit court corrected the judgment[.]" Id. at 25, 332 P.3d 
at 168. Here, unlike in Oahu Publications , the district court's dismissal, 
on jurisdictional grounds, finally resolved the district court case. 
8 