NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000158
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSEPH CALARRUDA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 06-1-1337)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joseph Calarruda (Calarruda)
 
appeals from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(Amended Judgment) filed on October 13, 2010, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai» i (State) charged 
Calarruda with being a felon in possession of a firearm (Count I) and ammunition (Count II). A jury found Calarruda guilty as charged of both counts. The Circuit Court sentenced Calarruda on 
1 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
each count to ten years of incarceration, with a mandatory 
minimum term of three years and four months as a repeat offender, and imposed the sentences to run concurrently. Calarruda's original judgment was entered on October 5, 2007. On appeal from the original judgment, this court concluded that there was sufficient evidence to support Calarruda's convictions. State v. 
Calarruda, No. 28880, slip op. at 2, 2009 WL 1060465, at *1 (Hawai» i App. April 21, 2009) (summary disposition order) 
(hereinafter, Calarruda I ). We further concluded, however, that 
Calarruda could not be sentenced on both counts because multiple punishments were not authorized under the facts of the case. Id. 
at 2-3, 2009 WL 1060465, at *2. We vacated the original judgment and remanded the case "for dismissal of either Count I or Count 
II at the State's option, and for resentencing on the remaining count." Id.  at 3, 2009 WL 1060465, at *2. 
On remand, the Circuit Court, at the State's request,
 
"took no further action" on Count II, and it resentenced
 Calarruda to ten years of incarceration with a mandatory minimum
 term of three years and four months on Count I. On October 13,
 2010, the Circuit Court entered its Amended Judgment. 
I. 
On appeal, Calarruda argues that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in resentencing him to the same mandatory
 minimum term of three years and four months on Count I, instead
 of a reduced mandatory minimum term. In support of his argument,
 Calarruda asserts that "[t]he trial court employed a rigid
 refusal to consider the defendant's contentions" in resentencing
 
him. We disagree with Calarruda's arguments, and we affirm his
 conviction and the sentence imposed on remand on Count I.
 
"A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in 
imposing a sentence." State v. Kahapea , 111 Hawai» i 267, 278, 
141 P.3d 440, 451 (2006) (block quote format, brackets, and 
citation omitted). We review a court's sentencing decisions to 
determine "whether the court committed plain and manifest abuse 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of discretion in its decision." Id. (block quote format and
 
citation omitted). 
Based on his conviction on Count I and his prior
 
criminal history, Calarruda was subject to a mandatory minimum
 
term of three years and four months as a repeat offender pursuant
 to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 706-606.5(1) (Supp. 2006). 
Calarruda sought a reduction in his mandatory minimum term
 pursuant to HRS ÿÿ 706-606.5(5) (Supp. 2006), which gave the
 Circuit Court discretionary authority to impose a reduced
 mandatory minimum term "where the court finds that strong
 mitigating circumstances warrant such action." 
Our review of the record does not support Calarruda's
 
claim that "[t]he trial court employed a rigid refusal to
 
consider [Calarruda's] contentions." Instead, the record shows
 that the Circuit Court considered Calarruda's contentions but
 determined that they did not constitute strong mitigating
 circumstances warranting a reduction in his mandatory minimum
 term. See HRS § 706-606.5 (1), (5). Among other things, the
 
Circuit Court's decision was supported by the circumstances
 underlying Calarruda's conviction on Count I and his prior
 criminal history. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 abuse its discretion in resentencing Calarruda to a mandatory
 minimum term of three years and four months on Count I.
 
We note that in Calarruda I, we remanded the case for
 
dismissal of either Count I or Count II and for resentencing on
 the remaining count. The State did not file a motion for
 reconsideration of our decision in Calarruda I  or apply for a
 
writ of certiorari. On remand, the Circuit Court did not dismiss
 
Count II, but, at the State's request, "took no further action"
 on Count II. We express no view on whether absent our remand
 instructions in Calarruda I , the Circuit Court's "take no further
 
action" remedy would have been a permissible response to the
 
multiple punishment issue. However, the Circuit Court's actions
 
did not comply with our remand instructions in Calarruda I .
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We affirm Calarruda's Count I conviction and the
 
sentence imposed by the Circuit Court on Count I. We remand the
 
case with instructions that the Circuit Court dismiss Count II
 and enter an amended judgment which reflects that dismissal. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, December 27, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 