NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000636 09-JAN-2024 07:49 AM Dkt. 108 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000636 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
EBBTIDE, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
HAWAIIAN EBBTIDE HOTEL, INC., Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-3090-12) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
Defendant-Appellant Hawaiian Ebbtide Hotel, Inc. 
(
Hawaiian Hotel) appeals from the June 24, 2019 Judgment on Jury 
Verdict (Judgment) and July 23, 2019 Amended Judgment on Jury 
Verdict (Amended Judgment), both entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
1 in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee 
Ebbtide, LLC (Ebbtide) and against Hawaiian Hotel. Hawaiian 
Hotel also challenges the Circuit Court's August 12, 2019 Order 
Denying [Hawaiian Hotel's] [ Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure 
1 The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(HRCP)] Rule 59 Motion for New Trial, (Order Denying Motion for 
New Trial) entered by the Circuit Court. 
Hawaiian Hotel raises four points of error, contending 
that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it entered the 
Order Denying Motion for New Trial because: 
(1) a jury is not 
permitted under Hawai# i law to award equitable relief; (2) the 
jury was improperly instructed on the legal standard applicable when awarding the equitable relief of lease termination; (3) the jury's factual determinations were insufficient to support equitable relief here; and (4) Hawaiian Hotel's attorney, 
Christopher Woo (
Woo), was unfit to act as trial counsel, 
constituting an extraordinary circumstance warranting exceptional 
relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6).2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Hawaiian Hotel's points of error as follows: 
(1) "In an action involving equitable claims, the jury 
may render a verdict which the court may use as an advisory aid in making findings of fact." Bd. of Directors of Ass'n of 
2 HRCP Rule 60(b)(6)(2022) states, in pertinent part: 
Rule 60. RELIEF FROM JUDGMENT OR ORDER . 
. . . . 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud, etc . On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order,or proceeding for the following reasons: . . . (6) any otherreason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Apartment Owners of Regency Tower Condo. Project v. Regency Tower 
Venture, 2 Haw. App. 506, 513, 635 P.2d 244, 249 (1981). 
"Equity courts may decide both fact and law, [and] they may,
if they see fit, refer doubtful questions of fact to a jury. . . but such a verdict is not binding upon the judgment ofthe court, it is advisory simply, and the court may
disregard it entirely or adopt it either partially or in 
toto." 
Honolulu Sav. & Loan Co. v. Reed, 40 Haw. 269, 273 (1953) 
(internal citations and brackets omitted). Here, the jury concluded that Hawaiian Hotel seriously or substantially breached its lease with Ebbtide, determined that money damages would not reasonably and adequately remedy the situation, and the subject lease should be terminated. However, the jury's determination concerning the equitable remedy of lease termination was not binding, and the Circuit Court could have chosen whether to accept it in whole or in part, or reject it. See id. The 
Circuit Court accepted the jury's verdict in its entirety. 
Nevertheless, HRCP Rule 52 requires a court, in all 
actions tried with an advisory jury, to find the facts specifically, and state separately its conclusions of law thereon. See HRCP Rule 52(a); see also Provident Funding 
Associates, L.P. v. Vimahi, No. 29797, 2010 WL 4491364, *2 (Haw. App. Nov. 10, 2010) (SDO) ("HRCP Rule 52(a) requires the court to issue findings of fact upon all actions tried upon the facts without a jury or with an advisory jury") (brackets and quotation marks omitted). Thus, although the Circuit Court had the discretion to accept the advisory jury's verdict, the Circuit 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court erred when it did not issue a separate findings of fact 
(FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs). Therefore, this case must 
be remanded to allow for the issuance of FOFs and COLs. 
(2) Hawaiian Hotel challenges the jury instructions 
appearing on pages 23,  31, and 32  of the court's written jury 
instructions. However, Hawaiian Hotel did not object to the 
challenged jury instructions. "Jury instructions 'to which no objection has been made at trial will be reviewed only for plain error.'" State v. Aganon, 97 Hawai# i 299, 302, 36 P.3d 1269, 
1272 (2001). 5 4 3
An appellate court should invoke the plain error 
doctrine in civil cases sparingly, and only when justice so requires. See Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 
Hawai#i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). In civil cases, 
"we have taken three factors into account in deciding
whether our discretionary power to notice plain error oughtto be exercised: (1) whether consideration of the issue notraised at trial requires additional facts; (2) whether itsresolution will affect the integrity of the trial court'sfindings of fact; and (3) whether the issue is of greatpublic import." 
3 The jury instruction on page 23 reads: "If a lessee substantially
or seriously breaches the terms of a lease, the lessor is entitled toreasonable and adequate relief." 
4 The jury instruction on page 31 reads: "If the lessee has engaged
in willful, intentional or grossly negligent conduct, the lease may beterminated. If the lessee has not engaged in willful, intentional or grosslynegligent conduct, relief other than termination may be granted." 
5 The jury instruction on page 32 reads: "To justify a termination
of a lease, the breach must have been serious or substantial." 
4  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. (internal brackets and citation omitted). Upon review of 
these factors, we consider whether the Circuit Court plainly erred with respect to the challenged jury instructions. 
Hawaiian Hotel argues that the instruction on page 23 
improperly suggests that if there is any breach of the lease, the 
plaintiff is entitled to any form of relief that the jury decides 
is reasonable and adequate. However, the first clause of the 
jury instruction "[i]f a lessee substantially or seriously breaches the terms of a lease. . ." undermines Hawaiian Hotel's argument, as reasonable and adequate relief would only be available for a serious or substantial breach. Additionally, Hawaiian Hotel does not offer support for an alternative jury instruction. Thus, we conclude that this argument is without merit. 
Next, Hawaiian Hotel challenges the jury instruction on 
page 31, which reads "[i]f the lessee has engaged in willful, intentional or grossly negligent conduct, the lease may be terminated. If the lessee has not engaged in willful, intentional or grossly negligent conduct, relief other than termination may be granted." Hawaiian Hotel argues that this is an incorrect or materially incomplete statement of the law, pointing to Food Pantry, Ltd. v. Waikiki Business Plaza, Inc., which states "where the lessee's breach has not been due to gross negligence, or to persistent and wilful conduct on his part, and the lessor can reasonably and adequately be compensated for his 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injury, courts in equity will generally grant relief." 58 Haw. 
606, 614, 575 P.2d 869, 876 (1978). However, a proper articulation of the law from Food Pantry appears on page 30 of the final jury instructions: 
"
If a breach has occurred but has not been due to gross
negligence, or not been due to persistent and willful
conduct by the lessee, and the lessor can reasonably andadequately be compensated for its injury, money damageslegally caused by the breach will generally be granted to
the lessor.
" 
The jury instruction on page 31 simply appears to be a 
different way of phrasing the rule from Food Pantry to facilitate 
the jury's understanding. Second, the omitted clause on page 31 of the jury instruction is contingent on the lessee's breach not being due to gross negligence or persistent and willful conduct. Here, the jury found that the breach was due to gross negligence and persistent and willful conduct. Lastly, the verdict form asked whether the jury believes that money damages can reasonably and adequately remedy the situation, to which the jury answered no. Thus, based on the jury instructions as a whole, we conclude that Hawaiian Hotel's challenge is without merit. 
Hawaiian Hotel argues that the Circuit Court plainly 
erred in instructing the jury that "[t]o justify a termination of a lease, the breach must have been serious or substantial." (Emphasis added). To justify a termination of a lease, "the 
breach must have been 'material,' 'serious,' 'substantial,' or 
the like[.]" Aickin v. Ocean View Investments Co., Inc.
, 84 
Hawai#i 447, 461, 935 P.2d 992, 1006 (1997) (emphasis added). In 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other words, a finding of any one or more of these alternatives 
can avoid the harsh result of a termination based on a merely technical or minor breach. See id. Here, the jury found that a 
termination of the lease was warranted based on the instruction that termination must be based on a serious or substantial breach, either of which would be sufficient to justify termination. On the special verdict form, the jury indicated, more than once, that Hawaiian Hotel's breach of lease was serious or substantial. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not plainly err in giving this instruction. 
(3) Hawaiian Hotel argues that the jury's factual 
determinations were insufficient to support the equitable remedy of termination of lease because there was no finding that Hawaiian Hotel's breach was "material, serious, substantial, or the like." As discussed above, we conclude that a finding that the breach was serious or substantial was sufficient to justify a termination of lease. Accordingly, we conclude that this argument is without merit. 
(4) Hawaiian Hotel argues that the Judgment and 
Amended Judgment should be set aside because Mr. Woo's unfitness to act as trial counsel amounts to an exceptional circumstance under Rule 60(b)(6) to warrant relief, citing U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n v. Salvacion, which states "HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) provides for extraordinary relief and is only invoked upon a showing of exceptional circumstances." No. 30594, 2011 WL 1574585, *6 (Haw. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
App. Apr. 26, 2011) (mem. op.). This court has recognized the 
possibility relief could be granted under the rule based on 
extreme conduct of civil trial counsel. See City and County of 
Honolulu v. Bennett, 2 Haw. App. 180, 183, 627 P.2d 1136, 1139 
(1981). 
"If we were to hold that in civil cases the failure to 
introduce an exhibit or exhibits by a party's counselwas the ground for setting aside a judgment, we wouldbe opening the gates to a veritable flood of appealsby disappointed litigants of whom there is at leastone in every case. It might be that a case couldarise of such extreme aggravation with respect to theconduct of counsel that a trial court, in itsdiscretion, would set aside a judgment in a civil caseunder Rule 60(b)(6)."
Id. 
Hawaiian Hotel offered several alleged instances 
during trial that they believed warranted extraordinary relief. 
The first is that Woo allegedly failed to inform the Circuit Court or Hawaiian Hotel that Woo's license to practice law was suspended between March 1, 2019, and April 23, 2019. 
However, 
Woo's suspension began after the trial had been completed and Hawaiian Hotel has not established that this suspected suspension 
warranted extraordinary relief.
   6
The Circuit Court carefully considered and addressed 
each of the other issues raised by Hawaiian Hotel and concluded 
that under the totality of the circumstances before the court, the extraordinary relief requested by Hawaiian Hotel was not 
6 The trial took place between February 11-21, 2019. Additionally,
we note that Woo's license was suspended for non-payment or late payment of
bar dues, not the type of conduct that would necessarily indicate an inabilityto competently represent a client prior to the suspension. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
warranted. Upon review, we cannot conclude that the Circuit 
Court abused its discretion in denying Hawaiian Hotel's request for relief pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(6). 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 24, 2019 
Judgment and July 23, 2019 Amended Judgment are vacated only on the grounds that the Circuit Court failed to enter FOFs and COLS. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, January 9, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
Richard T. Forrester,Matthew P. Holm, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
(Forrester Legal, LLLC), Associate Judge
for Defendant-Appellant. 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Jerrold K. Guben, Associate Judge
Randolph R. Slaton,Kristi L. Arakaki,(O'Connor Playdon Guben &
Inouye LLP),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
9 