 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000303 20-NOV-2023 08:02 AM Dkt. 75 MO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000303 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I  
JOHN A. FREUDENBERG, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Respondent-Appellee, and
CLARE E. CONNORS in her Official Capacity as
Attorney General for the State of Hawai# i,
Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(S.P.P. NO. 1PR191000018 (CR NOS. 1PC000057543 and 1PC000057327))
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.)
 
 
Self-represented Petitioner-Appellant John A. 
Freudenberg (Freudenberg) appeals from the Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Amended Petition to Vacate, 
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody, entered on March 15, 2021 (Order Denying Rule 40 
Petition), in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (First Circuit Court).
1 
I. BACKGROUND 
On July 22, 1982, a grand jury indicted Freudenberg for 
thirty-three felonies, including rape, sodomy, attempted rape, 
1 The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
burglary, attempted burglary, and sexual abuse. On September 15, 
1982, Freudenberg was indicted for three additional felonies of attempted rape, burglary, and attempted sodomy. On November 30, 1983, Freudenberg pleaded guilty to all thirty-six charges. In the first case, the First Circuit Court sentenced Freudenberg to life imprisonment on the ten counts of rape, sodomy, and attempted rape; twenty years on the seventeen counts of burglary and attempted burglary; and ten years on the six counts of sexual abuse. In the second case, the First Circuit Court sentenced Freudenberg to life imprisonment on the two counts of attempted rape and attempted sodomy, and twenty years on the burglary count. 
The Hawaii Paroling Authority (HPA) initially set 
Freudenberg's minimum terms of imprisonment at twenty years on the rape, sodomy, attempted rape, burglary and attempted burglary convictions, and ten years on the attempted sexual abuse charges from the first case; and twenty years on the convictions in the second case.
2 In 1990, the HPA reduced Freudenberg's twenty-year 
minimum terms to fourteen-year minimums in both cases. 
Freudenberg became eligible to be considered for parole 
in July of 1996, and Freudenberg submits that he has completed the State of Hawaii's (State's) Sex Offender Treatment Program 
and Behavior Modification Program. Despite applying for parole numerous times since July of 1996, Freudenberg has not been granted parole. 
2 In 1986, rape, sodomy, and other sexual offenses were incorporated
into a series of sexual assault offenses. See State v. Buch, 83 Hawai #i 308,
315, 926 P.2d 599, 606 (1996). 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 24, 2005, Freudenberg, self-represented, 
filed a civil action against the State in the Circuit Court of 
the Third Circuit (Third Circuit Court), in Civil No. 05-1-0015. 
Freudenberg requested various damages and other relief, including 
that he be transferred to the prison work furlough program. On August 23, 2005, the Third Circuit Court dismissed the complaint without prejudice. 
On June 17, 2014, Freudenberg filed a complaint against 
the Director of the State Department of Public Safety (
DPS) and 
Deputy Director of Corrections at DPS, in the United States District Court for the District of 
Hawai#i (Federal District 
Court), under Civil No. 14-000276 DKW-KSC, arguing that the State 
officials violated 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by repeatedly denying 
Freudenberg's requests to participate in the work furlough program, which Freudenberg alleged was a condition precedent to his parole. The Federal District Court dismissed the complaint, ruling that Freudenberg failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, because he failed to identify any federally-protected right that was violated. 
Freudenberg v. Sakai
, Civil No. 14-00276 DKW-KSC, 2014 WL 
4656485, at *1-2 (D. Haw. Sept. 16, 2014) (Order). 
On August 28, 2019, in the proceeding underlying this 
appeal, Freudenberg filed a petition for relief pursuant to Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 with the First 
Circuit Court (Rule 40 Petition) arguing that, by refusing to 
fairly consider him for parole, HPA and DPS violated his: (1) 
Due Process rights under article I, section 5 of the Hawai# i 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Constitution; (2) Equal Protection rights under article I, 
section 5 of the Hawai# i Constitution; (3) right to be free from 
cruel and unusual punishment under article I, section 12 of the Hawai#i Constitution; (4) Due Process rights under the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution; (5) Equal Protection rights under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution; and (6) right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Freudenberg filed an amended HRPP Rule 40 petition on November 21, 2019 (Amended Rule 40 Petition). 
Freudenberg alleged that HPA denied him parole twenty-
three times between September of 1996 and July of 2019, and that each time, HPA recommended that Freudenberg complete the work furlough program to be eligible for parole. Freudenberg alleged that, since September of 1996, he filed at least eight requests for admission to the work furlough program with DPS. DPS allegedly denied Freudenberg's applications despite rating him as "'community custody,' the lowest custody level," holding him in a low-security facility, and allowing him to work in the community on numerous occasions. 
Freudenberg further alleged that he believes that other 
inmates convicted of sexual offenses, who are diagnostically rated as greater risks than him and have completed the Sex Offender Treatment Program, have been admitted to work furlough. 
However, even though he completed the Sex Offender Treatment 
Program and Behavioral Modification Program, and met all written eligibility requirements of DPS for work furlough, DPS would not 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
allow him into the work furlough program. Freudenberg alleged 
that DPS gave him no reason at all or provided "blatantly pretextual justifications" for denying him admission to the work furlough program, such as claiming that DPS needed to make changes or improvements to its program before he would be admitted. 
On December 20, 2019, the State answered the Amended 
Petition, denying that Freudenberg's state and federal constitutional rights were violated by his continued imprisonment. By reference to its answer to the original petition, the State further argued that Freudenberg's claims have been waived or previously ruled upon and Freudenberg does not have a right to parole. 
On March 15, 2021, the First Circuit Court denied the 
Amended Rule 40 Petition without a hearing. The First Circuit Court concluded, inter alia: 
2. The factual basis, arguments, and claims raised
by Petitioner in the United States District Court in 2014
are the same being raised in this current Petition as listedin Petitioner's issues four [Fourteenth Amendment DueProcess], five [Fourteenth Amendment Equal Protection] andsix [Eighth Amendment]. As noted in the Findings of Fact,Petitioner's claims in the United States District Court were dismissed with prejudice for failure to state a claim uponwhich he could obtain relief under either the 8
th or 14th 
Amendment. Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(a)3, these same issuesshall be denied as they were previously raised and ruledupon. 
3. Similarly, Petitioner's prior filing for
injunctive relief and damages under Civil No. 05-1-0015which addressed issues one through three and the subsequentdismissal by the Third Circuit Court is a basis for denyingthe remainder of this current Petition pursuant to HRPP Rule40(a)3. 
4. Assuming, for argument sake, that issues one
through three were not previously ruled upon, the followingaddresses the issues raised. 
5. Petitioner in issue number one is alleging a
violation of his Due Process Rights under Article 1, section 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 of the Hawai #i Constitution. Hawai #i Rules of Penal 
Procedure Rule 40 is the appropriate means to challenge an
HPA decision denying parole. However, the IntermediateCourt of Appeals of Hawai #i (hereinafter ICA) in Turner v. 
Hawai #i Paroling Authority, 93 Hawai #i 298, 1 P.3d 768 (App.
2000), held that the courts may review a decision denyingparole in situations where the parole board has failed toexercise any discretion at all or arbitrarily andcapriciously abused its discretion so as to give rise to adue process violation or has otherwise violated anyconstitutional rights of the prisoner. Judicial review of a parole board's decision denying parole is very limited andnarrow. 
6. The Hawai #i Supreme Court in De La Garza v.
State, 302 P.3d 697, 129 Hawai #i 429 (2013) held that
procedural due process claims should be addressed in twosteps: 1. Whether a liberty or property interest has beeninterfered with by the State. 2. What specific proceduresare required to satisfy due process. 
7. In his due process claim, Petitioner is
asserting that he has a liberty interest in parole. The Hawai #i Supreme Court in Williamson v. Hawai #i Paroling
Authority, 35 P.3d 210, 97 Hawai #i 183 (2001) reviewed
Hawai #i Revised Statutes Section 353-62 regarding the
responsibilities and duties of the HPA and Hawai #i Revised 
Statutes Section 706-669 regarding the establishment ofminimum terms and held that the HPA has the authority to seta prisoner’s minimum term at a period equal to his or hermaximum sentence. The Court stated, "even where the HPArenders a prisoner effectively ineligible for parole bysetting his minimum term at a period equal to his maximumsentence, the prisoner has been "considered for parole". Id at 218. The Court in its decision made it clear that there is a right to be considered for parole, not a right toparole. Petitioner has had numerous parole hearings. Thus,he has been considered for parole, but Petitioner has noright to parole. With no liberty interest in a right toparole, Petitioner has not met the first step in aprocedural due process claim and therefore there is no needfor any further analysis. 
8. It should be noted that in regard to
Petitioner's numerous parole hearings, Petitioner has notprovided any evidence that there was a defect in the hearingprocess. 
9. The United States Supreme Court has also ruled
that there is no constitutional or inherent right to beconditionally released from prison before the expiration ofa valid sentence.  Greenholtz v. Inmates of Nebraska Penal & 
Correctional Complex, 442 U.S. 1,7, 99 S.Ct. 2100, 22103, 60L.ED.2d 668, 675 (1979). By both the State and FederalConstitutions, Petitioner has no right to parole. 
10. Petitioner in issue number two is alleging an
Equal Protection Rights violation under Article 1, Section 5of the Hawai #i Constitution. Other than the allegation that
he believes that "all other inmates convicted of sexual 
offenses who have successfully completed the Sex OffenderTreatment Program and were otherwise qualified for workfurlough have been, and continue to be, admitted to workfurlough, including some inmates who were diagnosticallyrated as greater risks than Petitioner", Petitioner has not 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provided any facts or evidence, such as specific inmate
names and records of similarly situated inmates. Therefore his claim is conclusory and without merit. 
11. In issue number three, Petitioner is alleging
that his continued imprisonment, is a violation of his rightto be free from Cruel and Unusual Punishment under Article 1, Section 12 of the Hawai #i Constitution. Petitioner is 
not challenging his convictions or sentences and is in factstill serving his sentences in both Cr. No. 57327 and Cr. 
No. 57543. The actions of PSD and HPA of denying workfurlough and parole have not extended Petitioner's sentence.There is no cruel and unusual punishment because Petitionerhas not been detained beyond his sentence. 
12. As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a
Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief where thepetition states a colorable claim. To establish a colorable claim, the allegations of the petition must show that, iftaken as true, the facts alleged would change the verdict,however, a petitioner's conclusions need not be regarded astrue. Where examination of the record of the trial court proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations showno colorable claim, it is not error to deny the petitionwithout a hearing. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai #i 423, 427, 879
P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
13. Accordingly, this Court finds the entire Petition
to be without merit, patently frivolous, and without a traceof support either in the record or from anything submittedby Petitioner. 
Freudenberg timely filed a notice of appeal on April 
13, 2021. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Freudenberg raises four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the First Circuit Court erred in: (1) entering Conclusions of Law (COLs) 2-3 because the issues raised in the 
Rule 40 Petition and the Amended Rule 40 Petition were not the 
issues as raised in the prior actions before the Third Circuit Court and the Federal District Court and the issues raised in the Third Circuit Court were never ruled upon; (2) entering COLs 5-9 and 12-13 because his Due Process rights were violated; (3) entering COLs 10 and 12-13 because his Equal Protection rights were violated; and (4) entering COLs 11-13 because he has been subjected to cruel and unusual punishment. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Review of orders denying HRPP Rule 40 petitions is de 
novo. Lewi v. State
, 145 Hawai#i 333, 345, 452 P.3d 330, 342 
(2019). 
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule
40 petition for post-conviction relief where the petition
states a colorable claim. To establish a colorable claim,the allegations of the petition must show that if taken astrue the facts alleged would change the verdict, however, apetitioner's conclusions need not be regarded as true.Where examination of the record of the trial court's proceedings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show
no colorable claim, it is not error to deny the petition
without a hearing. The question on appeal of a denial of aRule 40 petition without a hearing is whether the trialrecord indicates that Petitioner's application for reliefmade such a showing of a colorable claim as to require ahearing before the lower court. 
Id. (citation omitted; format altered). 
IV. DISCUSSION A. Previously Ruled Upon 
In COL 2 of the Order Denying Rule 40 Petition, the 
First Circuit Court concluded that Freudenberg's contentions based on the Eighth 
 and Fourteenth Amendments to the United 
States Constitution were previously ruled upon by the Federal District Court in 2014. In COL 3, the First Circuit Court  
similarly concluded that Freudenberg's contentions based on article I, sections 5 and 12 of the 
Hawai#i Constitution should 
be denied because they were previously raised in the Third Circuit Court and dismissed. 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides: 
(3) INAPPLICABILITY . Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruledupon or were waived. Except for a claim of illegalsentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly andunderstandingly failed to raise it and it could have beenraised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in ahabeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually 
8     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated under
this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove theexistence of extraordinary circumstances to justify thepetitioner's failure to raise the issue. There is a rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling orto raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure. 
We conclude that the First Circuit Court did not err in 
concluding that Freudenberg's claims based on the Fourteenth and 
Eighth Amendments were raised and ruled upon in the Federal District Court proceedings. In his federal court suit, Freudenberg claimed that the defendants violated 42 U.S.C. § 1983 by repeatedly denying him access to a prison work furlough program, which he contended was a condition precedent to his parole. Freudenberg, 2014 WL 4656485, at *1. The Federal 
District Court dismissed his complaint on the grounds that Freudenberg did not raise a valid 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claim because he failed to identify any federally protected right that was violated. Id. at *2. The Federal District Court concluded that 
Freudenberg's continued confinement and ineligibility for parole did not amount to over-detention or cruel and unusual conditions of confinement or any other conduct in violation of the Eighth Amendment because he was not detained beyond his life sentence. Id. at *3. Likewise, there were no violations of Freudenberg's Due Process or Equal Protection rights under the Fourteenth Amendment because prisoners have no constitutionally-protected liberty interest in their eligibility for rehabilitative programs, and allowing an Equal Protection challenge would undermine the defendants' inherent discretion in administering the work furlough program. Id. at *3-5. The issues ruled upon 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the Federal District Court are essentially identical to claims 
raised in this case based on the United States Constitution. 
The First Circuit Court did not conclude that 
Freudenberg's claims based on the Hawai# i Constitution were 
barred by the Federal District Court's decision. Rather, the First Circuit Court concluded that Freudenberg's claims based on the 
Hawai#i Constitution should be denied based on the Third 
Circuit Court proceedings.3 The First Circuit Court erred in 
doing so. 
First, no proceedings were actually conducted and ruled 
upon. By definition, a dismissal without prejudice allows for initiation of a new case raising the same claims. State v. 
Kalani
, 87 Hawai#i 260, 262, 953 P.2d 1358, 1360 (1998). Given 
the lack of proceedings on the prior claims, and the Third Circuit Court's dismissal without prejudice, we cannot conclude that Freudenberg waived the claims raised therein based on the Hawai#i Constitution or that they were ruled upon. 
In addition, subsequent to the filing of Freudenberg's 
Third Circuit Court Complaint, Freudenberg was allegedly denied parole numerous times. 
Roughly fourteen additional years passed 
between the Third Circuit Court proceedings and the filing of the Rule 40 Petition herein. Freudenberg alleged that he has been denied access to the work furlough program multiple times over this period and that he was denied parole as a result. The Third Circuit Court did not decide, and Freudenberg did not waive, the 
3 The First Circuit Court nevertheless considered whether 
Freudenberg's state-law contentions stated a colorable claim for relief. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issue of whether Freudenberg's rights under the Hawai# i 
Constitution were violated with respect to parole denials issued 
after the August 23, 2005 dismissal in the Third Circuit Court case. 
Therefore, we conclude that Freudenberg's claims based 
on the Hawai#i Constitution cannot be considered to have been 
raised and ruled upon or waived in the prior action filed in the Third Circuit Court. 
B. Freudenberg's Colorable Claim for Relief 
As noted above, Freudenberg challenges the First 
Circuit Court's COLs concluding that he has not stated a colorable claim for relief under the 
Hawai#i Constitution based 
on Freudenberg's contention that he has been denied parole based on his failure to participate in a work furlough program. 
The 
Hawai#i Supreme Court reviewed a similar contention 
in 
Rapozo v. State
, 150 Hawai#i 66, 85-86, 497 P.3d 81, 100-01 
(2021). In 
Rapozo, the Rule 40 petitioner (Rapozo) argued, inter 
alia, that HPA wrongfully denied him parole based on his failure to complete the work furlough program, which was unavailable to him due to where he was incarcerated. Id. at 85, 497 P.3d at 
100. As noted by the supreme court (id.), Hawaii Revised 
Statutes § 353-64 (2015) states in part: 
[T]o be eligible for parole, the committed person, if the
person is determined by the department to be suitable forparticipation, must have been a participant in an academic,vocational education, or prison industry program authorizedby the department and must have been involved in orcompleted the program to the satisfaction of the departmentand must have been involved in or completed the program tothe satisfaction of the department[.] 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court concluded that HPA may properly deny 
parole based on a failure to participate in or complete a prison 
industry program, such as a work furlough program. Rapozo
, 150 
Hawai#i at 85, 497 P.3d at 100. However, the supreme court 
further concluded: 
Although the HPA recommended he participate in or
complete the work furlough program, Rapozo was never given
the opportunity to do so. It may be arbitrary andcapricious to deny an incarcerated person parole for failureto participate in a program while never giving them anopportunity to do so. Thus, Rapozo stated a colorableclaim, and the circuit court erred by denying this claimwithout a hearing. 
Id. at 86, 497 P.3d at 101.
 Here, on several occasions, including on August 18, 
2014, September 12, 2017, and August 8, 2018, Freudenberg was 
denied parole as follows: 
REASON FOR DENIAL: Your participation in work furlough
while incarcerated will significantly enhance your successon parole. 
As the supreme court reiterated in Rapozo, HPA has the 
discretion to grant or deny parole. Id. at 84, 497 P.3d at 99. 
However, 
Hawai #i courts may review "a decision denying parole in
situations where the parole board has failed to exercise anydiscretion at all, or 
arbitrarily and capriciously abused
its discretion so as to give rise to a due process violationor has otherwise violated any constitutional rights of theprisoner." Williamson [v. Hawaii Paroling Authority]
, 97
Hawaii # [183,] 195, 35 P.3d [210,] 222 [(2001)] (cleaned
up). 
Id. at 84-85, 497 P.3d at 99-100 (emphasis added; further 
citation omitted). 
Here, although HPA repeatedly identified lack of 
participation in a work furlough program as the reason for denying parole to Freudenberg, he was never given the opportunity to participate in a work furlough program. As the supreme court 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
held in Rapozo, "[i]t may be arbitrary and capricious to deny an 
incarcerated person parole for failure to participate in a program while never giving them an opportunity to do so." Id. at 
86, 497 P.3d at 101. Thus, we conclude that Freudenberg stated a colorable claim, and the First Circuit Court erred by denying Freudenberg's Amended Rule 40 Petition without a hearing on this ground. 
We nevertheless conclude that Freudenberg failed to 
allege a colorable claim for an Equal Protection Rights violation under article I, section 5 or for a violation of his right to be free from Cruel and Unusual Punishment under article I, section 12 of the Hawaii Constitution, as concluded by the First Circuit Court. V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, we vacate the March 15, 2021 Order 
Denying Rule 40 Petition with respect to Freudenberg's claim that his Due Process rights under article 1, section 5 of the 
Hawai#i 
Constitution were violated. We affirm the March 15, 2021 Order Denying Rule 40 Petition in all other respects. We remand this case to the First Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, 
Hawai#i, November 20, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
John A. Freudenberg,Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se. /s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge
Craig Y. Iha,Lisa M. Itomura, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Deputy Attorneys General, Associate Judge
for Respondents-Appellees. 
13 