NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000121
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ROMOLO B. SILVA, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Defendant-Appellee, and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2264)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Romolo B. Silva (Silva) appeals
 
from the February 18, 2011 "Judgment in Favor of Defendant State
 
of Hawaii Against the Plaintiff" entered by the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
Silva brought this case as a result of being 
erroneously listed as non-compliant on the State of Hawai 'i's 
(State) Sex Offender website. His complaint asserted causes of action for (1) negligence, (2) intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED), (3) negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED), (4) defamation, (5) abuse of process, and (6) interference with prospective business advantage (IPBA). In its motion for summary judgment, the State asserted judgment should be entered in its favor as it was immune from liability under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 846E-8 (Supp. 2013) and, with regard to the intentional torts alleged, it had not waived its sovereign immunity. In his Memorandum in Opposition to the State's Motion for Summary Judgment, Silva "agree[d] and 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consent[ed] to the dismissal" of his claims of Defamation and
 
Abuse of Process "pursuant to the express provisions of [HRS §]
 662-15(4)" (Supp. 2013).  Thus, only counts I, II, III, and VI
 
are at issue in this appeal.
 
In granting judgment in the State's favor, the Circuit
 
Court relied on the immunity provision contained in HRS § 846E-8
2
 
for good faith conduct and the exception to the State's waiver of
 sovereign immunity contained in HRS § 662-15(4).
3
 
On appeal, Silva challenges the Circuit Court's
 
decisions to grant summary judgment in the State's favor and to
 deny him leave to amend his complaint.
4
 
Based on a careful review of the issues raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the applicable authority and the
 record, we reject Silva's challenges and affirm.
 
1.	 Summary Judgment.
 
[An appellate] court reviews a trial court's grant of
summary judgment de novo. O'ahu Transit Servs., Inc. v.
Northfield Ins. Co., 107 Hawai' i 231, 234, 112 P.3d 717, 720
(2005). The standard for granting a motion for summary
judgment is well settled: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
 
2 Section 846E-8 of the chapter on Registration of Sex Offenders and
Other Covered Offenders and Public Access to Registration Information (Sex
Offender Registration Law) provides:
 
Good faith immunity.  Law enforcement agencies,
employees of law enforcement agencies, and state and county
officials shall be immune from liability for good faith
conduct under this chapter.
 
3	 HRS § 662-15 of the State Tort Liability Act provides:
 
Exceptions.  This chapter shall not apply to:
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Any claim arising out of assault, battery, false
imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution,
abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation,
deceit, or interference with contract rights[.]
 
4
 We note that, on August 25, 2011, Silva erroneously filed with
this court, "Petitioner-Plaintiff-Appellant Romolo B. Silva's Application ForTransfer of Case to the Supreme Court" that was erroneously coded as a"Memorandum" in the Judiciary Electronic Filing System and assigned docketnumber 33. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 40.2
(applications for transfer are filed "in the supreme court"). No action was taken on Silva's erroneous filing. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, [the appellate court] must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the
 light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Price v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai' i 106, 110, 111 P.3d
1, 5 (2005) (original brackets and citation omitted). 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai 'i 92, 104, 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
Before the Circuit Court, the parties agreed that the
 
facts were not in dispute. Rather, the issues turned on whether
 
Silva's causes of action were barred by the immunity statutes. 
We first address the applicability of HRS § 846E-8. 
Chapter 846E, "Registration of Sex Offenders and Other
 
Covered Offenders and Public Access to Registration Information"
 (Sex Offender Registration Law) provides immunity for state
 officials' "good faith conduct under this chapter." HRS § 846E­8. In support of its motion for summary judgment, the State
 presented to the Circuit Court the declaration of Jennifer Sablan
(Sablan), which stated that (1) Sablan was employed by the Hawaii
Criminal Justice Data Center of the Department of the Attorney
 General, that maintains the statewide depository of adult
 criminal history information called the Criminal Justice
 Information System (CJIS); (2) CJIS receives its information
 regarding the final disposition of every circuit and family court
criminal charge from the Hawaii Judicial Information System
 (HAJIS), which is composed of information inputted by each
 judge's staff; (3) CJIS generates a list of persons who are
 required to, but have not registered as sex offenders; (4) Sablan
is "responsible for verifying conviction information of persons
 convicted of a covered offense to determine if the offender
 qualifies for public dissemination under Chapter 846E, HRS[;]"
 and (5) Sablan does this verification by comparing the
 information contained in CJIS with that contained in HAJIS.
   
 
 
In Silva's case, Sablan stated that she did this
 
verification in 2007 by viewing the "count screens" in HAJIS,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that reported Silva had been convicted of three felony sexual
 
assaults in 2002. Based on this information and the fact that
 Silva had not registered with her office, she placed his name on
 the "Non-Compliant list" of their Sex Offender website. She also
 stated that placement on the list is based on the information
 provided by the Judiciary and neither she nor any other "employee
 within the Sex Offender Registration Unit had any reason to
 question the accuracy of the information provided by Judge
 Cardoza's office regarding the disposition of the charges against
 Mr. Silva until our office was notified in 2007" to the contrary
 by a representative of Silva. Silva's name was removed from the
 website three days later, after the information reported to her
 that Silva in fact had not been convicted of sex assaults, had
 been verified.
 On appeal, Silva does not address the immunity 
provision of the Sex Offender Registration Law directly, but in the context of his argument that he presented an actionable claim of negligence, he maintains that the State failed to present evidence that its employees acted in good faith with regard to him. Silva also argues that, given the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's 
decision in State v. Bani, 97 Hawai 'i 285, 36 P.3d 1255 (2001), 
the Sex Offender Registration Law is "void and unenforceable[,]" and that "the State should have shut down the Hawaii Criminal Justice Data Center's internet website or at the very least, set up a system whereby candidates for the sex offender registry would be given notice and an opportunity to be heard." Despite Silva's assertions and suggestions, he offers no authority beyond Bani for the premise that the Sex Offender Registration Law, as it existed in 2007 when he was added to the Non-Compliant List, remained unconstitutional. See Brown v. Thompson, 91 Hawai
'i 1, 
14, 979 P.2d 586, 599 (1999) (Construing the individual defendants' claim of qualified immunity under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and stating that "whether an official protected by qualified immunity may be held personally liable for an allegedly unlawful official action generally turns on the 'objective legal reasonableness' of the action, assessed in light of the legal 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rules that were 'clearly established' at the time it was taken.")
 
(citation and internal quotations marks omitted).
 
Since the 
Bani decision, the Hawai 'i State Legislature 
has amended the Sex Offender Registration Law on several
 occasions and the Hawai
'i State Constitution has been amended to 
provide for a right of the public to access information regarding
 sex offenders and offenders against children.
5 The 2005
 
amendments to HRS § 846E-3 were made to "[r]eplace[] pre-access
 hearings with the right to post-access hearings for offenders
 
seeking to end public access 
as the duration and nature of the
 
public access is based on the level of the offense committed." 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 600, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1339
 (emphasis added). Therefore, in 2007, when the State listed
 
Silva on its Sex Offender Registration website,
6
 the Sex Offender 
Registration Law provided,7
 at the individual's option, a post­
5 Art. I, § 24 (2004) of the Hawaii Constitution, titled "Public
Access to Information Concerning Persons Convicted of Certain Offenses Against
Children and Certain Sexual Offenses[,]" states that:
 
[t]he public has a right of access to registration
information regarding persons convicted of certain offenses
against children and persons convicted of certain sexual
offenses. The legislature shall determine which offenses are
subject to this provision, what information constitutes
registration information to which the public has a right of
access, the manner of public access to the registration
information and a period of time after which and conditions
pursuant to which a convicted person may petition for
termination of public access.
 
Haw. Const. art. I, § 24.
 
6 The 2006 version of the Sex Offender Law provided that its
registration and public access provisions would apply without regard to the
date of the covered offender's conviction. HRS §§ 846E-2(f) and 846E-3(h)
(Supp. 2006).
 
7 HRS § 846E-3 (c) through (f) (Supp. 2006) provided, in pertinent
part: 
(c) Public access to a covered offender's public
information shall be permitted with regard to each covered
offender beginning the next working day following the filing
of a judgment of conviction, a finding of unfitness to
proceed or an acquittal due to mental disease, disorder, or
defect, for a covered offense, or as soon thereafter as is
practical. When a notice of appeal has been filed, the
public information shall note that the covered offender has
filed a notice of appeal. The public information shall be
removed upon the reversal of the covered offender's
conviction or the granting of a pardon to the covered
offender. Public access shall continue until the expiration
of at least the following periods:
 
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7(...continued)
(1)	 Forty years after sentencing or release,
whichever is later, of a sexually violent
predator or a repeat covered offender with at
least two separate convictions for a crime for
which this chapter requires registration, one of
which is a felony;
 
(2) 	 Thirty years after sentencing or release,
whichever is later, of any covered offender who
has been convicted of an aggravated sexual
offense;
 
(3) 	 Twenty–five years after sentencing or release,
whichever is later, of any covered offender who
is not subject to paragraph (1) or (2), and
whose most serious covered offense conviction,
except for a conviction under section
707–730(1)(c), is a class A felony or its
non–Hawaii equivalent;
 
(4) 	 Fifteen years after a covered offender's date of
sentencing or release, whichever is later, for
those covered offenders who are not subject to
paragraphs (1) through (3) and whose most
serious covered offense conviction is a class B
 felony, or a conviction under section
707–730(1)(c), or its non–Hawaii equivalent; or
 
(5) 	 Ten years after a covered offender's date of
sentencing or release, whichever is later, for
those covered offenders who are not subject to
paragraphs (1) through (4) and:
 
(A) 	 Whose most serious covered offense
 
conviction is a class C felony or its
non–Hawaii equivalent; or
 
(B) 	 Have been convicted of a second or
 
subsequent misdemeanor covered offense
when all of the previous covered offenses
are also misdemeanors.
 
(d) Public access authorized by this section shall
be accomplished by the following methods:
 
(1) 	 Public access to the public information for each
covered offender subject to subsection (c),
paragraphs (1) through (4) shall be provided by
both public internet access and on–site public
access or;
 
(2) 	 Public access to the public information for each
covered offender subject to subsection (c),
paragraph (5) shall be provided by on–site
public access;
 
provided that on–site public access shall be provided for
each covered offender at the Hawaii criminal justice data
center and at one or more designated police stations in each
county, to be designated by the attorney general, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays, excluding
holidays.
 
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
public notification hearing, to terminate public access to the
 
registration information.
 
Whether the 2007 version of the Sex Offender
 
Registration Law is unconstitutional is a question we need not
 reach. It suffices to say that the effect of various changes to
 
7(...continued)
(e) After forty years have elapsed after release or
sentencing, whichever is later, for covered offenders
subject to subsection (c), paragraph (1); thirty years have
elapsed after release or sentencing, whichever is later, for
covered offenders subject to subsection (c), paragraph (2);
twenty-five years have elapsed after release or sentencing,
whichever is later, for covered offenders subject to
subsection (c), paragraph (3); fifteen years have elapsed
after release or sentencing, whichever is later for covered
offenders subject to subsection (c), paragraph (4); and ten
years have elapsed after release or sentencing, whichever is
later, for covered offenders subject to subsection (c),
paragraph (5), a covered offender may petition the court in
a civil proceeding to terminate public access. In the civil
proceeding to terminate public access, the State shall be
represented by the attorney general; provided that the
attorney general, with the prosecuting agency's consent, may
designate the prosecuting agency that prosecuted the covered
offender for the most recent covered offense within the
 State to represent the State. For covered offenders who have
never been convicted of a covered offense within the State
 of Hawaii, the attorney general shall represent the State;
provided that the attorney general, with the prosecuting
agency's consent, may designate the prosecuting agency for
the county in which the covered offender resides to
represent the State. The court may order this termination
upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the
covered offender:
 
(1) 	 Has had no new convictions for covered offenses;
 
(2) 	 Is very unlikely to commit a covered offense
ever again; and
 
(3) 	 Public access to the covered offender's public
information will not assist in protecting the
safety of the public or any member thereof;
 
provided that a denial by the court for relief pursuant to a
petition under this section shall preclude the filing of
another petition for five years from the date of the last
denial.
 
(f) If a covered offender has been convicted of only
one covered offense and that covered offense is a
 misdemeanor, the covered offender shall not be subject to
the public access requirements set forth in this section.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In 2006, the procedure for termination of public access contained
in subsection (e) was amended to provide for participation by the attorney
general or prosecutor. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 106, § 3 at 309.
 
7
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the law and the Hawai 'i Constitution8
 subsequent to Bani had not
been assessed by the courts before Silva was added to the Sex 
Offender website, leaving the constitutionality of the Sex Offender Registration Law an open question. 
Thus, Silva failed to demonstrate that, at the time
 
Sablan placed his name on the "Non-Compliant List," the Sex
 Offender Law was clearly invalid and therefore failed to rebut
 the State's showing that Sablan was acting in good faith when she
 listed Silva pursuant to that Law. Therefore, the immunity
 provision of HRS Chapter 846E applied to the State in this case
 and the Circuit Court was correct in granting summary judgment in
 the State's favor on this basis.
9
 
2. Motion to Amend Complaint
 
Silva argues that pursuant to Rule 15 of the Hawai 'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP), the Circuit Court erred in denying his Motion for Leave to Amend Complaint because "leave shall be freely given when justice requires." HRCP 15(a).
10 
Review of a trial court's denial of leave to amend is reviewed for abuse of discretion. Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co., 
116 Hawai
'i 159, 163, 172 P.3d 471, 475 (2007). "It is generally 
inappropriate to grant leave to amend a complaint while summary judgment is pending." Coplin v. Conejo Valley Unified Sch. 
Dist., 903 F. Supp. 1377, 1388 (C.D. Cal. 1995) cited with 
8 See supra note 5.
 
9 Our resolution of this issue makes it unnecessary to address the
other grounds relied upon by the Circuit Court.
 
10 HRCP Rule 15(a), Amended and Supplemental Pleadings, read, at the
time of Silva's motion:
 
(a) Amendments.  A party may amend the party's
pleading once as a matter of course at any time before a
responsive pleading is served or, if the pleading is one to
which no responsive pleading is permitted and the action has
not been placed upon the trial calendar, the party may so
amend it at any time within 20 days after it is served.
Otherwise a party may amend the party's pleading only by
leave of court or by written consent of the adverse party;
and leave shall be freely given when justice so requires. A
 party shall plead in response to an amended pleading within
the time remaining for response to the original pleading or
within 10 days after service of the amended pleading,
whichever period may be the longer, unless the court
otherwise orders.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
approval in Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp. v. Transamerica Ins. Co., 
89 Hawai 'i 157, 162, 969 P.2d 1275, 1280 (1998) (construing HRCP 
Rule 15(a)). 
Silva's Motion was brought almost fifteen months after
 
his complaint was filed and more than a month after the State's
 motion for summary judgment had been filed, and it sought to add
 a cause of action for a violation of his civil rights under
 42 U.S.C. § 1983. More importantly, it is well-established that
 "[u]nder § 1983, a state cannot be sued unless it has consented
 to be sued or has otherwise waived its sovereign immunity[,]" and
 "Hawaii has not waived its sovereign immunity from § 1983 damages
 liability" pursuant to HRS Chapter 662, the State Tort Liability
 Act. Makanui v. Dep't of Educ., 6 Haw. App. 397, 406, 721 P.2d
 
165, 171 (1986).
 
As the amendment Silva sought to make was barred as a 
matter of law, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Silva's motion to amend his complaint as such an amendment would have been futile. Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp., 
89 Hawai
'i at 166, 969 P.2d at 1284 ("the trial court does not 
abuse its discretion in refusing leave to amend where such an amendment would be futile"). 
Therefore, the February 18, 2011 Judgment entered by
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael Jay Green,
Glenn H. Uesugi, andScott K. Collins,for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Dennis K. Ferm and 
Carol M. Inagaki,Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-Appellee. 
9
 