NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000224
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JULIA CATHRYN BROUGHTON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0940)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Julia Cathryn Broughton (Broughton)
 
appeals from a February 20, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence (Judgment), which was entered by the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 After a jury-waived trial,
 
the Circuit Court convicted Broughton of Assault in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­
711(1)(g) (Supp. 2013).
 
Broughton raises two points of error on appeal: (1)
 
Broughton's conviction must be reversed where there was no
 
substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's conclusion
 that the defense had failed to prove her affirmative defense of
 physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect by a
 preponderance of the evidence; and (2) Broughton's conviction
 must be vacated where the Circuit Court's verdicts acquitting her
 in CR No. 11-1-0882 and convicting her in this case were
 irreconcilably inconsistent.
 
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, applicable authorities, and the issues
 raised by the parties, we resolve Broughton's points of error as
 follows:
 
(1) 	Broughton was convicted of Assault in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(g) (Supp. 2013),2
 which
provides in relevant part:
 
Assault in the second degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of assault in the second degree if:
. . . . 
(g) 	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to a person employed at a
state-operated or -contracted mental health
facility. For the purposes of this paragraph,
"a person employed at a state-operated or
-contracted mental health facility" includes
health care professionals as defined in section
451D-2, administrators, orderlies, security
personnel, volunteers, and any other person who
is engaged in the performance of a duty at a
state-operated or -contracted mental health
facility.
 
In conjunction with her first point of error, Broughton
 
argues that, as a result of her mental disease, disorder, or
 
defect, she did not possess the requisite state of mind for
 commission of the charged offense, as well as that she proved the
 affirmative defense of physical or mental disease, disorder, or
 defect excluding penal responsibility, by a preponderance of the
 evidence.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 704-400 (1993):
 
§ 704-400 Physical or mental disease, disorder, or
defect excluding penal responsibility. (1) A person is not
responsible, under this Code, for conduct if at the time of
the conduct as a result of physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect the person lacks substantial capacity
either to appreciate the wrongfulness of the person's
conduct or to conform the person's conduct to the
requirements of law.
 
(2) As used in this chapter, the terms "physical or
mental disease, disorder, or defect" do not include an
 
2
 Broughton's charged offense was committed on May 15, 2009.
Subsequently, HRS § 707-711 was amended in 2010 and 2011. However, none of
the changes substantively affect the section of the statute with which
Broughton was charged. 
2
  
 
 Pursuant to HRS § 704-402(1) (1993), "[p]hysical or
 
mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding penal
 
responsibility is an affirmative defense[.]" Thus, pursuant to
 HRS § 701-115(2)(b) (1993),
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
abnormality manifested only by repeated penal or otherwise
anti-social conduct.
 
As noted by Broughton, evidence of physical or mental
 
disease may negate the state of mind that is required to
 
establish an element of the charged offense. Specifically, HRS
 § 704-401 (Supp. 2013) provides:
 
§ 704-401 Evidence of physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect admissible when relevant to state of
mind. Evidence that the defendant was affected by a
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect is
admissible whenever it is relevant to prove that the
defendant did or did not have a state of mind that is
 required to establish an element of the offense.
 
the defendant is entitled to an acquittal if the trier of
fact finds that the evidence, when considered in light of
any contrary prosecution evidence, proves by a preponderance
of the evidence the specified fact or facts which negative
penal liability.
 
Here, with respect to the conviction that is on appeal,
 
as well as the acquittal of Broughton on a charge stemming from a
 
separate incident that occurred approximately eighteen months
 later, the Circuit Court determined:
 
Absent a defense, the defendant would have been proved
guilty of the offense charged in each criminal number,
specifically I find following beyond a reasonable doubt:
That in Criminal Number 11-1-0882, on or about
November 30th, 2010, on the island of Oahu, State of
Hawai'i, Defendant Julia Broughton intentionally and
knowingly caused bodily injury to Manielyn Racuna [Racuna],
who was at that time employed at the Hawai' i State Hospital,
a State-operated mental health facility;
And that in Criminal Number 11-1-0940, on or about May
15th, 2009, on the island of Oahu, State of Hawai' i,
Defendant Julia Broughton intentionally and -- and knowingly
caused bodily injury to Doctor Anne [Virnig 
3
], who was at
that time employed at the Hawai' i State Hospital, a State-
operated mental health facility.
In both criminal numbers the defendant relies on the
 
defense of physical or mental disease, disorder or defect
excluding penal responsibility. This is an affirmative
defense that the defendant must prove by a preponderance of
 
3
 Please note that Dr. Anne Virnig's last name was misspelled in the
Transcript of Proceedings dated August 22, 2012, but has been edited herein to
reflect the correct spelling.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the evidence. The diagnoses of the defendant given by each
of the three examiners appointed by the Court in this case
included both Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and borderline
 personality disorder. The evidence indicates that the
defendant's borderline personality disorder would not
substantially impair her ability to appreciate the
wrongfulness of her conduct or to conform her conduct to the
requirements of law in the absence of extreme stress.
I am unable to find that sort of stress in the
 
evidence relevant to the assault on Doctor Virnig. The
defendant was calm and coherent for the most part while
participating in the video conference with Judge August up
to the point when she realized that the judge would not
order the transfer that she wanted, stood and attacked
Doctor Virnig.
Doctor Westfall [sic], who was on the scene
immediately after the assault while the defendant was still
struggling with hospital staff, did not notice any signs of
depression or psychosis or observe the defendant to be
responding to internal stimuli. Also, the defendant, rather
than randomly selecting a victim, chose to assault Doctor
Virnig in particular. Doctor Virnig was not the person
situated closest to the defendant in the video room at the
 time of the assault. The defendant told staff shortly after
the assault that Doctor Virnig deserved it and the doctor,
days before, had refused to prescribe the medication the
defendant wanted. 
As to the incident involving Manielyn Racuna, the
evidence indicates that prior to the assault the defendant
was agitated and hypervigilant, in Nurse Ganotisi's words,
quote, "not at her normal baseline," end quote. This was in
the cafeteria. There is no credible evidence to explain with
any certainty why the defendant was in such a state.
While she was asked by Ganotisi to go to building A,
she turned and walked in the opposite direction. Hospital
staff prevented her from leaving by surrounding her, then
accompanied her without any physical restraint to building
A. On the way the defendant remained in an agitated state,
posturing towards staff and threatening to break past
promises and hit someone but not actually attacking anyone.
In the quiet room, Manielyn Racuna picked up a chair
and walked to the doorway, turned back into the room and saw
the defendant lunge toward her. Interpreting that move as an
attack rather than what might have been an attempt by the
defendant to leave the quiet room, Racuna raised the chair
to block the defendant. At that point staff grabbed the
defendant and pushed her against the wall, she struggled and
they took her down to the floor. It was then that the
defendant grabbed Racuna's hair and pulled it. The defendant
was eventually placed in a restraint chair but remained for
some time in an angry and agitated state.
I find credible Doctor Altman's testimony to the
effect that the physical force used by hospital staff to
restrain the defendant triggered Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder, which exacerbated the borderline personality
disorder to the extent that the defendant's ability to
appreciate the wrongfulness of her conduct, specifically
pulling Nurse Racuna's hair -- oh, I'm sorry, pulling
Manielyn Racuna's hair, and to conform that conduct to the
requirements of the law were substantially impaired.
So as to Criminal Number 11-1-0882 involving Manielyn
Racuna, the Court finds by a preponderance of the evidence
that at the time of the assault on Nurse Racuna, as a result
of physical or mental disease, disorder or defect, the
defendant lacked substantial capacity to both appreciate the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
wrongfulness of her conduct and to conform her conduct to
the requirements of the law.
The Court further finds, based upon the evidence
presented at trial, that the defendant does present a risk
of danger to herself and others and that the defendant is
not a proper subject for conditional release at this time.
Therefore, the defendant is ordered committed to the custody
of the Director of Health to be placed in an appropriate
institution for custody, care and treatment. She's acquitted
in that case. 
As to Criminal Number 11-1-0940 involving Doctor
Virnig, the Court finds the defendant guilty as charged. 
The Hawai 'i appellate courts review the sufficiency of 
the evidence as follows:
 
We have long held that evidence adduced in the trial
court must be considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution when the appellate court passes on the legal
sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction; the
same standard applies whether the case was before a judge or
a jury. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier
of fact. Indeed, even if it could be said in a bench trial
that the conviction is against the weight of the evidence,
as long as there is substantial evidence to support the
requisite findings for conviction, the trial court will be
affirmed.
 
Substantial evidence as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier of
fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including
circumstantial evidence.
 
State v. Matavale , 115 Hawai 'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted;
 
format altered).
 
Regarding the issue of penal responsibility, in the
 
Circuit Court proceedings, "[o]nce evidence [of the affirmative
 defense] is introduced on this issue, the prosecution is required
 to prove the responsibility of the defendant beyond a reasonable
 doubt." HRS § 704-402(1) (1993) commentary;
 see also HRS § 701­
114 (1993). On appeal, "[t]he trial court's finding that [the
 defendant] was penally responsible will be affirmed as long as
 there was substantial evidence to support it." State v. Young,
 
93 Hawai
'i 224, 231, 999 P.2d 230, 237 (2000) (citations 
omitted).
 
Here, the State adduced substantial evidence with
 
respect to Broughton's mental state at the time of the charged
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense to support the Circuit Court's conviction of Broughton. 
Dr. Virnig testified that Broughton's mannerism "was very
 controlled, very much purposeful." Jamie Roman, the Hospital
 social worker who was present during the incident, also testified
 that Broughton "appeared calm . . . [and] clear-minded" at the
 hearing on May 15, 2009. 
On direct examination, Dr. Altman opined that
 
Broughton's penal responsibility was "substantially impaired" at
 the time of the incident, he attributed the impairment to
 "polysubstance abuse," "borderline disorder probably exacerbated
 by a psychostimulant psychotic disorder where she usually hears
 voices and has paranoia," as well as "the borderline disorder
 itself, which clearly the medications at the time were -- were
 not working." However, Dr. Altman was asked during cross-
examination, "when she attacked Dr. Virnig, [whether Broughton]
 knew she was going after Dr. Virnig." Dr. Altman responded, "I
 believe she did."
 
Dr. Gitter opined that Broughton's "cognitive and
 
volitional capacities at the time of the alleged two assaults
 were not substantially impaired as a result of her mental
 disorders." Dr. Gitter thoroughly supported his opinion as
 follows:
 
This opinion is based on my review of the police reports as
well as the progress notes in the defendant's Hawaii State
Hospital inpatient record.
 
Regarding the defendant's alleged assault of Dr. Virnig on
May 15, 2009, the progress notes document that already one
day prior to the alleged offense the defendant had behaved
in an agitated, aggressive and combative manner towards
staff and had also been threatening to the point where she
required four point restraints. She was released from
 restraints three and half hours later at which time she was
 cooperative and able to contract for safety. Apparently,
she had been upset about having been placed on phone
restrictions due to the fact that she had destroyed a
telephone.
 
In the morning of May 15, 2009, i.e. prior to the video
conference, Ms. Broughton was noted to be quite demanding.
She became loud, agitated and pounded the plexiglas window
at the nurse's station. During the video conference at
approximately 11:40 a.m., she became agitated and upset with
Judge August on Maui as well as with the treatment team
members. Since the judge denied her request to be
transferred back to a different unit at Hawaii State
 Hospital, she became very angry and then suddenly assaulted
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Virnig. After she had been subdued and she made the
 
spontaneous statement, "she, i.e. Dr. Virnig deserved it."
 
The progress notes also reveal that one day after the
instant offense the defendant apologized to Dr. Virnig for
her behavior and indicated that she had assaulted other
 people in the past or acted in other inappropriate manners
and "that she does not wish to continue doing this." She
 was noted to be nonpsychotic at the time of the alleged
offense as well the day afterwards when she apologized to
Dr. Virnig.
 
Regarding the defendant's assault on Ms. Marielyn Recuna, a
twenty-four year old female, on November 30, 2010, the
progress notes in the defendant's Hawaii State Hospital
inpatient record reflect that prior to the assault she had
become agitated. However, she walked voluntarily to the
quiet area "but was still verbally threatening." She said
 "all those promises I made that I wouldn't hurt you guys,
are off. I'm going to knock her block off." A late entry
from November 29, 2010, i.e. one day prior to the alleged
instant assault indicates that the defendant was very
unhappy with being housed on Unit E and that she wanted to
return to Unit H. She told staff "that it took hitting
someone to go to H that's what she would do."
 
Other evidence from the three-member panel, which
 
weighs against the Circuit Court's finding of penal
 
responsibility, was provided by Dr. Wade, who opined that "at the
 time of the alleged conduct, [Broughton's] capacity to appreciate
 the wrongfulness of her conduct and conform her conduct to the
 requirements of the law were probably substantially impaired by a
 mental disease, disorder, or defect." Dr. Wade's primary
 diagnosis of Broughton was PTSD, but he also noted that Broughton
 was suffering from borderline personality disorder "at the time
 of the alleged offenses." 
With respect to the PTSD diagnosis, Dr. Wade attributes
 
the condition to the fact that Broughton
 
was molested by two different people when she was five. One
 
of those people molested [Broughton] for like a couple of
years. She was raped when she was around 13 or 14. She was
 the victim of domestic violence that was so bad that she's
 got hearing loss in both her ears.
 
Dr. Wade described the symptoms and effects of PTSD as:
 
Symptoms include heightened arousal. So you have
somebody who is anxious. You're likely to see that by them
making various kinds of movements. They have exaggerated
startle responses. They're hypervigilant. They're scanning
their environment, things like that. They're also likely to
be irritable and have outbursts of anger. Likely have
trouble sleeping. They have episodes where they -- it seems
like they're reexperiencing what happened to them. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Things that trigger this off can be situations that
either symbolize or resemble the original traumatic event.
So something that seems like it might be threatening to them
in some fashion like she gets nervous when people make fast
movements around her, especially men.
And then you have a variety of other things that
involve people, like losing interest in things that they
liked to do before, or they have more difficulty forming
relationships. They tend to be more distant. Various kinds
 of emotional instability too.
 
However, as noted by the Circuit Court, there is no 
evidence in the record of the occurrence of any triggers that 
would cause the recurrence of PTSD. Rather, it appeared that Broughton was calm and coherent, but chose to assault Dr. Virnig because Dr. Virnig had just testified regarding why she had denied Broughton's request to be transferred to a different hospital unit, and, just days before that, Dr. Virnig had refused to prescribe the medication that Broughton wanted. Furthermore, it is not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflicting evidence. State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 
139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996). 
Finally, the Circuit Court's finding of penal
 
responsibility is supported by the testimony of Drs. Westphal and
 Booher. Dr. Westphal testified that, when he arrived on the
 scene on May 15, 2009, Broughton was not responding to internal
 stimuli and "more than alert." Overall, Dr. Westphal opined that
 "most borderline personality disorders have as good control over
 [the ability to think or act] as we do, as people without
 [borderline personality disorder]." Additionally, Dr. Booher, as
 a qualified expert witness and acting director of the Hospital,
 also testified that generally, Broughton "had control" of how she
 was thinking and how she was acting.
 
Thus, although there was contrary testimony, based upon
 
the totality of the testimony presented, we conclude that there
 was sufficient evidence to support the Circuit Court's ruling
 that the prosecution had proven beyond a reasonable doubt that
 Broughton was penally responsible and acted with the requisite
 intent to be convicted of Assault in the Second Degree.
 
(2) In her second point of error, Broughton challenges
 
her conviction as being irreconcilably inconsistent with her
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acquittal in Cr. No. 11-1-0882, for the assault of Racuna. 
Specifically, Broughton argues that the Circuit Court acquitted
 her of Assault in the Second Degree with respect to the November
 30, 2010 incident with Racuna, but convicted her of the May 15,
 2009 incident with Dr. Virnig while she "had the same diagnoses"
 for both incidents. 
As a general proposition, "inconsistent verdicts are
 
not per se grounds for reversal." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442,
 
474, 848 P.2d 966, 981 (1993) (Levinsin, J., concurring) (citing
 State v. Liuafi, 1 Haw. App. 625, 643, 623 P.2d 1271, 1282
 (1981)). As previously indicated:
 
a conflict in the jury's answers to questions in a special
verdict will warrant a new trial only if those answers are
irreconcilably inconsistent, and the verdict will not be
disturbed if the answers can be reconciled under any theory
. . . . When faced with a claim that the verdicts are
 inconsistent, the court must search for a reasonable way to
read the verdicts as expressing a coherent view of the case,
and must exhaust this effort before it is free to dismiss
 the jury's verdict and remand the case for a new trial.
 
Shanghai Inv. Co., Inc. v. Alteka Co., Ltd., 92 Hawai 'i 482, 
496-97, 993 P.2d 516, 530-31 (2000) (citation and brackets 
omitted; ellipsis in original); see also Harris v. Rivera, 454 U.S. 339, 346-47 (1981) (holding that, like the deference given
 to inconsistent jury verdicts, apparent inconsistency in the
 trial judge's verdict in a non-jury criminal trial does not give
 rise to "inference of irregularity in his finding of guilt that
 is sufficiently strong to overcome well-established presumption
 that the judge adhered to basic rules of procedure").
 
Here, as set forth above, the Circuit Court provided
 
its rationale for the difference in the court's determination
 regarding Broughton's penal responsibility in the two cases.
 
This rationale is supported by the record. Dr. Altman
 
testified that borderline personality disorder is characterized
 by "unstable moods, which are mood swings from hypermania to
 depression," and that "the mood swings are shorter and tend to be
 very stress related. And they can shift rapidly. A person can
 be very psychotic today and tomorrow they can reconstitute and be
 quite stable." Similarly, as indicated above, Dr. Gitter opined
 
9
  
Dr. Gitter further noted that, after the incident,
 
Broughton apologized to Dr. Virnig, "which certainly leads me to
 
believe that she knows right from wrong and she's of normal
 intellectual functioning . . . . it's not like saying, Oh, my
 God, I don't know how I did this, how this happened. But it was
 volitional in my opinion." While the Circuit Court did not adopt
 Dr. Gitter's opinion with respect to the Racuna incident, it was
 not unreasonable for the court to find that the prosecution had
 not met its burden as to the Racuna incident, but had met its
 burden with respect to the alleged assault on Dr. Virnig, in
 light of the different circumstances of the two events. Finally,
 this conclusion of penal responsibility with respect to the May
 15, 2009 incident was supported by Drs. Westphal and Booher, who
 both treated Broughton during her time in the Hospital.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that Broughton was penally responsible for the incident with Dr.
 Virnig, as well as the later incident with Racuna. To support
 this conclusion, he opined that
 
. . . if a person is under severe stress in a borderline
personality disorder, he or she might become psychotic or
temper briefly or engage in some kind of dissociative
behavior. That did not occur. 
I went to the hospital. I reviewed her medical
 
record, the progress notes from the time of the alleged
offense just before and after, and they very clearly state
that she was not psychotic. 
Dr. Altman testified that, with respect to the attack
 
on Racuna, Broughton "most likely was experiencing at least a
 
partial flashback, and at that point the person is both in the
 present and in the past . . . [but] with Dr. Virnig I don't
 believe she was experiencing any flashback or confusing her with
 anyone else." Specifically, according to Dr. Altman, Broughton
 said that she felt like she was being restrained during the
 incident with Racuna, which "sets her off." Dr. Altman explained
 that the situation in the quiet room was different from the
 situation with Dr. Virnig because there was "[p]robably an
 element of claustrophobia just being in there. There is with her
 a paranoia that she's going to be restrained. And if there are
 staff, especially male staff coming in and attempting to restrain
 her, I believe that sets off the PTSD."
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Altman also stated:
 
PTSD is a condition that's induced by exposure to a
severe trauma that's life threatening or threatens the
integrity of the person. In Ms. Broughton's case, that
trauma was sexual abuse from her mother's boyfriend when she
was ages 4 to 6, was being raped when she was 13, and severe
physical abuse from an ex-boyfriend from ages 19 to 22 which
involved being held down and choked, being locked in a
closet repeatedly, and then he would come in and make like
he was strangling her and boxing her on the ears, which -­repeatedly, which resulted in severe hearing loss to the
extent that she needs to wear hearing aids to hear normal
conversation. So that's the trauma. 
And the symptoms are nightmares, which she has, being
chased and held down and raped and beaten, flashbacks which
are triggered by situations resembling the original trauma.
 
(Emphasis added.) Based upon this evidence, it would be
 
reasonable for the Circuit Court to infer that the stress of
 being locked in the quiet room would result in flashbacks of the
 initial trauma of being locked in a closet, which triggered her
 PTSD.
 
This reasoning is supported by Dr. Wade, whose primary
 
diagnosis of Broughton was also PTSD, and he also noted that PTSD
 could be triggered by "situations that either symbolize or
 resemble the original traumatic event." 
For these reasons, the verdicts in these two cases are 
not irreconcilably inconsistent. For the incident with Dr. Virnig, there is substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's finding that there was no stress-induced psychosis for Broughton's borderline personality disorder, and that PTSD was also not triggered. For the incident with Racuna, there is also substantial evidence in the record to support the Circuit Court's finding that Broughton's PTSD was triggered, which exacerbated the borderline personality disorder to the extent that she was not able to appreciate the wrongfulness of her conduct. Having reconciled the verdicts under this theory of the cases, this Court will not disturb the conviction in this case. See Shanghai 
Inv. Co., Inc., 92 Hawai
'i at 496-97, 993 P.2d at 530-31. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's February 20,
 
2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i March 28, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Thomas R. Waters 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Sonja P. McCullen
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
12
 