NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000410
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MATTHEW CLEMENT, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 06-1-0035; CRIMINAL NO. 99-0376)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley and Leonard, JJ.; and
Nakamura, Chief Judge, concurring)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Matthew Clement (Clement) appeals
 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's)1
 
(1) April 14, 2011 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Denying Petitioner's Amended Motion to Compel DNA Testing of
 Remaining Fingernail Clippings from Eleanor Wimberly and to
 Compare and Compel DNA Samples from Matthew Clement and Duane
 Sato (Order Denying DNA Testing); and (2) January 18, 2012
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition
 
to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release
 Petitioner from Custody (Order Denying Second Rule 40 Petition).
 
With respect to the Order Denying DNA Testing, Clement
 
does not challenge the Circuit Court's Findings of Fact (FOFs) or
 
Conclusions of Law (COLs) 1 and 2, but challenges COLs 3 through
 
7 and contends that: (1) the Circuit Court failed to provide him
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the opportunity to exhaust state remedies as to DNA testing; and
 
(2) the Circuit Court's denial of DNA testing was a violation of
 his due process rights. With respect to the Order Denying Second
 Rule 40 Petition, Clement asserts that: (3) the Hawaii Paroling
 Authority (HPA) capriciously and arbitrarily set Clement's
 
minimum term of imprisonment; and (4) Clement was denied his
 
sixth amendment confrontation rights when impermissible hearsay
 was used at his trial.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Clement's
 contentions as follows:
 
(1) Pertaining to a state prisoner's filing of a writ
 
of habeas corpus in the federal court, 28 U.S.C. § 2254(b) (2012) 
states, in relevant part:
 
(b) (1) An application for a writ of habeas corpus
on behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of
a State court shall not be granted unless it appears that-­
(A) the applicant has exhausted the remedies
available in the courts of the State; or . . . 
Regarding exhaustion of state remedies, the United
 
States Supreme Court has held:
 
[t]o provide the State with the necessary "opportunity," the
prisoner must "fairly present" his claim in each appropriate
state court (including a state supreme court with powers of
discretionary review), thereby alerting that court to the
federal nature of the claim.
 
Baldwin v. Reese, 541 U.S. 27, 29 (2004) (citations omitted). 
A claim that is fairly presented includes the federal
 
nature of the claim, which is "the federal law basis for [the]
 
claim in the state-court petition or brief" or "by simply
 labeling the claim 'federal.'" Id. at 32-33. Clement has now
 raised a federal law claim for relief on his request for DNA
 testing by moving for post-conviction DNA testing and by alleging
 in his March 31, 2008 Amended Second Rule 40 Petition:
 
TRIAL COUNSEL AND PRIOR RULE 40 COUNSEL FAILED TO CONDUCT
 
FURTHER D.N.A. TESTING ON THE DECEDENT'S FINGERNAIL
 CLIPPINGS, AND COMPARE THE RESULTS TO DUANE SATO, AND TO
PETITIONER VIOLATING PETITIONER'S 5TH AND 14TH AMENDMENT DUE
 PROCESS RIGHTS AND STATE STATUTORY RIGHTS.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Clement further contends that DNA testing in a post-
conviction setting is a civil right pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983
 
(2006). Clement's request for post-conviction DNA testing was
 denied in the Order Denying DNA Testing. This claim is raised on
 appeal and addressed herein.
 
(2) Clement argues that Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 844D-123 is unconstitutional because it denied him due
 
process and challenges COLs 3 through 7 in the Order Denying DNA
 
Testing. HRS § 844D-123 (2014) provides:
 
§ 844D-123 Order for post-conviction DNA testing.
(a) The court shall order testing after a hearing if it
finds that:
 
(1) 	A reasonable probability exists that the
defendant would not have been prosecuted or
convicted if exculpatory results had been
obtained through DNA analysis, even if the
defendant later pled guilty or no contest;
(2) 	Identity was or should have been an issue in the
proceeding that led to the verdict or sentence;
(3) 	The evidence sought to be analyzed has been
identified with particularity and still exists
in a condition that permits DNA analysis;
provided that questions as to the chain of
custody of the evidence shall not constitute
grounds to deny the motion if the testing itself
can establish the integrity of the evidence;
(4) 	The evidence was not previously subjected to DNA
analysis or was not subjected to analysis that
can now resolve an issue not resolved by
previous analysis; and
(5)	 The application for testing is made for the
purpose of demonstrating innocence and not to
unreasonably delay the execution of sentence or
administration of justice.
 
(b) The court may order testing after a hearing if it
finds that:
 
(1) 	A reasonable probability exists that DNA
analysis of the evidence will produce results
that would have led to a more favorable verdict
 or sentence for the defendant had the results
 been available at the proceeding leading to the
verdict or sentence, even if the defendant pled
guilty or no contest;
(2) 	The evidence sought to be analyzed has been
identified with particularity and still exists
in a condition that permits DNA analysis;
provided that questions as to the chain of
custody of the evidence shall not constitute
grounds to deny the motion if the testing itself
can establish the integrity of the evidence;
(3) 	The evidence was not previously subjected to DNA
testing or was not subject to testing that can
now resolve an issue not resolved by previous
testing; and
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) 	The application for testing is made for the
purpose of demonstrating that the defendant was
guilty of a lesser offense or eligible for a
more lenient sentence and not to unreasonably
delay the execution of sentence or
administration of justice.
 
(c) If evidence had previously been subjected to DNA
analysis, by either the prosecution or defense, the court
may order the prosecution or defense to provide each party
and the court with access to the laboratory reports prepared
in connection with the DNA analysis, as well as the
underlying data and laboratory notes. If DNA or other
analysis of evidence was previously conducted by either the
prosecution or defense without knowledge of the other party,
all information relating to the testing shall be disclosed
by the motion for analysis or response. If the court orders
DNA analysis under this section, the court shall order the
production to each party and the court of any laboratory
reports prepared in connection with the DNA analysis and, in
its discretion, may order production of the underlying data
and laboratory notes.
 
The challenged COLs in the Order Denying DNA Testing
 
state:
 
3.	 As to HRS § 84[4]D-123(a)(1), Petitioner fails to show
that the State would not have prosecuted Petitioner or
that he would not have been convicted had exculpatory
results been obtained through DNA analysis.
 
4.	 As to HRS § 844D-123(b)(1), Petitioner fails to show
that the DNA analysis would have led to a more
favorable verdict had it been available at trial.
 
5.	 Even assuming, arguendo, that Sato's DNA was found in
Wimberly's fingernail clippings, this evidence would
not rise to the level of exculpatory evidence. Based
on the evidence adduced at trial, Sato was Wimberly's
live-in boyfriend at the time of the murder. Given the
nature of that relationship, there are various,
non-criminal explanations for the presence of Sato's
DNA under her fingernails.
 
6.	 At trial Petitioner vigorously pursued his theory that
Sato was responsible for the murder. The jury's
verdict reflects the conclusion that the jury, as the
trier of fact, considered and rejected Petitioner's
theory of the case.
 
7.	 As to HRS §§ 844D-123(a)(4) and (b)(3), the evidence
Petitioner seeks to have analyzed was already
subjected to DNA analysis. The results of the initial
tests were inconclusive. Petitioner fails to produce
any evidence that current DNA testing procedures would
yield a different result.
 
Clement argues that he has been denied due process
 
because, without the requested DNA evidence, he cannot meet the
 
statutory requirements needed to obtain the requested DNA
 evidence, and cites 
Skinner v. Switzer , 562 U.S. 521 (2011), as
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority for his claim of constitutional infirmity. In
 
addition, he contends that the Circuit Court's conclusion in COL
 5 is speculative, trial counsel was ineffective in investigating
 
2
the forensic evidence,  and that the expert testimony of Dr. Mark
Hagadone and private detective Steven Perry should have persuaded
 the Circuit Court to grant him the requested relief.
 
First, we reject Clement's argument that Skinner holds
 
that a due process violation occurs where the state court, in
 applying a state statute, requires a showing that the prisoner
 would not have been convicted if exculpatory results had been
 obtained through DNA testing or that the evidence was not
 previously tested through no fault of his own. Rather, Skinner
 holds that a convicted state prisoner may seek DNA testing of
 crime scene evidence in a civil rights action under 42 U.S.C.
 § 1983, and is not limited to proceeding by petition for writ of
 habeas corpus. Skinner, 562 U.S. at 525. Thus, Skinner does not
 
support Clement's assertion of error.
 
In addition, contrary to Clement's contentions, the
 
Circuit Court did not err in rejecting his argument that a
 reasonable probability exists that Clement would not have been
 prosecuted or convicted if DNA analysis found Sato's DNA in the
 victim's fingernail clippings. As the Circuit Court observed, in
 light of the fact that Sato was the victim's boyfriend at the
 time of her murder, there were various, non-criminal explanations
 for why Sato's DNA may be present under the victim's fingernails
 and, at trial, Clement vigorously pursued the defense that Sato,
 not Clement, shot the victim. Clement fails to acknowledge the
 State's references to the strong evidence that he was the
 perpetrator of this crime including, inter alia: the victim's
 reports the day before she was killed, to Sato that she saw
 Clement with a gun, and to a police officer that Clement "keeps
 coming around;" that Clement was seen outside of the victim's
 residence earlier in the day that she was killed; that Clement
 
2
 Clement relatedly asserts that the prior attorneys representing
him on direct appeal and in conjunction with his first Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 petition were also ineffective. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was seen by his friend with a .22 caliber revolver (the victim
 
was shot 5 times with a .22 caliber weapon); that, upon execution
 of a search warrant, the victim's suitcase was recovered from
 Clement's residence, as well as a .22 caliber revolver; and
 ballistic evidence supported Clement's conviction. Clement's
 reference to a "scratch" in a photograph of Sato's face was
 raised at trial, but a police detective testified that the
 "marking" on Sato's face was merely dried blood (reportedly from
 Sato's attempt to resuscitate the victim) and not an injury. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in its application of
 the HRS § 844D-123 standard to this case to deny Clement's
 request for DNA testing.
 
(3) Clement raises numerous contentions in conjunction
 
with his argument that HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously as
 to his (original) minimum term of imprisonment. The relief
 requested by Clement was a new minimum term hearing comporting
 with the requirements of due process. However, as submitted by
 the State in conjunction with a May 14, 2014 motion to dismiss
 this issue for mootness, HPA held a new minimum term hearing for
 Clement on January 28, 2014, and thereafter, a new minimum term
 order was entered reducing Clement's minimum term from 40 years
 to 25 years and setting forth the "Level of Punishment" and
 "Significant factors identified in determining level of
 punishment."
 
Clement argues that the mootness doctrine should not be 
applied because many of the same issues here "are likely to recur" and as the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held, in De La Garza v. 
State, 129 Hawai 'i 429, 439, 441-42, 302 P.3d 697, 707, 709-10 
(2013), the HPA is obligated to comply with the due process clause of the Hawai
'i Constitution in determining a prisoner's 
minimum term and the convicted person has a due process right to, inter alia, "the potentially wide range of information being considered by the HPA." Thus, Clement argues, we need to now determine what protections and notices an inmate is entitled to. However, to the extent that Clement seeks case law generally explicating those rights, De La Garza, which was decided before 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Clement's new (January 2014) HPA minimum term hearing, is binding
 
authority. Clement does not assert, nor can we presume, that the
 HPA disregarded De La Garza. Thus, we conclude that the alleged
 infirmities in conjunction with Clement's original minimum term
 hearing are moot. As requested by Clement, we confirm that
 Clement is not precluded from filing an HRPP Rule 40 petition
 regarding any constitutional arguments and objections he may have
 regarding the January 28, 2014 HPA minimum term hearing and
 Clement cannot be construed as waiving any of those arguments on
 account of our ruling in this appeal.
 
(4) Clement argues that he was denied his sixth
 
amendment rights to confront witnesses because impermissible
 hearsay was used at trial, citing Crawford v. Washington, 541
 U.S. 36 (2004). Clement further argues that, although the
 hearing issue was previously raised and ruled upon, it was not
 waived because Crawford was not decided until after his direct
 appeal was final. Nevertheless, Crawford is not retroactively
 applicable to collaterally attack a conviction. See Whorton v.
 
Bockting, 549 U.S. 406 (2007). Thus, Crawford cannot be applied
 to Clement's claim in his Rule 40 post-conviction collateral
 attack.
 
For these reasons, to the extent that Clement seeks
 
relief related to the HPA's December 20, 2000 Notice and Order
 Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment, Clement's appeal is
 dismissed as moot. Except with respect to the minimum term
 issue, the Circuit Court's April 14, 2011 Order Denying DNA 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Testing and January 18, 2012 Order Denying Second Rule 40
 
Petition are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 18, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Richard T. Pafundi,
for Petitioner-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Richard W. Stacey,Diane K. Taira,Deputy Attorneys General,for Respondent-Appellee. 
8
 