NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000531
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHRISTINE KIM, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(HONOLULU DIVISION)

(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-04670)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Christine Kim (Kim) with operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) (Count 1); and refusal to submit to testing (Count 2). Prior to trial, the State dismissed Count 2. 
On November 25, 2015, the District Court of the First
 
Circuit (District Court) set December 29, 2015, as the deadline
 for pretrial motions. On June 20, 2016, Kim filed a motion to
 suppress evidence. On June 22, 2016, the District Court held a
 bench trial on the OVUII charge. Kim did not mention her
 suppression motion prior to or during the trial, and the District
 Court did not rule on the motion. At the conclusion of the
 trial, the District Court found Kim guilty of OVUII. The
 District Court sentenced Kim and entered its Judgment on June 22,
 2016.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Kim contends that: (1) the District Court1/
 
erred in failing to obtain the parties' express agreement to
 
combine her suppression motion with the trial and in failing to
 rule on the motion prior to trial; (2) the District Court failed
 to obtain a valid waiver of her right to testify; (3) the
 District Court drew negative inferences from Kim's failure to
 testify thereby shifting the burden of proof to Kim; and (4) her
 trial counsel was ineffective for failing to move to strike
 hearsay testimony provided in response to trial counsel's
 question. We affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
At about 10:55 p.m., Honolulu Police Department Officer
 
Kaimiike Aguiar (Officer Aguiar) was called to assist with a
 motor vehicle accident. Officer Aguiar arrived at a Rosebank
 Place address and saw a black BMW sedan "kinda teetering or -- on
 the -- on top of the grassy median between two driveways." The
 BMW was stuck on the grass median and was aligned perpendicular
 to both driveways. Rosebank Place is a public road, and it is
 the only road providing access to the driveways.
 
Kim was seated in the driver's seat of the BMW and was
 
on the phone. Although Officer Aguiar did not hear what Kim was
 talking about over the phone, he believed "she was on the phone
 trying to call someone to pick her up or something."
 
Officer Aguiar asked Kim if she was injured, and Kim
 
related that she was not injured. Officer Aguiar then asked Kim
 what had happened. Kim told Officer Aguiar that "she got lost
 and she tried to turn around." Kim also told Officer Aguiar that
 she was the driver and the only occupant of the vehicle, and that
 when she was trying to turn around, she hit a dip or a ditch.
 
While Kim was talking to him, Officer Aguiar noticed "a
 
strong odor of alcoholic beverage emitting from her breath[.]" 
Kim's "eyes were red, bloodshot, and glassy." Officer Aguiar
 gave Kim the option of and asked her to participate in field
 
1/ The Honorable William M. Domingo presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sobriety tests. Kim agreed to exit her car and to participate in
 
the tests. After Kim got out of her car, she swayed from side to
 side while standing. Kim stumbled and veered to the left or the
 right as she walked with Officer Aguiar to an area where he
 conducted the tests.
 
Kim performed poorly on the walk-and-turn and one-leg­
stand tests. On the walk-and-turn test, she did not follow
 instructions, lost her balance, did not walk heel to toe, did not
 walk in a straight line, took the wrong number of steps, and
 stumbled while turning. On the one-leg-stand test, Kim swayed,
 raised her arms, and put her foot down numerous times during the
 period she was supposed to keep it raised. Based on all his
 observations, Officer Aguiar determined that Kim was impaired.
 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve the issues raised by Kim on appeal as

 
follows.
 
I.

 
Kim argues that the District Court erred by failing to
 
obtain the parties' express agreement to combine her suppression
 motion with the trial and by failing to rule on the motion prior
 to trial. We disagree. Kim's motion was untimely, filed long
 after the pretrial motions deadline had expired and just two days
 before trial; she failed to seek an extension of the pretrial
 motions deadline; and she failed to notify the District Court
 that the motion was pending or seek a ruling on the motion prior
 to or during trial. Under these circumstances, we conclude that
 Kim waived the right to challenge her conviction based on her
 claims of error regarding the suppression motion.
 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12(b)(3) 
(2007) requires that motions to suppress evidence "must be raised prior to trial[.]" HRPP Rule 12(c) (2007) establishes deadlines for filing pretrial motions and states: "Pretrial motions and requests must be made within 21 days after arraignment unless the court otherwise directs." HRPP Rule 12(f) (2007) further provides that: "Failure by a party to raise defenses or objections or to make requests which must be made prior to trial, 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
within the time set by the court pursuant to section (c), or
 
within any extension thereof made by the court, shall constitute
 waiver thereof, but the court for cause shown may grant relief
 from the waiver."
 
Here, on November 25, 2015, the District Court set
 
December 29, 2015, as the pretrial motions deadline. Kim filed
 her motion to suppress on June 20, 2016, more than five months
 after the deadline had passed and just two days before the
 scheduled trial. Nothing in the record indicates that Kim
 requested an extension of time to file her suppression motion or
 that she made any showing of cause for the belated filing. 
Accordingly, pursuant to HRPP Rule 12(f), Kim waived her
 objection to the evidence she moved to suppress.
 
Moreover, on June 22, 2016, when the trial was held, at
 
no time prior to or during trial did Kim bring her untimely
 pending motion to the attention of the District Court. In
 addition, the evidence presented at trial provides no support for
 Kim's claim that the evidence of her field sobriety tests were
 subject to suppression because her "traffic stop" detention was
 unreasonable and she was forced under duress to perform the field
 sobriety tests. Under the circumstances presented, we see no
 plain error with respect to the suppression-motion claims of
 error raised by Kim on appeal.
 
II.
 
We reject Kim's claim that the District Court failed to
 
obtain a valid waiver of her right to testify under the Tachibana
 v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995), line of cases. 
The record shows that the District Court's ultimate colloquy with Kim fully complied with the requirements of Tachibana. The District Court's ultimate colloquy included its obtaining Kim's verification that she understood that "[i]f you decide not to testify, the Court cannot hold it against you that you're not going to testify." The District Court's ultimate colloquy compensated for the District Court's failure in its pre-trial advisement to advise Kim that her exercise of the right not to testify may not be used by the fact finder to decide the case. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai 'i 361, 373, 341 P.3d 567, 579 
(2014). Looking to the totality of the facts and circumstances 
of this case, see State v. Han, 130 Hawai 'i 83, 89, 306 P.3d 128, 
134 (2013), we conclude that Kim validly waived her right to testify. 
III.
 
Kim's contention that the District Court drew negative
 
inferences from her failure to testify thereby shifting the
 burden of proof to Kim is without merit. The backdrop for Kim's
 claim is as follows.
 
A.
 
Officer Aguiar testified on direct examination that
 
when he asked Kim what had happened, Kim told him that "she got
 lost and she tried to turn around." 
On cross-examination, Kim's counsel asked Officer
 
Aguiar if he knew who called the police to report the accident,
 and Officer Aguiar provided the following answer:
 
Q Do you know who called and -- I know you mentioned
Officer Miyashiro mentioned it to you.

 
Do you know who called?

 
A 
No, I cannot remember. I know I spoke to the -­
there's the two driveways. The one in the right driveway, I
spoke to them, and they related the -- they were residents,
and they related that they don't know the -­
Q 
Oh, okay. 
A -- defendant, sorry -­
Q All right. 
A -- or the vehicle. 
Kim's counsel did not object to Officer Aguiar's answer or move
 
to strike it.
 
In explaining its verdict, and its finding that Kim
 
drove on a public road before her car became stuck between the
 private driveways, the District Court stated:
 
October 3rd, 2015, about . . . 10:55 p.m., Officer
Aguiar was called to [an address at] Rosebank Place which is
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii.
Rosebank Place is a public highway. It's in a cul-de-sac
 area. He was called by . . . backup officer Miyashiro who
was called for the motor vehicle accident . . . .
 
5
 There was no testimony that she lived either on
Rosebank Street, and the likelihood of her getting lost at
her own residence is -- is what I take into account in this
 
situation. So I will make a finding that she did not live
on rose -- Rosebank Street, and, therefore, I find that -­the element as far as her on the public highway and was
driving on the public highway. If give an analogy, if she
had driven off the road and ended up in someone's house,
then I don't know if that would be enough to find that she
was not on a public highway before then. So that's my
ruling at that stage.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When he arrived, he noticed that the defendant's car
was perpendicular in the driveway. If we're looking at
exhibit -- Defense Exhibit A where the X is -- I'll refer to
 the document. . . . 
. . . .
 
. . . And as he approached, he -- he identified Ms.
Kim as the driver. His testimony was that the front of the
car was facing to the left driveway, and that the car was
teetering between the two driveways on that median where the
X is at this point.
 
As he spoke with her . . . to find out whether or not
she was okay, he asked if she was okay. She stated she was
 not injured, and she was okay. And he asked what happened.
She said she got lost and tried to turn around.
 
With that statement and also the statement that I
 
heard earlier on cross-examination which was elicited by -­to Officer Aguiar that he spoke with the people on the right
driveway and that they weren't -- they didn't know who
defendant was at this point, I take a reasonable inference
that when she said she got lost, that she was driving with
-- her car that evening in relatively short period of time
before then, got lost, meaning she didn't know where to go
at this point.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
B.
 
Kim cites the District Court's comment that "[t]here
 
was no testimony that she lived either on Rosebank Street, and
 
the likelihood of getting lost at her own residence is -- is what
 
2/
I take into account in this situation."  Kim relies on this
 comment as showing that the District Court "used [Kim's] silence
 against her in rendering its verdict" and "shifted the burden of
 
2/ While the District Court referred to "Rosebank Street," it appears
that it meant to refer to "Rosebank Place" as the evidence was undisputed that
Kim's car was stuck between driveways located on Rosebank Place. We will
 hereinafter use "Rosebank Place," and not "Rosebank Street," when discussing
the District Court's remarks. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proof to [Kim]." Kim argues that her conviction must be
 
overturned since the District Court used the negative inference
 from Kim's failure to "testify that she lived on Rosebank [Place]
 against her[.]" 
Contrary to Kim's claim, the District Court's comment
 
that Kim cites does not show that the District Court used her 
failure to testify against her or shifted the burden of proof to
 her. Indeed, the District Court never referred to Kim's failure
 to testify. It simply stated that "there was no testimony" that
 Kim lived on Rosebank Place. Viewed in the context of the
 District Court's preceding remarks, the District Court's
 statement that "there was no testimony" that Kim lived on
 Rosebank Place does not appear to be a reference to Kim's failure
 to testify, but rather an acknowledgment of the absence of any
 evidence at trial to contradict the compelling evidence that Kim
 did not live at the scene of the accident. 
Prior to its remarks challenged by Kim, the District
 
Court had focused on Officer Aguiar's testimony on direct
 examination that Kim said her car became stuck when she got lost
 and tried to turn around. The District Court also referred to
 Officer Aguiar's testimony on cross-examination that he spoke to
 people at one of the driveways who said they did not know Kim. 
The clear and unmistakable inference from Kim's
 
statement that she became stuck in the driveways because she "got
 lost and tried to turn around" is that Kim did not live at the
 Rosebank Place location where her car was stuck. People do not
 get lost in their own driveway. This inference was corroborated
 by statements of people who lived where Kim's car was stuck that
 they did not know Kim. The District Court's observation that
 there was no testimony to rebut the State's strong showing that
 Kim did not live at the scene of the accident and therefore must
 have been driving on the public road leading to the driveways
 cannot reasonably be construed as the District Court's improper
 drawing of a negative inference from Kim's failure to testify. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The prohibition against drawing negative inferences
 
from a defendant's decision not to testify is a bedrock principle
 
of criminal law. We decline to infer that a trial judge engaged
 in this form of serious judicial error based on the tenuous and
 unconvincing showing made by Kim in this case. We conclude that
 the record does not support Kim's contention that the District
 Court drew negative inferences from her failure to testify and
 shifted the burden of proof to her. 
IV.
 
Kim contends that her trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance in failing to move to strike Officer
 Aguiar's hearsay testimony on cross-examination that residents he
 spoke to in one of the driveways said they did not know Kim or
 her vehicle. We conclude that Kim has failed to meet her burden
 of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel. 
A defendant has the burden of proving ineffective 
assistance of counsel and must satisfy the following two-part test: First, the defendant must show that "there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence"; second, the defendant must show that "such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (block 
quote format and citation omitted). 
As noted, because people do not get lost in their own
 
driveway, Kim's statement that her car became stuck when she "got
 lost and tried to turn around" was compelling evidence that she
 did not live at the Rosebank Place location where her car was
 found teetering between two driveways. Therefore, Officer
 Aguiar's hearsay testimony that Kim complains about only served
 to corroborate what was already obvious from the evidence
 previously admitted -- that Kim did not live at that Rosebank
 Place location. There was also undisputed evidence that Rosebank
 Place is a public road and that it is the only road that provides
 access to the driveways where Kim's car was stuck. Under these
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances, we conclude that Kim has not met her burden of
 
showing that the alleged deficient performance of her trial
 counsel "resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." See id. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the District Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 31, 2017. 
On the briefs:

 
Jonathan Burge
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Sonja P. McCullen

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
9

 