FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF THE WAIKOLOA BEACH VILLAS,
by its Board of Directors, Applicant-Appellee,
v.
 
SUNSTONE WAIKOLOA, LLC, Respondent-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000998
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.
 NO. 11-1-007K)
 
JANUARY 29, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Respondent-Appellant SunStone Waikoloa, LLC (SunStone)
 
appeals from the November 10, 2011 Final Judgment and the July
 
19, 2011 "Order Granting Applicant Association of Apartment
 
Owners of the Waikoloa Beach Villas, by its Board of Directors'
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion to Compel Mediation and Arbitration" (Order), both entered
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit court).
I. BACKGROUND
 
This appeal arises out of a construction dispute
 
initiated by Applicant-Appellee Association of Apartment Owners
 
of the Waikoloa Beach Villas (AOAO Waikoloa), by its Board of
 
Directors (Board) against SunStone. 
SunStone is the developer of
 
the Waikoloa Beach Villas. As required under Hawaii Revised
 Statutes Chapter 514A (2006 Repl.), the Condominium Property Act
 
(CPA), SunStone recorded its Declaration of Condominium Property
 
Regime of Waikoloa Beach Villas (Declaration). See HRS § 514A-11
 
(Supp. 2000). The Declaration describes the property, its
 easements and reserved rights, restrictions on use, and the
 
administration of the condominium project.
 
Under Section R ("Claims and Litigation"), the
 
Declaration addresses the Board's ability to initiate proceedings
 
on behalf of AOAO Waikoloa. Pursuant to Section R.2
 
("Association Approval"), initiating any proceeding other than an
 
"operational proceeding" requires the approval of at least 75% of
 
the unit owners. The Declaration generally defines an
 
operational proceeding as a proceeding involving matters within
 
the scope of AOAO Waikoloa's day-to-day operations or involving a
 
total amount in controversy of less than $10,000. Section R.6
 
("Funding of Proceedings") likewise applies to any proceeding
 
other than an operational proceeding, and it prohibits the use of
 
AOAO Waikoloa's reserve fund or working capital fund to pay for
 
the proceeding.
 
Under Section R.4, SunStone inserted a clause requiring
 
arbitration of any "development controversies," including
 
construction disputes brought against SunStone.
2 Section R.4
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
2
 The Declaration defines "development controversies" as follows:
 
(continued...)
 
2
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also outlined a procedure for any development controversies
 
maintained by the Board. The procedure required the Board to
 
first participate in "good faith negotiation" with the other
 
party by providing notice of the issues and participating in a
 
conference, and if the negotiation failed, to then participate in
 
mediation. If mediation failed to resolve the dispute, the Board
 
could not commence arbitration or litigation unless it complied
 
with the following requirements set forth in Section R.4(c):
 
R.	 CLAIMS AND LITIGATION
 
....
 
4.	 Procedures for Development Controversies.
 
. . . .
 
(c)	 . . .
 
(1) The Board shall first investigate
the legal merit, feasability, and expense of prosecuting the
Development Controversy by obtaining a written opinion of a
licensed Hawaii attorney regularly residing in Hawaii, with
3
a Martindale-Hubbell rating of 'bv' or better,  expressly
stating that such attorney has reviewed the underlying facts
and data in sufficient, verifiable detail to render the
opinion, and expressly opining that the [AOAO Waikoloa] has
a substantial likelihood of prevailing on the merits with
regard to the Development Controversy without substantial
likelihood of incurring any material liability with respect
to any counterclaim which may be asserted against the [AOAO
Waikoloa].
 
2(...continued)
 
R. 	CLAIMS AND LITIGATION
 
....
 
3. Development Controversies. Any Proceeding involving
the [AOAO Waikoloa] and/or the Board against Declarant or its
agents, or any officer, director, member, partner or shareholder
of Declarant or its agents (collectively and severally referred to
in this Section R.3 and in Section R.4 below as "Declarant")
arising from or otherwise relating to the Governing Documents, any
express or implied warranty, any construction defects, issues
involving the adequacy of reserves, or any other matter, of
whatever nature, involving the Project[.]
 
3
 According to Martindale-Hubbell, its rating system is based on
peer reviews reflecting the confidential opinions of members of the bar and
the judiciary. A BV rating is "an excellent rating for a lawyer with more
experience" and is the maximum rating for lawyers admitted to the bar for five
to nine years. Frequently Asked Questions About LexisNexis Martindale-Hubbell
Peer Review Ratings, LexisNexis, available at
http://law.lexisnexis.com/literature/LMH00074-0.pdf.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Said attorney opinion letter shall
also contain the attorney's best good faith estimate of the
amount of legal costs, . . . which are reasonably expected
to be incurred for prosecution to completion (including
appeal) of the Development Controversy.
 
(3) Upon receipt and review of the
Attorney Letter, if two-thirds (2/3) or more of the Board
affirmatively votes to proceed with the institution or
prosecution of, and/or intervention in, the Development
Controversy, the Board thereupon shall duly notice and call
a special meeting of the [AOAO Waikoloa]. . . . [T]he Board
shall call for a vote of the Owners, whereupon: . . . if
seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the Owners vote in
favor of pursuing such Development Controversy and in favor
of levying a Special Litigation Assessment on the apartment
owners in the amounts and for the duration set forth in the
 Special Assessment Report and/or of entering into the loans
proposed to fund necessary borrowings, then the Board shall
be authorized to proceed to institute, prosecute, and/or
intervene in the Development Controversy.
 
The initial individual owners purchased condominium
 
units in Waikoloa Beach Villas pursuant to a standard sales
 
agreement. The agreement noted, in all capitalized letters and
 
in bold, that all claims relating to the agreement were subject
 
to mandatory and "final and binding arbitration pursuant to and
 
in accordance with the provisions of the arbitration agreement
 
contained in the Home Builder's Limited Warranty (Warranty)[.]" 
The Warranty, which was also incorporated into the Declaration,
 
stated the agreement is governed by the Federal Arbitration Act
 
(FAA) (9 U.S.C.A. §§ 1-16) and required arbitration be initiated
 
by mailing the Binding Arbitration Request Form to the Warranty's
 
administrator, who would arrange the arbitration proceeding.
 
On October 7, 2009, the Board sent a letter to SunStone
 
alleging certain construction defects. The Board requested a
 
conference to discuss the defects in dispute, and the parties met
 
on December 3, 2009. The parties continued to discuss repairs
 
over the next several months, and on April 6, 2010, SunStone
 
informed the Board it believed it had completed all work for
 
which it was responsible. The Board responded on June 21, 2010,
 
providing a list of items it believed still needed repair, and
 
demanded mediation.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Further discussions failed to resolve the remaining
issues, and the Board filed its Motion to Compel Mediation and
Arbitration (Motion to Compel) in the circuit court on April 5,
2011.  It is undisputed that the Board has not complied with the
procedure set forth in Declaration Section R.4(c) or in the
Warranty.
The circuit court held a hearing on May 16, 2011, and
entered its Order in the Board's favor on July 19, 2011.  Final
Judgment was entered on November 10, 2011 from which SunStone
timely appealed.
On appeal, SunStone argues the circuit court erred when
it granted the Motion to Compel.4  SunStone contends the circuit
court could not compel arbitration because the Board failed to
comply with the procedural requirements for initiating
arbitration set forth in the Declaration and in the Warranty.
II.  STANDARDS OF REVIEW
4The circuit court's Final Judgment and Order compelled both
mediation and arbitration.  However, SunStone conceded willingness to mediate
at the circuit court, and the parties' arguments to this court focus on the
requirement to arbitrate.  Therefore, we limit our discussion to the
arbitration provisions in the Declaration and the Warranty.
5A.Motion to Compel Arbitration
We review a ruling on a motion to compel arbitration de
novo and based on the same standards that apply to a summary
judgment ruling.  The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated:
The trial court can only decide, as a matter of law, whether
to compel the parties to arbitrate their dispute if there is
no genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of
a valid agreement to arbitrate.  Therefore, we hold that the
standard of review applicable to the trial court's decision
in this case should be that which is applicable to a motion
for summary judgment.  Accordingly, we review this case de
novo, using the same standard employed by the trial court
and based upon the same evidentiary materials "as were
before [it] in determination of the motion."
Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 439-40,
834 P.2d 1294, 1298 (1992) (citation omitted). FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Contract Interpretation
 
"As a general rule, the construction and legal effect 
to be given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by 
an appellate court. . . . These principles apply equally to 
appellate review of the construction and legal effect to be given 
a contractual agreement to arbitrate." Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. 
Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
"[W]hen presented with a motion to compel arbitration,
 
the court is limited to answering two questions: 1) whether an
 
arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so,
 
whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under
 
such agreement." Koolau Radiology, 73 Haw. at 445, 834 P.2d at
 
1300. The Board brought its motion pursuant to HRS § 658A-7
 
5
(2011) ; thus, the Board concedes the existence of an agreement
to arbitrate the underlying dispute based on the Declaration. 
However, in its Motion to Compel, the Board contended the
 
Declaration and Warranty provisions for initiating arbitration
 
are unenforceable because the provisions (1) violate HRS
 
§ 514B-105(a) (2006 Repl.) and (2) are unconscionable.
 
5 HRS § 658A-7 states, in relevant part:
 
[§658A-7] Motion to compel or stay arbitration.  (a) On motion of
a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and alleging another person's
refusal to arbitrate pursuant to the agreement:
 (1) If the refusing party does not appear or does not
oppose the motion, the court shall order the parties to
arbitrate; and
 (2) If the refusing party opposes the motion, the court
shall proceed summarily to decide the issue and order the
parties to arbitrate unless it finds that there is no
enforceable agreement to arbitrate.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. HRS § 514B-105(a) Is Inapplicable To This Case
 
6
HRS § 514B-105(a)  states: "The declaration and bylaws
may not impose limitations on the power of the association to
 
deal with the developer which are more restrictive than the
 
limitations imposed on the power of the association to deal with
 
other persons." 
The Board contends Section R and the Warranty
 
violate HRS § 514B-105(a) because the provisions impose
 limitations on AOAO Waikoloa's power to deal with SunStone that
 
would not apply if AOAO Waikoloa wished to bring claims against
 
other persons.
 
Contrary to the Board's contentions, however, Section
 
R.2
 (requiring approval by at least 75% of unit owners before
 
commencing any major litigation or arbitration) and Section R.6
 (governing funding of proceedings) do not apply only to
 
proceedings brought against the developer; rather, the provisions
 
apply to any proceeding other than an "operational proceeding." 
As noted above, an operational proceeding is a proceeding
 
generally involving matters within the scope of AOAO Waikoloa's
 
day-to-day operations with a small amount in controversy. Thus,
 
the Declaration draws a reasonable distinction between minor and
 
major proceedings, recognizing that the latter may impose
 
6 Pursuant to HRS § 514B-22 (2006 Repl.), Chapter 514B's provisions
on the management of condominiums (including HRS § 514B-105) apply to this
 
case. HRS § 514B-22 states, in relevant part:
 
§514B-22 Applicability to preexisting condominiums. Sections 
514B-4, 514B-5, 514B-35, 514B-41(c), 514B-46, 514B-72, and part VI
["Management of Condominiums," HRS §§ 514B-101 to 514B-163 (2006
Repl.)], and section 514B-3 to the extent definitions are necessary in
construing any of those provisions, and all amendments thereto, apply to
all condominiums created in this State before July 1, 2006; provided
that those sections:
 (1) Shall apply only with respect to events and
circumstances occurring on or after July 1, 2006; and
 (2) Shall not invalidate existing provisions of the
declaration, bylaws, condominium map, or other constituent
documents of those condominiums if to do so would invalidate
 the reserved rights of a developer or be an unreasonable
impairment of contract.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Although the Warranty states it shall be governed by the Federal
Arbitration Act (FAA), the FAA and HRS Chapter 658A contain nearly identical
provisions regarding the validity of agreements to arbitrate, and both require
courts to apply state contract law principles.  See 9 U.S.C.A. § 2; HRS
§ 658A-6.  We therefore need not decide whether 9 U.S.C.A. § 2 or HRS § 658A-6
is controlling and may rely on cases construing either provision.
8significant expenditures and liabilities on unit owners.  The
above provisions limit AOAO Waikoloa's power to institute major
proceedings against any party and do not favor SunStone alone.
B.The Arbitration Provisions Are Not Unconscionable
HRS § 658A-6 (2011)7 provides: "An agreement contained
in a record to submit to arbitration any existing or subsequent
controversy arising between the parties to the agreement is
valid, enforceable, and irrevocable except upon a ground that
exists at law or in equity for the revocation of a contract." 
The Board argues the arbitration provisions are invalid because
they are unconscionable adhesion contract provisions.  
A contract of adhesion "is drafted or otherwise
proffered by the stronger of the contracting parties on a 'take
it or leave it' basis[,]" such that the contract's terms are
imposed upon the weaker party who has no choice but to conform.
Brown, 82 Hawai #i at 247, 921 P.2d at 167.  Voiding a contract
for unconscionability requires a showing of both a procedural and
substantive element of unconscionability.  Id.  ("[A]
contract . . . is unenforceable if two conditions are present:
(1) the contract is the result of coercive bargaining between
parties of unequal bargaining strength; and (2) the contract
unfairly limits the obligations and liabilities of, or otherwise
unfairly advantages, the stronger party.").  The principle of
unconscionability is of preventing oppression and unfair
surprise, and not of disturbance of allocation of risks because
of superior bargaining power.  Lewis v. Lewis,  69 Haw. 497, 501,
748 P.2d 1362, 1366 (1988).
The Board argues the Declaration is procedurally
unconscionable because it was drafted by SunStone and recordedFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before any unit was purchased and before an association and a
 
board were formed. The Declaration also prohibits amendments
 
without SunStone's written consent and joinder. Thus, the Board
 
argues the arbitration provisions were offered on a "take it or
 
leave it" basis with no meaningful opportunity for negotiation. 
However, the two cases the Board cited in support of its
 
argument, Villa Milano Homeowners Ass'n v. Il Davorge, 102 Cal.
 
Rptr. 2d 1 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000) and Pinnacle Museum Tower Ass'n
 
v. Pinnacle Mkt. Dev. (US), LLC, 113 Cal. Rptr. 3d 399 (Cal. Ct.
 
App. 2010), were both overruled and disapproved of by the
 
California Supreme Court in Pinnacle Museum Tower Ass'n v.
 
Pinnacle Mkt. Dev. (US), LLC, 282 P.3d 1217 (Cal. 2012)
 
(Pinnacle), and its analysis is relevant. 
In Pinnacle, the California Supreme Court concluded the
 
arbitration provisions in a condominium's declaration of
 
covenants, conditions, and restrictions were not procedurally
 
unconscionable against an association. Pinnacle, 282 P.3d at
 
1231-33. The California act governing common interest
 developments expressly provides for a developer's capacity to
 
record a declaration that, when accepted by the first purchaser,
 
binds all others who accept deeds. Actual notice is not required
 
to enforce the declaration's terms because recording provides
 
sufficient notice. Id. at 1225-26. The court concluded the
 
act's intent is to permit developers "to develop and market their
 properties to purchasers as condominium developments operating
 
under certain covenants and restrictions." Id. at 1232. The act
 
ensures the terms in the project's declaration will be accepted
 and respected in accordance with the expectations of all property
 
owners and will not be disturbed by subsequent modifications by
 
an association or a board. Id. at 1232-33. 
Although the CPA and California's act are not
 
identical, the CPA similarly requires developers draft and record
 
a declaration before offering any units for sale to the public,
 
and thus the Board's arguments are unpersuasive. See HRS § 514A­
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11, 514A-40, 514A-105 (2006 Repl.). We see no reason to
 
frustrate the expectations of the purchasers, the developer, and
 
other stakeholders who relied on the Declaration provisions
 
setting forth a clear and binding procedure for resolving
 
disputes on matters of common interest. The record indicates the
 
condominium purchasers received reasonable notice of the
 
arbitration provisions. The sales agreement clearly and
 
conspicuously noted that mandatory arbitration would apply, and
 
it required buyers initial by hand, a page stating the buyer "had
 
full opportunity to read and review and hereby approves and
 
accepts" the project documents, including the Declaration. Each
 
buyer also signed a separate document acknowledging the buyer's
 
receipt and agreement to read and understand the Warranty.
 
Furthermore, the CPA provides additional mechanisms
 
aimed at ensuring sufficient notice of the declaration's terms. 
For example, developers must provide prospective purchasers with
 
a notice describing the purchaser's thirty-day right to cancel
 
and a copy of the project's public report, which is reviewed by
 
the Real Estate Commission and must disclose all material facts
 
pertaining to the project. HRS §§ 514A-36, 514A-62 (2006 Repl.). 
In addition to notice by recording, the declaration must also be
 
kept available to prospective purchasers and owners at the
 
managing agent's office, and all board members must receive a
 
copy of the declaration. HRS §§ 514A-84.5, 514A-82(b)(11)
 
(2011). Thus, there is no element of unfair surprise or
 
oppression regarding the arbitration provisions, and we conclude
 
neither the Declaration nor the Warranty evidence procedural
 
unconscionability. 
Moreover, the arbitration provisions are not so
 
unreasonable or unfairly one-sided to be substantively
 
unconscionable. The requirement for a BV-rated attorney is not
 
unduly burdensome, as evidenced by the Board's ability to engage
 
and retain a BV-rated attorney since the beginning of this
 
dispute. Further, the attorney's opinion letter only needs to
 
10
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provide an estimate of an association's likelihood of success and
 
the legal costs and fees, which would help unit owners decide
 
whether to incur the burdens of a proceeding. Nothing in Section
 
R requires the attorney to reveal litigation strategy or any
 
other privileged information, as the Board claims. Finally, as
 
discussed above, the Declaration provisions regarding obtaining
 
unit owners' approval and funding proceedings apply to any major
 
litigation or arbitration instituted against any party, not only
 
against SunStone. Thus, the provisions are a justifiable means
 
of obtaining the owners' informed, collective decision about
 
initiating a major proceeding, and they do not unfairly favor
 
SunStone. For these reasons, we conclude the arbitration
 
provisions are not unconscionable and are enforceable against the
 
Board.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We reverse the November 10, 2011 Final Judgment and the
 
July 19, 2011 "Order Granting Applicant Association of Apartment
 
Owners of the Waikoloa Beach Villas, by its Board of Directors'
 
Motion to Compel Mediation and Arbitration" both entered in the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit and this case is remanded for
 
further proceedings.
 
On the briefs:
 
Michael L. Freed
 
Brad S. Petrus
 David R. Harada-Stone
 (Tom Petrus & Miller)
for Respondent-Appellant.
 
Terrance M. Revere
 
Malia Nickison-Beazley
(Revere & Associates)
for Applicant-Appellee.
 
11
 