   
    
         
          FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND   PACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000239 31-DEC-2024 08:24 AM Dkt. 113 OP 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I  
---o0o---
KELLY  WAIAU,  Individually  and  as  Guardian  Prochein  Ami 
of  MINOR  BOY  1,  RAQUEL  BALGA;  ROMAINE  DEBBIE  CASTRO, 
as  Personal  Representative  of  the  Estate  of  AMOS  KEN  AGLIAM, 
Plaintiffs-Appellants,  v. 
HAWAII  EMPLOYERS'  MUTUAL  INSURANCE  COMPANY,  INC.; 
FIRST  INSURANCE  COMPANY  OF  HAWAII,  LTD.;  GENERAL  STAR 
INDEMNITY  COMPANY;  NORTH  AMERICAN  CAPACITY  INSURANCE  COMPANY, 
Defendants-Appellees,  and 
JOHN  DOES  1-10;  JANE  DOES  1-10;  DOE  PARTNERSHIPS  1-10; 
DOE  CORPORATIONS  1-10;  ROE  "NON-PROFIT"  CORPORATIONS  1-10; 
and  ROE  GOVERNMENTAL  ENTITIES  1-10,  Defendants 
NO.  CAAP-20-0000239 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  THIRD  CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL  NO.  18-1-0123K) 
DECEMBER  31,  2024 
LEONARD,  ACTING  CHIEF  JUDGE,  WADSWORTH  AND  NAKASONE,  JJ. 
OPINION  OF  THE  COURT  BY  LEONARD,  ACTING  CHIEF  JUDGE 
The appellants
 in this case challenge two summary 
judgment orders entered against them and in favor of three 
insurance companies. With these orders and a judgment, all of         
        
         
          
        
         
          
         
       
    
        
        
       
        
        
        
         
     
            
          
        
       
          
       
          
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the appellants' claims against these insurers were dismissed with 
prejudice. The appellants' claims arose, in the first instance, 
from the work-related death of a trucking company employee. When 
the employer and the deceased employee's co-workers were sued, 
the insurance companies denied any duty to defend or provide 
coverage for liability. That litigation ended with a judgment in 
favor of the appellants herein and an assignment of the 
defendants' claims against multiple insurers. That assignment 
underlies this lawsuit and appeal. 
The
 appellants argue that the court below erred in 
granting summary judgment based on the employee and fellow 
employee exclusions contained in, or incorporated into, the 
insurers' policies. The appellants argue that these exclusions 
are invalid and unenforceable on various grounds, including based 
on a severability-of-interests clause and the requirements of the 
Hawai i Motor  Vehicle Insurance Law. We hold that the 
severability-of-interests provision does not entitle appellants 
to relief in this case. We further hold, in brief summary, that 
the insurers were not entitled to a dismissal of all claims 
against them with prejudice because, inter alia, enforcement of 
the subject policy exclusions would conflict with statutory 
mandates, and under the terms of the policies, the statute takes 
precedence over conflicting policy provisions. However, the 
court below did not err in concluding that the excess coverage 
insurers had no duty to defend the claims in the underlying 
lawsuit. 
2         
     
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs-Appellants  Kelly  Waiau,  individually  and  as 
Guardian  Prochein  Ami  of  Minor  Boy  1,  Raquel  Balga,  and  Romaine 
Debbie  Castro,  as  Personal  Representative  of  the  Estate  of  Amos 
Ken  Agliam  (Waiau  Parties ),  appeal  from  the  March  24,  2020  Rule 
54(b)  Final  Judgment  entered  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Third 
Circuit  (Circuit  Court), which  was  amended  by  the  September  3, 
2020  Amended  Rule  54(b)  Final  Judgment  (Amended  Rule  54(b) 
Judgment )  entered  by  the  Circuit  Court.   The  Waiau  Parties  also 
challenge  two  summary  judgment  orders  that  were  entered  against 
them,  and  in  favor  of  the  three  insurance  companies,  and  then 
reduced  to  an  appealable  judgment  in  the  Amended  54(b)  Judgment:   
(1)  the  September  5,  2019  Order  Granting  [Defendant-Appellee] 
General  Star  Indemnity  Company's  [(General  Star's)]  Motion  for 
Summary  Judgment  (Filed  5/30/19)  and  Defendant[-Appellee]  First 
Insurance  Company  of  Hawaii,  Ltd's  [(First  Insurance's )] 
Substantive   Joinder   (Filed  5/31/2019)   (the  General   Star  SJ 
Order);  and  (2)  the  September  5,  2019  Order  Granting  Defendant-
[Appellee]  North  American  Capacity  Insurance   Company's 
[(NACIC's )]  Motion  for  Summary   Judgment   and  [First  Insurance's] 
Joinder   (the  NACIC  SJ  Order).   With  these  orders  and  judgments, 
all  of  the  Waiau  Parties'   claims  against   First  Insurance,   General 
Star,  and  NACIC  were  dismissed   with  prejudice.    The  Waiau 
Parties'   claims  against   Defendant-Appellee   Hawaii  Employers' 
Mutual  Insurance   Company   (HEMIC),  as  well  as  First  Insurance's 
cross-claims   against   HEMIC,  General   Star,  and  NACIC,  HEMIC's 2 1 
1 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. 
2 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided. 
3         
      
       
 
  
        
         
         
         
             
           
         
      
          
       
        
        
      
        
           
        
   
      
          
          
          
             
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cross-claim against First Insurance, and General Star's 
counterclaim for declaratory relief remain pending before the 
Circuit Court. 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. The Underlying Suit 
On November 15, 2013, Amos K. Agliam (Agliam), an 
employee of C&F Trucking, was operating a C&F Trucking tractor 
and fuel-hauling trailer filled with diesel fuel; when its brakes 
failed, the tractor-trailer careened off the road, and Agliam was 
ejected and died. C&F Trucking is not an entity, but a "dba" and 
a trade name registered by Frank M. Lawrence (Frank). A claim 
was made on behalf of Agliam for workers' compensation benefits 
and benefits were received by Agliam's estate. 
In a separate suit filed on October 31, 2014, the Waiau 
Parties sued Frank, Claudia Lawrence (Claudia ), Kevin Lawrence 
(Kevin), Keith Lawrence (Keith), and C&F Trucking (together, the 
Assignors ) alleging, inter alia, that each of the individual 
Assignors were managing and/or supervisory employees and/or 
officers and/or directors of C&F Trucking, and that Agliam's 
death was caused by the wilful and wanton misconduct of each of 
the Assignors, within the meaning of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 386-8 (2015). 
The Assignors notified HEMIC, First Insurance, NACIC, 
but perhaps not General Star, of the underlying lawsuit.3 Each 
of the insurers declined to provide any defense and/or liability/ 
3 General Star maintains that it did not receive notice of the 
lawsuit until January 31, 2018, but that issue was not the basis for General 
Star's motion for summary judgment. 
4         
         
         
           
       
         
         
          
           
         
         
          
         
         
         
         
           
 
         
         
       
           
         
        
         
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indemnity coverage to any of the Assignors regarding the Agliam 
incident or the underlying lawsuit. The Assignors hired defense 
counsel at their own expense for a period of time, but after 
certain discovery was completed, the Assignors eventually entered 
into an agreement with the Waiau Parties to stipulate to 
liability as to a single count (Negligent, Wilful, and/or Wanton 
Misconduct), and to go to binding arbitration on the sole issue 
of the damages to the Waiau Parties arising from Agliam's death. 
The parties further agreed that the Assignors would, inter alia, 
assign their rights and claims against the Assignors' insurers to 
the Waiau Parties and that the Waiau Parties would give the 
insurers notice of the binding arbitration and an opportunity to 
appear and dispute the damages. None of the insurers 
participated in the arbitration. A total of $2,607,528.60 of 
special and general damages were awarded to the Waiau Parties, 
and a Final Judgment reflecting that amount was entered on May 9, 
2018. 
B. The Insurance 
At the time of Agliam's death, Frank dba C&F Trucking 
had in effect with HEMIC an insurance policy that included 
Employer's Liability Insurance, with bodily injury limits of 
$1,000,000 per accident. HEMIC admits that it did not defend or 
indemnify the Assignors in the underlying lawsuit and denies that 
there was any applicable coverage under the HEMIC policy, 
specifically raising as a defense, inter alia, the terms and 
conditions under Part Two Employers Liability Insurance of the 
5         
             
        
          
         
           
           
        
          
       
  
  
        
       
      
       
       
         
        
       
        
        
       
      
  
     
      
 
      
      
       
       
   
           
          
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
policy. The HEMIC policy does not appear to be in the record on 
appeal. 
At the time of Agliam's death, "C&F Trucking Frank 
Lawrence DBA" had in effect with First Insurance a Business Auto 
Policy with liability limits of $300,000 per person and $600,000 
per accident. First Insurance sent a denial letter to Frank dba 
C&F Trucking, as well as a denial letter to the other Assignors, 
pursuant to a commercial general liability policy and the 
Business Auto Policy at issue here. Of particular relevance to 
this dispute, First Insurance's Business Auto Policy, Part 
IV–LIABILITY INSURANCE, includes:4 
A. WE WILL PAY. 
1. We will pay all sums the insured legally must 
pay as damages because of bodily injury or 
property damage to which this insurance applies, 
caused by an accident and resulting from the 
ownership, maintenance or use of a covered auto. 
2. We have the right and duty to defend any suit 
asking for these damages. However, we have no 
duty to defend suits for bodily injury or 
property damage not covered by this policy. We 
may investigate and settle any claim or suit as 
we consider appropriate. Our payment of the 
LIABILITY INSURANCE limit ends our duty to 
defend or settle. 
   . . . . 
C.
 WE WILL NOT COVER — EXCLUSIONS. 
This insurance does not apply to: 
   . . . . 
3.
 Any obligation of the insured to indemnify 
another for damages resulting from bodily injury 
to the insured's employee. [This exclusion does 
not apply to liability assumed by the insured 
under an insured contract.] 
4 Subparts C.3. & C.5. of the Business Auto Policy were changed with 
an Endorsement. For completeness, we have included the original policy 
language, with the language added with the Endorsement in brackets and 
italicized . 
6         
       
         
  
       
          
      
       
     
     
       
       
 
         
      
       
    
       FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Bodily injury to any fellow employee of the 
insured arising out of and in the course of his 
or her employment. 
5. Bodily injury to any employee of the insured 
arising out of and in the course of his or her 
employment by the insured. However, this 
exclusion does not apply to bodily injury to 
domestic employees not entitled to workers' 
compensation benefits [or to liability assumed 
by  the  insured  under  an  insured  contract] . 
The
 First Insurance Business Auto Policy also includes 
what is known as a severability-of-interests provision, which 
states: 
"Insured"  means  any  person  or  organization  qualifying  as  an 
insured  in  the  WHO  IS  INSURED  section  of  the  applicable 
insurance.   Except  with  respect  to  our  limit  of  liability, 
the  insurance  afforded  applies  separately  to  each  insured 
who  is  seeking  coverage  or  against  whom  a  claim  is  made  or 
suit  is  brought.  
At  the  time  of  Agliam's  death,  Frank  dba  C&F  Trucking 
had  in  effect  with  General  Star  an  Excess  Automobile  Liability 
Policy.   The  Declarations  for  this  policy  state  that  the  policy 
limit  is  "100%  of  the  difference  between  $1,000,000  Combined 
Single  Limits  and  the  limits  stated  in  the  SCHEDULE  OF  UNDERLYING 
INSURANCE."   The  General  Star  policy  states  that  except  for  its 
own  express  provisions,  "the  policy  will  follow  the  terms, 
conditions,  agreements,  definitions,  exclusions  and  limitations 
of  the  controlling  underlying  policy,"  i.e.,  First  Insurance's 
Business  Auto  Policy.   The  General  Star  policy  expressly  states 
that  General  Star  "will  not  be  obligated  to  investigate,  defend 
or  settle  any  claim  or  suit  against  the  insured."   The  General 
Star  policy  further  states: 
7. LOSS PAYABLE 
If the amount of the ultimate net loss becomes certain 
either through trial court judgment or agreed 
settlement among the insured, the claimant, or the 
claimant's legal representative, the underlying 
insurer and us, then, the insured or underlying 
7         
         
        
         
         
        
        
        
         
        
       
        
    
         
         
          
         
          
         
     
       
         
         
           
          
         
          
          
      
 
         
       
        
          
           
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insurer will pay the amount of ultimate net loss to 
the claimant to effect settlement. Upon submission of 
due proof thereof, we will pay on behalf of the 
insured that part of ultimate net loss which is in 
excess of the underlying insurance , or we will, upon 
request of the insured, make such payment to the 
claimant on behalf of the insured after the underlying 
insurers have paid or have been held legally liable to 
pay the full amount of their respective limits of 
liability as stated in the SCHEDULE OF UNDERLYING 
INSURANCE, subject to our Limit of Insurance shown in 
Item 4. of the Declarations. 
At the time of Agliam's death, Frank dba C&F Trucking 
had in effect with NACIC a Commercial Following Form Excess 
Liability Policy, with an ultimate net loss limit in excess of 
the First Insurance and General Star insurance of $4,000,000. 
Similar to the General Star policy, the NACIC policy states that 
except to the extent inconsistent with its own limits and 
provisions, the terms, conditions, agreements, definitions, 
exclusions, and limitations of the controlling underlying policy 
are incorporated by reference. The NACIC policy expressly states 
that NACIC "shall not be obligated to investigate, defend or 
settle any claim or suit against the insured." The Limits of 
Liability provision in the NACIC policy includes: "The limits of 
the Company's liability under this Policy apply only after the 
underlying insurers have paid or have been held legally liable to 
pay the full amount of their respective limits of liability as 
stated in Item 2 of the Declarations[.]"5 
C. Proceedings Below 
On June 19, 2018, the Waiau Parties filed the complaint 
herein (Complaint ) against HEMIC, First Insurance, General Star, 
5 This language is modified by provisos concerning aggregate limits 
and accompanied by terms concerning the nature of the excess liability 
(Contributing Excess Basis versus Excess of Loss Basis) that have not been 
addressed by the parties. 
8         
        
        
         
      
          
         
         
       
          
         
           
          
        
        
        
           
         
        
           
           
       
         
         
          
          
          
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and NACIC, seeking (among other things) declaratory relief, and 
special, general, and punitive damages. The Complaint includes 
counts for: Declaratory Relief (Count I); Breach of Contract 
and/or Contractual Warranties (Count II); Negligence and/or 
Breach of the Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing (Count 
III); and Punitive Damages (Count IV). The Complaint alleges, 
variously, that the insurers should have provided a defense to 
the Assignors and tendered their full policy limits. 
Germane to this appeal, on May 15, 2019, NACIC filed a 
motion for summary judgment on all counts (NACIC MSJ), arguing 
that NACIC had no duty to defend or indemnify the Assignors based 
on the fact that its policy provided excess coverage over the 
underlying policies issued by First Insurance and General Star, 
and the primary insurer First Insurance's policy expressly and 
unambiguously excludes coverage for bodily injury to an employee 
or fellow employee of the insured. NACIC argued that it breached 
no duty to its insureds because the NACIC policy expressly 
provides that NACIC "shall not be obligated to investigate, 
defend, or settle any claim or suit against the insured." NACIC 
further argued that because it did not violate any tort duty, it 
could not be held liable for punitive damages. 
On May 30, 2019, General Star filed a motion for 
summary judgment on all counts (General Star MSJ), arguing that 
General Star had no duty to defend or indemnify the Assignors 
based on the fact that its policy provided excess coverage only 
upon the exhaustion of the limits of the underlying policy issued 
by First Insurance, and the primary insurer First Insurance's 
9         
       
           
            
        
         
         
            
       
       
         
        
         
       
           
          
          
          
           
 
         
         
        
        
        
           
          
        
              
           
            
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
policy expressly and unambiguously excludes coverage for bodily 
injury to an employee or fellow employee of the insured. General 
Star argued it had no duty to defend because its policy is an 
excess policy, First Insurance's declination of coverage did not 
trigger any obligation by General Star, and General Star's policy 
expressly states that it "will not be obligated to investigate, 
defend or settle any claim or suit . . ." Regarding punitive 
damages, General Star pointed to the NACIC MSJ. 
On May 31, 2019, First Insurance filed [First 
Insurance's] Substantive Joinder to: (1) [NACIC MSJ]; and (2) 
[General Star MSJ] (Substantive Joinder ). In the Substantive 
Joinder, First Insurance joined both motions to the extent that 
the First Insurance policy expressly and unambiguously excludes 
coverage to an employee or fellow employee of the insured. Based 
on the policy exclusions, First Insurance argued that it did not 
breach any duty to its insured, and therefore, the Waiau Parties 
have no claim against it for breach of contract, negligence or 
bad faith, and there is no basis for an award of punitive 
damages. 
The Waiau Parties filed memoranda in opposition to the 
insurers' motions and the Substantive Joinder.6 With respect to 
the applicability and enforcement of the First Insurance policy 
exclusions used to preclude coverage, the Waiau Parties agreed 
6 In response to First Insurance's Substantive Joinder, in addition 
to opposing First Insurance's request for relief, the Waiau Parties included a 
cross-motion for summary judgment against First Insurance. The Waiau Parties 
similarly included cross-motions for summary judgment with their oppositions 
to the General Star MSJ and the NACIC MSJ. However, none of the defendants 
responded to the cross-motions and, while the record is silent, it appears 
that they may have been procedurally infirm and they were simply abandoned. 
The Circuit Court entered no ruling on the cross-motions. 
10         
           
        
         
       
        
          
          
        
     
       
       
        
          
           
        
         
         
         
         
     
        
          
        
           
         
        
            FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that there were no material facts in dispute. They argued that 
their claims against the Assignors, as co-employees of Agliam, 
for wilful and wanton conduct, are covered under the First 
Insurance policy, the policy exclusions are invalid and/or 
unenforceable, and First Insurance breached its duty to defend 
and indemnify. With respect to First Insurance's breach of the 
duty of good faith and fair dealing and punitive damages, the 
Waiau Parties argued that discovery was incomplete and a 
continuance should be granted. 
As
 discussed further below, the Waiau Parties pointed 
to the severability-of-interests clause in the First Insurance 
policy, and the Hawai i Supreme  Court's interpretation of such 
provisions in Tri-S Corp. v. Western World Ins. Co.,
 110 Hawai i 
473,
 135 P.3d 82 (2006), and cases outside Hawai i. The  Waiau 
Parties also argued that Exclusion 4 contravenes Hawai i public  
policy and that enforcing it would allow First Insurance to 
provide auto coverage that does not comply with Hawaii's Motor 
Vehicle Insurance statute, HRS § 431:10C-301 (2019). The Waiau 
Parties argued that the court should find the employee and/or 
fellow employee exclusions void and/or unenforceable. 
The
 Waiau Parties relied on, inter alia, Hawai i case 
law regarding an insurer's broad duty to defend when even a 
remote possibility of coverage exists to argue that summary 
judgment should be denied to First Insurance on the bad faith and 
punitive damages issues, and that discovery should be allowed. 
The Waiau Parties' arguments in opposition to the NACIC 
MSJ and the General Star MSJ raised many of the arguments raised 
11         
         
        
         
           
          
         
          
        
       
       
            
        
           
          
         
         
          
       
        
           
        
  
  
         
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against the primary insurer. In particular, the Waiau Parties 
argued that the employee and fellow employee exclusions are 
invalid and unenforceable. In addition, the Waiau Parties argued 
that the excess carriers had a duty to defend the Assignors once 
it became clear that the primary's limits would be exhausted, and 
the excess carriers further breached their duties of good faith 
and fair dealing by failing to engage in good faith settlement 
evaluations, or further discovery was necessary to uncover their 
conduct and communications with respect to the underlying 
lawsuit. 
Reply
 memoranda were filed by the excess coverage 
insurers and a hearing was held on June 18, 2019. At the 
conclusion of the parties' arguments, the matters were taken 
under advisement. On September 5, 2019, both the General Star SJ 
Order and the NACIC SJ Order were entered. Thereafter, General 
Star filed a motion requesting Hawai i Rules  of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 54(b) certification of the summary judgment orders as 
final, on the basis that they finally resolved all claims with 
respect to the commercial automobile insurance policies, and 
fully resolved the Waiau Parties claims against First Insurance, 
General Star, and NACIC. The other parties took no position, the 
motion for HRCP Rule 54(b) certification was granted, and 
judgment was entered. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
The Waiau Parties raise four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in entering: (1) the 
12         
          
        
   
         
         
     
        
           
          
  
  
         
           
            
        
           
          
    
       
       
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NACIC SJ Order; (2) the General Star SJ Order; (3) the 
Substantive Joinder; and (4) the Amended Rule 54(b) Judgment. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo. Summary judgment is appropriate if the 
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and 
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, 
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact 
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law. 
Carmichael  v.  Bd.  of  Land  and  Nat.  Resources,  150  Hawai i  547, 
560,  506
  P.3d  211,  224  (2022)  (citation  omitted). 
"This  court  reviews  the  interpretation  of  a  contract  de 
novo."   Title  Guar.  Escrow  Serv.,  Inc.  v.  Wailea  Resort  Co.,  146 
Hawai i  34,  46,  456  P.3d   107,  119  (2019).   
Moreover,  because  an  insurance   policy  is  a  contract, 
insurance  policies  are  subject  to  the  general  rules  of 
contract  construction;  the  terms  of  the  policy  should  be 
interpreted  according  to  their  plain,  ordinary,  and  accepted 
sense  in  common  speech  unless  it  appears  from  the  policy 
that  a  different  meaning  is  intended.   Moreover,  every 
insurance  contract  shall  be  construed  according  to  the 
entirety  of  its  terms  and  conditions  as  set  forth  in  the 
policy.   
Tri-S Corp., 110  Hawai i at 489,  135 P.3d at 98 (quoting Dairy 
Rd. Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 Hawai i  398, 411,  992 P.2d 
93, 106 (2000)). "On the other hand, however, we have long held 
that any ambiguities in an insurance contract regarding coverage 
are resolved in favor of the insured as against the insurer." 
Nautilus Ins. Co. v. Lexington Ins. Co., 132 Hawai i  283, 293,  
321 P.3d 634, 644 (2014). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The
 Hawai i Supreme  Court has stated the general 
principles of law concerning the interpretation of insurance 
policies as follows: 
13         
    
   
         
      
      
      
    
       
         
  
       
          
      
       
     
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Insurers  have  the  same  rights  as  individuals  to  limit 
their  liability  and  to  impose  whatever  conditions  they 
please  on  their  obligation,  provided  they  are  not  in 
contravention  of  statutory  inhibitions  or  public  policy.   As 
such,  insurance  policies  are  subject  to  the  general  rules  of 
contract  construction;  the  terms  of  the  policy  should  be 
interpreted  according  to  their  plain,  ordinary,  and  accepted 
sense  in  common  speech  unless  it  appears  from  the  policy 
that  a  different  meaning  is  intended.   Moreover,  every 
insurance  contract  shall  be  construed  according  to  the 
entirety  of  its  terms  and  conditions  as  set  forth  in  the 
policy.   Nevertheless,  adherence  to  the  plain  language  and 
literal  meaning  of  insurance  contract  provisions  is  not 
without  limitation.   We  have  acknowledged  that  because 
insurance  policies  are  contracts  of  adhesion  and  are 
premised  on  standard  forms  prepared  by  the  insurer's 
attorneys,  we  have  long  subscribed  to  the  principle  that 
they  must  be  construed  liberally  in  favor  of  the  insured  and 
any  ambiguities  must  be  resolved  against  the  insurer.   Put 
another  way,  the  rule  is  that  policies  are  to  be  construed 
in  accord  with  the  reasonable  expectations  of  a  layperson. 
Dairy  Rd.  Partners,   92  Hawai i  at  411-12,   992  P.2d  at  106-07 
(cleaned  up). 
These principles guide
 our analysis of the insurance 
policies at issue, and the parties' arguments in this case. 
A. The First Insurance Business Auto Policy Exclusions 
The  Waiau  Parties  argue  that  the  Circuit  Court  erred  in 
granting  summary  judgment  based  on  the  First  Insurance  Business 
Auto  Policy  exclusions,  which  state,  in  relevant  part,  that  the 
insurance  does  not  apply  to:  
3. Any obligation of the insured to indemnify 
another for damages resulting from bodily injury 
to the insured's employee. 
4. Bodily injury to any fellow employee of the 
insured arising out of and in the course of his 
or her employment. 
5. Bodily injury to any employee of the insured 
arising out of and in the course of his or her 
employment by the insured. However, this 
exclusion does not apply to bodily injury to 
domestic employees not entitled to worker's 
compensation benefits. 
Collectively,  these  three  exclusions  are  considered 
employee  and  fellow  employee  exclusions.   The  "named  insured" 
14
         
          
         
       
        
          
         
    
       
        
        
           
          
         
            
     
           
         
         
           
        
       
         
   
       
         
         
        
        
       
        
          
        
       
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under the First Insurance Business Auto Policy is Frank dba C&F 
Trucking, Agliam's employer. The insurers argue that pursuant to 
these exclusions, the First Insurance policy expressly and 
unambiguously excludes coverage for the bodily injury to Agliam 
as either an employee of Frank dba C&F Trucking or fellow 
employee of Frank or, assuming arguendo they are insured under 
the policy, the other Assignors. 
Plainly, the base rationale supporting such exclusions 
is that, under the exclusivity provision in Hawaii's workers' 
compensation statute, HRS § 386-5 (2015),7 with few exceptions, 
an injured employee gives up his or her right to recover damages 
from an employer "in exchange for the certainty of a statutory 
award for all work-connected injuries." Evanson v. Univ. of 
Haw., 52 Haw. 595, 598, 483 P.2d 187, 190 (1971). By eliminating 
coverage that unnecessarily duplicates workers' compensation 
insurance, an employer can try to lower its insurance expenses. 
HRS § 386-8 (2015), which addresses the liability of a 
third person for a compensable work injury, provides, in relevant 
part: 
§ 386-8 Liability of third person. (a) When a work 
injury for which compensation is payable under this chapter 
has been sustained under circumstances creating in some 
person other than the employer or another employee of the 
7 HRS § 386-5 provides: 
§ 386-5 Exclusiveness of right to compensation; 
exception . The rights and remedies herein granted to an 
employee or the employee's dependents on account of a work 
injury suffered by the employee shall exclude all other 
liability of the employer to the employee, the employee's 
legal representative, spouse, dependents, next of kin, or 
anyone else entitled to recover damages from the employer, 
at common law or otherwise, on account of the injury, except 
for sexual harassment or sexual assault and infliction of 
emotional distress or invasion of privacy related thereto, 
in which case a civil action may also be brought. 
15         
 
 
     
        
        
        
       
         
       
  
          
         
       
        
         
         
        
            . . . . FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employer  acting  in  the  course  of  his  employment  a  legal 
liability  to  pay  damages  on  account  thereof,  the  injured 
employee  or  his  dependents  .  .  .  may  claim  compensation 
under  this  chapter  and  recover  damages  from  such  third 
person. 
(k)  Another  employee  of  the  same  employer  shall  not  be  
relieved  of  his  liability  as  a  third  party,  if  the  personal 
injury  is  caused  by  his  wilful  and  wanton  misconduct. 
(Emphasis added.)8 
While  HRS  §  386-8  extends  immunity   from  suit  for  simple 
negligence  to  an  injured  worker's  co-employee,  that  immunity  does 
not  extend  to  the  wilful  and  wanton  misconduct  of  a  co-employee.   
See  Iddings  v.  Mee-Lee,  82  Hawai i  1,  9,  919  P.2d  263,  271  (1996) 
(allowing  suits  between  co-employees  based  upon  reckless 
conduct). 
Thus,
 although Frank's liability as Agliam's employer 
was prohibited by the workers' compensation statute, the Waiau 
Parties' fellow employee claims against the Assignors were not 
otherwise barred by the statute. Accordingly, the First 
Insurance Business Auto Policy exclusions, if enforced, deny 
coverage for bodily injury claims that are not subject to 
liability protections under the workers' compensation statute. 
1. The Severability-of-Interests Clause 
Here, the Waiau Parties point to Frank as being a co-
employee of Agliam and argue that, pursuant to the severability-
of-interests clause contained in the First Insurance policy, 
exclusion 3 and exclusion 5 are unenforceable. 
In the Circuit Court and on appeal, the Waiau Parties 
argue that they sued Frank as a "supervisory and/or managing 
8 In 2016, technical, non-substantive amendments were made to HRS 
§ 386-8. See Act 55 of 2016, § 11. 
16         
         
        
           
         
         
    
       
        
       
        
    
         
          
         
           
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employee and/or officer and/or director of C&F Trucking." In 
response, NACIC points to the trade name registration application 
that was submitted with the NACIC MSJ as evidence that Frank was 
not a managing employee, officer, or director of C&F Trucking, 
and that the authorities cited by the Waiau Parties concerning 
severability-of-interests provisions are distinguishable. 
General Star argues that the severability-of-interests clause is 
not inconsistent with the application of the employer and 
employee exclusions because, applying each separately to each 
insured, as the severability clause requires, the policy still 
does not provide coverage. 
The Waiau Parties argue that this case is like Tri-S 
Corp., 110 Hawai i 473, 135  P.3d 82 (2006), and applying the 
principles from Tri-S, Frank should be treated like a fellow 
employee of Agliam, and not just an employer. The insurers argue 
that Tri-S does not support the Waiau Parties' argument here. 
As  in  this  case,  the  underlying  dispute  in  Tri-S  arose 
out  of  the  employment-related  death  of  a  worker,  Charles  L. 
Rapoza,  Jr.  (Rapoza),  employed  by  Tri-S  Corporation  (Tri-S).   110 
Hawai i  at  477,  13  P.3d  at  86.   The  appeal  and  cross-appeal  in 
Tri-S  were  brought  by  two  insurance  companies,  Western  World 
Insurance  Co.  (WWI)  and  Travelers  Insurance  Co.  (Travelers ).   Id.  
Rapoza's  estate  had  sued  Karl  Milton  Taft  (Taft),  the 
president/chief  executive  officer,  sole  shareholder,  general 
manager,  and  employee  of  Tri-S,  alleging  that  he  was  liable  in 
tort  as  a  co-employee  under  the  workers'  compensation  exclusivity 
exception  found  in  HRS  §  386-8.   Id.  at  478,  482,  135  P.3d  at  87, 
17
         
           
         
        
             
       
        
        
         
               
        
        
           
            
               
      
           
       
             
          
         
          
        
       
      
        
         
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
91. In a separate suit, a trial court initially rejected the 
claims against Taft on the grounds that he was effectively 
Rapoza's employer, but the supreme court vacated the summary 
judgment order in favor of Taft. Id. at 479, 135 P.3d at 88. 
Taft tendered his defense to WWI and requested 
indemnification; WWI refused to provide coverage on the grounds 
that its commercial general liability (CGL) policy did not 
provide coverage based on the facts alleged in the underlying 
suit. Id. at 480, 135 P.3d at 89. Taft and Tri-S sued WWI, and 
the trial court granted summary judgment in their favor, 
concluding, inter alia, that based on the undisputed evidence, 
Taft was an executive officer of the named insured, he was sued 
in that capacity, and thus he was an insured under the terms of 
the policy. Id. at 481, 483, 135 P.3d at 90, 92. WWI filed a 
third-party complaint against Travelers, alleging that Travelers, 
not WWI, owed Taft a duty to defend and indemnify under Tri-S's 
Worker's Compensation and Employment Liability policy issued by 
Travelers. Id. at 484, 135 P.3d at 93. Taft and Tri-S were 
granted leave to amend to bring claims against Travelers, too. 
Id. Ultimately, the trial court granted summary judgment in 
favor of Tri-S, Taft, and WWI and against Travelers on the 
grounds that Tri-S had a reasonable expectation of comprehensive 
coverage, for both workers' compensation benefits under the 
workers' compensation part, and non-workers' compensation claims 
under the employers liability part, including for defense and 
indemnity for the liability of the corporation to Taft for 
indemnity for the Rapoza estate's wrongful death claims against 
18         
            
           
           
        
      
            
           
            
           
         
        
             
            
         
        
         
           
            
       
          
             
     
     
      
       
   
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Taft. Id. at 486, 135 P.3d at 95. After various stipulations 
and orders, judgment was entered in favor of Tri-S and Taft and 
against WWI, and in favor of Tri-S, Taft, and WWI, and against 
Travelers. Id. at 486, 135 P.3d at 95. 
WWI and Travelers both appealed, raising numerous 
issues. Of relevance here, WWI argued both that Taft was not an 
insured under the CGL policy and that, even if he was, policy 
exclusions applied. Id. at 490, 135 P.3d at 99. Unlike the 
First Insurance policy in the case now before us, the WWI CGL 
policy in Tri-S provided that the executive officers of Tri-S 
were insureds, with respect to their duties as executive 
officers. Id. at 491, 135 P.3d at 100. However, the WWI policy 
also stated that no employee is an insured for a bodily injury to 
a co-employee. Id. Interpreting the WWI insurance contract 
before it, the supreme court concluded that the co-employee 
exclusion did not apply to executive officers with respect to 
their executive duties. Id. WWI further argued that even if 
Taft was an insured under the policy, he was not covered due to 
the workers' compensation exclusion and the employer's liability 
for bodily injury arising out of the employment exclusion. Id. 
at 492, 135 P.3d at 101.9 Tri-S and Taft argued that Tri-S, not 
9 These exclusions state, in relevant part: 
This insurance does not apply to: 
   . . . . 
d.
 Workers Compensation and Similar Laws 
Any obligation of the insured under a workers 
compensation, disability benefits or 
unemployment compensation law or any similar 
law. 
(continued...) 
19         
        
          
   
        
       
       
           
          
            
        
         
       
           
             
           
          
          
       
         
                    
   
  
          
       
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Taft, was the employer, and therefore neither exclusion applied 
to Taft. Id. This is where the severability-of-interests clause 
analysis comes into play. 
The supreme court adopted the view of courts holding 
that, by operation of the severability-of-interests clause, when 
analyzing the applicability of these exclusions, "'the insured' 
must be read to mean the party seeking coverage rather than the 
named insured" or any other insured who could claim coverage. 
Id. Accordingly, Taft was the insured claiming coverage. Id. 
Taft was not Rapoza's employer, so the workers' compensation 
exclusion did not apply. Similarly, because Taft was not 
Rapoza's employer, the employer's liability for bodily injury 
arising out of employment exclusion did not apply. Id. at 492-
93, 135 P.3d at 101-02. In sum, as an executive officer of Tri-
S, Taft was separately insured under the express terms of the WWI 
CGL policy and, as Taft was not Rapoza's employer, these employer 
exclusions did not apply. Put another way, as a non-employer 
additional insured, Taft's interests were so separate and 
different from those of the named insured, Tri-S, his interest 
was severable – to be treated as if he had been issued coverage 
independently from the corporate employer who was the named 
insured. 
9(...continued) 
e. Employer's Liability 
"Bodily Injury" to: 
(1) An employee of the insured arising out of and in 
the course of: 
(a) Employment by the insured[.] 
Tri-S,
 110 Hawai i at 480, 135 P.3d at 89. 
20         
       
      
              
          
          
         
            
           
             
          
              
          
        
           
         
         
          
           
         
         
          
          
         
           
          
        
        
       
         
       
         
 
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the Waiau Parties nevertheless point to the 
supreme court's reference to the "multiple, non-mutually 
exclusive hats" worn by Taft. See id. at 495, 135 P.3d at 104. 
The Waiau Parties argue that Frank, like Taft in Tri-S, wears 
many hats and that Frank was sued wearing his co-employee hat, 
not his employer hat, and therefore the First Insurance Business 
Auto Policy exclusions 3 and 5 should not apply to Frank. The 
many hats analysis is contextual. In Tri-S, WWI argued that it 
was clear that Taft was sued for breach of his duty as a co-
employee – which was plainly subject to exclusion under the WWI 
policy – not as breach of his duty of an executive officer. Id. 
The supreme court observed that the material facts were not in 
dispute; rather the legal significance of those facts was 
contested. Id. The supreme court focused on the seminal Dairy 
Road Partners holding that only the possibility of coverage must 
be established for an insured to prevail on summary judgment 
against an insurer – framing the question as "Was it possible 
that Taft's alleged breach of duty occurred in his capacity as an 
executive officer?" Id. (quotation marks omitted).10 WWI did 
10 The Dairy Road Partners case addressed a number of insurance-
related issues, but of particular pertinence here is the supreme court's 
discussion on the insurer's duty to defend, which is excerpted here: 
It is well settled that the duty to provide coverage, 
i.e., the duty to indemnify, and the duty to defend on the 
part of an insurer are separate and distinct. Moreover, the 
parties' respective burdens of proof with respect to the 
duties to indemnify and to defend are also distinct. 
With respect to [the insurer's] prayer for a 
declaration that it has no duty to defend [the insured] 
pursuant to the policies, [the insurer's] already heavy 
burden of proof as a movant for summary judgment was 
significantly augmented. 
The obligation to defend is broader than the duty to 
(continued...) 
21         
          
           
            
         
           
             
        
            
          
          
       
           
       
          
          
          
       
         
   
     
         
          
        
          
          
        
        
     
            FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not show it was impossible for Rapoza's estate to prevail against 
Taft on the basis that Taft breached his duty as an executive 
officer – for which he was insured under WWI CGL policy – and 
therefore, the supreme court concluded that the trial court did 
not err in granting summary judgment in favor of Tri-S and Taft 
as to WWI's duty to defend. Id. at 496, 135 P.3d at 105. 
The context of a many hats analysis is somewhat 
different in this case. There is at least some evidence in the 
record that Frank wears more than one hat: undisputed evidence 
that Frank dba C&F Trucking was Agliam's employer; and the Waiau 
Parties' allegations in the underlying suit and evidence 
including, inter alia, an April 9, 2015 letter sent on behalf of 
First Insurance acknowledging that Agliam was Frank's "fellow 
employee" (and invoking exclusion 4, as well as exclusion 5). 
The allegations in Count I of the underlying wrongful death suit 
include that Frank's wilful and wanton conduct as, inter alia, a 
supervisory and/or managing employee of C&F Trucking caused 
Agliam's death. While the insurer defendants in this case 
10(...continued) 
pay claims  and arises wherever  there is the mere potential
for  coverage.   In  other  words,  the  duty  to  defend  rests 
primarily  on  the  possibility  that  coverage  exists.   This 
possibility  may  be  remote  but  if  it  exists,  the  insurer  owes 
the  insured  a  defense.   All  doubts  as  to  whether  a  duty  to 
defend  exists  are  resolved  against  the  insurer  and  in  favor 
of  the  insured.           
Accord
ingly, in connection with the issue of its duty 
to defend, [the insurer] bore the burden of proving that 
there was no genuine issue of material fact with respect to 
whether a possibility existed that [the insured] would incur 
liability for a claim covered by the policies. In other 
words, [the insurer] was required to prove that it would be 
impossible for the [plaintiffs in the underlying suit] to 
prevail against [the insured] in the underlying lawsuits on 
a claim covered by the policies. 
Dairy Rd. Partners ,
 92 Hawai i at 412-13, 992 P.2d at 107-08 (cleaned up). 
22         
       
           
         
        
            
           
      
         
          
            
        
   
        
         
           
           
         
          
     
    
       
        
       
      
      
        
       
     
              
      
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
undoubtedly dispute the legal significance of the judgment 
entered in favor of the Waiau Parties and against Frank and the 
other Assignors, applying the Dairy Road Partners analysis, it is 
certainly possible that Frank's adjudicated breach of his duties 
to Agliam could be found to have occurred in a capacity as a 
fellow employee and possible that the claim could be found to be 
covered under the subject policies.11 
However, context is not one dimensional. In Tri-S, in 
his capacity as an executive officer, Taft was an insured under 
the "WHO IS AN INSURED" terms of the WWI CGL policy issued to 
Tri-S, with an interest that was separate, independent, and 
severable from Tri-S's interest. 
Here, the First Insurance Business Auto Policy does not 
insure "officers and directors" of C&F Trucking. Frank does 
business as C&F Trucking, which is not a separate legal entity. 
Frank is in fact the employer and only insured person. The 
policy defines "You" and "Your" as the person or organization 
shown as the named insured in the declaration (Frank dba C&F 
Trucking), and states in relevant part:12 
D. WHO IS INSURED. 
1. You are an insured for any covered auto. 
2. Anyone else is an insured while using with your 
permission a covered auto you own, hire or 
borrow with a reasonable belief that such 
insured is entitled to do so except: 
a. The owner of a covered auto you hire or 
borrow from one of your employees or a 
member of his or her household. 
11 This is not to say that all three insurers had a duty to defend in 
this case, as discussed later further below. 
12 The lead-in part of D.2. includes policy changes made in an 
endorsement. 
23         
       
       
    
    
      
      
       
      
          
            
         
        
         
           
          
        
          
       
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
b. Someone using a covered auto while he or 
she is working in a business of selling, 
servicing, repairing, or parking autos 
unless that business is yours. 
c. Anyone other than your employees, a lessee 
or borrower or any of their employees, 
while moving property to or from a covered 
auto. 
3. An yone  liable  for  conduct  of  an  insured 
described  above  is  an  insured  but  only  to  the 
extent  of  that  liability.  .  .  . 
Thus, while the severability-of-interests clause in the 
First Insurance policy might apply if the issue was whether one 
of the other persons described in D.2. or D.3. was the insured in 
question, there is no separate, severable coverage for Frank, who 
was Agliam's employer. In other words, the severability-of-
interests clause works only when there is a separate, nonemployer 
insured. But here, there is no such separate coverage at issue 
because there is only a single insured, Frank dba C&F Trucking. 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Waiau Parties' 
arguments that exclusions 3 and 5 of the First Insurance Business 
Auto Policy are unenforceable based on the severability-of-
interests clause is without merit. 
The  Waiau  Parties  also  argue  that  "bodily  injury  to  any 
fellow  employee"  exclusion,  exclusion  4  in  the  First  Insurance 
policy,  is  rendered  inapplicable  by  the  severability-of-interests 
clause.   Their  severability-of-interests  argument  rests  primarily 
on  a  Wyoming  case,  Barnette  v.  Hartford  Ins.  Grp.,  653  P.2d  1375 
(Wyo.  1982),  that  was  cited  favorably  by  the  supreme  court  in 
Tri-S.   See,  e.g.,  Tri-S,  110  Hawai i  at  492,  135  P.3d  at  101.  
This  argument  is  to  no  avail,  however,  as  the  severability-of-
interests  analysis  in  Barnette  is  wholly  resonant  with  our 
24
         
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discussion  above.   In  Barnette,  Gibson  A.  Barnette  (Barnette ) 
sought  indemnity  from,  inter  alia,  The  Hartford   Insurance   Group 
(Hartford )  for  injuries   suffered   by  a  fellow  employee   of  Barnette 
Enterprises,  Inc.  (Barnette  Inc.).   653  P.2d  at  1375-76.  
Barnette  was  the  president  of  Barnette  Inc.   Id.  at  1376.   Under 
the  Hartford  policy,  "executive  officers"  of  the  named  insured, 
Barnette  Inc.,  were  also  persons  insured,  and  the  policy 
contained  a  severability-of-interests  clause.   Id.   Barnette  does 
a  deep  dive  into  various  jurisdictions  interpreting  cross-
employee  exclusionary  clauses  (not  all  of  which  are  in  accord), 
but  ends  with  the  following  recap: 
By  this  addition  [of  the  severability-of-interests 
clause]  the  policy  clearly  intends  that  the  "insured",  with 
whom  we  are  at  any  given  time  concerned  when  applying  the 
cross-employee  exclusionary  rule,  must  be  held  to  be  the 
insured  seeking  protection  under  the  policy.   If  that 
insured  is  an  employer  whose  employees  are  making  a  claim 
against  him  or  her,  the  cross-employee  exclusionary  rule 
serves  to  preclude  coverage.   Why?   Because  such  an  employer 
has  paid  for  the  protection  of  those  workers  through 
worker's  compensation  contribution  and  there  is  therefore  no 
good  purpose  to  be  served  by  causing  him  or  her  to  pay  for 
double  coverage  especially  where  it  furnishes  no  additional 
protection  given  the  fact  that  the  injured  employee  is 
foreclosed  from  bringing  suit  against  the  contributing 
employer  because  of  the  exclusive  remedy  provisions  of  the 
worker's  compensation  law. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  insured  in  question  is  not 
an  employer  who  seeks  policy  protection  from  the  claims  of 
employees,  then  the  cross-employee  exclusionary  rule  cannot 
interfere  with  the  coverage  of  that  insured—and  why  should 
it?   Such  an  insured  has  no  employer-employee  relationship 
with  which  to  be  concerned.   He  is  not  one  who  is  obligated 
to  protect  employees  through  either  compensation 
contribution  or  private  insurance.   He  is  just  an  additional 
insured  as  is,  for  example,  an  omnibus  additional  insured 
for  whom  the  named  insured  has  contracted  with  its  insurance 
company  to  furnish  protection.   Coverage  should  not  be 
denied  to  an  insured  by  the  cross-employee  exclusionary 
clause  of  the  contract  when  that  clause  has  no  applicability 
to  the  insured  person  seeking  protection.   Barnette  falls 
within  this  classification.   He  is  not  an  employer  seeking 
protection  from  claims  arising  out  of  an  injury  to  his 
employee  and  is  therefore  not  precluded  by  the 
cross-employee  exclusionary  clause  from  coverage  by  the 
Hartford  policy. 
Id. at 1383. 
25         
       
           
      
           
         
          
          
        
     
    
        
      
          
        
     
      
          
        
        
             
       
       
         
         
        
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Frank is an employer seeking protection from 
claims arising out of an injury to his employee. As discussed 
above, there is no potentially-severable, additional coverage 
here for Frank in some other capacity. Under the analysis stated 
in Barnette , coverage was only found to exist because Barnette 
fell within a category of additional insureds. In sum, we 
conclude that the Waiau Parties' argument that exclusion 4 of the 
First Insurance Business Auto Policy is unenforceable based on 
the severability-of-interests clause is without merit. 
2. Hawaii Motor Vehicle Insurance Law 
The Waiau Parties further argue that exclusion 4 (the 
fellow employee exclusion) contravenes Hawai i public policy  
because it would allow First Insurance to provide an auto policy 
not in compliance with Hawaii's statutory insurance requirements. 
This issue is unsettled in Hawai i. 
We reiterate
 the principle that "liability insurers 
have the same rights as individuals to limit their liability, and 
to impose whatever conditions they please on their obligation, 
provided they are not in contravention of statutory inhibitions 
or public policy." First Ins. Co. of Haw. v. State, 66 Haw. 413, 
423, 665 P.2d 648, 655 (1983) (citation omitted). 
The Waiau Parties argue that enforcing exclusion 4 
would allow First Insurance to provide a motor vehicle insurance 
policy not in compliance with the Hawaii Motor Vehicle Insurance 
Act, citing HRS § 431:10C-301 (2019), which provides, in 
pertinent part: 
§  431:10C-301   Required  motor  vehicle  policy  coverage .  
(a)   An  insurance  policy  covering  a  motor  vehicle  shall 
provide: 
26         
    
    
          
       
       
       
        
        
      
        
      
      
   
        
       
       
      
        
     
      
 
 
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Coverage specified in section 431:10C-304 
[personal injury protection benefits]; and 
(2) Insurance to pay on behalf of the owner or any 
operator of the insured motor vehicle using the 
motor vehicle with a reasonable belief that the 
person is entitled to operate the motor vehicle, 
sums which the owner or operator may legally be 
obligated to pay for injury, death, or damage to 
property of others, except property owned by, 
being transported by, or in the charge of the 
insured, which arise out of the ownership, 
operation, maintenance, or use of the motor 
vehicle ; . . . 
(b) A motor vehicle insurance policy shall include: 
(1) Liability coverage of not less than $20,000 per 
person, with an aggregate limit of $40,000 per 
accident, for all damages arising out of 
accidental harm sustained as a result of any one 
accident and arising out of ownership, 
maintenance, use, loading, or unloading of a 
motor vehicle[.] 
(Emphasis added). 
HRS § 431:10C-120(a) (2019) states: 
§  431:10C-120   Prohibitions,  penalty.   (a)  No  insurer 
shall  issue  or  offer  to  issue  any  policy  which  the  insurer 
represents  is  a  motor  vehicle  insurance  policy  unless  such 
insurer  meets  the  requirements  of  this  article. 
Accordingly,  under  HRS  §§  431:10C-120(a)  and  431:10C-
301(a)  &  (b),  all  insurance  policies  covering  motor  vehicles  in 
this  state  must  provide  insurance,  to  pay  on  behalf  of  the  owner 
of  an  insured  vehicle,  sums  which  the  owner  may  be  obligated  to 
pay  for  injury  or  death  arising  out  of  the  ownership,  operation, 
maintenance  or  use  of  the  motor  vehicle,  including  liability 
coverage  of  not  less  than  the  statutory  minimums. 
None  of  the  insurers  in  this  case  deny  that  the  First 
Insurance  Business  Auto  Policy  is  a  motor  vehicle  insurance 
policy.   None  of  the  insurers  contend  that  the  First  Insurance 
Business  Auto  Policy  provides  the  coverage  set  forth  in  HRS 
§  431:10C-301(a)(2)  and  (b)(1).   None  of  the  insurers  dispute 
that  the  Waiau  Parties,  as  assignees  of  vehicle  owner  Frank  dba 
27
         
         
           
        
      
       
          
           
         
         
       
        
        
          
       
          
          
          
        
          
          
 
       
           
          
        
            
            
            
           
            FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C&F Trucking, are claiming that First Insurance must pay sums 
which Frank may be legally obligated to pay for the death of 
Agliam, which arise out of the ownership, operation, maintenance, 
or use of the motor vehicle. 
Rather, in the first instance, First Insurance ignores 
the Waiau Parties' reference to HRS § 431:10C-301 and argues that 
the Waiau Parties failed to cite to a specific Hawai i law or  
statute that was violated, i.e., that no statutory inhibition or 
public policy was violated. First Insurance then argues that 
public policy supports the employee and fellow employee 
exclusions in the First Insurance Business Auto policy because 
those were meant to exclude claims covered by workers' 
compensation coverage. The fly in this ointment is, of course, 
that workers' compensation insurance appears only to have 
provided coverage to Frank in his capacity as employer, but not 
to defend against plaintiffs who claimed he was also a fellow 
employee, and appears not to have provided any coverage for the 
fellow employee claims against the other Assignors.13 Thus, 
Frank and the other Assignors were left with no defense, let 
alone an indemnity, when the Waiau Parties sued them in the 
underlying lawsuit. 
First Insurance further argues on appeal that the 
exclusions at issue here serve a valid purpose, which is to lower 
the costs of insurance, and that the Waiau Parties are improperly 
13 We say "appears" because the HEMIC workers' compensation and 
employer's liability policy is not in the record on appeal and the Waiau 
Parties' claims against HEMIC remain pending. However, it is clear from the 
record before us – specifically including HEMIC's Answer to the Complaint – 
that HEMIC denied that there was any applicable coverage under the HEMIC 
policy and declined to defend Frank and the other Assignors in the underlying 
lawsuit. 
28         
         
          
           
       
         
      
          
          
 
       
         
       
        
         
        
         
           
       
        
         
        
        
       
       
          
        
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
seeking a "dual recovery." Lowering the costs of insurance 
premiums is a worthy purpose, but that consideration alone is not 
determinative here. There is no support in the record for First 
Insurance's argument concerning a dual recovery; indeed, First 
Insurance's only argument in its Substantive Joinder was that its 
Business Auto Policy expressly and unambiguously excludes 
coverage for bodily injury to an employee or fellow employee of 
the insured, and therefore it was entitled to summary judgment on 
all counts. 
General Star argues that the fellow employee exclusion, 
as incorporated into its policy, is not inconsistent with HRS 
§ 431:10C-301 because Hawaii's compulsory motor vehicle insurance 
statute does not require unlimited coverage, and since General 
Star's policy does not attach until exhaustion of the underlying 
limits that satisfy the required amount of compulsory motor 
vehicle insurance coverage, it is impossible for an exclusion in 
the General Star policy to be inconsistent with the statute. In 
briefing, General Star admits that public policy requires 
coverage, just not under their excess motor vehicle insurance 
policy – arguing, "because the General Star policy attaches well 
in excess of the $20,000/$40,000 coverage mandated by Hawaii's 
statute, exclusions in the General Star policy cannot possibly 
violate Hawaii's public policy that requires such coverage." 
General Star's construction of the issue is not 
persuasive. The question of whether or not the exclusions in 
First Insurance's policy are inconsistent with § 431:10C-301 is 
not, in the first instance, dictated by whether or not the excess 
29         
        
          
          
            
         
       
         
          
           
          
          
         
          
            
        
        
       
            
        
         
          
        
        
           
         
            
            
            
              FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
coverage is triggered. Notably, HRS § 431:10C-301(b)(1) provides 
a floor for coverage ("not less than"), and not a specific 
mandated amount of coverage. General Star argues that the remedy 
for any failure to comply with the statute is to read the minimum 
coverage amounts into First Insurance's policy, and points to a 
Maryland case as supporting its argument. 
In Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Wilson, 893 A.2d 1177, 
1188 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2006), aff'd sub nom., Wilson v. 
Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 910 A.2d 1122 (Md. Ct. App. 2006), the 
appellate court did in fact uphold the validity of the fellow 
employee exclusion in the subject auto insurance policy. It did 
so, however, because the exclusion was expressly modified by: 
"this exclusion does not apply for coverage up to the minimum 
limit specified by the Maryland Vehicle Law." Id. at 1180. The 
Maryland court explained that it previously had declared invalid 
and void certain exclusions in automobile insurance policies that 
effectively excluded all liability coverage as against public 
policy. Id. at 1183. However, the court concluded that a fellow 
employee exclusion in a commercial auto policy that expressly 
provided for only the statutory minimum coverage was not invalid 
because it complied with the Maryland Vehicle Law, but allowed an 
employer to minimize the costs associated with providing for 
coverage under that statute as well as workers' compensation 
benefits. Id. at 1188-89.14 In the instant case, the First 
14 The Maryland special appeals court did discuss another case in 
which the court concluded that a household exclusion was void as to public 
policy only to the extent that it denied mandatory minimum coverage. See 
Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 893 A.2d at 1188 (discussing State Farm Mut. Auto 
Ins. Co. v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 516 A.2d 586 (Md. App. 1986)). However, 
(continued...) 
30         
        
     
      
        
        
          
          
          
        
        
        
        
           
           
           
         
        
     
        
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Insurance Business Auto Policy exclusions have no provision for 
coverage up to the statutory minimum. 
NACIC argues that several jurisdictions have found 
similar exclusions in commercial auto insurance policies to be 
consistent with state motor vehicle insurance laws and workers' 
compensation statutes. We have examined these cases. Canal Ins. 
Co. v. Nix, 7 P.3d 1038, 1040-42 (Colo. App. 1999), involved 
claims of an injured employee against his employer, not a fellow 
employee, and the court's decision rested on the specific 
language of Colorado's Workers' Compensation Act, which provided 
immunity to employers who obtained the required insurance, and 
the Colorado Motor Vehicle ("No-Fault") Insurance law in effect 
at that time, which has since been repealed. See Colo. Rev. 
Stat. §§ 10-4-701 to 10-4-726, repealed eff. July 1, 2003. In 
Helms v. Southern Farm Bureau Cas. Ins. Co., 664 S.W.2d 870, 871-
72 (Ark. 1984), the Arkansas Supreme Court declined to invalidate 
an employee exclusion on the grounds that Arkansas's Workers' 
Compensation Commission had exclusive jurisdiction, mainly 
because of the exclusivity of workers' compensation benefits and 
Arkansas precedent holding that it is in the public interest to 
14(...continued) 
the  court  also  recognized  that  in  Larimore  v.  American  Ins.  Co.,  552  A.2d  889, 
892-93  (Md.  App.  1989),  the  Maryland  Court  of  Appeals  rejected  the  notion  that 
a  collateral  source  of  payments  through  workers'  compensation  justified 
upholding  a  fellow  employee  exclusion  in  an  automobile  insurance  policy  and 
held  the  exclusion  to  be  invalid.   The  Court  of  Appeals  noted,  inter  alia, 
that  the  injured  fellow  employee  may  not  receive  workers'  compensation 
benefits  equal  to  his  actual  tort  damages  and  that  upholding  a  fellow  employee 
exclusion  could  end  up  excluding  a  large  class  of  claimants,  significantly 
frustrating  the  purpose  of  the  compulsory  automobile  liability  insurance  law.  
Id.  at  892.   The  court  recognized  other  cases  that  had  upheld  fellow  employee 
exclusions,  but  noted  distinctions  including  a  lack  of  compulsory  liability 
law,  an  express  statutory  authorization  for  the  exclusion,  or  a  workers' 
compensation  law  that  prohibits  fellow  employee  tort  actions.   Id.  at  892-93 
(citations  omitted). 
31         
        
           
           
        
         
           
       
        
           
           
      
         
        
       
         
        
       
        
       
        
          
        
          
         
          
           
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
give the Workers' Compensation Act priority over other statutes 
as providing an exclusive remedy. In Boecker v. Great West Cas. 
Co., 361 N.W.2d 160, 162-63 (Minn. Ct. App. 1985), the Court of 
Appeals of Minnesota upheld the validity of employee exclusions 
in a no-fault policy, but those exclusions had previously been 
written into a Minnesota law that was replaced by a no-fault law 
that specifically allowed, inter alia, exclusions. It 
nevertheless appears from that case that Minnesota tends to 
uphold employee exclusions for various reasons. Id. In Zink v. 
Allis, 650 S.W.2d 320 (Mo. Ct. App. 1983), in response to a 
somewhat convoluted claim seeking uninsured motorist coverage, 
the Missouri Court of Appeals affirmed that the fellow employee 
exclusion is recognized in Missouri as a rational exclusion 
because it "distinguish[es] the employer's liability to his 
employees from that of his liability to the general public, 
thereby relieving the employer of the onerous requirement of 
insuring his employees under his public liability insurance 
policy, such employees being already protected by the workmen's 
compensation statutes." Id. at 323-24 (citation omitted). 
None of these cases are dispositive because the issue 
raised here is whether the denial of coverage pursuant to fellow 
employee exclusion is consistent with Hawai i public policy, as 
expressed in HRS §§ 431:10C-120 and 431:10C-301(a) & (b) of the 
Hawai i Motor Vehicle  Insurance statute. Indeed, none of these 
cases discuss a statutory scheme with the clear mandate of HRS 
§ 431:10C-120 to insurers: "No insurer shall issue or offer to 
issue any policy which the insurer represents is a motor vehicle 
32         
        
        
       
      
           
        
        
          
   
 
       
        
        
        
    
          
           
           
          
          
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insurance policy unless such insurer meets the requirements of 
this article." Moreover, Hawai i law authorizes an injured 
employee
 to receive workers' compensation benefits and pursue 
claims against third-parties, including fellow employees, based 
on wilful and wanton misconduct. See HRS § 386-8; Iddings , 82 
Hawai i at 6-9, 919 P.2d at  268-71.15 
That said, prior to attempting to resolve the Hawai i 
public policy issues,
 we return to the provisions of the First 
Insurance Business Auto Policy. 
3. The   Conflict  of  Provisions  Term16 
The  First  Insurance  Business  Auto  Policy  includes  a 
Conflict  of  Provisions  term  that  states: 
CONFLICT  OF   PROVISIONS 
In  the  event  that  there  is  a  conflict  between  the  provisions 
of  this  policy  or  endorsements  attached  and  the  Hawaii  Motor 
Vehicle  Insurance  Law,  such  law  shall  take  precedence  over 
the  provisions  of  the  policy  or  endorsements. 
If  the  employee  and  fellow  employee  exclusions  relied 
on  by  the  insurers  are  enforced,  the  First  Insurance  Business 
Auto  Policy  at  issue  in  this  case  does  not  provide  the  coverage 
set  forth  in  HRS  §  431:10C-301(a)(2)  &  (b)(1).   The  threshold 
question  is  whether  this  is  a  conflict. 
NACIC
 argues that there is no conflict because the 
exclusion for bodily injury to an insured's employee is 
15 HRS § 386-8(d) further provides for the subrogation and 
reimbursement of workers' compensation benefits when an injured employee 
recovers damages from a third-party. 
16 The issues arising from the Conflicts of Provisions term were not 
addressed in the initial briefing. Therefore, pursuant to Hawaii Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4), this court entered an Order on October 4, 
2024, allowing the parties to file supplemental briefs. Supplemental briefs 
addressing the Conflicts of Provision term were submitted by the Waiau 
Parties, First Insurance, and NACIC, but not General Star. 
33         
        
        
        
        
         
        
         
         
        
         
         
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consistent with the public policy purposes behind both the 
Hawai i Motor Vehicle  Insurance statute and the Hawai i  Workers' 
Compensation
 Law. NACIC submits that the two compensation 
schemes are designed to complement, rather than duplicate, each 
other. First Insurance also argues that the Conflict of 
Provisions term is inapplicable because the policy exclusions do 
not conflict with HRS § 431:10C-301. First Insurance emphasizes 
that if First Insurance's fellow employee exclusion is held to 
conflict with the Motor Vehicle Insurance statute, then every 
insurance policy exclusion will similarly be in conflict with the 
law, which will have the unintended consequence of driving up 
costs. 
First  Insurance  points  to  Budget  Rent-A-Car  Sys.,  Inc. 
v.  Coffin,  82  Hawai i  351,  922  P.2d  964  (1996),  to  support  the 
proposition  that  HRS  §  431:10C-301(a)(2)  &  (b)(1)  does  not 
mandate  that  all  motor  vehicles  must  be  covered  by  insurance  at 
all  times  arising  out  of  the  ownership,  maintenance,  or  use  of 
the  motor  vehicle.   However,  that  is  not  exactly  the  holding  in 
Coffin.   The  issue  in  Coffin  was  not  whether  an  insurance  policy 
provision  was  void  as  against  public  policy;  rather,  the  issue 
was  whether  a  use  limitation  provision  in  Budget's  rental 
agreement  (a  prohibition  against  driving  the  rental  vehicle  on  a 
particular  public  road)  was  void  as  against  public  policy  because 
it  impermissibly  cut  into  the  requirements  of  the  Hawai i  Motor 
Vehicle  Law.   Id.  at  353-54,  922  P.2d  at  966-67.   Budget 
successfully  argued  to  the  supreme  court  that  the  use  limitation 
provision  was  a  proper  exercise  of  its  right  to  limit  the 
34
         
          
            
        
            
          
         
          
             
         
        
          
              
         
           
          
     
      
                  
          
        
         
        
        
          
       FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permission granted to Coffin with respect to Coffin's use of the 
vehicle. Id. at 354, 922 P.2d at 967. The supreme court 
interpreted HRS § 431:10C-104 and 431:10C-105 – the provisions 
relied on by Coffin – and held that HRS § 431:10C-104 contains a 
mandate to all owners of motor vehicles to maintain a no-fault 
policy, not a mandate to insurance companies to provide coverage 
for every accident that occurs on a public street, road, or 
highway. Id. at 355, 922 P.2d at 968. The supreme court further 
held that the use limitation provision did not implicate issues 
of minimum insurance requirements because it was a proper 
exercise of Budget's authority to restrict the use of its rental 
vehicles. Id. at 356, 922 P.2d at 969. To ensure clarity as to 
the intended limits of its holding, the supreme court stated, 
"[i]t is important to stress that our holding in the present case 
is limited exclusively to the permissive use context." Id. at 
357, 922 P.2d at 970. 
Notwithstanding the arguments pressed by the insurers, 
we conclude that if the employee and fellow employee exclusions 
in the First Insurance Business Auto Policy are enforced, the 
policy does not provide the coverage mandated in HRS § 431:10C-
301(a)(2) & (b)(1), which constitutes a conflict between the 
policy exclusions and the statute. Accordingly, pursuant to the 
Conflict of Provisions term, HRS § 431:10C-301(a)(2) & (b)(1) 
"shall take precedence over" the employee and fellow employee 
exclusions. 
It is unclear what it means for the statute to "take 
precedence" over the conflicting exclusions, i.e., what the 
35         
          
           
           
          
          
           
          
        
        
         
           
  
          
          
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remedy is if they conflict. Without waiving their arguments that 
there is no conflict, the insurers argue that the remedy would be 
to read into the policy the "statutory minimum" set forth in HRS 
§ 431:10C-301(b)(1). In support, NACIC cites Canal Ins. Co. v. 
Merritt , 683 F. Supp. 1296 (W.D. Mo. 1988), Merchants Mut. Cas. 
Co. v. Tuttle, 101 A.2d 262, 266 (N.H. 1953), and Wilson, 910 
A.2d 1122; First Insurance cites Tuttle, as well. The Waiau 
Parties point to Hawaii's "long standing history" of voiding 
provisions that are in conflict with Hawaii's motor vehicle 
insurance statutes, referencing Dawes v. First Ins. Co. of Haw., 
Ltd., 77 Hawai i 117, 883 P.2d 38 (1994),  and the other Hawai i 
cases cited therein. 
Of  more  than  passing  interest  here,  the  starting   point 
of  the  analysis  in  Merritt  is  that  because  of  the  mandate  of  the 
Kansas  Automobile  Injury  Reparations  Act  in  effect  at  the  time, 
the  federal  court  had  previously  invalidated  the  subject  employee 
exclusion  provisions,  which  accorded  the  plaintiff  some  amount  of 
coverage  pursuant  to  the  public  policy  expressed  in  the  Act.   683 
F.  Supp.  at  1296-97.   Based  on  a  Kansas  Supreme  Court  case, 
DeWitt  v.  Young,  625  P.2d  478  (Kan.  1981),  the  Merritt  court  held 
that  the  invalidated  employee  exclusions  were  void  only  as  to  the 
minimum  coverage  under  the  Act,  because  that  was  the  amount 
necessary  to  effect  the  public  policy  reflected  in  the  Act, 
notwithstanding  the  policy  limits  in  the  insurance  contract.   683 
F.  Supp.  at  1296-97.  17
17 In DeWitt, the Kansas Supreme Court held that a garage shop 
exclusion was void and unenforceable because it was contrary to Kansas 
insurance law requiring coverage for all permissive drivers, but concluded 
(continued...) 
36         
         
        
         
        
        
          
           
        
       
        
         
           
     
 
       
         
       
          
        
           
 
        
          
           
           
         
            
            
          
        
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Tuttle, the New Hampshire Supreme Court held that a 
fellow employee exclusion was "ineffective to defeat or avoid 
coverage" as to the minimum limits of liability required under 
New Hampshire law because, inter alia, the subject insurance 
policy included an endorsement that stated "all policy provisions 
required by [the law] are hereby incorporated by reference." 101 
A.2d at 265. The court concluded that the policy otherwise set 
out permissible exclusions and limits. Id. at 266.18 
As discussed above, in Wilson, the fellow employee 
exclusion was expressly limited to excluding coverage above the 
minimum required under the applicable motor vehicle law. 893 
A.2d at 1180. Thus, the insurance policy itself made clear that 
statutorily-mandated coverage would be provided, notwithstanding 
the exclusion. 
In Dawes, the Hawai i Supreme Court reiterated  "the 
longstanding propositions . . . that liability insurers may not 
limit their liability in contravention of statutory inhibitions 
or public policy, and that when the terms of an insurance 
contract are in conflict with statutory language, the statute 
must take precedence over the terms of the contract." 77 Hawai i 
17(...continued) 
that  the  exclusion  was  valid  as  to  amounts  exceeding  the  statutorily-required 
coverage.   625  P.2d  at  482-83.   The  court  "caution[ed]  that  the  limited 
application  of  such  exclusions  should  be  clearly  and  specifically  set  forth  in 
the  policy."   Id.  at  483. 
18 Years later, in 1978, New Hampshire amended that state's workers' 
compensation law to bar negligence claims against fellow employees; in 1983, 
New Hampshire again amended the statute to only allow claims for intentional 
torts against fellow employees; but in 1985, the New Hampshire Supreme Court 
held those provisions to be unconstitutional under the New Hampshire 
Constitution. See Estabrook v. American Hoist & Derrick, Inc., 498 A.2d 741 
(N.H. 1985). The New Hampshire Supreme Court subsequently had a change of 
heart and overruled Estabrook , holding that the statute "now controls and 
expressly provides employees immunity from non-intentional tort claims brought 
by co-employees." Thompson v. Forest, 614 A.2d 1064, 1067 (N.H. 1992). 
37         
            
         
        
       
          
        
          
            
       
         
             
         
       
        
           
           
      
        
         
         
        
       
        
            
         
         
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 128, 883 P.2d at 49 (cleaned up). The supreme court noted 
that the uninsured motorist (UM) coverage in the First Insurance 
policy at issue contained five provisions that had been 
previously voided "as being in contravention of statutory 
inhibitions or public policy." Id. The court commented "[s]uch, 
apparently, is the deference that [First Insurance] accords the 
law of this state when it comes to issuing auto policies 
consonant therewith." Id. at 129, 883 P.2d at 50. The supreme 
court ultimately reaffirmed, inter alia, that insurance policies 
with UM provisions that attempt to restrict the applicability of 
UM statutes are void. Id. at 131, 883 P.2d at 52. 
In a later case, the supreme court held that in 
underinsured motorist (UIM) policies, clauses that require an 
insured to exhaust the tortfeasor's insurance prior to seeking 
UIM benefits are void as against public policy. Taylor v. Gov't 
Emps. Ins. Co., 90 Hawai i 302, 312, 978  P.2d 740, 750 (1999). 
Hawai i courts have  repeatedly voided policy provisions 
that conflict with statutory requirements and the public policy 
reflected in the various enactments of Hawaii's no fault and 
motor vehicle insurance law. The cases do not, however, 
specifically address the proper remedy where the policy itself 
states that the statute takes precedence. 
We conclude that the Conflict of Provisions term is 
ambiguous with respect to how it is to be applied when a conflict 
arises, because it is reasonably susceptible to more than one 
interpretation. See Found. Int'l, Inc. v. E.T. Ige Constr., 
Inc.,
 102 Hawai i 487, 496-97, 78 P.3d 23, 32-33 (2003) 
38         
          
         
          
         
        
         
          
          
           
          
     
         
        
        
            
          
        
         
        
         
      
           
         
         
         
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(determination of ambiguity of a contract term is a question of 
law, whether based on the document itself, there is uncertainty 
or doubt as to meaning). As stated above, "because insurance 
policies are contracts of adhesion and are premised on standard 
forms prepared by the insurer's attorneys, we have long 
subscribed to the principle that they must be construed liberally 
in favor of the insured and any ambiguities must be resolved 
against the insurer." Dairy Rd. Partners ,
 92 Hawai i at 411-12, 
992 P.2d at 106-07 (cleaned up). "[P]olicies are to be construed 
in accord with the reasonable expectations of a layperson." Id. 
at 412, 992 P.2d at 107. 
HRS § 431:10C-301(b) sets a floor, not a ceiling, for 
coverage, requiring all insurers who issue a motor vehicle 
insurance policy to include "[l]iability coverage of not less 
than $20,000 per person . . . for all damages arising out of 
accidental harm sustained as a result of any one accident and 
arising out of ownership, maintenance, use, loading, or unloading 
of a motor vehicle[.]" (Emphasis added). Resolving all 
ambiguities against the insurer, it is reasonable for the 
layperson insured to expect that if the policy exclusions are 
unenforceable with respect to this statutorily-mandated coverage, 
the liability coverage would be in the amount stated in the motor 
vehicle insurance policy. That is the amount of liability 
coverage that was offered by the insurer, purchased by the 
insured, and reflected in the policy documents, not the statutory 
minimum, which is referenced nowhere in the First Insurance 
39         
          
          
     
      
      
         
           
          
         
         
 
       
 
  
  
        
       
      
       
       
         
        
       
        
        
       
      
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Business Auto Policy. In this light, we consider the Circuit 
Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of all three insurers. 
B. Disposition of the Summary Judgment Orders 
1. Summary Judgment in Favor of First Insurance 
First Insurance, Frank's primary motor vehicle insurer, 
filed the Substantive Joinder, arguing that based on the employee 
and fellow employee exclusions, it did not breach any duty to its 
insured, and thus it was entitled to summary judgment against the 
Waiau Parties on all counts alleged against First Insurance in 
the Complaint. The Circuit Court granted summary judgment to 
First Insurance. 
As stated above, the First Insurance Business Auto 
Policy includes: 
PART IV–LIABILITY INSURANCE 
A. WE WILL PAY. 
1. We will pay all sums the insured legally must 
pay as damages because of bodily injury or 
property damage to which this insurance applies, 
caused by an accident and resulting from the 
ownership, maintenance or use of a covered auto. 
2. We have the right and duty to defend any suit 
asking for these damages. However, we have no 
duty to defend suits for bodily injury or 
property damage not covered by this policy. We 
may investigate and settle any claim or suit as 
we consider appropriate. Our payment of the 
LIABILITY INSURANCE limit ends our duty to 
defend or settle. 
Thus,  under  the  First  Insurance  Business  Auto  Policy, 
First  Insurance  had  a  duty  to  defend  Frank,  as  well  as  provide 
liability  coverage,  absent  the  exclusions,  which  are 
unenforceable  due  to  the  conflict  with  the  Hawai i  Motor  Vehicle 
Insurance  statute.   Accordingly,  the  Circuit  Court  erred  in 
granting  summary  judgment  in  favor  of  First  Insurance   on  Count  I 
(Declaratory   Relief)   and  Count  II  (Breach   of  Contract). 
40         
        
          
          
          
        
           
           
         
           
        
         
         
         
    
      
        
           
            
          
           
       
         
           
          
          
          
       FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Waiau Parties further argue that the Circuit Court 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of First Insurance on 
Count III (Negligence and/or Breach of the Covenant of Good Faith 
and Fair Dealing) and Count IV (Punitive Damages). In the 
Substantive Joinder, First Insurance simply argued that based on 
the policy exclusions, it did not breach any duty to its insured, 
and thus the Waiau Parties have no claim for negligence or bad 
faith, and accordingly no claims upon which punitive damages may 
be awarded. In light of our conclusion that the employee and 
fellow employee exclusions are unenforceable, and there being no 
other grounds presented upon which the Circuit Court could grant 
summary judgment, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting summary judgment in favor of First Insurance on Counts 
III and IV. 
2. Summary Judgment in Favor of General Star 
In the General Star MSJ, General Star argued, inter 
alia, that under the express terms of the General Star policy, it 
had no duty to defend the Assignors in the underlying suit. In 
opposition to the General Star MSJ, the Waiau Parties made no 
argument and offered no evidence to the contrary. Section II of 
General Star's Excess Automobile Liability Policy states, inter 
alia, that "[General Star] will not be obligated to investigate, 
defend or settle any claim or suit against the insured[.]" We 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary 
judgment in favor of General Star on Count I (Declaratory Relief) 
and Count II (Breach of Contract) with respect to any obligation 
to defend the Assignors in the underlying suit. 
41         
        
           
         
        
        
         
          
           
            
       
           
        
         
        
         
         
          
          
       
         
           
        
          
            
           
         
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
General Star further argued to the Circuit Court that 
it had no duty to indemnify the Assignors because its policy only 
affords coverage upon the exhaustion of the limits of liability 
under the First Insurance Business Auto Policy, and the 
incorporation of the First Insurance employee and fellow employee 
exclusions into the General Star policy bars coverage for the 
Waiau Parties' claims. Section I of the General Star policy 
states, inter alia, that General Star "will pay on behalf of the 
insured ultimate net loss in excess of the total of the limits of 
the underlying insurance ," i.e., the First Insurance Business 
Auto Policy. In opposition to the General Star MSJ, the Waiau 
Parties argued that the employee and fellow employee exclusions 
were invalid and unenforceable, but they made no argument and 
offered no evidence contesting that General Star's duty of 
indemnification did not arise until the limits of the First 
Insurance policy were exhausted. We conclude that the Circuit 
Court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of 
General Star on Count I (Declaratory Relief) and Count II (Breach 
of Contract) with respect to a then-existing contractual 
obligation to indemnify Frank in the underlying suit. However, 
in light of our ruling with respect to the Waiau Parties' claims 
against First Insurance, a declaratory or prospective ruling that 
General Star has no duty whatsoever arising out of Agliam's death 
to pay on behalf of Frank is premature. Thus, we vacate the 
entry of summary judgment in favor of General Star on Count I 
(Declaratory Relief) and Count II (Breach of Contract) to the 
extent that it barred any duties that might arise under the 
42         
         
          
    
       
        
        
         
        
          
       
         
       
    
        
        
        
        
   
 
         
           
        
        
          
          
         
          
          
          
         
           
      FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
General Star Excess Automobile Liability Policy in light of our 
ruling that First Insurance had a duty to defend and indemnify 
Frank in the underlying suit. 
We further conclude that the General Star Excess 
Automobile Liability Policy is ambiguous with respect to the 
incorporation of the First Insurance employee and fellow employee 
exclusions. This ambiguity is pertinent in light of our 
conclusion that the exclusions are unenforceable with respect to 
the underlying policy. With respect to the application of the 
underlying policy terms, the General Star policy states: 
Except for the express provision of this policy and its 
attached endorsements, this policy will follow the terms, 
conditions, agreements, definitions, exclusions and 
limitations of the [First Insurance] policy. Should there 
be a conflict between the provisions of this policy, 
including any of its attached endorsements, and the [First 
Insurance] policy, then the provisions of this policy and 
its endorsements will govern. 
(Emphasis omitted). 
On the one hand, the proviso that "this policy will 
follow the . . . exclusions" could be read to incorporate the 
exclusions into the General Star policy regardless of the 
enforceability of the exclusions with respect to the First 
Insurance policy. On the other hand, this language could be 
interpreted to apply the exclusions as they apply with respect to 
the First Insurance policy. As discussed above, this language 
must be construed liberally in favor of the insured and any 
ambiguities must be resolved against the insurer. See Dairy Rd. 
Partners ,
 92 Hawai i at 411-12, 992 P.2d at 106-07. Accordingly, 
we conclude that the employee and fellow employee exclusions in 
the First Insurance policy do not operate as a bar to excess 
liability coverage under the General Star policy. 
43         
          
          
          
        
         
        
         
          
         
         
          
       
            
     
      
                   
         
          
                      
              
          
            
          
           
             FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to Counts III and IV, in the General Star 
MSJ, General Star argued that under the express terms of its 
policy, General Star had no obligation to defend or settle the 
underlying suit, and therefore it was entitled to summary 
judgment on the Waiau Parties' remaining claims. In opposition, 
the Waiau Parties argued that both excess carriers acknowledged 
that punitive damages are available when it can be established 
that a "defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or with such 
malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal indifference 
to civil obligations, or where there has been some wilful 
misconduct or that entire want of care which would raise the 
presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences," citing 
Best Place, Inc. v. Penn Am. Ins. Co., 82 Hawai i 120, 134,  920 
P.2d 334, 348 (1996). 
Thus, General Star's argument on summary judgment 
regarding bad faith was entirely premised on the language of the 
insurance policies and did not otherwise address its conduct in 
its dealings with the Assignors with respect to claims brought 
against them in the underlying suit. General Star did address 
the fact that the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing 
can be breached even if the insurer alleges that it adhered to 
the express terms of its policy. See id. at 132, 920 P.2d at 346 
("The breach of the express covenant to pay claims, however, is 
not the sine qua non for an action for breach of the implied 
covenant of good faith and fair dealing."). The insurer's duty 
to act in good faith in dealing with its insured includes the 
duty to handle and pay claims in good faith, and a breach of the 
44         
            
            
         
        
           
           
            
        
         
            
          
       
        
          
    
        
          
    
   
        
         
        
       
         
         
           
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
duty to act in good faith gives rise to an independent tort cause 
of action. See Hough v. Pacific Ins. Co., 83 Hawai i  457, 468 -
69, 927 P.2d 858, 869-70 (1996) (citations omitted). Clearly, 
"conduct based on an interpretation of the insurance contract 
that is reasonable does not constitute bad faith." Id. at 469, 
927 P.2d at 870 (citing, inter alia, Best Place, 82 Hawai i  at 
133,
 920 P.2d at 347). As General Star presented no evidence, or 
even argument, concerning the reasonableness of its conduct, we 
cannot conclude that it demonstrated that the Waiau Parties will 
be unable to carry their burden at trial. See, e.g., Jardine v. 
State, 155 Hawai i 60, 75,  556 P.3d 406, 421 (2024) (citation 
omitted) (summary judgment movant may satisfy burden by 
presenting evidence negating an element of the opposing party's 
claim or demonstrating that the claimant will be unable to carry 
its burden at trial). 
The Waiau Parties further argued that the Circuit Court 
abused its discretion when it denied a request for a continuance 
pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f). 
HRCP Rule 56(f) provides: 
(f) When Affidavits are Unavailable. Should it 
appear from the affidavits of a party opposing the motion 
that the party cannot for reasons stated present by 
affidavit facts essential to justify the party's opposition, 
the court may refuse the application for judgment or may 
order a continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or 
depositions to be taken or discovery to be had or may make 
such other order as is just. 
Here,  the  Waiau  Parties  further  argue  that  they 
requested  a  continuance  to  permit  depositions  and  further 
discovery  with  respect  to  their  bad  faith  claims  because  they 
anticipated  they  would  be  able  to  demonstrate  that  General  Star 
acquiesced  to  First  Insurance's  bad  faith  denial  of  coverage  or 
45
         
         
         
         
        
         
         
           
          
           
          
           
           
             
            
        
            
 
         
       
         
       
        
          
  
           
          
       
       
          
         FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
even ratified the bad faith interpretation of the First Insurance 
policy. The Waiau Parties failed to provide an affidavit 
supporting this request. Nevertheless, in Ralston v. Yim, the 
supreme court rejected the proposition that summary judgment may 
be appropriate before a discovery deadline if the nonmovant had 
"adequate time to conduct discovery and to identify experts." 
129 Hawai i 46, 62-63, 292  P.3d 1276, 1292-93 (2013). The court 
stated that such an approach would be inconsistent with French v. 
Hawai i Pizza Hut,  Inc., 105 Hawai i 462, 99 P.3d  1046 (2004), as 
"the clear import of French is that summary judgment should not 
be granted when there is still time for the non-movant to develop 
evidence for use at trial, unless there is a basis for concluding 
. . . that such an effort would be futile." Ralston , 129 Hawai i 
at 63, 292
 P.3d at 1293. The supreme court further stated that 
HRCP Rule 56(f) provides non-movants with protection against a 
premature grant of a motion for summary judgment. Id. The court 
emphasized that: 
The purpose of subdivision (f) is to provide an additional 
safeguard against an improvident or premature grant of 
summary judgment and the rule generally has been applied to 
achieve that objective. Consistent with this purpose, 
courts have stated that technical rulings have no place 
under the subdivision and that it should be applied with a 
spirit of liberality. 
Id. (citing 10B Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller, & Mary Kay 
Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure Civil 3d § 2740, at 402 
(1998)). 
Thus, even if General Star's argument could be 
construed as addressing the reasonableness of its conduct, 
applying HRCP Rule 56(f) with a spirit of liberality here, we 
conclude that the Waiau Parties should have been granted a 
46         
        
      
           
        
          
        
        
     
     
         
         
           
          
        
          
         
          
          
         
          
           
         
        
         
 
        
        FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
continuance to complete discovery related to its bad faith 
claims, including whether General Star unreasonably interpreted 
its policy or otherwise acted in bad faith with respect to, inter 
alia, its refusal to participate in settlement discussions in 
light of the claims in excess of First Insurance's policy limits. 
For these reasons, except as otherwise stated above, we 
conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary 
judgment in favor of General Star. 
3. Summary Judgment in Favor of NACIC 
In the NACIC MSJ, NACIC argued, inter alia, that under 
the express terms of the NACIC Commercial Following Form Excess 
Liability Policy, it had no duty to defend the Assignors in the 
underlying suit. In opposition, the Waiau Parties pointed to no 
contractual obligation in the NACIC policy requiring a defense, 
but posited that a duty to defend might nevertheless arise once 
the excess carrier understood that the underlying policy would be 
exhausted. Like Section II of General Star's policy, Section III 
of NACIC's policy states, inter alia, that [NACIC] shall not be 
obligated to investigate, defend or settle any claim or suit 
against the insured[.]" Based on the unambiguous language of the 
NACIC policy, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in 
granting summary judgment in favor of NACIC on Count I 
(Declaratory Relief) and Count II (Breach of Contract) with 
respect to any obligation to defend the Assignors in the 
underlying suit. 
NACIC further argued that as a following form excess 
policy, the NACIC policy incorporated the employee and fellow 
47         
          
          
          
         
         
         
         
        
         
        
          
       
      
     
       
       
      
      
         
        
         
       
          
         
           
          
         
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employee exclusions, and thus NACIC has no duty to indemnify the 
insureds for any liability to the Waiau Parties. Consistent with 
our analysis of General Star's similar argument, in light of our 
ruling with respect to the Waiau Parties' claims against First 
Insurance, we conclude that the NACIC policy is ambiguous with 
respect to the incorporation of the First Insurance employee and 
fellow employee exclusions. This ambiguity is pertinent in light 
of our conclusion that the exclusions are unenforceable with 
respect to the underlying policy. With respect to the 
application of the underlying policy terms, the NACIC policy 
states: 
Except for the limits of liability and any provisions in the 
underlying insurance policy which are inconsistent with this 
Policy, including any endorsements attached hereto, the 
terms, conditions, agreements, definitions, exclusions and 
limitations of the [First Insurance] policy are incorporated 
by reference as a part of this Policy. 
Although the NACIC policy states that it 
"incorporate[s]" the exclusions by reference, which differs 
slightly from the "will follow" language in the General Star 
policy, the NACIC policy is equally ambiguous concerning whether 
an exclusion that is unenforceable in the First Insurance policy 
becomes enforceable when incorporated into the excess policy 
written by NACIC. Thus, we construe this language liberally in 
favor of the insured and resolve the ambiguities against the 
insurer. See Dairy Rd. Partners ,
 92 Hawai i at 411-12, 992 P.2d 
at 106-07. Accordingly, we conclude that the employee and fellow 
employee exclusions in the First Insurance policy do not operate 
as a bar to excess liability coverage under the NACIC policy. 
48         
         
        
         
         
         
          
       
          
           
         
           
        
        
       
         
          
        
            
   
         
          
       
        
         
         
        
          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to Counts III and IV, NACIC argued that 
the Waiau Parties' claims are predicated on allegations that 
NACIC failed to timely defend and/or settle the claims against 
the insured, and based on the incorporated exclusions, NACIC is 
entitled to summary judgment. NACIC further argued that punitive 
damages against it are not recoverable because it could not have 
acted wantonly, oppressively, maliciously, or even recklessly in 
refusing to do something that neither its contract nor the law 
requires. In opposition to the NACIC MSJ, on this point, the 
Waiau Parties argued that the three insurers left the Assignors 
with no defense and no choice but to stipulate to liability and 
submit to the arbitration on damages only. 
Like General Star, NACIC presented no evidence, or even 
argument, concerning the reasonableness of its conduct, relying 
instead on its interpretation of the language of the insurance 
contract to support its request for summary judgment. Thus, we 
cannot conclude that NACIC demonstrated that the Waiau Parties 
will be unable to carry their burden at trial with respect to the 
tort of bad faith. 
In addition, as with its opposition to the General Star 
MSJ, the Waiau Parties sought an HRCP Rule 56(f) continuance to 
conduct discovery regarding NACIC's evaluation of the Waiau 
Parties' claims in the underlying suit and NACIC's communications 
with First Insurance and/or General Star in order to demonstrate 
that NACIC acquiesced to First Insurance's bad faith denial of 
coverage, and ratified the bad faith interpretation of First 
Insurance's policy. Again applying HRCP Rule 56(f) with a spirit 
49         
         
         
       
        
      
        
    
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of liberality here, we conclude that the Waiau Parties should 
have been granted a continuance to complete discovery related to 
its bad faith claims, including whether NACIC unreasonably 
interpreted its policy or otherwise acted in bad faith. 
Accordingly, except as otherwise stated above, we 
conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary 
judgment in favor of NACIC. 
V. CONCLUSION 
For  the   reasons  stated  above,  the  Circuit  Court's 
September  3,  2020  Amended  Rule  54(b)  Judgment  is  vacated.   The 
September  5,  2019  General  Star  SJ  Order  and  the  September  5,  2019 
NACIC  SJ  Order  are  affirmed  in  part  and  vacated  in  part.   This 
case  is  remanded  to  the  Circuit  Court  for  further  proceedings 
consistent  with  this  Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu,
 Hawai i, December 31,  2024. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
Laurent  J.  Remillard,  Jr., 
Don  V.  Huynh, /s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Rechelle  A.M.  Barbour Associate  Judge 
(Remillard  &  Huynh), 
Robert  P.  Marx,  and /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Ronald  G.  Self, Associate  Judge 
for  Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
Stephen  K.  Roy  and 
Lance  S.  Au 
(Roy  &  Au), 
for  Defendant-Appellee 
FIRST  INSURANCE  COMPANY  OF  HAWAII,  LTD. 
Richard  B.  Miller  and 
David  R.  Harada-Stone 
(Tom  Petrus  &  Miller  LLLC) 
for  Defendant-Appellee 
NORTH  AMERICAN  CAPACITY  INSURANCE  COMPANY. 
50
         
  
 
     
     
  
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gary G. Grimmer 
Ann Correa 
(Gary G. Grimmer & Associates), and 
Sean M. Hanifin (pro hac vice) 
(Dykema Gossett, PLLC) 
for Defendant-Appellee 
GENERAL STAR INDEMNITY COMPANY. 
51 