 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI  RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000605 18-SEP-2024 08:08 AM Dkt. 82 SO 
NO. CAAP-20-0000605 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
WILLARD J. RAPOZA, SR., Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, v. 
TINA L. ARCHER; MCLAUGHLIN HOLDINGS, LLC, 
a Hawaiʻ i limited liability company; and CARE HAWAII, INC., 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CC18100229K)  
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: 
Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Willard J. Rapoza, 
Sr. (Rapoza
), appeals from the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit's1 September 9, 2020 Judgment; August 14, 2020 "Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order"; and March 3, 2020 
"Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment[.]" 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Tina L. Archer (Archer), 
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided.    
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
McLaughlin Holdings, LLC (McLaughlin II), and CARE Hawaii, Inc. 
(CARE) (collectively Defendants) appeal from the circuit court's 
July 14, 2020 "Order Denying Defendants Tina L. Archer, 
McLaughlin Holdings, LLC and CARE Hawaii, Inc.'s Second Motion 
for Summary Judgment." 
For a brief background, in 1987, Rapoza's parents 
leased a roughly half-acre Kealakekua vacant property (Property) 
to Ivan and David Basque for a 56-year term, from 1987 to 2043 (Lease). 
In 2006, member-managed McLaughlin Holdings, LLC 
(
McLaughlin I), formed by Archer and her husband, purchased the 
Lease for $489,000. Archer was also the sole shareholder of CARE, which took possession of the Property to provide substance 
abuse and crisis management services and made about $100,000 in 
improvements. CARE made all payments the Lease required since 
it took possession of the Property. But CARE had cash flow 
issues at times due to late payments from the State of 
Hawai‘i 
for services provided under various contracts. 
In 2009, the State of Hawai
‘i Department of Commerce 
and Consumer Affairs (DCCA) administratively terminated 
McLaughlin I for "failure to file an annual report for a period 
of two years" or nonpayment of fees. In February 2014, Archer 
learned of the termination when CARE was renewing its insurance policy. 
2    
 
  
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 12, 2014, McLaughlin II was formed with 
Archer as its member and registered agent. 
In 2016, Rapoza inherited the Property from his 
parents. In February 2017, Rapoza notified Archer of his intent 
to terminate the Lease due to McLaughlin I's administrative 
termination. Rapoza then offered to enter into a new lease, 
increasing the rent from the $625 per month CARE was paying to 
$4,000 or $5,000 per month. 
In 2018, Rapoza filed the underlying complaint 
seeking: (1) a declaratory judgment stating the Lease was terminated based on the administrative termination of 
McLaughlin I; (2) an order ejecting McLaughlin II and CARE from 
the Property based on the termination of the Lease; and (3) an 
order declaring the Lease terminated based on material breach 
for late payment of rent.
2 
Following a bench trial, the circuit court ruled in 
favor of Defendants on all counts. Rapoza timely appealed. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
2 Rapoza challenges numerous findings and conclusions in his points of 
error, but does not analyze how each finding was erroneous or how each 
conclusion was wrong in his argument. Instead, Rapoza appears to address 
these findings and conclusions in the context of his argument. We address 
the challenged findings and conclusions in the same manner. 
3    
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) In his first and second points of error, Rapoza 
contends the circuit court erred in concluding the DCCA's 
administrative termination of McLaughlin I was not a material 
breach of the Lease. Rapoza also argues the circuit court 
erroneously concluded he was required to provide written notice 
of the breach and a twenty-day opportunity to cure the breach. 
Contrary to Rapoza's contentions, the circuit court did not err. 
"A lease to a [corporate entity] may, by its terms, 
terminate where the [entity] ceases to exist. But unless the lease so provides, the rights and obligations thereunder are not 
extinguished by the [entity's] dissolution, since leases affect 
property rights and survive the death of the parties." Perry v.
Shaw, 13 So.2d 811, 812 (Fla. 1942) (cleaned up). 
To support his argument that the language of the Lease 
provided for its termination, Rapoza quoted the following language from the "Default" provision in the Lease: 
"This demise is upon and subject to the [continuing] 
condition that . . . if any assignment . . . is made of the Lessees' property for the benefit of creditors . . . the Lessors may . . . terminate the lease[.]" 
(Emphases omitted.) Rapoza then attempted to tie this excerpt 
to the requirement to carry insurance on the Property to show 
4    
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Archer could not indemnify him for any losses. However, the 
language Rapoza relies on does not support his argument that the 
Lease provided for its termination upon McLaughlin I's 
administrative termination. In any event, in an unchallenged 
finding, the circuit court noted testimony showed CARE "always 
maintained insurance required by the Lease for the Property." 
Moreover, section 8 of the Lease required Rapoza to 
provide written notice of the breach and opportunity to cure before enforcing any forfeiture: 
before any forfeiture shall be enforced, the Lessors shall 
give written notice by registered mail to the Lessees of 
the breach constituting the ground of forfeiture and the 
Lessees shall have twenty (20) days from the date of 
receipt of such notice by them within which to remedy or 
cure such breach, and if such breach shall be so cured or remedied, then such breach shall be waived and no 
forfeiture shall be enforced for such breach[.] 
(Emphasis added.) To the extent McLaughlin I's administrative 
termination could result in a forfeiture, Rapoza does not point 
to evidence in the record indicating he provided written notice 
and opportunity to cure pursuant to section 8. See Onaka v.
Onaka
, 112 Hawai‘i 374, 387, 146 P.3d 89, 102 (2006) (explaining 
"[w]e have repeatedly warned that an appellate court will not 
sift through a voluminous record" where appellant fails to 
provide citations to the record). 
5    
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, the circuit court did not err in denying 
Rapoza's request for a declaratory judgment stating the Lease 
was terminated due to McLaughlin I's administrative termination. 
(2) Next, Rapoza contends the circuit court "abused 
its discretion in concluding that if [Defendants] did materially 
breach, they are entitled to equitable relief from forfeiture." 
(Emphasis omitted.) 
However, the circuit court acted within its 
discretion in exercising its equitable powers. 
"In an action for declaratory judgment, the court is 
empowered to grant ancillary equitable relief." Food Pantry,
Ltd. v. Waikiki Bus. Plaza, Inc., 58 Haw. 606, 613, 575 P.2d 869, 875 (1978). "And in the exercise of its general equity 
jurisdiction over forfeitures and penalties, it may afford 
relief against forfeiture for the breach of a covenant in a 
lease." Id. at 613, 575 P.2d at 876. "Equity does not favor 
forfeitures, and where no injustice would thereby be visited upon the injured party, equity will award him compensation rather than decree a forfeiture against the offending party." 
Id. at 614, 575 P.2d at 876. Absent "gross negligence" or 
"persistent and wil[l]ful conduct" and where the "lessor can 
reasonably and adequately be compensated for his injury, courts 
in equity will generally grant relief." Id.
6    
 
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the circuit court concluded the two late 
payments (paid more than twenty-days after the rent was due) did 
not require forfeiture as Defendants invested substantial 
amounts in obtaining the Lease and improving the Property to 
support its use as a transitional housing and crisis management 
facility. The circuit court further concluded the two late rent 
payments were not due to gross negligence or willful conduct, 
and Rapoza suffered no injury since he cashed the checks. 
The record supports the facts underlying the circuit 
court's conclusion, and it appears the circuit court did not disregard rules or principles of law to Rapoza's substantial 
detriment in exercising its equitable powers. 
Thus, the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion. 
(3) In his final point of error, Rapoza contends the 
circuit court erred in concluding he "breached the lease by filing [the] lawsuit." 
"When parties have differing positions as to the 
meaning of a contractual term, it [cannot] be deemed a breach for one party to sue to enforce its view of the contract," when 
the contract "does not contain a covenant not to sue." 
Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Universal Music Grp., Inc., 440 
F.Supp.2d 342, 345 (S.D.N.Y. 2006). 
7    
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court concluded Rapoza breached the Lease 
when he filed the underlying complaint: 
"77. Plaintiff breached the Lease by bringing suit for 
payments made over twenty days after the date due, without providing Plaintiff [sic] with notice of default and twenty days to cure such default as required by the Lease. 
Therefore, Plaintiff cannot 
maintain this action against Defendants." 
In this case, the Lease did not contain a covenant not 
to sue. But, as discussed above, section 8 requires written 
notice and an opportunity to cure before any forfeiture can 
occur. Again, Rapoza does not point to evidence in the record indicating he provided written notice and opportunity to cure. 
See generally, Onaka, 112 Hawai‘ i at 387, 146 P.3d at 102. 
Thus, as Rapoza's claims against Defendants otherwise 
lack support, we conclude the circuit court's error in 
conclusion 77 is harmless and does not require vacating the 
judgment. 
(4) In their sole point of error on cross-appeal, 
Defendants contend the circuit court erred in denying their 
second motion for summary judgment. However, because we affirm 
the circuit court's judgment in favor of Defendants, their 
cross-appeal is moot. See Leone v. Cnty. of Maui
, 141 Hawai‘i 
68, 89, 404 P.3d 1257, 1278 (2017) (explaining that "because we 
8    
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affirm the circuit court's judgment in favor of the County, we 
find its cross-appeal moot"). 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the September 9, 
2020 Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, September 18, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 Acting Chief Judge 
Jason R. Braswell,  
Terri Fujioka-Lilley, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Dawn H. Laird, Associate Judge 
For Plaintiff-Appellant/  
Cross-Appellee. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
 Associate Judge 
Paul M. Saito, 
Lindsay N. McAneeley, 
(Cades Schutte), for Defendants-Appellees/ 
Cross-Appellants. 
9 