NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
1 The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided.NO. CAAP-16-0000582
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
JOHANNE AUGER, Petitioner-Appellee, 
v.
PAUL POCINO, Respondent-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(FC-DA NO. 15-1-0210)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Respondent-Appellant Paul Pocino (Pocino) appeals from
the Amended Order For Protection (Amended Protective Order)
entered on July 22, 2016 in the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit
(family court).1 
On October 1, 2015, Petitioner-Appellee Johanne Auger
(Auger) filed a Petition For An Order of Protection against her
husband, Pocino, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
Chapter 586.  The family court issued a temporary restraining
order (TRO), and conducted evidentiary hearings on January 27,
2016, March 23, 2016, May 20, 2016, July 6, 2016 and July 20,
2016.  At the conclusion of the July 20, 2016 hearing the family
court entered its Order For Protection and subsequently
thereafter, on July 22, 2016 entered its Amended Protective Order
ordering Pocino, inter alia, to refrain from contacting or
threatening Auger for a period of one year.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
2 No answering brief was filed.
3During the pendency of the protective order proceeding, Pocino
initiated a divorce proceeding.  
2On appeal, Pocino contends that the family court erred
when it granted the Order For Protection based on the court's
findings that the two incidents of name-calling by Pocino
constituted extreme psychological abuse.
Upon careful review of the record, and the brief
submitted by Pocino2 and having given due consideration to the
arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Pocino's
points of errors as follows:
We conclude that the family court's findings of past
domestic abuse and that a protection order was necessary to
prevent domestic abuse or a recurrence of abuse was not supported
by substantial evidence and therefore was clearly erroneous.
The question on appeal is whether the record contains
"substantial evidence" supporting the family court's
determinations, and appellate review is thereby limited to
assessing whether those determinations are supported by
"credible evidence of sufficient quality and probative
value."
In re Doe, 95 Hawai #i 183, 196, 20 P.3d 616, 629 (2001)
(citations omitted).
"Domestic abuse" is defined, in part, as "[p]hysical
harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat of imminent physical
harm, bodily injury, or assault, extreme psychological abuse  or
malicious property damage between family or household members[.]"
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 586-1 (2006).  Auger and Pocino
both testified they were married and living together at the time
of the alleged incidents leading to the issuance of the
protective order against Pocino.3  Based on that testimony, the
family court properly found that their relationship fell within
the definition of household members.
"Extreme psychological abuse" is defined as "an
intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at an
individual that seriously alarms or disturbs consistently or
continually bothers the individual, and that serves no legitimate
purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a
reasonable person to suffer extreme emotional distress."NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
3HRS ยง 586-1.
At the hearing on July 20, 2016, the family court
granted the protective order for a period of one year concluding
that two incidents of name-calling by Pocino during a one-week
span constituted a course of conduct amounting to extreme
psychological abuse.
The family court declined to find that other incidents
alleged by Auger occurred.  The family court's reliance solely on
two incidents of name-calling did not amount to "substantial
evidence" to support the finding that Pocino's course of conduct
constituted extreme psychological abuse warranting the issuance
of the protective order.  Therefore, we conclude that the family
court erred in issuing the Amended Order of Protection.
Based on the foregoing, the Amended Order of Protection
entered on July 22, 2016 in the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit
is reversed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2017
On the briefs:
Donna E. Richards and
Mark R. Zenger
(Richards & Zenger)
for Respondent-Appellant.
James A. Stanton
(Stanton Law Group)
for Petitioner-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge