 
       
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-25-0000467 08-MAY-2026 08:06 AM Dkt. 51 SO 
NO. CAAP-25-0000467 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I
 
J.R., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
K.R., Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3FDV-25-0000007) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Leonard, and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
This appeal challenges the family court's entry of a 
default divorce decree that contained terms beyond what was 
prayed for in the complaint. We vacate and remand. 
Defendant-Appellant K.R. ( Husband) appeals from the 
May 20, 2025 "Divorce Decree," entered by the Family Court of the Third Circuit ( Family Court ).
   1
Husband contends the Family Court erred by entering 
the Divorce Decree as a default judgment, granting items of relief beyond what the complaint requested without a proof 
1 The Honorable Jeffrey W. Ng presided.       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
   hearing, by altering visitation, ordering a sale of the marital 
residence, and increasing Husband's child support obligation.2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve the contention as follows. 
On January 3, 2025, self-represented Plaintiff-
Appellee J.R. ( Wife) filed a "Complaint for Divorce" 
(Complaint ). Wife requested that Husband be awarded 
"[s]upervised visitation" of the children ( Children ) "as stated 
in [an] active Protective Order." The Complaint further requested that "[a]ll assets" and "debts" be "divided in a just and equitable way." Attached to the Complaint was an "Exhibit 
Pertaining to Conciliation, Child Care, and Child Custody 
Proceedings" ( Exhibit) and "Matrimonial Divorce Action 
Information" ( MAI). 
On January 30, 2025, a "Proof of Service" was filed, 
stating that Husband was personally served with the Complaint, MAI, Exhibit, and the Kids First Information Sheet on January 
22, 2025. 
On March 28, 2025, Wife filed a "Motion for Default" 
and attached a "Certificate of Service," certifying service of 
the motion on Husband. 
On March 31, 2025, the Family Court entered default 
against Husband. 
2 We have consolidated and restated Husband's points of error for
clarity. In light of our disposition, we need not address the remaining
contention that the Family Court erred by issuing the Divorce Decree "withoutentering findings of fact and conclusions of law despite a timely request."
(Emphasis added.) The record reflects that the request was not timely filed,
and Husband's August 18, 2025 request for findings of fact and conclusions oflaw acknowledges it, i.e. asserting "that there was good cause for theuntimeliness of this request[.]" (Emphasis added.)
2       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
    
 
  On May 15, 2025, Wife filed an "Asset and Debt 
Statement" listing the marital residence for the first time. 
Wife stated that the property was purchased for $150,000.00, that $113,076.00 was still owed on the property, and that the current gross value of the property was $350,000.00. 
On May 20, 2025, Wife filed the Child Support 
Guidelines Worksheet ( CSGW). Wife claimed Husband made 
$6,933.00 per month and requested Husband pay $1,200.00 per month in child support because Husband "charges cash" for carpentry work and "does not file accurately his income" [sic]. 
On May 20, 2025, Wife filed an "Affidavit of Plaintiff 
(For Uncontested Divorce)" ( Affidavit ), stating that default was 
entered against Husband, and requesting a deviation from the 
child support guidelines because Husband "charges clients cash" 
and "does not file what he makes." 
On May 20, 2025, Wife also filed a Proposed Divorce 
Decree. Wife proposed that Husband be awarded "visitation at the discretion of the [C]hildren and [Wife]" as "stated in the active Protective Order"; however, when the protective order 
expires, "visitation will be at the discretion of [Wife] with 
consideration of the [C]hildren's desires." Wife also proposed that Husband pay child support in the amount of $1,200.00 per month. Lastly, Wife proposed that the marital property "be sold at fair market value with [e]quity to be split equally," and that Husband have "45 days to vacate the property and leave all structures and infrastructures in tact [sic]." 
The record reflects that all of Wife's filings after 
the March 28, 2025 Motion for Default had a "Notice of Electronic Filing"; and these notices stated that Husband needed to be "conventionally served[.]" The record does not reflect 
3
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  that Husband was conventionally served with Wife's post-default 
filings. 
On May 20, 2025, the Family Court approved the 
Proposed Divorce Decree, from which Husband timely appealed. 
Husband argues that the Family Court "deprived 
[Husband] of notice and the opportunity to respond" when it granted the Divorce Decree that included "relief not pleaded" in 
the Complaint. Husband contends that "[Hawai ʻi Family Court 
Rules (HFCR)] Rule 54(c) forbids default judgments that differ 
in kind or exceed what the pleadings demand" and that Wife "did 
not request that visitation be placed at [Wife']s discretion or extended indefinitely beyond the term of the protective order" 
in the Complaint; and Wife did not serve Husband prior to 
default "with any documents that mentioned the marital residence" nor "requested a change to [Husband]'s child support obligations." 
Wife argues that Husband was "served with the 
Complaint for Divorce, which placed . . . custody determinations[] and equitable division of property at issue," 
and Husband "had the opportunity to be heard by filing a 
response," and his "failure to do so resulted in default."
3 
HFCR Rule 55, entitled "Default," provides for 
judgment by default in subsection (b) with a proof hearing, as follows: 
(b) Judgment.  In a contested or uncontested action, where
it appears from the record and by testimony (or by
affidavit or declaration in an uncontested matrimonial action) that the adverse party has been duly served with 
3 Wife also argues that Husband should have filed an HFCR Rule
60(b) motion for relief to set aside default before filing this appeal. We 
note that Husband is not challenging the entry of default or seeking relief
from the default; rather, Husband contends that the default judgment in thiscase, i.e. the Divorce Decree, went beyond what was prayed for in theComplaint. 
4       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  the complaint or dispositive motion, and the adverse party
has failed to appear or otherwise defend as provided bythese rules, the court may grant an entry of default andproceed with a proof hearing, when a hearing is required,
and enter a default judgment. 
(Emphasis added.) HFCR Rule 54 entitled "Judgment; Costs," 
contains a limitation for default judgments, as follows: 
(c) Demand for judgment.  A judgment by default shall not
be different in kind from or exceed in amount that which 
was prayed for in the demand for judgment. Except as to a
party against whom a judgment is entered by default, everyfinal judgment shall grant the relief to which the party inwhose favor it is rendered is entitled, even if the partyhas not demanded such relief in the party's pleadings. 
(Emphasis added.) 
In Uyeno v. Uyeno, this court held that the family 
court erred in granting default judgment and allowing husband to 
be awarded an offset from wife's share of husband's retirement benefits even though said offset was never mentioned, requested, 
nor prayed for prior to default. 105 Hawai ʻi 335, 340-41, 
97 P.3d 411, 416-17 (App. 2004). 
In MD v. JR, this court held 
that the family court erred when it "granted relief by default 
that was different in kind from (and greater than) the relief sought" by father prior to entry of default, and mother was "not provided with notice of the scope of [f]ather's new claim . . . and a meaningful opportunity to defend against it." No. 
CAAP-19-0000003, 2022 WL 3011147, at *2-5 (Haw. App. July 29, 
2022) (mem. op.). 
Here, Wife did not make any claim as to the division 
of the marital property, child support payments, and custody prior to the entry of default against Husband. In the Complaint, Wife requested Husband be awarded supervised visits 
"as stated in [the] active Protective Order." 
While Wife 
5       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
     
  
 
   
 
   
 requested that "[a]ll assets" and "debts" "be divided in a just 
and equitable way[,]" Wife made no specific claims regarding the 
marital property. See Uyeno, 105 Hawai ʻi at 341, 97 P.3d at 417 
(holding that although there were "equitable deviation issues" 
noted in a pretrial order prior to default, it did not "specify" the issues or "mention any claim . . . for reimbursement or 
offset"). Lastly, Wife made no claim as to child support 
payments and Husband's income. 
After default was entered against Husband, Wife filed 
an Asset and Debt Statement listing the marital residence; an 
Affidavit and CSGW claiming Husband made $
6,933.00 per month and 
requesting a deviation from the CSGW; and the Proposed Decree 
with terms that visitation "be at the discretion of [Wife]," 
Husband pay "$1[,]200 per month" in child support, and the marital residence be sold "with [e]quity to be split equally" and Husband to "have 45 days to vacate the property." 
None of 
these filings, however, were conventionally served on Husband as 
required. See Hawai ʻi Electronic Filing & Service Rules ( HEFSR ) 
Rule 14 and 6.5 
We conclude the Family Court abused its discretion in 
issuing the Divorce Decree, which contained terms that went 
beyond what was prayed for prior to default, and where Husband was not provided with notice of Wife's new claims. See
4 HEFSR Rule 1 defines "[c]onventional service" as "providing a
paper document or printed copy of a document to a party . . . as required by
law or rule of court and submitting a certificate to the court attesting tothe fact the paper document or printed copy of a document was so provided." 
5 HEFSR Rule 6.2, entitled "Conventional Service of Electronically
Filed Documents," requires that the filing party "shall provide conventionalservice of electronically filed documents that are required to be served toparties who are not JEFS Users or who have not consented to electronicservice. The filing party shall file a certificate of conventional service."
6       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
   
 Kakinami, 127 Hawai ʻi 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 705 (2012) 
("Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in 
making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." (citation omitted)). 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Family 
Court's May 20, 2025 Divorce Decree and remand for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, May 8, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Sharla A. Manley, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
J.R., Self-Represented Plaintiff-
Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Chief Judge
 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
7
 