NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-19-0000068
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF SK, LK JR., SKF, LK
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 17-00094)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Father-Appellant (Father 1 ) appeals and Mother-Cross-
Appellant ( Mother) cross-appeals from a January 18, 2019 Order
Terminating Parental Rights, issued by the Family Court of the
First Circuit ( Family Court).   The Family Court terminated Father
1 and Mother's (collectively, Parents) rights to their children,
SK, LK Jr., and LK ( Father 1's Children ), and Mother's rights to
her child with Father-Appellee/Cross-Appellee (Father 2 ), SK-F
(children identified above collectively referred to as Children). 
The Family Court awarded permanent custody of Children to
Appellee/Cross-Appellee Department of Human Services ( DHS), and
ordered a permanent plan with a goal of having the Children adopted
by their resource caregivers ( Resource Caregivers ).  21
Father 1 argues the Family Court erroneously concluded he
was unable and unwilling to provide a safe family home for Father
1  The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
2  The Family Court terminated Father 2's parental rights to SK-F.
Father 2 does not appeal.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1's Children, even with the assistance of a service plan, and would
not become able and willing to do so within the foreseeable future.
He maintains that the Permanent Plan, with the goal of adoption by
the current Resource Caregivers, is not in Father 1's Children's
best interests.  Related to these points is Father 1's contention
that in the Family Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
(FOF/COL), Findings of Fact (FOFs) 28, 29, 33, 35, 98, 103, 105,
107, 108, 118, 120, 121, 126-28, and 131, part of FOF 104, and
(COLs) 16-19 are clearly erroneous.  
Mother argues that the Family Court erred in terminating
her parental rights to Children where there was insufficient
evidence that her oxycodone, cocaine, and alcohol abuse presented a
threat of harm to Children, DHS did not make reasonable efforts to
reunify her with Children because DHS failed to provide her with
services for six months while Children were in foster custody, and
the Family Court erred by not giving her more time to demonstrate
sobriety.  Related to these points is Mother's contention that the
FOF/COL, FOFs 34, 35, 71, 72, 74, 77, 79, 82, 83, 85, 86, 90, 94,
97, 124-29, and 136 and COLs 17 and 19 are clearly erroneous, and
COL 14 is wrong. 
I.  Father 1's Appeal
A. The Family Court did not clearly err by concluding that
Father 1 was unwilling and unable to provide a safe
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan,
and would not become willing and able to do so within a
reasonable amount of time.
We reject Father 1's contention that the Family Court
clearly erred by concluding he was unwilling and unable to provide
a safe family home for Father 1's Children, even with the
assistance of a service plan, and would not become willing or able
to do so within a reasonable amount of time.  We also reject his
related argument that FOFs 98,  103, 105, 107, and 108,  part of4 3
3  FOF 98 provides:
[Father 1]'s primary problems/safety issues that subjected
his three children to harm and/or threatened harm and
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
104, and COLs 16 and 17  are clearly erroneous.6 5 
1. Father 1's incarceration was not the only reason the
Family Court terminated his parental rights.
While this case was proceeding, Father 1 was arrested and
then incarcerated pending trial on two counts of Sexual Assault in
the Third Degree (Sex Assault 3 ), for touching the private parts of
his girlfriend's fourteen-year-old daughter.  Citing to In re Doe,
100 Hawai# i 335, 345, 60 P.3d 285, 295 (2002), Father 1 argues that
3(...continued)
prevents him from providing a safe home for them is his
chaotic lifestyle, his relationship problems with [SK] and
[LK Jr.], his lack of parenting skills, his being an
admitted sex offender of a child, and his incarceration at
the time of the December 19, 2018 trial.
4  FOFs 103, 105, 107, and 108 provide:
103.  Even if [Father 1] were sentenced to a period of
probation on January 3, 2019 and released from
incarceration, he will not be able to reunify with any of
his three children at that time. 
. . . . 
105.  At the time of the trial, due to his
incarceration, [Father 1] was not able to provide a safe
home for his children.  Even if he were not incarcerated,
[Father 1] would [sic] have been able to provide a safe home
for his children. 
. . . . 
107.  [Father 1] is not presently willing and able to
provide his children with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan.
108.  It is not reasonably foreseeable that [Father 1]
will become willing and able to provide his children with a
safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan
because even if [Father 1] were to suddenly change his long
standing pattern of behavior, there is no likelihood that he
would sufficiently resolve his problems at any identifiable
point in the future. 
5  Father 1 appears to contest the part of FOF 104 that provides,
"[Father 1] would not be able to complete sex offender treatment and reunify
with his children before the two-year anniversary of his children's May 22,
2017 date of entry into foster care: May 22, 2019." 
6  COLs 16 and 17 provide:
16. [Father 1] . . . [sic] not presently willing and
able to provide [Father 1's Children] with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service plan.
17.  It is not reasonably foreseeable that [Father 1]
. . . will become willing and able to provide [Father 1's]
with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period of time.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the sole basis for the TPR Motion was his incarceration, and a
parent's incarceration cannot be the only reason for terminating
their parental rights.  He notes that before he was in custody, he
was on track to reunify with Children 1.  
Although incarceration does not mandate a per se
forfeiture of parental rights, it "may be considered along with
other factors and circumstances impacting the ability of the parent
to remedy the conditions of abuse and neglect."  Id.  (Internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).  In FOF 98, in addition to
Father 1's incarceration, the Family Court identified as Father 1's
"primary problems/safety issues" his admission to sexually
assaulting a child (he pleaded guilty to both counts of Sex Assault
3), relationship problems with SK and LK Jr., and lack of parenting
skills. 
As the Family Court found, before Father 1 was arrested
for Sexual Assault 3, he "had completed services and the DHS was in
the process of transitioning [Father 1's Children] to his care." 
However, the reunification process was derailed by Father 1's
arrest and guilty plea in the criminal case.  At trial in this
case, K. Stacia Ohira (Ohira), who is employed by DHS as a human
services professional in the field of child protective or welfare
services, was designated by the Family Court as an expert in the
field of child protective or welfare services.  Ohira testified
that it is a major concern when a parent sexually assaults someone
who is the same age as the parent's child.  At the time of the
permanency hearing, SK was the same age or close to the same age as
the sex assault victim in Father 1's criminal case. 
Moreover, Father 1 testified that he had not been
sentenced yet, but believed he would be given five years' probation
in accordance with his plea deal and may be ordered to participate
in a psychosexual risk assessment and sex-offender treatment. 
Father 1 testified that even if he was sentenced to probation and
released from OCCC, he would be unable to reunify with Father 1's
Children at that time and would still need to complete services in
this case and possibly the criminal case. Ohira testified that even
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
if Father 1 were sentenced to probation, he would be unable to
reunify by the two-year, statutory deadline,  which expired
approximately five months after trial, because it would take him
much longer than six months to complete sex-offender treatment. 
Ohira also testified that prior to Father 1's arrest, DHS was
scheduling conjunct therapy sessions so Father 1, SK, and LK Jr.
could repair the parent-child relationship and move toward
reunification; however, conjunct therapy never occurred because
Father 1 was arrested. 7
At the time of trial, SK was over fourteen years old and
LK Jr. was twelve years and nine months old.  The Family Court
found, and it is not disputed, that SK and LK Jr. did not want to
be reunified with their parents and they both consented to the
permanent plan with the goal of adoption by Resource Caregivers. 
See HRS § 587A-33 (2018) (providing that at a termination of
parental rights hearing, one factor the court should determine is
whether "[t]he child consents to the permanent plan if the child is
at least fourteen years old . . ."); HRS § 587A-21(d) (2018); HRS §
578-2(a)(8) (2018) (providing that among the individuals from whom
a court should obtain consent for a petition to adopt a child is
"the child to be adopted if more than ten years of age, unless the
court in the best interest of the child dispenses with the child's
consent.").
In this case, although Father 1 finished services and was
on track to reunify with Children 1 before he was arrested,
sufficient evidence was presented at trial that Father 1's "primary
problems/safety issues" which had been identified by DHS remained
at issue and they could not be resolved in a reasonable time
period, particularly within two years of the Children entering
foster care.
7  Under Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 587A-33(a)(2) (2018), at a
termination of parental rights hearing, the Family Court shall determine
whether "[i]t is not reasonably foreseeable that the child's parent whose
rights are subject to termination will become willing and able to provide the
child with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan,
within a reasonable period of time, which shall not exceed two years from the
child's date of entry into foster care."  (Emphasis added.)
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2. The Family Court did not err by failing to give
Father 1 more time to reunify.
Father 1 argues that he should have been given more time
to reunify with Father 1's Children.  He maintains that once he was
released from custody in his criminal case, five months of the two-
year statutory maximum remained in the instant case, and he could
have achieved reunification in that time.  However, as discussed,
the evidence showed that Father 1 would be unable to reunify until
he completed services in both cases, which he very likely could not
do until long after the statutory deadline in this case passed. 
The Family Court did not err by failing to give Father 1 more time
to reunify.
B. Father 1 does not demonstrate the Family Court clearly
erred by finding DHS made reasonable efforts to reunify
him with Father 1's Children.
Father 1 argues that DHS should have exercised its
discretion to extend the two-year statutory period, and because DHS
did not do so, DHS did not make reasonable efforts to reunify him
with Father 1's Children.  Related to this point is Father 1's
contention that FOFs 126-128  are clearly erroneous. 8
Two years is the maximum amount of time within which a
parent must become willing and able to provide a safe family home.
See HRS § 587A-33(a)(2).  Once DHS determines the criteria for
terminating parental rights is present, nothing prevents DHS  
8  FOFs 126-128 provide:
126.  Under the circumstances presented by this case,
the DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts to reunify
. . . [Father 1] . . . with [Father 1's Children] . . . by
identifying necessary, appropriate and reasonable services
to address the identified safety issues (problems), and by
making appropriate and timely referrals for these services.
127.  Under the circumstances presented in this case,
the DHS treated . . . [Father 1] . . . fairly and serviced
the entire family intensely since the start of the instant
DHS and Family Court intervention with this family.
128.  None of the underlying facts and data upon which
the DHS based its opinions, assessments and recommendations
were shown to be unreliable or untrustworthy.  The DHS'
continuing assessments in this case were conducted in an
appropriate manner.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
from filing a motion to terminate parental rights.  See HRS
§ 587A–31(h) (2018).  Father 1 provides no authority to support his
argument that DHS failed to make reasonable efforts to reunify him
with Father 1's Children because DHS failed to extend the two-year
statutory period, and we find none.  FOFs 126-128 are supported by
sufficient evidence and not clearly erroneous.
C. Father 1 fails to demonstrate the Family Court erred by
concluding that the Permanent Plan with the goal of
adoption by Resource Caregivers was in Father 1's
Children's best interests.
Father 1 argues in a summary fashion that he "does not
believe it is in [Father 1's Children]'s best interest to be
adopted by [Resource Caregivers][.]"  Related to this argument is
his contention that FOFs 120 and 121  and COL 19  are clearly
erroneous.  Father 1 does not provide any discernible argument on
this point, and it is waived.  See Hawai#i Rules of Appellate
Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7).10 9
D. Remaining Contested FOFs and COL
Father 1 argues that FOFs 28 and 29  are clearly
erroneous, but the FOFs accurately describe the contents of the
January 15, 2019 Decision and Order and procedural history and are
not clearly erroneous. 11
9  FOFs 120 and 121 provide:
120.  There are no compelling reasons/evidence why the
goals of either legal guardianship or permanent custody is
[sic] in the Children's best interests.  Therefore, the goal
of adoption is in the Children's best interests.
121.  The Permanent Plan, dated July 27, 2018, is in
the Children's best interests.
10  COL 19 provides, "The Permanent Plan, with the goal of adoption,
dated July 27, 2018, is in the best interests of the Children." 
11  FOFs 28 and 29 provide:
28.  On January 15, 2019, the court entered its
Decision and Order.  The court entered HRS § 587A-33(a)
findings; granted the DHS' Motion to Terminate Parental
Rights; terminated the parental rights of [Parents] and
[Father 2]; awarded permanent custody of the Children to the
DHS; and ordered the permanent plan, with the goal of
adoption.
29.  On January 18, 2019, the court entered the [TPR
Order] and the Letters of Permanent Custody.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Father 1 contests FOF 33  and 131,  which include
credibility determinations, which we decline to review.  See Fisher
v. Fisher, 111 Hawai#i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006).  The rest
of FOF 33 accurately summarizes Ohira's testimony and is not
clearly erroneous. 13 12
Father 1 contests FOFs 35  and 118  and COL 18  but
presents no discernible argument with regard to them, and the
points are waived.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).16 15 14
II. Mother's Cross-Appeal
A. The Family Court did not clearly err by finding Mother's
substance abuse posed a threat of harm to Children.
Mother concedes that there was sufficient evidence to
show she abused cocaine, oxycodone, and alcohol; however, she
12  FOF 33 provides:
Based on the credible expert testimony of [Ohira], the
parents may participate in services and complete services
without benefitting from services by failing to make
necessary and appropriate lifestyle changes to allow the
parents the ability to provide a safe family home for their
children.  Unless parents are sincerely motivated to make
such changes, are honest and truthful in services regarding
their problems, and gain insight into all of their behaviors
that led to their causing their children to be harmed and/or
subject to threatened harm, the parents will not be able to
make the necessary and appropriate internal lifestyle
changes to allow the parents to provide a safe family home
for their children.  The parents must demonstrate that they
have addressed their safety issues (problems) in services
and that they have made appropriate and necessary internal
lifestyle changes to allow them to provide a safe family
home for their children, and demonstrate the ability to
sustain such changes over a period of time.
13  FOF 131 provides, "[Father 1] is not a credible witness, unless
otherwise stated above."
14  FOF 35 provides:
It is reasonable to look at a parent's history and patterns
of behavior in assessing a parent's ability to provide a
safe family home.  A parent's history and patterns of
behavior is an indicator of future behavior if the parent
continues his or her historical patterns of behavior.
15  FOF 118 provides, "Having made the 'parental unfitness' findings
of fact, HRS § 587A-33(a)(1) and (2), the court makes the following findings
of fact regarding the Permanent Plan, dated July 27, 2018, pursuant to HRS
§ 587A-33(a)(3)."
16  COL 18 provides, "Having made conclusions of law pertaining to
'parental unfitness' pursuant to HRS § 587A-33(a)(1) and (2), the court makes
the following conclusions of law regarding the Permanent Plan, dated July 27,
2018, pursuant to HRS § 587A-33(a)(3)."
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
argues that insufficient evidence was presented to show that her
substance abuse posed a risk of harm to Children.  She points out
that according to her psychological evaluation, her parenting
deficiencies likely stemmed from her chaotic and disruptive
upbringing.  She maintains that although LK was exposed to cocaine
and oxycodone in utero, he showed no symptoms of drug exposure, and
no reliable evidence was adduced to show that a parent's substance
abuse per se is a safety issue.  Related to this point is Mother's
contention that FOFs 71, 72,  74, 90, and 13620 and COL 17  are21 19 18 17
17  FOFs 71 and 72 provide:
71. [Mother']s primary problem / safety issue that
subjected her four children to harm and/or threatened harm
and prevents her from providing a safe home for them is her
untreated substance abuse.  She exposed [LK] to cocaine and
oxycodone in utero during her pregnancy.  Her drug use
subjected her children to her unstable and chaotic
lifestyle, which is the cause of [SK] and [LK Jr.]'s
negative feelings about her ability to provide a safe and
stable home.  Her untreated substance abuse also subjected
the Children to threatened harm.
72.  Based on the credible evidence in the record and
drawing all reasonable inferences, as long as [Mother] does
not address her untreated substance abuse, she will not be
able to provide a safe home for her children, even if she
were to participate and successfully complete other
services.  [Mother] must successfully complete all phases of
substance abuse treatment, and demonstrate the ability to
live a drug-free and sober lifestyle on a sustained and
prolonged basis, by having negative drug urinalysis test
results on a sustained and prolonged basis.
18  FOF 74 provides, "[Mother]'s drugs of choice are cocaine and
oxycodone, a form of OxyContin.  According to [Mother], she uses cocaine for
tooth pain, and uses oxycodone for back pain.  However, she is not under the
care of a dentist for the tooth pain or a physician for the back pain, and she
does not have prescriptions for these drugs.  She obtains the drugs
illegally."
19  FOF 90 provides, "Based on the credible evidence in the record, and
drawing all reasonable inferences from the credible evidence, [Mother] will
continue to pose a substantial foreseeable threat of harm to, and will not be
willing and able to provide a safe home for, the Children as long as her
untreated substance abuse problem continues to exist."
20  FOF 136 provides:
It is reasonable for [Ohira], testifying on behalf of the
DHS and as an expert witness in the area of child protective
and welfare services, to rely on the facts she used to
provide the bases for her expert opinions.  The facts she
used to form her expert assessments and opinions are of the
type reasonably relied upon by experts in her areas of
expertise.  Her testimony reflects the DHS' expert child
protective and welfare assessments and opinions in this
(continued...)
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
clearly erroneous. 
Mother does not indicate where in the record she objected
to DHS's identification of her substance-abuse problem as a safety
concern.  In fact, at the adjudicatory hearing on DHS's Petition
for Temporary Foster Custody, Mother, who was represented by
counsel, stipulated to DHS's recommendation in its May 18, 2017
Family Service Plan that she undergo substance-abuse treatment
because her unresolved substance-abuse issues were a safety issue. 
She never objected that substance-abuse treatment was unnecessary
or inappropriate.  Therefore, this point is waived.  See HRAP Rule
28(b)(4).
Even if Mother had preserved this point, HRS § 587A-
7(a)(7) (2018) ("Safe family home factors") provides that when
deciding if it will terminate parental rights, the Family Court
must take into consideration "[w]hether there is a history of
substance abuse by the child's family[.]"  Based on the plain
language of the statute, a parent's substance abuse must be
considered in assessing safety concerns.  See In re Doe, 100
Hawai#i at 343 n.12, 60 P.3d at 293 n.12 (block quotation format
and citations omitted) ("Where the language of a statute is plain
and unambiguous, our only duty is to give effect to the statute's
plain and obvious meaning.").  Therefore, the Family Court did not
clearly err by finding that Mother's substance abuse posed a risk
of harm to Children, and FOFs 71, 72, 74,  90, and 136 and COL 17
are not clearly erroneous. 22
B. The Family Court was not wrong to conclude that Mother
failed to timely argue DHS did not give her a reasonable
opportunity to reunify.
Mother argues that the Family Court clearly erred by
finding she failed to timely argue DHS did not make reasonable
20(...continued)
case.
21  COL 17 provides, in relevant part, "It is not reasonably foreseeable
that [Mother] . . . will become willing and able to provide the Children with
a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
reasonable period of time."
22  Mother does not actually argue that FOF 74 is clearly erroneous. 
Rather, she maintains it fails to support the finding that her substance abuse
was a safety issue.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
efforts to reunify her with Children.  She asserts that after March
23, 2018, DHS stopped providing her with services, and she raised
her objection at the first opportunity, a hearing on September 13,
2018.  Related to this argument is Mother's contention that part of
COL 14 is wrong.23
In FOF 93, which Mother does not contest, the Family
Court found:
At all of the hearings before the September 13, 2018 hearing,
[Mother] did not object to the finding that the DHS was making
reasonable efforts to reunify the Children with her, and did
not make a demand for services.  Throughout the pendency of
the case prior to September 13, 2018, [Mother] did not file
any motions asking the court to compel the DHS to make timely
referrals for services for her.
Although Mother argues that after March 23, 2018, there
was no hearing until September 13, 2018, a transcript in the record
on appeal shows that the Family Court held a periodic
review/permanency hearing on March 29, 2018, at which Mother's
counsel appeared and did not move the Family Court to compel DHS to
refer Mother to services.  Further, Mother does not contest that
prior to the September 18, 2018 hearing, her counsel failed 
to file any motions to compel.  See In re Doe, 100 Hawai#i at 338,
343–44, 60 P.3d at 288, 293–94.  Given Mother's delay in raising
the issue, plus the evidence showing she exhibited an unwillingness
to participate in services, the Family Court did not err by finding
that her demand was untimely, and the part of COL 14 that she
contests is not wrong.  
C. The Family Court did not wrongly conclude that DHS made
reasonable efforts to reunify Mother with Children and
gave Mother a reasonable opportunity to reunify.
Mother argues that the Family Court wrongly concluded DHS
gave her a reasonable opportunity to reunify with Children.  She
23  The relevant part of COL 14 provides:
[Mother] waived the defense at the termination of parental
rights trial that the DHS did not make reasonable efforts to
reunify her with her children and that the DHS did not give
her a reasonable opportunity to reunify with her children by
making timely referral for services, because she failed to
make timely objections at all hearings prior to the
September 13, 2018 hearing.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
maintains that since DHS failed to refer her to any services
between March 23 and October 31, 2018, DHS should have given her an
equivalent additional amount of time to show she could maintain
sobriety.  Related to this point is Mother's contention that FOFs
97 and COL 19  are clearly erroneous and part of COL 14  is
wrong.  26 25 24
We hold that FOF 97 and COL 19 are not clearly erroneous,
the part of COL 14 Mother contests is not wrong, and the Family
Court did not wrongly conclude that DHS made reasonable efforts to
reunify Mother with Children and gave Mother a reasonable
opportunity to reunify.  The evidence shows that DHS referred
Mother to numerous services to address her substance abuse, and
Mother failed to participate in them.  Mother disagrees and
presents specific arguments with regard to the following FOFs
concerning her participation in services.
FOF 77 provides, "In July 2017, [Mother] was again
assessed for substance abuse treatment at Women's Way, but she did
not follow-through with the requirements to be admitted into the
program."  It appears FOF 77 is clearly erroneous in part because
according to Ohira's testimony and a September 13, 2018 Salvation
Army Letter, Mother contacted Women's Way in July 2018, not 2017. 
However, the error is harmless because even without the erroneous
date, there is sufficient evidence to support the Family Court's
finding that Mother was unable and unwilling to provide a safe
family home.
FOF 79 provides, "After [Mother] failed to participate in
substance abuse treatment with Ho#omau Ke Ola in November 2017, the
24  FOF 97 provides, "It is not reasonably foreseeable that [Mother]
will become willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home,
even with the assistance of a service plan because even if [Mother] were to
suddenly change her long standing pattern of behavior, there is no likelihood
that she would sufficiently resolve her problems at any identifiable point in
the future."
25  COL 19 provides, "The Permanent Plan, with the goal of adoption,
dated July 27, 2018, is in the best interests of the Children." 
26  Mother contests the part of COL 14 providing, "Even if [Mother] had
made timely objections, the credible evidence in the record shows that the DHS
did make reasonable efforts and gave [Mother] the [sic] reasonable opportunity
to reunify with her children." 
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
DHS referred her to Hope, Inc. for substance abuse treatment, but
[Mother] failed to follow-through with this referral."  FOF 79 is
clearly erroneous in part because Ohira testified that Mother
referred herself for substance abuse treatment with Hope, Inc. 
However, the error is harmless because even without the erroneous
finding, there is sufficient evidence to support the Family Court's
finding that Mother was unable and unwilling to provide a safe
family home.
FOF 82 provides:
In October 2018, the DHS referred [Mother] to Hina Mauka for a
substance abuse assessment and random drug urinalysis.  Hina
Mauka made an appointment with [Mother] for the substance
abuse assessment to be conducted on November 19, 2018. 
[Mother] failed to participate in the November 19, 2018
substance abuse assessment.
Mother argues she did not have sufficient contact with Hina Mauka
in November 2018 to know that a substance abuse assessment was
scheduled.  Mother's vague assertion is insufficient to overcome
the evidence in support of the finding.
FOF 83 provides, "In the latter part of 2018, [Mother]
contacted Women's Way for substance abuse treatment.  However,
[Mother] did not follow-through with Women's Way."  Mother argues
she attempted to follow through by repeatedly contacting the
program in December 2018.  However, given Ohira's testimony that
Mother failed to follow through and Mother's admission in her 
testimony that she failed to follow up when Women's Way did not
call her back regarding scheduling, there was sufficient evidence
to support FOF 83.
FOF 85 provides:
Throughout the pendency of this case, [Mother] failed to
successfully complete a substance abuse treatment program, and
has failed to demonstrate the ability to live a drug-free and
sober lifestyle on a sustained and prolonged basis.  She has
not had sustained and prolonged periods of testing negative
during drug urinalyses or drug hair follicle tests (including
not missing drug tests which were deemed to be presumptively
positive test results for illicit drugs).
Mother argues that she testified she was clean and sober at the
time of trial.  However, FOF 85 is supported by sufficient evidence
in the record, the Family Court found Mother was not credible, and
if Mother was sober at the time of trial, it would not contradict
the finding. 
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother argues that FOF 86,  94, 124, and 126-28  are
clearly erroneous where DHS made no efforts to refer her to
services after March 23, 2018 and until October 31, 2018.  However,
a contact log admitted into evidence shows that DHS referred Mother
to services during that time period and Mother either failed to
comply or lacked the proper insurance. 29 28 27
D. Remaining Contested FOFs
Mother contests FOFs 34 and 35,  which accurately
summarize parts of Ohira's testimony and are not clearly erroneous. 30
27  FOF 86 provides, "[Mother]'s failure to participate in and
successfully complete substance abuse treatment was the result of her own
conduct, and not the result of the alleged failure of the DHS to refer her for
substance abuse treatment in a timely manner."
28  FOF 94 provides, "[Mother]'s testimony and representations that the
DHS did not make timely referrals for services for her, including for
substance abuse treatment, is not supported by the credible evidence in the
record and is not credible." 
29  FOFs 124 and 126-28 provide:
124.  Under the circumstances of this case, the DHS
made reasonable efforts to prevent or eliminate the need to
remove the Children from the family home. 
. . . . 
126.  Under the circumstances presented by this case,
the DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts to reunify
[Mother] with the Children . . . by identifying necessary,
appropriate and reasonable services to address the
identified safety issues (problems), and by making
appropriate and timely referrals for these services.
127.  Under the circumstances presented in this case,
the DHS treated [Mother] . . . fairly and serviced the
entire family intensely since the start of the instant DHS
and Family Court intervention with this family.
128.  None of the underlying facts and data upon which
the DHS based its opinions, assessments and recommendations
were shown to be unreliable or untrustworthy.  The DHS'
continuing assessments in this case were conducted in an
appropriate manner.
30  FOFs 34 and 35 provide:
34.  Based on the credible expert testimony of
[Ohira], a parent's substance abuse impairs the parent's
ability to provide a safe family home by placing the
children at risk for threatened harm and/or neglect.
35.  It is reasonable to look at a parent's history
and patterns of behavior in assessing a parent's ability to
provide a safe family home.  A parent's history and patterns
of behavior is an indicator of future behavior if the parent
continues his or her historical patterns of behavior.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother contests FOFs 129 and 130,  in which the Family
Court found Ohira credible and Mother not credible, respectively. 
Determining witness credibility is within the province of the
Family Court.  See Fisher, 111 Hawai#i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360.  The
FOFs are not clearly erroneous.31
III.  Conclusion
 For the reasons set forth above, the Order Terminating
Parental Rights issued by the Family Court of the First Circuit on
January 18, 2019, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 18, 2020.  
On the briefs:
Rebecca S. Lester, 
Father-Appellant/Cross
Appellee.
Jacob G. Delaplane, 
for Mother Cross-Appellant.
Patrick A. Pascual, 
Julio C. Herrera,
Erin L.S. Yamashiro,
Erin K. Torres, 
Deputy Attorneys General 
Department of the Attorney
General, for Petitioner-
Appellee/Cross-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
31  FOFs 129 and 130 provide:
129. [Ohira], testifying on behalf of DHS, is a
credible witness.
130. [Mother] is not a credible witness.
15