FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
PETER DAVID, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000109
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0050)

 
DECEMBER 15, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FOLEY and REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Peter David (David) with second-degree murder 
(Count 1) and second-degree assault (count 2). The State alleged that on or about January 2, 2011, David fatally stabbed his cousin, Santhony Albert (Albert), and assaulted Torokas Kikku (Kikku) with a dangerous instrument. David and Albert had been drinking before the charged murder.  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At trial, David argued that he had stabbed Albert in
 
self-defense. The jury returned guilty verdicts on the included
 
offenses of manslaughter and third-degree assault. The Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced David to
twenty years of imprisonment on Count 1 and one year of
 imprisonment on Count 2, with the terms to be served
 concurrently. 
David appeals his convictions and sentences. 
In
 
challenging his convictions, David argues that the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion (1) in permitting Kikku to testify about
 statements made by David that were not disclosed to the defense
 prior to trial, and (2) permitting the State to call two rebuttal
 witnesses, who David contends should have been called in the
 State's case-in-chief. 
We hold that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in determining a remedy for the State's discovery
 violation and in permitting the State to call rebuttal witnesses.
 We therefore affirm David's convictions. 
David also challenges his sentences. At sentencing,
 
the prosecutor highlighted the fact that David is from Chuuk,
 Micronesia. The Prosecutor then stated that "we're talking
 Micronesians who get inebriated on alcohol, then become violent
 with their own family members, their own friends and they involve
 knives." The Prosecutor urged the Circuit Court to impose a 
sentence of twenty years of incarceration on David to "send[] a
 message to the Micronesian community" that such behavior "is not
 acceptable in the laws of the United States and the State of
 Hawaii." David argues that these remarks not only constituted
 prosecutorial misconduct, but impermissibly affected the Circuit
 Court's sentence and require that David's sentences be vacated. 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided over the trial and sentencing.
For the proceedings in the Circuit Court, the prosecutor was Darrell J.K. Wong
and David's counsel was Earl Edward Aquino.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We hold that a defendant's race, ethnicity, or national
 
origin cannot be used as a justification for the imposition of a
 
harsher penalty on the defendant. Although we do not believe
 that the Circuit Court accepted or based its sentence on the
 prosecutor's improper arguments, "justice must satisfy the
 appearance of justice." Offutt v. United States, 348 U.S. 11,
 
14, (1954). Given the prosecutor's emphasis of David's
 Micronesian heritage in his sentencing recommendation, and the
 highly improper nature of the prosecutor's arguments, we conclude
 that to satisfy the appearance of justice, the Circuit Court was
 required to make its repudiation of the prosecutor's arguments
 clear on the record. Under the circumstances of this case, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court's response to the prosecutor's
 arguments was not sufficiently definitive to satisfy the
 appearance of justice. Accordingly, we vacate David's sentences.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The undisputed evidence established that in the early
 
morning hours of January 2, 2011, David fatally stabbed his
 cousin Albert just outside of Kikku's Waipahu apartment. Both
 had been drinking heavily. When Kikku, Albert's aunt, attempted
 to prevent David from further harming Albert, a scuffle between
 David and Kikku ensued. 
The main disputed issues at trial were whether David or
 
Albert was the first aggressor and whether David acted in self-
defense. A related disputed fact was whether David had been
 invited to Kikku's apartment. 
Defense counsel learned during the State's opening
 
statement and the State's questioning of Kikku that the State
 intended to introduce two statements made by David to Albert and
 overheard by Kikku, which had not been disclosed prior to trial. 
Defense counsel argued that the State violated its discovery
 obligations by failing to disclosed the statements. To remedy
 the discovery violations, the Circuit Court offered continuances
 
3
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the defense as well as opportunities to interview Kikku. 
Notwithstanding these remedies, David sought to exclude the
 statements, or in the alternative, moved for a mistrial. The
 Circuit Court found the remedies it provided were adequate and
 admitted the statements over David's objection. 
We begin by focusing on the circumstances relevant to
 
the discovery issue and then continue with the other pertinent
 evidence presented at trial, including the evidence presented in
 rebuttal.
 
II.
 
A.
 
The prosecutor presented the State's opening statement
 
on September 28, 2011. The prosecutor explained to the jury that
 while at Kikku's Waipahu apartment, David and Albert were
 drinking and "play wrestling" to determine who was the better
 fighter. However, at some point the two men began to argue.  
The prosecutor explained that Kikku and Arlynn Ewen (Ewen),
 
David's cousin, noticed a cut on David's nose, and the prosecutor
 referred to the following statement that David made to Albert: 
Well, they notice that [David] had this cut over his
nose, and he was apparently upset about it, and it appeared
to them that he was upset about it because through their
play wrestling or whatever they were doing, he got this cut
on his nose, and he was telling [Albert], Nobody does this
to me, make me look like this, beat me up.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
At the close of the State's opening statement, defense
 
counsel requested a bench conference and objected to the
 
prosecutor's reference to David's statement on the ground that it
 had not previously been disclosed. Defense counsel stated:
 
That's nowhere in the discovery. It's not in the
 
statements of the eyewitnesses. It's not in the statements
 
to the police. It's not in the statements of preliminary.
It's nowhere in the discovery, and this has not been
disclosed to us. 
These are statements by the defendant, which if they
intended to use, should have been disclosed to the defense. 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In response, the prosecutor explained that he
 
understood the obligation to disclose statements in discovery
 
pertained to "statements that are given as a matter of recorded
 statements and so forth[,]" but not to statements that his
 witnesses mention in the course of a discussion with him. 
The Circuit Court stated that it believed the "remedy
 
at this juncture [was] not to preclude [David's statement], but
 the remedy [was] to give [defense counsel] ample opportunity to
 prepare if need be." The prosecutor identified Kikku as the
 witness who would testify about David's statement. The Circuit
 Court offered to make Kikku available so that defense counsel and
 his investigator could question her before defense counsel made
 his opening statement and to postpone defense counsel's opening
 statement until the following morning. The Circuit Court told 
defense counsel, "You just tell me what you want to do." Defense
 counsel declined the Circuit Court's offer to postpone his
 opening statement, but requested the opportunity to interview
 Kikku and explore what other alternatives he had.
 
In his opening statement, defense counsel proceeded to
 
lay out David's claim of self-defense. Defense counsel stated: 
"What the evidence will show is that this incident came down to a
 split-second decision, a split-second choice between either
 getting beaten up by a drunken [Albert], or having to defend
 against a drunk [Albert]. [David] chose to defend himself
 against a drunk [Albert] on New Year's night." Defense counsel
 
asserted that the evidence would show that Albert initiated the
 
fight, that David found himself on the ground being attacked, and
 that at some point, David hit back and the attack stopped. 
B.
 1.
 
On Thursday, September 29, 2011, the evidentiary
 
portion of trial commenced. The State called two witnesses
 before calling Kikku to testify in the afternoon. Prior to Kikku
 taking the stand, the Circuit Court asked defense counsel if he
 
5
    
  
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had "ample opportunity" to speak with Kikku. Defense counsel
 
responded affirmatively. Defense counsel indicated that based on
 his interview with Kikku, it appeared that Kikku had disclosed
 David's purported statement -- "Nobody does this to me, make me
 look like this, beat me up" -- to the prosecutor on July 7, 2011,
 and then went over that statement again with the prosecutor on
 September 25, 2011. Defense counsel asked the Circuit Court to
 
exclude the statement based on "unfair surprise." The Circuit
 
Court denied defense counsel's request, on the grounds that it
 had given defense counsel "ample opportunity to question Kikku"
 and was willing to give defense counsel "any additional time to
 prepare if need be."
 
2.
 
Kikku stated that her native language is Chuukese, but
 
that she spoke and understood some English. Kikku testified in
 part through an interpreter over the course of three days.
2
 
According to Kikku, a number of relatives attended a
 
party at a relative's home in Kalihi on January 1, 2011. The
 attendees included herself and her boyfriend Erick Sam (Sam),
 Ewen and her husband Jino Moses (Moses), David, and Albert. At
 this Kalihi party, the men were drinking heavily. A fight broke
 
out between Moses and another male relative, at which time Kikku
 
decided that it was time to return home. Albert then drove
 
Kikku, Sam, Ewen, and Moses to Kikku's apartment in Waipahu. 
Kikku testified that before leaving the Kalihi party,
 
David spoke to Albert. The prosecutor then asked, "What did they
 
say? What happened?" Defense counsel objected and a bench
 
conference ensued. 
At the bench conference, the prosecutor proffered that
 
Kikku's anticipated testimony would be that "[David] told
 [Albert] I want the beer that you have in your car. And [Albert]
 
2
 Kikku testified primarily in Chuukese with the use of an interpreter
on the first day of her testimony, and primarily in English with the
assistance of an interpreter on the second and third day. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
said, no, you can't have the beer. And [David] was upset about
 
it." (Emphasis added.) Defense counsel responded that the
 proffered statement by David was "a brand new statement" that had
 not been disclosed in discovery. Defense counsel asserted that
 the statement "I want the beer" served to "create[] argument for
 motive of why [David] would get into conflict with the decedent
 in this case[]" and described it as "a loaded statement" that
 should have been disclosed. 
The Circuit Court ruled that the State should have 
disclosed David's statement regarding his wanting beer pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRAP) Rule 16, which 
requires disclosure of the substance of any oral statement made by the defendant. The Circuit Court noted, however, that based on the parties' opening statements, there would be other evidence establishing that David and Albert were upset with each other and that alcohol was involved in the case. The Circuit Court denied David's motion for mistrial, concluding that the State's failure to disclose "can be cured by a continuance of the matter so that it gives [the defense] ample time to prepare." The Circuit Court recessed the trial for the remainder of the day, and it directed Kikku to remain in the courthouse so that defense counsel could talk to her. It was in the morning on Friday, September 30, 2011, when the Circuit Court recessed the trial, and trial did not resume until the following Monday. 
When Kikku resumed her testimony the following Monday,
 
she testified that Albert had cans of beer with him but did not
 remember how many. The prosecutor then questioned Kikku about
 whether David had asked Albert for beer before she and the others
 left the Kalihi party in Albert's car. Kikku testified as
 follows:
 
Q. . . . [B]efore you left [the Kalihi party], did
[David] ask for any beer?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. What did he ask for?
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. He tell [Albert] to give him the beer.
 
[(David objected and was overruled)]
 
Q. Okay. When you say the beer, do you mean all
the beer or one beer, how much beer?
 
A. The whole beer.
 
Q. The -- all the beer?
 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Okay. And did [Albert] give him the whole beer?
 
A. No, he give him but one, but he doesn't want the
one, he want the whole beer.
 Q. Okay. Now, so what happens next?
 
A. We went to [my Waipahu apartment].
 
According to Kikku, she arrived at her two-story
 
Waipahu apartment at around 8:00 p.m. with Albert, Sam, Ewen, and
 
Moses. Albert, Moses, and Sam resumed their drinking. 
Approximately half an hour later, David arrived. Kikku had not
 invited David to her apartment, and Sam told David not to come
 in. Nevertheless, David entered the apartment and joined the
 other men in drinking beer, playing music, and dancing. 
At some point, the police arrived and spoke with Ewen
 
on the second floor lanai, while David and Albert were in the
 parking lot below. When the police left, David and Albert
 returned to the second floor of the apartment. Kikku observed a
 fresh scratch on David's nose. The prosecutor asked Kikku what
 David said to Albert about the cut on David's nose. Over defense
 counsel's objection, Kikku testified that "[h]e tell [Albert] how
 come you do this to me, no man can do this to me." David
 appeared angry, but Albert was smiling when David told him that. 
David then left the apartment and called Albert to come
 
outside. Albert eventually followed David out the door, despite
 Kikku holding Albert's hand to stop him from leaving. Kikku did
 not want Albert to leave the apartment because she could tell
 David was mad. Kikku went outside, observed that the gate door
 was open, and then saw David chasing Albert. As David chased
 
8
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Albert, Kikku saw David hit Albert in the back of the head. The
 
men continued running down Awanei Street. Kikku followed, but
 was "far" behind. When Kikku turned the corner onto Mokukaua
 Street, she saw Albert bending forward with his torso
 approximately parallel to the ground. 
Kikku helped Albert back to the parking lot of her
 
apartment. Kikku saw David approaching Albert from a distance of
 twenty feet, holding a rock in each hand. Kikku ran up to David
 to block him from Albert. Kikku and David pushed each other, and
 in the scuffle, Kikku suffered several scratches on her arms and
 under her chin from the rocks David was holding.
3 Kikku
 
explained that David used the rocks to push her. Kikku was able
 to temporarily stop David from approaching Albert, but when she
 let go of David, he ran up to Albert. 
Albert was now lying face up on the ground. David
 
straddled Albert, and it appeared as though he was going to throw
 the rocks on Albert. However, Ewen came out of the apartment and
 started screaming and calling for David to stop. Kikku was
 screaming too. David cast the rocks aside and ran off. 
Kikku and Ewen then carried Albert up to the apartment. 
Ewen called 911 and was instructed to perform CPR. Kikku first
 realized that David had been stabbed and was bleeding when the
 paramedics arrived.
4
 
3
 At this point in Kikku's testimony, the Circuit Court took a short
 
recess. Defense counsel acknowledged that he had been able meet the prior
Friday with Kikku to question her about the circumstances of David's alleged
statements. Defense counsel renewed his objection to the admission of David's
statements, which were introduced into evidence through Kikku's testimony.
Defense counsel indicated that if the Circuit Court did not exclude those
 statements, he would again move for a mistrial. The Circuit Court indicated
 that it was denying defense counsel's requests. The Circuit Court noted its
 understanding that both parties were given "ample opportunity" to speak with
witnesses and asked defense counsel if he needed "additional time[.]" Defense
 counsel responded that he did not need additional time.
 
4 On cross-examination, Kikku admitted that a number of events that she
had described in her testimony were not mentioned to the police that night,
nor in her subsequent statement to Detective Gregory McCormick of the Honolulu
Police Department (HPD).
 
(continued...) 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3.
 
The State called Ewen, who testified that she is
 
related to David through marriage, because her husband and David
 
are first cousins, and that her husband was also related to
 Albert. Ewen testified in a manner largely consistent with Kikku
 about the events leading up to Albert's death. Ewen explained
 that when she saw David get dropped off at Kikku's apartment, it
 did not appear as though Sam wanted David to come upstairs. 
However, once upstairs, everything was "okay" and "[David] was
 having a good time with everyone" in the living room. Ewen could
 tell that David and Albert were "really drunk" and could hear the
 men "talking about who's the best fighter." She heard Albert say
 to David, "come on, I'm going to show you how to do self-defense,
 let's go downstairs in the parking lot." The two men appeared to
 be "just joking and playing around." However, Albert and David
 "all of a sudden" said that they were going downstairs to "show
 each other who is the best fighter."
 
For twenty minutes, David and Albert shouted at each
 
other in the parking lot. It sounded as though the two men were
 "seriously mad at each other." Ewen then heard the police
 arrive. 
Ewen testified that she spoke with the police and asked
 
them to "please go talk to those two guys, they were drunk and
 making a lot of noise[.]" Ewen apparently did not witness
 whether the police actually talked to David and Albert. Ewen
 thought that David and Albert would leave, but when she opened
 the window five minutes later, she saw Albert and David sitting
 in Albert's car. Ewen and Kikku briefly left the apartment, and
 when they returned, David and Albert were sitting in the living
 room talking and drinking. Ewen noticed that David had a cut on 
(...continued)
On redirect, Kikku explained that she did not mention the omitted
statements to the police because she was not asked specific questions
regarding those statements. 
10
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his nose, which was not there before. The two men began to argue
 
and moved to the balcony. 
Moments later, Ewen witnessed Kikku "holding [Albert's]
 
hand, trying to pull him back, telling him not to go downstairs." 
Albert pulled free and ran downstairs to where David was in the
 parking lot. From the balcony, Ewen saw David chasing Albert and
 Kikku running after them. 
Ewen subsequently saw Kikku helping Albert back to the
 
apartment. She also saw David run back and stand next to Albert
 and Kikku, holding two rocks in his hands, "ready to throw." 
When Ewen saw this, she began screaming, calling out, "[David],
 don't do that[.]" Ewen ran downstairs, at which time, David cast
 the rocks aside and ran off.
5
 
4.
 
According to forensic pathologist Dr. Kanthi De Alwis
 
(Dr. De Alwis), Albert died due to severe blood loss as a result
 of the "penetrating sharp force wound" that punctured his heart
 and left lung. Dr. De Alwis opined that the type of instrument
 
used was a "[p]enetrating elongated or long, narrow instrument,
 
but not a knife[,]" such as a screwdriver, pen, or pencil. 
C.
 
David testified, through a Chuukese interpreter, in his
 
own defense at trial. David testified that on January 1, 2011,
 he arrived at his cousin's residence in Kalihi for a party. 
According to David, when the Kalihi party broke up due to a fight
 between Moses and another male relative, Albert approached David
 and said, "why are you looking at me, you want me to beat you
 up?" David just ignored Albert, because he knew Albert was
 drunk. 
Contrary to Kikku and Ewen's testimony, David claimed
 
that he was invited to continue the party at Kikku and Sam's
 residence in Waipahu. David stated that his cousin dropped him
 
5
 On cross-examination, Ewen admitted that much of her testimony had
been omitted from her statements to the police. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
off, and when he arrived, Sam said, "okay, let's continue the
 
party."
 
David claimed that when the police arrived, he was on
 
the balcony, but then went downstairs. David testified that he
 and Albert had not been fighting in the parking lot before the
 police arrived. David denied talking to the police and denied
 that the police told him to leave the area. 
According to David, after the police left, he and
 
Albert went back upstairs. While sitting at the dining table
 with Albert, David asked Albert for a beer. Instead of giving
 David a beer, Albert punched David and took the beer bottle and
 struck David's nose with it. David felt "scared." Albert told
 David, "I can beat you up." David did not believe that Albert
 was joking. 
Albert then told David to follow him to the parking
 
lot. David obliged "just to tell him and beg him not to do that
 to me anymore." As David was walking between two cars, Albert
 started kicking, punching, and attacking him. David fell to the
 ground. While David was on the ground, Albert continued to kick
 David in the leg, butt, and back area. David reached out for
 "something," held it in his hand, and swung at Albert, while
 David was still facing the ground. David maintained that when he
 hit Albert, he was "just defending [him]self." David did not
 know what type of object he had swung at Albert, as he was scared
 and did not look at it carefully.
 
After David swung at Albert, Albert's hitting and
 
kicking stopped. David stood up and Albert ran. David chased
 after Albert because, at this point, he was mad at Albert for the
 "blows and injuries" Albert had inflicted. David picked up two
 rocks and approached Albert and Kikku. David intended to throw
 the rocks at Albert, but realized that Albert was just lying on 
12
   
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the ground, so he tossed the rocks aside. When David left the
 
scene, he did not think that Albert was dead.6
 
D.
 
After David rested his case, the State sought to call
 
HPD Officer Randall Woo (Officer Woo) and Sam as rebuttal
 witnesses. The prosecutor stated that the witnesses were being
 offered to impeach: (1) David's testimony regarding whether and
 to what extent he talked to the police when they first came to
 Kikku and Sam's apartment; and (2) David's testimony that he had
 been invited to the apartment. The defense objected on the
 ground that the State should have presented the evidence in its
 case in chief. The Circuit Court permitted the State to call the
 witnesses in rebuttal. 
1.
 
Officer Woo testified that at around 11:30 p.m. on
 
January 1, 2011, he responded to a call referencing a "suspicious
 circumstance" at an apartment (which matched the address of Kikku
 and Sam's apartment). Upon arrival, he spoke with a female on
 the second level of the apartment building, who wanted two men to
 leave the premises. When Office Woo spoke to the two men, he
 
instructed them that they needed to leave the area. One of the
 
men stood out in particular, a "Micronesian male with a
 ponytail."
7 That particular male did not leave immediately, and
 
Officer Woo had to instruct him several times to leave. Officer
 Woo returned to the same apartment approximately an hour and a 
6Related to the issue of first aggressor, the defense called HPD Officer
Violet Williams (Officer Williams). Officer Williams described a prior
incident involving Albert that occurred on November 29, 2008. Officer
 Williams testified that on that date, she responded to a fight call and
observed Albert holding a bat amongst a crowd of people. After Officer
 Williams told the crowd to leave, Albert came back and pushed her in the left
arm and called her names like "bitch" and pig." Two other officers had to
 help her place Albert under arrest for harassment. 
7During his testimony, David admitted that on January 2, 2011, his hair
was tied in tied in the back with a rubber band. He also admitted that Albert
 had very short hair, like a crew cut. 
13
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
half later when he responded to a call of a "med assist, defib­
type case." 
2.
 
Sam testified that when he left the Kalihi party, he
 
did not invite David to come over to his apartment. He also did
 not invite David to come into the apartment after David arrived. 
Rather, Sam maintained that when David arrived, he asked David in
 
a loud voice "what was he doing over at the apartment."
 
III.
 
The jury returned guilty verdicts on the included
 
offenses of manslaughter on Count 1 and third-degree assault on
 Count 2. On January 24, 2012, the Circuit Court sentenced David
 to concurrent terms of twenty years of imprisonment on Count 1
 and one year of imprisonment on Count 2. On the same date, the
 Circuit Court entered its Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. 
This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
David argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in permitting Kikku to testify about two statements
 made by David that the prosecutor did not disclose to the defense
 prior to trial. The two statements, as understood by the
 prosecutor, were: (1) David saying to Albert at Kikku's
 apartment, in connection with a cut on David's nose, "Nobody does
 this to me, make me look like this, beat me up"; and (2) David
 telling Albert at the Kalihi party, "I want the beer that you
 have in your car."
8
 
When Kikku informed the prosecutor of the challenged
 
statements made by David is subject to some dispute. The
 prosecutor and defense counsel disagreed over when the challenged
 statements became known to the prosecutor. The prosecutor
 
8As set forth in the "Background" section of this opinion, Kikku's
actual trial testimony about David's statements was substantively similar to,
but differed in certain details from, the prosecutor's understanding of what
Kikku would say.
 
14
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
represented that Kikku informed him of David's statement relating
 
to the cut on David's nose on the Sunday before trial and of the
 statement concerning the beer only after defense counsel's
 opening statement. Defense counsel represented that based on his
 interview of Kikku, it appeared that Kikku had disclosed David's
 statement relating to the cut on David's nose to the prosecutor
 on July 7, 2011, and discussed the statement again with the
 prosecutor a few days before trial. Kikku was not specifically
 asked when she disclosed David's statements to the prosecutor,
 and the Circuit Court observed that there were some "language
 barrier, maybe some cultural barrier" at play, creating
 difficulties for counsel in communicating with Kikku.
 
What is not disputed, however, is that the prosecutor
 
violated HRPP Rule 16 by failing to disclose the substance of the
 two statements made by David that Kikku had overheard. At issue
 
is whether the Circuit Court abused its discretion in the remedy
 
it chose to address the discovery violations. David argues that
 the Circuit Court abused its discretion by offering continuances
 and opportunities to interview Kikku, rather than excluding the
 statements or ordering a mistrial. David further argues that the
 
Circuit Court's remedies did not cure the "unfair surprise" or
 
offset the prejudice. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion.
 
A.
 
Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16 (2012)
9
 
establishes requirements for discovery in cases in which the
 
defendant is charged with a felony, as in the instant case. HRPP
 Rule 16(a). Pursuant to HRPP Rule 16, the prosecutor is required
 to make certain disclosures to the defendant or the defendant's
 attorney, including "any written or recorded statements and the
 substance of any oral statements made by the defendant[.]" HRPP
 
9We will cite to the current version of HRPP Rule 16 because no
 
amendments material to our discussion have been made to the rule in effect at
 
the time relevant to this case. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 16(b)(1)(ii) (emphasis added). There is a continuing duty
 
to disclose under HRPP Rule 16, which requires a party to
 "promptly disclose" additional material or information subject to
 disclosure upon learning of the information or material after
 initial compliance with the rule. HRPP Rule 16(e)(2). Both
 parties agree that under HRPP Rule 16, the prosecutor was
 required to disclose the substance of oral statements made by
 David that were overheard by Kikku and that the prosecutor failed
 to comply with HRPP Rule 16. 
When a discovery violation occurs, the trial court is
 
given discretion to remedy the violation as follows:
 
(9) SANCTIONS.
 
(i) If at any time during the course of the
proceedings it is brought to the attention of the
court that a party has failed to comply with this rule
or an order issued pursuant thereto, the court may
order such party to permit the discovery, grant a
continuance, or it may enter such other order as it
deems just under the circumstances.
 
HRPP Rule 16(e)(9)(i) (emphasis added).
 
"[I]n exercising the broad discretion as to sanctions
 
under HRPP Rule 16, the trial court should take into account the
 
reasons why the disclosure was not made, the extent of prejudice,
 if any, the feasibility of rectifying that prejudice by a
 continuance, and any other relevant circumstances." State v.
 
Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. 491, 495, 878 P.2d 739, 742 (1994)
 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). The
 test for determining whether a court abused its discretion in
 handling a HRPP Rule 16 violation is "if after finding a
 violation of the rule, the court takes measures to alleviate any
 prejudice . . . ." State v. Miller, 67 Haw. 121, 122, 680 P.2d
 
251, 252 (1984).
10 "[B]efore the court orders dismissal of a
 
10For example, in Miller, where the discovery violation was the
prosecutor's failure to disclose the name of a testifying witness, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court concluded that measures to alleviate any prejudice would include
the trial court's "making a full inquiry into the circumstances, and allowingthe other side to interview the unlisted witness before the witness testifies." Miller, 67 Haw. at 121-22, 680 P.2d at 252. 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case because of the State's violation of HRPP Rule 16, it must 
consider whether less severe measures would rectify prejudice caused to the defendant by the violation." Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. 
at 495, 878 P.2d at 742; see State v. Sugimoto, 62 Hawai
'i 259, 
262, 614 P.2d 386, 289 (1980) (stating that "[a] violation of [HRPP] Rule 16 does not warrant an immediate declaration of a mistrial by the trial court" and noting that HRPP Rule 16 authorizes the court to impose remedies less severe than a mistrial). 
B.
 
In this case, the prosecutor plainly violated his
 
obligation under HRPP Rule 16. The rule specifically requires
 disclosure of "the substance of any oral statements made by the
 defendant" and imposes a continuing obligation on the prosecutor. 
HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(ii), (e)(2). However, in addressing the
 prosecutor's violation of HRPP Rule 16, the Circuit Court
 considered the circumstances and the extent of the prejudice, and
 it took measures to alleviate any prejudice to the defense. As
 set forth below, we conclude that the remedies afforded by the
 Circuit Court were sufficient to alleviate any prejudice to the
 defense. As such, David was not denied his right to a fair
 trial.
 
1.
 
David contends that he was prejudiced because the non­
disclosures affected his trial strategy. Namely, David suggests
 that he may have abandoned his trial strategy of self-defense
 altogether and instead chosen other defenses, including "'no
 intent/knowledge' and simple 'reasonable doubt.'" We are not
 
persuaded by this argument.
 
When the defense learned of the first undisclosed
 
statement during the State's opening statement, the Circuit Court
 
offered the defense a remedy that would have permitted it to
 reassess or adjust its trial strategy. Specifically, the Circuit
 Court offered to postpone defense counsel's opening statement and
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thereby continue the trial to give defense counsel an opportunity
 
to interview Kikku. In response, defense counsel declined the
 Circuit Court's offer to delay his opening statement, and instead
 chose to proceed with opening statement without first
 interviewing Kikku. Defense counsel informed the Circuit Court
 that he could continue with his opening statement and would "just
 cross[-examine]" Kikku with respect to David's statement. 
Defense counsel then proceeded to give his opening statement,
 which set forth self-defense as David's primary defense and
 informed the jury of the evidence defense counsel planned to
 elicit to support it.
 
Given the record and the evidence adduced at trial, we
 
are not persuaded that the undisclosed statements reasonably
 called into question the defense's trial strategy, or that the
 defense would have changed its strategy if the disclosures had
 been made earlier. Clearly, self-defense was David's strongest
 theory of defense.
 
2.
 
We conclude that the unfair surprise and extent of the
 
prejudice were not as great as David contends. David argues that
 the undisclosed statements were relevant to his motive for the
 stabbing and served to contradict his claim of self-defense. The
 undisclosed statements provided evidence that David was upset
 with Albert before the fatal stabbing. However, the State had
 ample evidence besides the undisclosed statements establishing
 that David was angry and upset with Albert before the fatal
 stabbing. David does not contend that in preparing for trial,
 the defense was unaware that: (1) the State's theory of the case
 was that David was drunk and angry at Albert, and that David was
 the aggressor in stabbing Albert without justification; and (2)
 the State would call Kikku and Ewen as witnesses to support this
 theory. In discounting defense counsel's claim of prejudice due
 to the undisclosed evidence, the Circuit Court cogently observed
 that it was "quite obvious that the parties were upset with each
 
18
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other and there was alcohol involved." In other words, the
 
Circuit Court did not believe that the undisclosed statements
 affected the tenor of the State's case.
 
3.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in the measures it chose to alleviate the prejudice
 from the undisclosed statements. With respect to the first
 undisclosed statement, "Nobody does this to me, make me look like
 
11
this, beat me up[,]"  the Circuit Court permitted defense
counsel to interview Kikku before she testified and also offered
 to postpone defense counsel's opening statement until after the
 interview. As noted, defense counsel declined the Circuit
 Court's offer to delay his opening statement. Defense counsel
 interviewed Kikku, and before Kikku was called to testify,
 defense counsel acknowledged that he had been given "ample
 opportunity" to interview Kikku. 
With respect to the second undisclosed statement, "I

 
want the beer that you have in your car[,]"12 the Circuit Court
 
stopped Kikku's direct examination and recessed the trial on
 Friday to give defense counsel another opportunity to interview
 Kikku that day. Trial did not resume until the following Monday,
 so defense counsel had the weekend to prepare his cross-
examination of Kikku. Defense counsel stated for the record that
 he had met with and questioned Kikku on Friday.
13
 
11Kikku's actual trial testimony was that David told Albert, "[H]ow come
you do this to me, no man can do this to me."
 
12Kikku's actual trial testimony was that "[David] tell [Albert] to give
him the beer. . . . The whole beer."
 
13We note that the testimony regarding the second undisclosed statement
that was actually elicited at trial was less significant to David's self-
defense claim than the testimony proffered by the prosecutor. The prosecutor
proffered that Kikku's anticipated testimony would be that "[David] told
[Albert] I want the beer that you have in your car. And [Albert] said, no,
you can't have the beer. And [David] was upset about it." (Emphasis added.)
At trial, Kikku testified that "[David] tell Albert to give him the
beer. . . . The whole beer[,]" and that Albert "give him but one, but he
doesn't want the one, he want the whole beer." Kikku, however, did not
specifically testify that David was upset about not getting "the whole beer." 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4. 
"The obligation to seek justice is paramount and the
 
prosecutor's duty under HRPP Rule 16 must be diligently
 
observed." Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. at 497, 878 P.2d at 743. The
 
prosecutor clearly fell short of his HRPP Rule 16 duties in this
 case. However, HRPP Rule 16 affords the trial court broad
 discretion in determining what remedies are most appropriate when
 discovery violations occur. We conclude that in light of the
 relevant circumstances, the Circuit Court's actions and the
 measures it chose to alleviate the prejudice resulting from the
 undisclosed statements did not constitute an abuse of discretion. 
See Miller, 67 Haw. at 122, 680 P.2d at 252; Sugimoto, 62 Haw. at
 261-62, 614 P.2d at 389-90 (holding that the trial court did not
 err in denying defendant's motion for mistrial and instead
 remedying the prosecution's HRPP Rule 16 violation, for failing
 to disclose witnesses until the day of trial, by permitting
 defense counsel to interview the unlisted witnesses, thereby
 insuring that defendant "was not surprised or prejudiced by the
 testimony of the two witnesses"); State v. Morishige, 65 Haw.
 354, 360-61, 652 P.2d 1119, 1125 (1982) (citing Sugimoto in
 upholding the trial court's decision to allow evidence of the
 defendant's statement to a witness that was belatedly disclosed
 only a few days before trial, in violation of HRPP Rule 16, and
 the testimony of two witnesses whose names were not disclosed in
 advance of trial, in violation of HRPP Rule 16).
 
II.
 
David argues that the State improperly called Officer
 
Woo and Sam as rebuttal witnesses. He claims that their
 "testimon[ies] should have been introduced in the State's case­in-chief because it confirmed the affirmative position in the
 State's case that [David] was not invited into [Kikku and Sam's]
 apartment." The admissibility of rebuttal testimony is reviewed 
20
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for an abuse of discretion. State v. Duncan, 101 Hawai 'i 269, 
274, 67 P.3d 768, 773 (2003). We conclude that the Circuit Court 
did not abuse its discretion in allowing the rebuttal testimony. 
In Duncan, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated three 
general rules regarding rebuttal evidence: 
First, as a general rule, a party is bound to give all
available evidence in support of an issue in the first
instance it is raised at trial and will not be permitted tohold back evidence confirmatory of his or her case and thenoffer it on rebuttal. 
Second, this general rule does not necessarily apply
where the evidence sought to be presented on rebuttal is
"negative of a potential defense," even if the evidence is
also confirmatory of an affirmative position upon which the
party seeking to present the evidence bears the burden of
proof. 
Third, although a plaintiff is not required to call,
during his or her case-in-chief, every conceivable witness
who might contradict a potential defense witness, it is also
generally true that a party cannot, as a matter of right,
offer in rebuttal evidence which was proper or should have
been introduced in chief, even though it tends to contradict
the adverse party's evidence and, while the court may in its
discretion admit such evidence, it may and generally should
decline to admit the evidence.
 
Id. at 276, 67 P.3d at 775 (brackets and citations omitted; block
 
quote formatting altered).
 
Under these general rules, if a party does not call a
 
witness that should have been called in its case in chief, then
 the trial court may decline to permit that witness's testimony as
 rebuttal evidence, even though it tends to contradict the other
 party's evidence. Id. In other words, in this situation, the
 
witness's testimony cannot be offered in rebuttal "as a matter of
 right[.]" Id. However, although not admissible in rebuttal as a
 
matter of right, the trial court retains the discretion to admit
 such testimony in rebuttal. Id. (acknowledging that "the court
 
may in its discretion admit such evidence" (emphasis added)).
 
Here, the State called Officer Woo and Sam in rebuttal
 
to impeach David's testimony. David had testified: (1) that he
 did not speak to the police and the police did not tell him to
 leave the area, the first time the police came to Kikku and Sam's
 apartment; and (2) that David had been invited to Sam and Kikku's 
21
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
apartment. The rebuttal evidence presented by the State directly
 
contradicted David's testimony on these points. 
In addition, David's testimony that he had been invited
 
to the apartment was contrary to the testimony of Kikku and Ewen
 that had been presented in the State's case in chief. Ewen had
 also testified that she asked the police to speak to David and
 Albert, but apparently did not witness whether the police
 actually talked to them.
 
In permitting the rebuttal evidence, the Circuit Court
 
determined that it was admissible (1) to impeach David's
 testimony and (2) because David's testimony had placed the
 credibility of Kikku and Ewen in issue and the State could not
 have anticipated that David would deny their testimony. We
 conclude that the rebuttal evidence was relevant to credibility
 issues that were raised by David's testimony and that the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion in permitting the rebuttal
 evidence.
 
III.
 
David argues that at sentencing, the prosecutor made
 
remarks that David characterizes as "racist" when he urged the
 Circuit Court to "send[] a message to the Mirconesian community"
 by imposing a twenty-year term of imprisonment. David maintains
 
that the Circuit Court exhibited "tolerance" and "apparent
 
adoption" of the prosecutor's improper arguments, which he
 contends indicated that the Circuit Court had been influenced by
 the prosecutor's arguments. David requests that we vacate his
 sentences and remand the case for resentencing before a different
 judge.
 
A.
 
The pertinent facts underlying this issue are as
 
follows. At the sentencing hearing, the prosecutor sought a
 twenty-year sentence of imprisonment, while defense counsel
 
maintained that a ten-year term of probation was appropriate. 
Defense counsel pointed out, among other things, that David "has
 
22
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no prior history of delinquency or criminal activity and has led
 
a law abiding life for a substantial period of time before
 commission of the present crime." 
The prosecutor made the following argument in support
 
of his recommendation for a twenty-year term of incarceration: 
As you consider the factors to be imposed in sentence
14
[ ] -- in a sentence under 706-606, obviously, the nature
and circumstances of this case are the most severe as what
 
they can get, in the fact that a life was taken, whether it
be recklessly or knowingly, and the jury found recklessly,
nevertheless, we're talking about an act which could have
been prevented.
 
Alcohol was involved. 
Sharp instrument, similar to a
knife, or in this case it was testified a pencil or
screwdriver was involved with the defendant taking the life
of another person, his own relative.
 
This sentence of 20 years would no doubt reflect the
seriousness of the offense. 
Hopefully promote respect for the law on the
defendant's part. 
You know he comes from Micronesia, from Chuuk, and
well, in this case, would provide just punishment for the
offense. 

14 HRS § 706-606 (1993) sets forth the factors a court is required to
consider in imposing a sentence, and provides as follows:
 
Factors to be considered in imposing a sentence. The court,
in determining the particular sentence to be imposed, shall
consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and the history
and characteristics of the defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote
respect for law, and to provide just punishment for
the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes of the
defendant; and
 
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed educational or
vocational training, medical care, or other
correctional treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among
defendants with similar records who have been found guilty
of similar conduct.
 
23
 no means mean to be a racist about anything,
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
But what I wanted to focus on, Your Honor, is does
this sentence under subsection B2, subsection B, afford
adequate deterrence to criminal conduct? 
And when I talk about, perhaps, a sentence like this
could save lives, I'm talking about sending a message to the
Micronesian community. 
Even more so than just a community, but I say this, by
 but in my
experience, and I believe in the Court's experience, as well 

as [defense counsel's] experience, over the past few years,
we have had a number of cases that have come in involving
Chuukese, Micronesian males drinking, not high on drugs,
like type of cases we're more used to seeing, high on drugs,
try to get drugs, commit offenses because of the need to get
drugs or being high on drugs. 
But we're talking Micronesians who get inebriated on
alcohol, then become violent with their own family members,

their own friends and they involve knives.
 
It is the exact same situation that is before the
 
Court today, and when you think about a sentence that needs
to send a message out to the Micronesian community, mainly
the males, the idea that they can just drink all they want
and not be responsible for what happens after that, I think
this would send a strong message to them that that is not
acceptable in the laws of the United States and the laws of
the State of Hawaii. 
So we're talking about affording adequate deterrence
of criminal conduct by sending a message.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Prior to rendering its decision, the Circuit Court
 
first acknowledged that it was required to balance certain
 
sentencing factors. The Circuit Court then addressed the gallery
 as follows:
 
I think the root of all evils in this case was,
obviously, alcohol.
 
Those of you who are in the gallery, you seen or you
-- you see the devastating effects that alcohol can cause. 
I guess it's fun and it tastes good when you're
drinking it at the time, but the taste of alcohol,
obviously, doesn't taste good as you sit there today. 
No one can stop you from drinking alcohol, but those
of you who are from the Micronesian Islands, you come here
to start a legacy, and in this legacy, you don't need that
legacy tarnished by alcohol, because alcohol will leave the
legacy of people getting killed, and people being prosecuted
and standing before a Court for wrongdoings. That's not
 what you need. 
24
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
But my sentence today is not to send a message to you.
My message today is to address the specific conduct of Mr.
David.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Circuit Court stated that it could not ignore the
 
seriousness of the harm that David caused -- that David had
 
killed someone -- and the need to provide a just punishment for
 the offense. Accordingly, the Circuit Court sentenced David to a
 
term of imprisonment of twenty years on Count 1, and one year on
 
Count 2, to be served concurrently. 
B. 
We hold that a defendant's race, ethnicity, or national 
origin cannot be used as a justification for the imposition of a harsher penalty on the defendant. "A defendant's race or nationality may play no adverse role in the administration of justice, including at sentencing." United States v. Leung, 40 
F.3d 577, 586 (2nd Cir. 1994). As the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has 
stated: "[A]n appeal to racial prejudice threatens our multicultural society and constitutional values. We must therefore recognize that "'our government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher. For good or for ill, it teaches the whole people by its example.'" State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 414-15, 
984 P.2d 1231, 1240-41 (1999) (citation and brackets omitted). 
In this case, the prosecutor's sentencing arguments
 
were highly improper. The prosecutor emphasized David's
 ethnicity and national origin, used a negative generalization to
 characterize Micronesians, and urged the Circuit Court to send a
 message to the Mircronesian community. In resorting to such
 arguments, the prosecutor committed a particularly harmful form
 of misconduct.
 
The prosecutor made David's ethnicity and national
 
origin a central part of his sentencing recommendation. Early in
 his sentencing argument, the prosecutor specifically drew
 attention to David's ethnicity and national origin by telling the
 Circuit Court, "You know he comes from Micronesia, from Chuuk[.]" 
25
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The comment suggested that David's status as a Micronesian from
 
Chuuk was relevant to the punishment he should receive.
 As the prosecutor continued with his sentencing argument, he
 repeatedly made inappropriate references to David's status as a
 Micronesian male and the need to send a message to the
 Micronesian community: 
And when I talk about, perhaps, a sentence like this
could save lives, I'm talking about sending a message to the
Micronesian community. 
Even more so than just a community, but I say this, by
no means mean to be a racist about anything, but in my
experience, and I believe in the Court's experience, as well
as [defense counsel's] experience, over the past few years,
we have had a number of cases that have come in involving
Chuukese, Micronesian males drinking . . . . 
But we're talking Micronesians who get inebriated on
alcohol, then become violent with their own family members,
their own friends and they involve knives.
 
It is the exact same situation that is before the
 
Court today, and when you think about a sentence that needs
to send a message out to the Micronesian community, mainly
the males, the idea that they can just drink all they want
and not be responsible for what happens after that, I think
this would send a strong message to them that that is not
acceptable in the laws of the United States and the laws of
the State of Hawaii.
 
A defendant's race, ethnicity, or national origin
 
cannot legitimately be used as a basis for enhancing the
 
defendant's sentence. See Leung, 40 F.3d at 586 ("[W]e reject
 
the view that a defendant's ethnicity or nationality may
 legitimately be taken into account in selecting a particular
 sentence to achieve the general goal of deterrence."); United
 States v. Trujillo-Castillon, 692 F.3d 575, 579 (7th Cir. 2012)
 ("The [United States Sentencing Guidelines] make clear that race
 . . . [and] national origin . . . 'are not relevant in the
 determination of a sentence.'" (citing U.S.S.G. § 5H1.10));
 United States v. Kaba, 480 F.3d 152, 156-58 (2nd Cir. 2007). The
 prosecutor's attempt to inject consideration of David's ethnicity
 and national origin into the determination of David's sentence in
 order to "send[ ] a message to the Mircronesian community"
 clearly constituted prosecutorial misconduct. See McFarland v.
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Smith, 611 F.2d 414, 419 (1979) ("The evils of racial prejudice
 
lurk too frequently throughout the administration of criminal
 justice. They must be condemned whenever they appear.").
 
C.
 
The prosecutor's highly improper sentencing arguments
 
raised serious questions about the fairness and integrity of the
 defendant's sentencing hearing. Confidence and respect for the
 fairness of the sentencing process is critical to our criminal
 justice system. "[J]ustice must satisfy the appearance of
 justice." Offutt v. United States, 348 U.S. 11, 14 (1954). 
In light of the prosecutor's strong emphasis in his
 
sentencing arguments on David's Micronesian heritage and the need
 to send a message to the Micronesian community, we conclude that
 the Circuit Court was required to take more definitive action to
 dispel the appearance that the prosecutor's improper arguments
 may have played a role in determining David's sentence. See
 
United States v. Thompson, 37 M.J. 1023, 1028 (A.C.M.R. 1993)
 ("[W]hen the government's representative attempts to use race to
 infect the sentencing proceedings and that error goes uncorrected
 by the trial judge, it raises doubt as to the fairness and
 impartiality of his sentence."); Leung, 40 F.3d at 586-87. 
Although the Circuit Court stated that its sentence was not to
 send a message to the Mirconesian community, we conclude that the
 Circuit Court did not go far enough to make its repudiation of
 the prosecutor's improper arguments clear on the record. See
 
Thompson, 37 M.J. at 1028 ("When a trial counsel uses racial
 comments as part of his sentencing argument without any legal
 justification, a trial judge is well-advised to react immediately
 by stopping counsel and condemning his argument or clearly and
 unambiguously indicating that he will not consider the improper
 racial remarks at the conclusion of the argument."); State v.
 Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 661 n.2, 728 P.2d 1301, 1303 n.2 (1986)
 ("[T]he trial judge has an obligation in the interests of
 fairness and justice to stop the prosecutor from delivering a
 
27
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
greatly prejudicial argument sua sponte."); Leung, 40 F.3d at
 
586-87 ("[E]ven the appearance that the sentence reflects a
 defendant's race or nationality will ordinarily require a remand
 for resentencing[.]"); Kaba, 480 F.3d at 158 (same). 
The record does not demonstrate, and we do not believe,
 
that the Circuit Court accepted or actually relied upon the
 prosecutor's improper arguments in determining David's sentence. 
However, because "justice must satisfy the appearance of
 justice[,]" Offutt, 348 U.S. at 14, we vacate David's sentences
 on Counts 1 and 2. In addition, although we believe that the
 Circuit Court could fairly resentence David on remand, we
 conclude that the appearance of justice would be better served if
 resentencing was handled by a different judge. See Leung, 40
 
F.3d at 586-87; Kaba, 480 F.3d at 159.
15
 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm David's convictions as to Count 1 and Count
 
2, but vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment of Conviction and
 Sentence with respect to the sentences imposed on those counts. 
We remand the case to the Circuit Court for resentencing on
 Counts 1 and 2 in accordance with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 Summer M. M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant 
James M. Anderson
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
15We note that in support of David's argument that his sentences should
be vacated, David also contends that the prosecutor made improper sex-based
arguments in an attempt to influence the Circuit Court's sentencing decision.
However, unlike David's ethnicity and national origin, his status as a male
was not emphasized or made a central part of the prosecutor's sentencing
arguments. The Circuit Court also did not refer to David's sex when it
 imposed his sentences. In any event, in light of our decision to vacate
David's sentences, we do not address David's contention that his sentences
should be vacated on the ground that the prosecutor made improper sex-based
arguments in an attempt to influence the Circuit Court's sentencing decision.
 
28
 