NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0001019
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BENJAMIN N. PULAWA, III,
Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
OAHU CONSTRUCTION CO., LTD.,
Employer-Appellee,
and
 
SEABRIGHT INSURANCE COMPANY,
Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2009-496 (2-96-12947))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Claimant-Appellant Benjamin N. Pulawa, III ("Pulawa")
 
appeals from the November 2, 2011 Decision and Order of the Labor
 
and Industrial Relations Appeals Board ("Board" or "LIRAB"). 
Pulawa was injured while employed as a construction 
supervisor by Employer-Appellee, Oahu Construction Company, Ltd. ("Employer"), when, during work-site excavation on August 20, 1996, he was struck in the head by a chunk of hardened cement. Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel., 112 Hawai
'i 3, 7–8, 143 P.3d 1205, 
1209–10 (2006). By decision dated July 26, 2001, the Director of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations ("Director") determined that Pulawa sustained a personal injury to his head, and awarded him medical benefits, including concurrent treatment with Dr. Robert Marvit, and temporary total disability ("TTD") benefits.    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
By decision dated January 5, 2009, the Director denied
 
Pulawa's request for a listening device manufactured by
 
1
Neuromonics ("Neuromonics device")  on the basis that there was
no written request from the attending physician. By decision
 dated March 30, 2009, the Director found that Pulawa's request
 for a Neuromonics device was barred pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
2
Statutes ("HRS") § 386-87(a),  awarded Pulawa TTD benefits
through December 16, 2008, and awarded Employer credit for weekly
 benefits paid for the period December 17–30, 2008. 
Pulawa appealed to the Board from the Director's
 
March 30, 2009 decision. 
A hearing before the Board occurred on
 
September 29, 2010. By its Decision and Order, the Board
 addressed the merits of Pulawa's Neuromonics device-related claim
 and affirmed the Director's decision denying the request and
 limiting TTD benefits. 
On appeal, Pulawa contends that the Board erred in
 
concluding that (1) the Neuromonics device was not reasonable and
 appropriate treatment; (2) he lacked certification to be
 temporarily and totally disabled for the period December 17, 2008
 through August 4, 2010; and (3) he was able to resume work. 
1 While Pulawa was being treated at Casa Colina Hospital, a brain
injury rehabilitation center in California, Dr. David Patterson, Medical
Director at the facility, referred Pulawa to Dr. Lucy Shih, a specialist in
Otology and Neurotology, for evaluation of Pulawa's chronic bilateral
tinnitus, also known as ringing in the ears. According to Dr. Shih's letter
of October 21, 2007, she discussed treatment options with Pulawa and informed
him:
 
of a relatively new tinnitus treatment which may be
beneficial. It utilizes a listening device
manufactured by Neuromonics which incorporates a
neural stimulus into music to interrupt and
desensitize the brain from continued perception of
this symptom. I would like to recommend this for Mr.
 Pulawa, however [I] am currently not aware of a center
in Hawaii which provides this service at this time.
 
2
 "A decision of the director shall be final and conclusive between
 
the parties, . . . unless within twenty days after a copy has been sent to
each party, either party appeals therefrom to the appellate board by filing a
written notice of appeal. . . ." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-87(a) (1993).  In so
 
ruling, the Director held that Pulawa's second request was barred by his
failure to timely appeal from the January 5, 2009 decision. 
2
   
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Pulawa's points as follows and affirm:
 
(1) "Immediately after a work injury sustained by an
 
employee and so long as reasonably needed the employer shall
 furnish to the employee all medical care, services, and supplies
 as the nature of the injury requires." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386­
21(a) (Supp. 2013) (emphasis added). With respect to medical
 devices, "[w]here it is certified to be necessary by a licensed
 physician or surgeon chosen by agreement of the employer and the
 employee, the employer shall furnish such other aids, appliances,
 apparatus, and supplies as are required to cure or relieve the
 effects of the injury." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-22 (1993).
 
In support of its conclusion of law ("COL") 1 that the
 
Neuromonics device was not "reasonable or necessary medical
 treatment", the Board's findings of fact ("FOF") 12 and 13
 referenced the opinions of Dr. Brian Goodyear, a clinical
 psychologist who conducted an independent neuropsychological
 evaluation of Pulawa, who stated that no further
 neuropsychological diagnostic studies or treatments were
 required, and Dr. Anthony James Mauro, a neurologist who
 performed an independent medical examination ("IME") on Pulawa,
 who stated "that he was not aware that such a [Neuromonics]
 device was an accepted standard of treatment for tinnitus." The
 Board further noted in FOF 17 that Dr. Ajit S. Arora, an
 internist who performed a supplemental IME on Pulawa, agreed with
 Dr. Mauro's assessment that "the [N]euromonic[s] device would be
 of questionable value and benefit to Mr. Pulawa for treatment of
 his tinnitus." 
It is not contested that Pulawa's tinnitus condition
 
was related to his work injury. The issue, then, is whether the
 Board properly concluded that the Neuromonics device did not
 constitute "reasonably needed" medical supplies. See H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 386-21(a).  As to this issue, the Board's conclusion
 
presents a mixed question of fact and law. It appears to be
 supported by substantial evidence, and is not clearly erroneous
 
3
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
in view of the evidence on the whole record. See Igawa v. Koa 
House Rest., 97 Hawai 'i 402, 405-06, 38 P.3d 570, 573-74 (2001). 
While the Neuromonics device was recommended by Dr.
 
Shih, her October 21, 2007 letter to Dr. Patterson stated only
 
that the Neuromonics device "may be beneficial." (Emphasis
 added.)  Dr. Scott McCaffrey, Pulawa's treating physician,
 
testified that Pulawa needed treatment for tinnitus, but he
 
admitted that he was not familiar with the Neuromonics device and
 stated that "I don't know where Doctor Marvit got on to this
 other new technology, I don't know much about it though."
3 Dr.
 
Mauro and Dr. Arora specifically addressed the Neuromonics device
 in their reports, and both agreed that it would not necessarily
 be beneficial for treatment of Pulawa's tinnitus. In sum, there
 were varying opinions among the physicians as to whether a
 Neuromonics device was "reasonably needed."
 
Pulawa argues that the Board erred in relying upon the 
opinions of Dr. Arora and Dr. Mauro because Dr. Arora specialized in internal medicine, toxicology and forensic medicine, and Dr. Mauro specialized in neurology and admitted that he was unaware of the device in Hawai
'i and whether it was an acceptable 
treatment. Pulawa maintains that the only "competent medical 
4
advice" presented satisfying HRS § 386-24  was the opinion of Dr.
Shih, to which Dr. McCaffrey, Dr. Marvit, and Dr. Patterson
 deferred. 

Nothing in HRS chapter 386 suggests that, as a matter
 
of law, a physician must be licensed in a particular sub-

specialty in order for his or her opinion to constitute
 
3
 Dr. Marvit preceded Dr. McCaffrey as Pulawa's treating physician.
Based upon Dr. Shih's recommendation, Dr. Marvit submitted a formal request
for concurrent treatment with House Ear Institute by letter dated December 2,
2008. 
4
 HRS § 386-24 provides, in part, that "[t]he director . . . , on
 
competent medical advice, shall determine the need for or sufficiency of
medical rehabilitation services furnished or to be furnished to the employee
and may order any needed change of physician, hospital or rehabilitation
facility." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-24 (1993) (emphasis added).
 
4
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"competent medical advice."5 Instead, the definitions of "health
 
care provider" and "physician" provide more general
 
qualifications. HRS § 386-1 defines "health care provider" as "a
 person qualified by the director to render health care and
 service and who has a license for the practice of[,]" among other
 things,"[m]edicine or osteopathy. . . ." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-1
 
(Supp. 2013). It further defines a "physician" as "a doctor of
 medicine, a dentist, a chiropractor, an osteopath, a naturopathic
 physician, a psychologist, an optometrist, and a podiatrist." 
Id.
 
Of course, the Board may consider a physician's 
specialty in determining what weight to give to particular medical advice. This essentially amounts to a credibility determination, on which we defer to the Board as the expert agency. Moi v. State, Dept. of Public Safety, 118 Hawai
'i 239, 
242, 188 P.3d 753, 756 (App. 2008). Here, although Dr. Mauro and Dr. Arora were not specialists in the field of otology or neurotology, they were both physicians as defined in HRS § 386-1, and were certified in neurology and internal medicine, respectively. The Board also relied on the reports of multiple physicians. See Ramsey v. Cash & Carry Foods, Inc., 664 So. 2d 
511, 515 (La. Ct. App. 1995) (holding that the sole report relying on the opinion of an unidentified "Physician Advisor," where no basis for the opinion was stated in the report, did not constitute "competent medical evidence" under a Louisiana workers' compensation statute). 
Additionally, while Pulawa maintains that Dr. Mauro was 
simply unaware of the device in Hawai
'i and whether it was an 
acceptable device and treatment, the record suggests otherwise. 
5
 LIRAB regulations state that "'competent medical advice' may 
include advice from a panel of at least three physicians selected by the
director after consultation with organizations such as the Hawai' i Medical 
Association and convened for the purpose of this subsection." H AW. ADMIN. R. 
§ 12-15-38(b) (1996) (emphasis added). Such a panel was not convened in theinstant case, and because the regulation uses the word "may," it does not
appear that a panel is required in every instance. See State v. Kahawai, 103
Hawai'i 462, 465, 83 P.3d 725, 728 (2004) ("The term 'may' is generally
construed to render optional, permissive, or discretionary the provision inwhich it is embodied[.]" (quoting State ex. rel. City of Niles v. Bernard, 372
N.E.2d 339, 341 (1978)) (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
5
    
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Mauro said that he had reviewed the literature regarding the
 
device and that he had no enthusiasm for the device as a proposed
 treatment. Under these circumstances, the Board did not err in
 relying on Dr. Mauro and Dr. Arora's opinions as "competent
 medical advice." 
In reviewing a decision of the Board, this court will 
"give deference to the LIRAB's assessment of the credibility of witnesses and the weight LIRAB gives to the evidence." Moi, 118 
Hawai
'i at 242, 188 P.3d at 756. Moreover, 
[i]t is well established that courts decline to consider the
weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in
favor of the administrative findings, or to review the
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the findings
of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field.
 
Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai 'i 263, 268, 47 P.3d 730, 735 (2002) 
(quoting Igawa, 97 Hawai 'i at 409-10, 38 P.3d at 577-78). 
Accordingly, we defer on the weight given by the Board to each of 
the doctor's opinions, and hold that the Board's FOF 20, that the Neuromonics device was not reasonable and necessary, is not against the substantial weight of the evidence.
6 
(2) "Under HRS § 386-31(b) (1993), temporary total 
disability payments can be terminated in two ways: (1) if the employee is able to resume work, or (2) by order of the director." Atchley v. Bank of Hawai
'i, 80 Hawai 'i 239, 243, 909 
P.2d 567, 571 (1996) (citing H AW. REV. STAT. § 386-31(b) (1993)). 
We address Pulawa's second and third points of error together, as a challenge to the Board's conclusion regarding Pulawa's TTD benefits. 
As to the termination of TTD benefits, HRS § 386-31(b)
 
provides, in part, that "[t]he payment of these benefits shall
 only be terminated upon order of the director or if the employee
 is able to resume work." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-31(b) (Supp. 2013). 
"Able to resume work" means that "an industrially injured
 
6
 Bocalbos v. Kapiolani Medical Center for Women and Children, 93
Hawai'i 116, 997 P.2d 42 (App. 2000), cited by Pulawa, is readily
distinguishable by the fact that here two physicians affirmatively recommended
that the Neuromonics device "may be beneficial", and two other experts opinedthat the Neuromonics device was not necessary. Unlike Bocalbos, there is 
evidence on both sides, and, therefore, the Board could reasonably concludethat the requested Neuromonics device was not reasonable and necessary. 
6
    
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
worker's injury has stabilized after a period of recovery and the
 
worker is capable of performing work in an occupation for which
 the worker has received previous training or for which the worker
 has demonstrated aptitude." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-1 (Supp. 2013). 
In this case, more than twelve years after the underlying
 accident, the Director concluded that Pulawa was "capable of
 resuming some form of full-time work" and the Board found that
 Pulawa's condition was "medically stable" and that he was
 "capable of working." 
1.	 The Board's determination that Pulawa was
 
medically stable was not clearly erroneous.
 
Pulawa first challenges the Board's finding that he was
 
medically stable. He initially argues that the Board erred in
 
FOF 10, 11, and 21, when it found that Pulawa did not provide
 physician certifications to support an award of temporary total
 disability. Pulawa contends that the Board treated
 "certification of disability" or "medical certification" as terms
 of art, despite the fact those terms are not defined by the
 statute, and that the evidence he provided was sufficient for
 purposes of an award of temporary total disability benefits. 
Although the Board used the terms "certification of 
disability" and "medical certifications", taken in the context of its findings, it does not appear that those terms were used as terms of art. Instead, the Board appears to have found that the information provided by Dr. Marvit and Dr. McCaffrey did not amount to persuasive evidence demonstrating that Pulawa was entitled to an award of temporary total disability. The Board did not indicate that the reports failed to comply with any statute or regulations, and the reports appeared to comply with Hawai
'i Administrative Rules § 12-15-80(a)(3)(E), which states 
that an interim WC-2 report shall include "[d]ates of disability, work restrictions, if any, and return to work date." H
AW. ADMIN. 
R. § 12-15-80 (2004). Pursuant to HRS § 386-31(b)(1), the
 Director's decision is "based upon a review of medical records
 and reports". H
AW. REV. STAT. § 386-31(b)(1). Therefore, the
 
Board was not adding an additional requirement by using the terms
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"certification of disability" or "medical certification", but
 
rather was commenting on the sufficiency of the medical report
 evidence as to the stability of Pulawa's medical condition. 
Pulawa next contends that the Board erred in concluding
 
that he was medically stable, at FOF 22 and COL 2. In support of
 this contention, Pulawa points to the trial testimony that he was
 undergoing treatment for headaches, tinnitus, and depression on
 an ongoing basis. Pulawa also refers to the July 21, 2010 IME
 report by Dr. Arora which stated that "ongoing treatment would be
 necessary during the foreseeable future" for Pulawa's depression,
 
acknowledged that Pulawa was suffering from ongoing "intractable"
 
headaches, and recommended a consultation with a Dr. Raskin in
 California. Finally, Pulawa notes that in his May 30, 2008
 report, Dr. Goodyear stated that "I do continue to believe that
 it would be reasonable and appropriate to have [Pulawa] evaluated
 by a neurologist who is experienced in the area of traumatic
 brain injury in order to optimize future medical care to address
 the issue of maximum medical improvement." 
On the other hand, as to the stabilization of Pulawa's 
medical condition, Dr. Goodyear's report stated that Pulawa's condition had been "stable and ratable" since the time of his December 1999 evaluation, and that Pulawa was capable of returning to some type of productive employment if he were motivated to do so. Dr. Mauro's report similarly concluded that Pulawa's condition was medically stable and ratable. Dr. Arora's report indicated that Pulawa "could be involved in some type of employment with his limitations." The Board credited these opinions in its finding that Pulawa's condition was medically stable. Accordingly, there was substantial evidence on the record supporting Pulawa's medical stability, and the Board's finding and conclusion on this issue were not clearly erroneous. See In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 119, 9 
P.3d 409, 431 (2000) ("An FOF or a mixed determination of law and fact is clearly erroneous when . . . the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or determination."). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
2.	 The Board did not err in finding that Pulawa was
capable of working.
 
Pulawa contends that the Board erred in its FOF 22 that
 
Pulawa was capable of working. Pulawa argues that the Board
 
improperly used the term "capable of working" in its findings,
 
rather than the term "able to resume work" as defined in HRS §
 
386-1 (Supp. 2013). The Board's use of the phrase "capable of
 working" notwithstanding, the employer here sought termination
 due to Pulawa's alleged ability to resume work. Therefore we
 consider whether sufficient evidence supports the implicit
 finding that Pulawa was able to resume work.
 
We conclude that sufficient evidence was presented to
 
support a finding that Pulawa was able to resume work. Dr.
 Goodyear, for instance, indicated that while Pulawa would have
 difficulty returning to his previous position, he was capable of
 returning to some type of productive employment if he were
 motivated to do so. Dr. Mauro similarly opined that while Pulawa
 was not suited for work as a construction supervisor, he was
 capable of "gainful employment in a position commensurate with
 his current cognition and personality." Further, Dr. Arora
 stated that Pulawa's symptoms should not restrict him from
 gainful employment. The reports of Dr. Goodyear, Dr. Mauro, and
 Dr. Arora constitute reliable, probative, and substantial
 evidence that Pulawa was capable of performing work "in an
 occupation for which [he] has received previous training or for
 which [he] has demonstrated aptitude," and therefore support the
 implicit finding that Pulawa was able to resume work.
 
Pulawa contends that the Board erroneously relied on
 
the report of Priscilla Ballesteros Havre ("Havre") for the
 proposition that Pulawa would not be a feasible candidate for
 vocational rehabilitation. However, Havre's opinion was not
 material to the Board's finding that Pulawa was able to resume
 work. Having determined that the Board did not err in finding
 that Pulawa was medically stable and able to resume work, we hold
 that the Board properly concluded, pursuant to HRS § 386-31(b),
 that Pulawa's TTD benefits could be terminated.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
The November 2, 2011 Decision and Order of the Labor
 
and Industrial Relations Appeals Board is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Dan S. Ikehara,

for Claimant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Brian G.S. Choy and

Keith M. Yonamine
 
(Choy & Tashima)for Employer-Appellee and
Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
 
10
 