NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002529
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KARL C. SEE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
('Ewa Division)
(CASE NO. 1DTA-13-00359)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Karl C. See (See) with operating a vehicle 
under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII). The District Court 
1
of the First Circuit (District Court)  dismissed the charge
without prejudice. 

On appeal, See contends that: (1) the District Court

 
erred in dismissing the charge without prejudice because See did
 not move for dismissal of the charge but requested that his
 motions to suppress evidence be granted; and (2) the District
 Court improperly applied the factors set forth in State v.
 Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 625 P.2d 1040 (1981), and abused its
 discretion in dismissing the charge without prejudice, instead of
 with prejudice. We affirm the District Court's dismissal of the
 charge without prejudice.
 
1The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.
  
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
On January 7, 2013, See was arrested for OVUII, and on 
January 24, 2013, the State charged See by complaint with that 
offense. See was arraigned on February 4, 2013. Trial was set for March 19, 2013, and See "Waived Speedy Trial and [Hawai
'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 48" from March 12, 2013, to March 19, 2013. On March 7, 2013, See filed a number of motions, including motions to suppress evidence. On March 19, 2013, the District Court granted the State's oral motion to continue, and the District Court continued the hearing on the motions and trial to May 7, 2013. The record indicates that the continuance was granted because the arresting officer was on "family leave" and not present.
2 
On April 24, 2013, See filed a motion to continue the
 
case from May 7, 2013, to May 28, 2013, due to a scheduling
 conflict. The District Court granted the motion. At a hearing
 
called on May 28, 2013, the State orally moved for its second
 
continuance. The record does not indicate the reason for the
 State's request.
3 The District Court granted the State's motion
 
and continued the case to July 9, 2013, for a hearing on motions. 
At the hearing on July 9, 2013, the State moved to
 
continue the case again on the grounds that the arresting officer
 was sick and the intoxilyzer operator was on vacation. The
 
District Court noted that only the arresting officer was needed,
 
and not the intoxilyzer operator, because the case had only been
 set that day for a hearing on See's motions, and not for trial. 
See objected to the State's request for a continuance. In
 response to the District Court's question, the State informed the
 District Court that the HRPP Rule 48 time limits expired on 
August 5, 2013. The District Court denied the State's motion for
 
2See did not include the transcript of March 19, 2013, hearing as part
of the record on appeal. The reference to the arresting officer being on
"family leave" is contained in the hearing notes included in the record.
 
3See did not include the transcript of the May 28, 2013, hearing as part
of the record on appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a continuance, and it advised the parties that it was going to
 
dismiss the case because the State was not ready to proceed and
 any setting of the case would be beyond the expiration of the
 HRPP Rule 48 deadline. 
The District Court then heard arguments from the
 
parties regarding whether the dismissal should be with or without

 
prejudice. The State argued that the dismissal should be without
 prejudice because See's breath alcohol concentration was 0.145
 and that See's offense was a serious offense. See argued that
 his OVUII offense was not a serious offense, as the Legislature
 had made it a petty misdemeanor, and that all the factors set
 forth in Estencion clearly weighed in favor of a dismissal with
 prejudice.
4
  
The District Court dismissed See's OVUII charge without
 
prejudice, ruling as follows:

 
And in Mr. See's case, it is [an OVUII] case, and yes,
it is a petty misdemeanor. But with respect to the cases
that comes before this Court, the Court does see it as a
serious offense.
 
And here what brings us to the dismissal and the State
not being ready, that the officer is not available, it's not
a situation where the State does not know where they are and
does not want to proceed with prosecution. So here while
 there is prejudice to Mr. See in having to come back, should
or if the State were to refile its case, it's not a
situation where it does offend the notions of justice.
 
So considering the factors in this case as well as
State v. Estencion, 63 Hawaii 264, Court will dismiss Case
No. 18 without prejudice. Any bail that's posted, the $500,
that's returned to Mr. See.
 
The District Court filed its Judgment on July 9, 2013,
 
and this appeal followed. 
4The "Estencion  factors," which a trial court is required to consider in
determining whether to dismiss a charge with or without prejudice for aviolation of the HRPP Rule 48 time limits, are: "[(1)] the seriousness of theoffense; [(2)] the facts and the circumstances of the case which led to thedismissal; and [(3)] the impact of a reprosecution on the administration of[HRPP Rule 48] and on the administration of justice.'" 
State v. Hern, 133
Hawai'i 59, 60, 323 P, 3d 1241, 1242 (App. 2013) (brackets in original)
(quoting State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 269, 625 P.2d 1040, 1044 (1981)). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by See on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. See argues that because he did not move to dismiss
 
the OVUII charge based on the arresting officer's failure to
 
appear but rather requested that his suppression motions be
 granted, the District Court erred in dismissing the charge
 without prejudice and should have granted his suppression
 motions. We disagree. See cites no authority for the
 proposition that a trial court is required to grant a suppression
 motion if an essential witness for the State is unable to appear
 due to illness. We conclude that the District Court was not
 required to grant See's suppression motions based on the non­appearance of the arresting officer and that it did not err in
 selecting dismissal of the charge without prejudice as a remedy
 for the State's inability to proceed with the suppression
 motions.
 
2. See argues that the District Court improperly
 
applied the Estencion factors and abused its discretion in
 dismissing the OVUII charge without prejudice, instead of with
 prejudice. We disagree.
 
When the District Court dismissed the OVUII charge
 
against See, the HRPP Rule 48 time limits had not expired and
 HRPP Rule 48 had not been violated. Because the Estencion
 factors apply specifically to the decision to dismiss a charge
 with or without prejudice for violation of HRPP Rule 48, it was
 not mandatory for the District Court to consider the Estencion
 factors in determining whether to dismiss the OVUII charge in
 this case with prejudice or without prejudice. Nevertheless,
 because the District Court's decision to dismiss the charge was
 based, at least in part, on its belief that the trial could not
 be set before the HRPP Rule 48 deadline if the suppression
 hearing was continued, it was appropriate for the District Court
 to consider the Estencion factors in exercising its discretion in
 deciding whether to dismiss the charge with or without prejudice.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The District Court explained its reasons for deciding 
to dismiss the case without prejudice, and we cannot say, based 
on our review of the record, that the District Court abused its discretion. See State v. Kim, 109 Hawai
'i 59, 62, 122 P.3d 1157, 
1160 (App. 2005) ("Generally, to constitute an abuse [of discretion], it must appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). We disagree with See's contention that the District Court's acknowledgment that it generally dismisses similar cases without prejudice meant that the District Court failed to consider the specific circumstances of See's case in rendering its decision. The District Court's explanation of its reasons for dismissing See's case without prejudice reveals that the District Court considered the specific circumstances of See's case in rendering its decision. 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the District
 
Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 2, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Richard L. Holcomb 
(Holcomb Law, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 