NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000389
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL MAWAE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 13-1-0184)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Mawae (Mawae) with: (1) abuse of a
 
family or household member, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
1
Statutes (HRS) § 709-906(1) (Supp. 2013)  (Count 1); and (2)
unlawful imprisonment, in violation of HRS § 707-722(1) (2014)
 (Count 2).
2 The complaining witness (CW) for both charges was
 
Mawae's girlfriend. After a jury-waived bench trial, the Family
 
3
Court of the Fifth Circuit (Family Court)  found Mawae guilty as
1HRS § 709-906(1) provides, in relevant part: "It shall be
unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to physically
abuse a family or household member[.]" 
2HRS § 707-722(1) provides: "A person commits the offense of
unlawful imprisonment in the second degree if the person
knowingly restrains another person."
 
3The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided.
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
charged. 
On appeal, Mawae contends that: (1) the Family Court
 
erred in finding him guilty of abuse of a family or household
 
member because there was insufficient evidence to show that he
 physically abused the CW; and (2) the Family Court erred in
 failing to consider Mawae's claim of self-defense in finding him
 guilty of both counts. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The following evidence was presented during the State's
 
case in chief at trial.
 
Mawae and the CW were in an intimate "boyfriend and
 
girlfriend" relationship. On the night in question, Mawae and
 the CW went drinking at a bar. Mawae became angry with the CW at
 the bar and was upset with the CW when they left the bar. The CW
 drove Mawae in her truck to a place called "Kitchens" where Mawae
 had a tent by the beach. 
While at Kitchens, the CW received a text message from
 
another guy. Mawae read the text message and became upset. 
Mawae began "snapping" and "yelling" at the CW, and they argued. 
Mawae pushed a pillow onto the CW's face, hit the pillow, and
 pushed and pulled the CW around. The CW told Mawae that she
 wanted to leave and the CW tried to leave, but Mawae refused to
 let her go. The CW had sex with Mawae to calm him down, but
 Mawae thereafter still refused to permit the CW to leave. 
Over several hours, the CW repeatedly attempted to
 
leave, and Mawae prevented her from leaving. Whenever the CW
 would get up, Mawae would pull the CW's arm down, causing her to
 
fall. There were rocks in the area, and the CW sustained "a huge
 
bruise on [her] side[.]" A few times, Mawae got on top of the CW
 and pinned her down. At some point, Mawae also slapped the CW in
 
the face.
 
The CW fought back, and the CW punched Mawae and kicked
 
him in an attempt to get away. But Mawae was much stronger than
 
the CW. The CW explained: "[F]or me to punch him in the face is
 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
like almost nothing. But for him to do what he did is like, it
 
really hurt me." Eventually, after being thrown to the ground
 "multiple times," the CW was able to go from Mawae's tent to her
 truck. However, Mawae got into the passenger seat of the truck
 
and would not get out of the truck or let the CW leave. The CW
 
hit Mawae with a glass bottle, stabbed him with a nail file, and
 eventually "kicked him out of the truck[.]" The CW drove home
 and called the police. 
When the police arrived, the CW was "covered in
 
bruises," and the police took photographs of the CW's injuries. 
These photographs as well as a diagram of the bruises observed by
 the police on the CW's body were introduced at trial. During her
 testimony, the CW examined the photographs taken by the police
 and described a bruise on her right arm as coming from Mawae's
 trying to stop her from leaving; a mark on her shoulder as
 resulting from Mawae's grabbing and pulling her; and bruising on
 her shin as resulting from being pushed down by Mawae. 
II.
 
Mawae testified in his own defense. According to
 
Mawae, he and the CW argued after he read the text message on her
 phone. After arguing, they had sex and slept "for maybe three
 hours." The CW then received a text message from her father and
 began "freaking out." The CW rolled out of the tent and
 frantically began looking for her keys. Mawae told the CW that
 her keys were in her truck and tried to calm her down. The CW
 started hitting Mawae with sticks, and Mawae grabbed her arm to
 stop her. The CW then punched Mawae in the face and tried to
 
stab him and hit him with sticks. Mawae stated that he "was
 
blocking, trying to defend myself and trying to . . . give her
 love." Mawae "maybe" grabbed the CW's arm to stop her from
 hitting him and grabbed her leg to stop her from kicking him. 
At some point, Mawae and the CW both got into the CW's
 
truck and were arguing. The CW hit Mawae in the head with a
 bottle, stabbed him with a file, and tried to stab him with a
 steak knife. Mawae defended himself, grabbed the CW's arm, and 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
took the knife away. Mawae jumped out of the truck, and the CW
 
drove away.
 
Mawae denied that he: (1) prevented the CW from leaving
 
by grabbing her arm or in any other manner; (2) inflicted any of
 the CW's injuries; or (3) smothered the CW, got on top of her and
 pinned her down, or slapped her. Mawae testified that he
 sustained injuries caused by the CW as a result of the events,
 including a laceration across his skull, a "slice" down his left
 arm, a bruised back, and a swollen face. 
On cross-examination, Mawae was shown the photographs
 
the police had taken of the CW, which depicted bruises on the
 CW's body. Mawae testified that the injuries depicted in the
 photographs were either not caused by him, were caused when he
 acted in self-defense, or were caused by the CW injuring herself
 when she punched or kicked him. 
III.
 
After the parties presented closing arguments, the
 
Family Court made various findings regarding its view of the
 evidence and what had happened during period in question. While
 discussing the CW's testimony, the Family Court stated that it
 found the CW's testimony to be credible. The Family Court found
 that the State had proven the charges in Counts 1 and 2 beyond a
 reasonable doubt, and it found Mawae guilty of both counts. In
 rendering its verdict, the Family Court did not specifically
 address Mawae's claim of self-defense, and Mawae did not request
 that the Family Court make specific findings on this claim. 
The Family Court sentenced Mawae to two years of
 
probation on Count 1 and one year of probation on Count 2, with
 credit for time served. The Family Court entered its Judgment on
 January 2, 2014, and this appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Mawae argues that the Family Court erred in finding him
 
guilty of abuse of a family or household member because there was
 insufficient evidence to show that he physically abused the CW. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In particular, Mawae argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
to show that he physically abused the CW because the State failed
 to adduce testimony from the CW that she experienced pain. We
 conclude that Mawae's argument is without merit.
 
For purposes of HRS § 709-906(1), "to 'physically 
abuse' someone means to maltreat in such a manner as to cause injury, hurt, or damage to that person's body." State v. Nomura, 
79 Hawai
'i 413, 416, 903 P.2d 718, 721 (App. 1995). The term 
physical abuse also includes causing "physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical conditions." Id. at 720-21, 903 P.2d 
at 415-16 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Contrary to Mawae's suggestion, testimony by the CW 
that she experienced pain was not the only way for the State to prove that Mawae physically abused the CW. Even in the absence of direct testimony by the CW that she experienced pain, there was sufficient circumstantial evidence to support a finding that Mawae caused the CW to suffer physical pain. The evidence showed that Mawae slapped the CW in the face and that his actions in repeatedly grabbing her, pulling her down, and causing her to fall resulted in significant bruising to various parts of her body. The Family Court could reasonably infer from this evidence that Mawae's actions caused the CW to suffer physical pain. This evidence was also sufficient to show that Mawae maltreated the CW "in such a manner as to cause injury, hurt, or damage" to the CW's body. See Nomura, 79 Hawai
'i at 416, 903 P.2d at 721. We 
conclude that when viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there was substantial evidence to support the Family Court's finding that Mawae was guilty of abuse of a family or household member. 
II. 
The Family Court did not specifically address Mawae's
 
self-defense claim in finding him guilty on both counts. Mawae
 relies on this to argue that the Family Court erred in failing to
 consider his claim of self-defense in finding him guilty. We 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that Mawae's argument is based on a false presumption,
 
and we reject it.
 
Mawae's argument presumes that the Family Court was 
required to specifically address his claim of self-defense in rendering its verdict. However, he provides no support for this presumption. Indeed, Mawae's presumption is contrary to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 23(c) (1977) and established case law. 
HRPP Rule 23(c) provides:
 
(c) Trial without a jury. In a case tried without a
 
jury the court shall make a general finding and shall in
addition, on request made at the time of the general
finding, find such facts specially as are requested by the
parties. Such special findings may be orally in open court
or in writing at any time prior to sentence.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
When the Family Court rendered its verdict, Mawae did
 
not make a request for specific findings of fact regarding his
 
claim of self-defense. 
It is well-settled that in reviewing a decision rendered in
a case tried by the court without a jury, an appellate court
will indulge every reasonable presumption in favor of
findings made by the court below as the basis of its
decision and in the absence of specific findings, every
finding of fact necessary to support the decision appealed
from will be presumed to have been made.
 
State v. Alsip, 2 Haw. App. 259, 262, 630 P.2d 126, 128 (1981). 
Because Mawae did not request specific findings on his self-
defense claim, the Family Court's general finding of guilt on
 both counts was sufficient to establish the validity of its
 verdicts. See State v. Bigelow, 2 Haw. App. 654, 638 P.2d 873,
 
874 (1982). Contrary to Mawae's argument, we presume from the
 Family Court's silence on Mawae's self-defense claim that it
 implicitly made the necessary findings to reject the defense. If
 Mawae believed that the Family Court had failed to consider his
 self-defense claim, he could have and should have requested
 specific findings by the Family Court. 
6
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nothing in the record serves to overcome the
 
presumption that the Family Court implicitly made the findings
 
necessary to support its verdicts. Mawae's testimony raised the
 issue of self-defense, and he argued self-defense in closing
 argument. Given the manner in which Mawae presented his defense,
 Mawae provides no explanation for why the Family Court would have
 overlooked or failed to consider his claim of self-defense in
 rendering its verdicts. In announcing its verdict, the Family
 Court specifically stated that it found the CW's testimony to be
 credible, and it adopted a version of events that was consistent
 with the CW's testimony. The CW's testimony, if believed,
 refuted Mawae's claim of self-defense. The record does not
 support Mawae's contention that the Family Court failed to
 consider his claim of self-defense.
 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Family Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 14, 2015. 
On the briefs:

 
Daniel G. Hempey 
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Defendant-Appellant
(on opening brief)
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
J. Scott Kessinger
for Defendant-Appellant
(on reply brief)
 
Sinclair Salas-Ferguson
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kauai
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
7

 