NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000428
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Matter of the
 
THOMAS H. GENTRY REVOCABLE TRUST
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(TRUST NO. 02-1-0030)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant, Kiana E. Gentry (Kiana), appeals
 
from the March 25, 2013 "Final Judgment Re: Order Denying
 
Petitioner Kiana E. Gentry's Petition to Enforce Settlement
 Agreement and Appoint Receiver, Filed on August 26, 2010," (Final
 
Judgment) filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1
 
(circuit court). The Final Judgment denied both Prayers for
 Relief found in Kiana's August 26, 2010 "Petition to Enforce
 
Settlement Agreement and Appoint Receiver" (Petition to Enforce). 
Kiana's Petition to Enforce requested the circuit court (1)
 
enforce Paragraphs 6 and 7 of a Sealed Settlement Agreement,
 dated December 21, 2007, and (2) appoint a neutral receiver to
 complete the Settlement Agreement.
 
On appeal, Kiana contends the circuit court erred when
 
it (1) refused to enforce the Settlement Agreement; and (2) did
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H. M. Chan presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not order an evidentiary hearing or trial after denying Kiana's
 
Petition to Enforce.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
2
Thomas H. Gentry (Gentry) died January 15, 1998.  At 
the time of Gentry's death, his assets were comprised of real estate, personal property, and interests in several corporations, partnerships and limited liability corporations involved in real estate development in both Hawai
'i and California. 
Kiana was Gentry's wife at the time of his death. 
She
 
is a beneficiary of the Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust
 (Revocable Trust), created by Gentry, and the T.H.G Marital
 
Trusts (Marital Trust), created by Gentry's son, Norman H. Gentry
 
under Durable Power of Attorney. Respondents-Appellees Mark L.
 
Vorsatz and First Hawaiian Bank (together, Co-Trustees) are the
 
Trustees for the two trusts. Kiana objected to several of the
 
Co-Trustees' "Petitions for Approval of Income and Principal
 Accounts for the Trusts" and challenged many other aspects of the
 trusts' accountings. Because of the disputes, the circuit court
 set all Revocable Trust matters and Marital Trust matters for
 trial commencing November 26, 2007. Shortly after the trial
 began, the parties agreed to mediate the dispute and eventually
 settled.
 
The Settlement Agreement at issue was made by and
 
between (1) Mark L. Vorsatz, as Personal Representative of the
 Estate of Thomas H. Gentry, Co-Trustee of the Revocable Trust,
 and Co-Trustee of the Marital Trust; (2) First Hawaiian Bank as
 Co-Trustee of the Revocable Trust and Co-Trustee of the Marital
 Trust; and (3) beneficiaries of the Revocable Trust and Marital
 Trust: Kiana; Norman H. Gentry; Tania V. Gentry; Mark T. Gentry;
 Colin K. K. Goo as Guardian Ad Litem for Minor Beneficiaries of
 the Revocable Trust and Marital Trust; Scott A. Makuakane as
 Guardian Ad Litem for Unborn, Contingent Beneficiaries of the
 Revocable Trust and the Marital Trust; Minor Children.
 
2
 Thomas H. Gentry died from injuries suffered in a boating
accident. He remained in a coma from the time of the accident in November
 
1994 until his death.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On December 7, 2007, the circuit court held a hearing
 
with the parties to discuss the terms of a settlement agreement.3
 
On December 21, 2007, the parties executed a written Settlement
 
Agreement that memorialized the terms discussed in the December
 7, 2007 settlement hearing. Central to this appeal are terms
 found in Paragraph 6 and 7 of the Agreement that required the Co-
Trustees to sell certain assets of the Trusts by June 10, 2010,
 30 months from December 21, 2007, the effective date of the
 settlement. The Settlement Agreement provides in Paragraph 6:
 
6. ORDERLY DISPOSITION OF ASSETS.
 
A. The parties agree to the orderly disposition of
certain assets of the Trusts. These assets are the Trusts'
 
interests in TG California Company, Gentry-Pacific, Ltd.,
Gentry Properties and Gentry Homes, Ltd. The Co-Trustees
 will sell these entities or their assets within a 30-month
 period from the Effective Date, with one 18-month extension
permitted if supported by good cause as approved the Court
.
 
Paragraph 7 provides:
 
7. GENTRY INVESTMENT PROPERTIES. Gentry Investment
Properties ("GIP") will not be subject to the disposition
parameters of paragraph 6 above. As soon as practicable,
the Trust's interests in GIP will be distributed to the
 marital subtrust, Gentry's Children (free of trust), and to
the GST subtrust, Pro Rata. Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., will
remain as the general partner of GIP for the aforesaid
30-month period. The parties will use their best efforts to
assure that Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., and/or GIP will not use
GIP's accumulated income or sales proceeds to start or
acquire any new businesses, or to acquire additional real
property, or to construct intract improvements. The intent
of the parties is that GIP will dispose of its assets over
time (unspecified) in a commercially reasonable manner.
 
By the June 21, 2010 deadline, the Co-Trustees had not
 
sold all assets in Gentry-Pacific, Ltd. or Gentry Properties, as
 
required under the Settlement Agreement.
 
On August 25, 2010, Kiana filed her Petition to
 
Enforce. Kiana's petition requested the circuit court order the
 Co-Trustees to perform the actions as required under Paragraphs 6
 and 7 of the Settlement Agreement.
 
On December 1, 2010, the Co-Trustees filed a "Petition
 
for Instructions Regarding Distribution of Remaining Assets and
 Termination of Trust or in the Alternative Resignation of Co­
3
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Trustees" (Petition for Pro Rata Distribution), which requested a
 
pro rata distribution of interests in the remaining trust assets,
 
or in the alternative, requested approval of their resignation as
 trustees to the trust if required to sell the assets.
4
 
On October 7, 2011, the circuit court heard Kiana's
 
Petition to Enforce, along with the Co-Trustees' Petition for Pro
 Rata Distribution. The circuit court took Kiana's Petition to
 Enforce under advisement and granted-in-part the Co-Trustees'
 Petition for Pro Rata Distribution.
 
On March 25, 2013, the circuit court issued its "Order
 
Denying [Kiana's] Petition to Enforce Settlement Agreement and
 Appoint Receiver," and its Final Judgment. The Final Judgment
 (1) denied Kiana's request for the circuit court to enforce the
 Settlement Agreement and order the Co-Trustees to effectuate the
 terms of the Settlement Agreement and (2) denied Kiana's request
 for the circuit court to appoint a neutral receiver should the
 Co-Trustees resign.
 
On March 25, 2013, the circuit court issued its "Order
 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Co-Trustees' Petition for
 Instructions Regarding Distribution of Remaining Assets and
 Termination of Trust, or in the Alternative, Resignation of Co-
Trustees, Filed on December 1, 2010" and its "Final Judgment Re:
 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Co-Trustees' Petition
 for Instructions Regarding Distribution of Remaining Assets and
 Termination of Trust, or in the Alternative, Resignation of the
 Co-Trustees, Filed on December 1, 2010" (Final Judgment re Order
Granting/Denying Petition for Instructions re Distribution). The
 
circuit court's Final Judgment re Order Granting/Denying Petition
 
for Instructions re Distribution granted the Co-Trustees' request
 for a pro rata distribution of interests in Gentry Pacific,
 Gentry Properties, and several other pieces of real estate
 without requiring the sale of those assets.
 
4
 On February 3, 2011, the Co-Trustees filed a "Co-Trustees'
Supplement to Petition for Instructions Regarding Distribution of Remaining
Assets and Termination of Trust or in the Alternative Resignation of Co-Trustees,
Submitting plant of Liquidation Requested By Court" that further clarified the
Co-Trustees' plan for pro rata distribution of the Trusts' assets.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On April 24, 2013, Kiana filed a timely notice of
 
appeal from the Final Judgment. Kiana did not appeal the circuit
 
court's Final Judgment re Order Granting/Denying Petition for
 Instructions re Distribution.
 
II. DISCUSSION
 
This appeal is a collateral attack on a judgment not on 
appeal resulting from Kiana not filing a notice of appeal from the circuit court's Final Judgment re Order/Denying Petition for Instructions re Distribution, and is therefore improper. A collateral attack "is an attempt to impeach a judgment or decree in a proceeding not instituted for the express purpose of annulling, correcting, or modifying such judgment or decree." Kim v. Reilly, 105 Hawai
'i 93, 96, 94 P.3d 648, 651 (2004) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omittted). 
In Kim, the defendant-appellant appealed a circuit 
court order that granted the plaintiff-appellee's motion to enforce an arbitration award. Kim, 105 Hawai
'i at 94, 94 P.3d at 
649. The defendant-appellant refused to adhere to the terms of
 
the arbitration award because he believed that what he was
 required to pay under the arbitration award should have been
 reduced pursuant to the covered loss deductible statute. Id. at
 
94-95, 94 P.3d at 649-50. Instead of appealing the arbitration
 award itself, the defendant-appellant only appealed the circuit
 court's order granting the plaintiff-appellee's motion to
 enforce. Id. at 95, 94 P.3d at 650. The defendant-appellant
 
"essentially argue[d] that the circuit court erred in enforcing
 the judgments in favor of the plaintiffs in full because the
 covered loss deductible statute mandates that arbitration awards
 'shall be reduced' by a certain amount." Id. The defendant-
appellant attempted to challenge the arbitration award by
 challenging the plaintiff-appellee's motion to enforce the award. 
See id.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated that the defendant­
appellant's challenge was improper because "a proceeding to enforce a judgment is collateral to the judgment [so] any challenge to the judgment raised therein constitutes a collateral attack." Id. at 96, 94 P.3d at 651. Because plaintiff­
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
appellee's motion to enforce the arbitration award was collateral
 
to the arbitration award itself, defendant-appellant's challenge
 constituted a collateral attack. Id. The circuit court held
 
that because "(1) [defendant-appellant] challenged the judgments
 in response to the plaintiffs' motion to enforce and (2)
 [defendant-appellant's] contention was based on non-
jurisdictional grounds, [his] attack on the judgments was
 collateral and improper." Id. at 97, 94 P.3d at 652.
 
Similarly, in this appeal Kiana is attempting to collaterally
 attack the Final Judgment re Order Granting/Denying Petition for
 Instructions re Distribution through her appeal of the Final
 Judgment, which denied her Petition to Enforce. Kiana argues
 "[t]he [circuit] court modified the Settlement Agreement by
 approving a pro rata distribution scheme that was contrary to the
 Settlement Agreement's requirements that the Gentry Company
 assets be sold -- something that it could not do." Although
 Kiana appealed the Final Judgment denying her Petition to
 Enforce, she did not appeal the Final Judgment re Order
 Granting/Denying Petition for Instructions re Distribution.
 
Because the Final Judgment re Order Granting/Denying 
Petition for Instructions re Distribution was not appealed, this court cannot give Kiana effective relief. Therefore, this appeal is moot. "A case is moot if it has lost its character as a present, live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law." Kaho
'ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai 'i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 
(2007) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Grp. By and Through Serrano v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d 161, 165 (1987) (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). When "an event occurs which renders it impossible for an appellate court, if it should decide the case in favor of the appellant, to grant him any effectual relief whatever, the court will not proceed to a formal judgment but will dismiss the appeal." City Bank v. Saje Ventures II, 7 Haw. App. 130, 134, 
748 P.2d 812, 815 (1988) (brackets omitted) (quoting Mills v. Green, 159 U.S. 651, 653 (1895)). "The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the circumstances that destroy the justiciability of 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a suit previously suitable for determination." Wong v. Bd. of 
Regents, Univ. Of Haw., 62 Haw. 391, 394, 616 P.2d 201, 203 
(1980). "The doctrine seems appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of the trial court have so affected the relations between the parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal-adverse interest and effective remedy-have been compromised." Id. at 394, 616 P.2d at 203-04. "Simply put, 
a case is moot if the reviewing court can no longer grant effective relief." Kaho
'ohanohano, 114 Hawai 'i at 332, 162 P.3d 
at 727 (brackets, emphasis, and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting City Bank, 7 Haw. App. at 134, 748 P.2d at 815). 
In City Bank, defendants-appellants filed a motion to
 
reconsider an earlier circuit court order that confirmed a public
 auction sale of their Waikiki property. City Bank, 7 Haw. App.
 
at 131, 748 P.2d at 813. After the circuit court denied their
 motion to reconsider, defendants-appellant appealed the circuit
 court's denial of their motion to this court. Id. at 132, 748
 
P.2d at 814. However, defendant-appellants did not file a
 supersedeas bond to stay enforcement of the circuit court's
 confirmation order and the sale of the property had closed by the
 time the case was decided on appeal. Id. at 133-34, 748 P.2d at
 
815. This court noted that "even if we were to reverse the
 
confirmation order, the closed sale of the Property to Outrigger
 could not be vitiated and we could not direct a new sale of the
 Property as requested by [defendant-appellants]." Id. at 134,
 
748 P.2d at 815. This court emphasized that defendant-appellant
 could have taken steps to challenge the sale of the property or
 stay the confirmation order, but failed to do so. See id. As a
 
result, this court ultimately held that appeal was moot. Id. at
 
132, 748 P.2d at 814.
 
Like City Bank, this court cannot grant Kiana's
 
requested relief, the liquidation of the Revocable Trust and
 Marital Trust assets pursuant to the terms of the Settlement
 Agreement, without overruling the circuit court's Final Judgment
 re Order Granting/Denying Petition for Instructions re
 Distribution, which was not appealed and is not before us. This
 court cannot overrule the Final Judgment re Order
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Granting/Denying Petition for Instructions re Distribution
 
because Kiana failed to file a notice of appeal for that order
 and judgment. See Hall v. Hall, 96 Hawai
'i 105, 110, 26 P.3d 
594, 599 (2001) ("An appellant's failure to file a timely notice
 of appeal is a jurisdictional defect that can neither be waived
 by the parties nor disregarded by the courts in the exercise of
 judicial discretion." (citation and internal quotation marks
 omitted)). This court has no jurisdiction to prevent the pro
 rata distribution of the assets from the Revocable Trust and the
 Marital Trust to give Kiana effective relief, assuming her points
 on appeal have merit.
 
III. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons this appeal is dismissed as
 
moot.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 22, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Margery S. Bronster
Jae B. Park
 (Bronster Hoshibata)for Petitioner-Appellant Kiana E.
Gentry.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Carroll S. Taylor

(Law Office of Taylor, Leong &
Chee)for Respondents-Appellees Mark L.
Vorsatz and First Hawaiian Bank,
and
 Alan T. Yoshitake
 (Seyfarth Shaw)
for Respondent-Appellee FirstHawaiian Bank.
 
8
 