  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000797 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRENNAN KYLE PURTZER, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(HONOLULU DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DTA-19-00488) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Brennan Kyle Purtzer (Purtzer) 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment (Judgment), entered on October 15, 2019, by the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).
1 
1 The Honorable Russell Nagata presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Purtzer was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2019).   2 
Purtzer raises two, related, points of error on appeal, 
contending that: (1) the District Court clearly erred in finding 
that Purtzer was operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against casualty; and (2) there was insufficient evidence to convict Purtzer of OVUII. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Purtzer's points of error as follows: 
Purtzer contends that the evidence at trial was 
insufficient to show that he was intoxicated to the point where his normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against casualty were impaired. Accordingly, he submits 
2 HRS § 291E-61(a) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of avehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that we should conclude that there is insufficient evidence to 
support his conviction. 
It is well-established that the evidence adduced at 
trial must be considered in the strongest light for the prosecution. State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166 
P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007). 
"[E]ven if it could be said [] that the 
conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long as there is substantial evidence to support the requisite findings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed." State v. 
Xiao, 123 Hawai# i 251, 257, 231 P.3d 968, 974 (2010) (citation 
omitted). 
In conjunction with his argument, Purtzer contends that 
the District Court erred in its oral findings when it found that, when Purtzer turned left after exiting the freeway, he crossed the solid line a "couple times" before going back in his lane. This finding is clearly erroneous because it is not supported by 
the evidence. Honolulu Police Department (
HPD) Officer James 
Baik (Officer Baik) testified as to his observations of Purtzer's 
driving, including that he saw Purtzer's vehicle, which was 
headed westbound on the Moanalua Freeway, "completely cross[] over" the center median dividing the Pu# u
loa exit and the freeway 
without signaling to get on the 
Pu#uloa exit.  The median was 
about a "one-lane width" and marked with solid diagonal lines. Officer Baik testified that Purtzer thereafter made a "wide left" turn onto Jarrett White Road; during the turn, Purtzer's right 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tires crossed a solid line by about a "couple feet" before he 
"immediately jerked back" into his lane. Purtzer then turned right onto Salt Lake Boulevard without signaling. Officer Baik did not testify that Purtzer crossed the solid line more than once. There is no other evidence related to this finding. Therefore, we conclude that the District Court clearly erred in finding that, when Purtzer turned left after exiting the freeway, he crossed the solid line a "couple times" before going back in his lane. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that: 
Error is not to be viewed in isolation and considered 
purely in the abstract. It must be examined in lightof the entire proceedings and given the effect towhich the whole record shows it is entitled. In that context, the real question becomes whether there is areasonable possibility that error might havecontributed to conviction. If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then theerror is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, andthe judgment of conviction on which it may have beenbased must be set aside. 
State v. Roman , 119 Hawai# i 468, 477, 199 P.3d 57, 66 (2008) 
(citation omitted). 
Here, the District Court expressly based its finding of 
guilt on the "totality of the evidence" presented and "the 
totality of the circumstances." 
The District Court found both 
testifying officers to be credible, but acknowledged that their testimonies were different in some regards, stating: "As to how they individually viewed the events that day may be different views, but both were credible. But they may have viewed the events differently." The District Court also said it was not 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"going to consider" some of Officer Baik's testimony because the 
court believed Purzter's explanation as to why he rested his hands on the vehicle door when Purtzer exited the vehicle. In light of the District Court's explanation for its determination 
of guilt based on the totality of the evidence, we cannot conclude that the District Court's erroneous finding as to 
Purtzer's driving irregularities was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
We must nevertheless address Purtzer's express claim of 
insufficiency of the evidence. See State v. Davis
, 133 Hawai# i 
102, 120, 324 P.3d 912, 930 (2014). 
In addition to the testimony noted above, Officer Baik 
testified that during the traffic stop, Officer Baik detected a "strong smell of alcohol" coming from Purtzer's vehicle, Purtzer's eyes were "red and glassy," and Purtzer told the officer that he was coming from a club or bar in 
Waikî kî where he 
had a drink. 
HPD Officer Garrett Elliott (
Officer Elliott) testified 
that he noted a "strong odor of alcohol" when he spoke to Purtzer and that Purtzer had "glassy eyes." On cross-examination, Officer Elliott testified that Purtzer's eyes were not red, bloodshot, or watery. Officer Elliott administered a standardized field sobriety test to Purtzer. During a horizontal gaze nystagmus test, Purtzer kept moving his head, which was contrary to Officer Elliott's instructions to keep his 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
chin in place. When Officer Elliott instructed Purtzer to stand 
with his right foot in front of his left for the walk-and-turn test's instructional phase, Purtzer "had difficulty trying to figure out which was left and which was right" and took about three tries to get into the correct position. Purtzer broke that stance after about three seconds, and began the test early. Contrary to Officer Elliott's instructions, Purtzer's first nine steps were not in line and he held out his arms, he turned by spinning on the tips of his toes
, and his nine steps back touched 
heel to toe "only on the corners" and his arms extended from his side. During a one-leg-stand test, contrary to Officer Elliott's instructions, Purtzer swayed left to right, held his arms out more than six inches from his side, dropped his foot after about 15 seconds, took about 10 more seconds for "a breather" before raising it again, and kept his foot pointed up instead of parallel to the ground. 
On appeal, Purtzer notes that both officers testified 
that Purtzer did not exhibit any slurred speech, that he did not appear to be unsteady on his feet when he walked, and that neither officer offered lay opinion testimony that Purtzer was intoxicated. Purtzer also offered evidence that the exit was poorly designed and that he was unfamiliar with it (as he was from out of town), as an explanation for his unlawful maneuver when he exited the freeway. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We nevertheless conclude that when the evidence adduced 
at trial is considered in the light strongest for the 
prosecution, there was substantial evidence to convict Purtzer of OVUII. 
For these reasons, the District Court's October 15, 
2019 Judgment is vacated, and this case is remanded to the District Court for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 26, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeWilliam H. Jameson, Jr., Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7 