  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000526 30-JAN-2025 08:19 AM Dkt. 47 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000526 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
PENNYMAC CORP., Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ELISE SARI TRAVIS, Defendant-Appellant,
a
nd 
BRUCE ROBERT TRAVIS; WAILEA COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION; 
WAILEA KIALOA HOMESITES ASSOCIATION; Defendants-Appellees,
and DOES 1 THROUGH 20, inclusive, Defendants.
AND 
WAILEA KIALOA HOMESITES ASSOCIATION, Cross-claimant-Appellee, v.
ELISE SARI TRAVIS, INDIVIDUALLY AND AS TRUSTEE UNDER THE
ELISE S. TRAVIS TRUST DATED NOVEMBER 5, 1990,
Cross-claim Defendant-Appellant,
and 
BRUCE ROBERT TRAVIS, Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0527 (1)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, and Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
This appeal arises out of a foreclosure decree and 
judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(Circuit Court) against Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant-Appellant 
Elise Sari Travis (Elise), Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant-
Appellee Bruce Robert Travis (Bruce) (together, the Travises), 
and other defendants.  Elise appeals from the August 25, 2021
Judgment entered in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee PennyMac Corp. 1/
1/ They include Defendant-Appellee Wailea Community Association ( WCA)
and Defendant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee Wailea Kialoa Homesites Association
(WKHA) (together, the Other Defendants ).   
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(PennyMac) and against the Travises and the Other Defendants.2/ 
Elise also challenges the Circuit Court's August 25, 2021 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting . . . PennyMac['s] Second Motion for Summary Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed June 4, 2021" (Foreclosure Decree).
3/ 
Elise signed a promissory note (Note) dated December 1, 
2007, to Washington Mutual Bank, FA (Washington Mutual) in return 
for a loan (Loan). The Note was secured by a mortgage (Mortgage) 
on real property in Kihei, Maui. In 2008, the FDIC, as receiver 
for Washington Mutual, sold Washington Mutual's assets to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (Chase), and in 2012, the FDIC assigned 
the Mortgage to Chase. A notice of default was allegedly sent to 
Elise by Chase on August 29, 2011. In 2014, Chase assigned the Mortgage to PennyMac. 
On May 23, 2012, Chase filed a complaint for 
declaratory relief and mortgage foreclosure against the Travises and the Other Defendants. On September 22, 2014, PennyMac was substituted for Chase as plaintiff. On June 24, 2016, PennyMac filed a motion for summary judgment. On October 13, 2016, the Circuit Court granted the motion and entered a foreclosure decree and judgment in favor of PennyMac.  The Travises appealed. On 
November 21, 2018, this court entered a summary disposition order vacating the Circuit Court's foreclosure decree and judgment and remanding the case for further proceedings. See PennyMac Corp. V. Travis, No. CAAP-16-0000806, 2018 WL 6074792, at *2 (Nov. 21, 2018 Haw. App.) (SDO). 
4/
On remand, PennyMac filed a second summary judgment 
motion (
Second MSJ) on June 4, 2021. On August 25, 2021, the 
Circuit Court granted the motion and entered the Foreclosure Decree and the Judgment. Elise filed this timely appeal. 
On appeal, Elise contends that the Circuit Court erred 
2/ It appears that the Judgment did not resolve WKHA's cross-claim
against Bruce and Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee Elise Sari Travis,
individually and as Trustee Under the Elise S. Travis Trust Dated November 5,1990. 
3/ The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi entered the Foreclosure Decree
and the Judgment. 
4/ The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
in: (1) granting the Second MSJ, where there were genuine issues 
of material fact;5/ (2) denying Elise's February 23, 2018 motion 
for reconsideration of the February 16, 2018 "Order Granting [PennyMac's] Motion for Confirmation of Foreclosure Sale, Allowance of Costs, Commissions and Fees, Distribution of Proceeds, Directing Conveyance and for Writ of Possession/Ejectments Filed on March 6, 2017"; and (3) denying Elise's "request for time under [Hawai# i Rules of Civil 
Procedure] Rule 56(f) to have a second expert examine the questioned note." (Capitalization altered.) 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Elise's contentions as follows, and vacate. 
Elise first contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
granting PennyMac's Second MSJ. In support of this contention, Elise argues in part that the declaration submitted by PennyMac to admit its documents related to the Loan did not comply with the requirements set forth in 
U.S. Bank Trust, N.A., as Tr. for 
LSF9 Master Participation Tr. v. Verhagen, 149 Hawai# i 315, 326, 
489 P.3d 419, 430 (2021), and Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. as Tr. for Morgan Stanley ABS Cap. I Inc. Tr. 2006-NC4 v. Yata, 152 Hawai#i 322, 331, 526 P.3d 299, 308 (2023). We review the 
Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment de novo. Nozawa v. 
Operating Eng'rs Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 338, 418 
P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). 
On February 25, 2021, Johnny Morton (Morton)
 signed a 
declaration to authenticate PennyMac's documents (the Morton 
Declaration). Morton was authorized to sign his declaration on 
behalf of PennyMac as an authorized representative of PennyMac 
Loan Services, LLC (PLS), the servicer for the Loan. As 
5/   Elise contends there were genuine issues concerning the following:
(1) "Johnny Morton was not a 'qualified witness' . . . and thus the records of
the prior servicer were not admissible"; (2) "[Elise] presented specific factsshowing that the prior servicer's records were not trustworthy and thus theburden shifted back to PennyMac . . . to prove that there was no genuine issueof material fact"; (3) "there is no proof that the notice [of] default wasever mailed to [Elise]"; (4) "the loan history presented by PennyMac was not
understandable and should not have been admitted into evidence." 
(Capitalization altered.) 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
PennyMac's servicer, PLS maintained the records for the Loan. 
PLS received records related to the Loan from Washington Mutual, the FDIC, and Chase; integrated those records into PLS's business records; and relied upon the accuracy of the integrated records in providing its loan servicing functions. 
[W]hen an entity incorporates records prepared by another
entity into its own records, they are admissible as businessrecords of the incorporating entity provided that it relieson the records, there are other indicia of reliability, andthe requirements of [Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE)]
Rule 803(b)(6) are otherwise satisfied. 
State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai# i 354, 367–68, 227 P.3d 520, 533–34 
(2010). 
Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)when a custodian or qualified witness[
6/] testifies that
[(1)] the documents were incorporated and kept in the normalcourse of business, [(2)] that the incorporating businesstypically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of thedocuments, and [(3)] the circumstances otherwise indicate 
the trustworthiness of the document . 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 37, 45, 414 P.3d 
89, 97 (2018) (footnote and emphasis added). 
The Morton Declaration satisfied the first two Behrendt 
elements. As to circumstances indicating trustworthiness of the 
incorporated documents, the Morton Declaration stated: 
12. To the extent that the business records of the 
loan in this matter were created by the originating lender,
the successor to the originating lender and/or the priorservicers, the originating lender's, the successor to theoriginating lender's and/or the prior servicer's businessrecords for the loan were incorporated and boarded into[PLS]'s systems, such that the originating lender's, thesuccessor to the originating lender's or the priorservicer's records concerning the Loan are now part of[PLS]'s business records. Before incorporating thoserecords, [PLS] conducted an independent check into the priorrecords and found them in keeping with industry wide loanservicing standards and only integrated them into [PLS]'sown business records after finding the prior records weremade as part of a regularly conducted activity, met industrystandards and were determined to be trustworthy. 
. . . . 
14. In this matter, [PLS] verified for accuracy
the records received from Washington Mutual . . ., the 
6/ Morton was a qualified witness because he had knowledge of PLS's
record-keeping system and described its incorporation of prior loan servicers'
documents. See Yata
, 152 Hawai #i at 334 n.17, 526 P.3d at 311 n.17. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
originating lender; the [FDIC] as the receiver for
[Washington Mutual]; and . . . Chase . . . , the priorservicer, and is thus familiar with the records andrecord-keeping systems of [Washington Mutual], the FDIC asreceiver for [Washington Mutual], and Chase. [PLS] thenintegrated the records received from [Washington Mutual],the FDIC as receiver for [Washington Mutual] and Chaserelated to the Loan into [PLS]'s business records and hasrelied upon the accuracy of those boarded integrated recordsin providing its loan servicing functions. 
In Verhagen, the loan servicer's declaration stated: 
The information regarding the Loan transferred to Caliberfrom the Prior Servicer has been validated in many ways,including, but not limited to, going through a due diligencephase, review of hard copy documents, and review of the
payment history and accounting of other fees, costs, andexpenses charged to the Loan by Prior Servicer. 
149 Hawai# i at 326, 489 P.3d at 430 (emphasis added). The 
supreme court held: 
Though scant, this testimony establishes circumstances
indicating the trustworthiness of Caliber's incorporatedrecords. It is evidence that before incorporating JPMorganChase's documents, Caliber reviewed hard copies of thedocuments, engaged in a "due diligence" process, andreviewed the payment history and accounting associated withthe loan. JPMorgan Chase's documents were not, in otherwords, uncritically incorporated into Caliber's own. Theywere vetted by Caliber. This pre-incorporation vetting,however nebulously described by Patterson's testimony, is acircumstance that indicates the trustworthiness of the documents. 
Id. The supreme court held the incorporated records admissible 
under HRE Rule 803(b)(6). Id. at 327, 489 P.3d at 431. 
In Yata, the loan servicers' declarations stated: 
SLS maintains quality control and verification procedures as
part of the boarding process to ensure the accuracy of theboarded records. 
152 Hawai#i at 325, 328, 526 P.3d at 302, 305. The supreme court 
held: 
The declarations in Verhagen provided specific methods of
validation of documents from the prior loan servicer,
"including, but not limited to, going through a duediligence phase, review of hard copy documents, and reviewof the payment history and account of other fees, costs, andexpenses charged to the Loan by Prior Servicer." The Mountes and McCloskey Declarations merely assert that SLShas "quality control and verification procedures" to ensurethe accuracy of incorporated records without stating whatthose procedures are. This court noted that the testimonyindicating circumstances of trustworthiness in Verhagen was"scant" and "nebulously described" circumstances of 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
trustworthiness. Here, there is even less testimony
describing circumstances of trustworthiness. Thus, itappears that the third Behrendt requirement was notsatisfied, and the documents attached to the Mountes andMcCloskey Declarations were not admissible. 
Id. at 335, 526 P.3d at 312 (emphasis added) (citations omitted). 
Here, the Morton Declaration, like those in Yata, made 
conclusory statements. Morton did not explain what "specific 
methods of validation" PLS used in its pre-incorporation vetting to determine that the incorporated records were made as part of a regularly conducted activity, met industry standards, and were trustworthy. "[A]ffidavits that state ultimate or conclusory facts cannot be used in support of or in opposition to a motion for summary judgment." Nozawa, 142 Hawai# i at 338, 418 P.3d at 
1194. 
On this record, we conclude that the Morton Declaration 
did not show circumstances establishing that the information in the records incorporated by PLS was trustworthy. Yata, 152 
Hawai#i at 335, 526 P.3d at 312. 
Elise allegedly defaulted on the Note in 2011, which 
appears to be at least two years before PLS began servicing the Loan for PennyMac. Exhibit K, the payment history for the Loan, has information about events that happened before PLS took over the loan servicing. 
The Morton Declaration did not explain what 
specific methods of validation PLS used to make sure that information was accurate. Exhibit K was not admissible under the HRE Rule 803(b)(6) exception to the hearsay rule. Morton's testimony about Elise's default, being based on Exhibit K, was inadmissible hearsay. Having failed to show Elise's default through admissible evidence,
7/ PennyMac did not satisfy its burden 
as summary judgment movant. Nozawa
, 142 Hawai#i at 342, 418 P.3d 
at 1198. Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in granting the Second MSJ. 
In light of our disposition, we need not address 
Elise's other arguments. 
For the reasons discussed above, the Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Plaintiff PennyMac Corp.'s Second Motion for Summary Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of 
7/ The Travises' answer appears to deny a default. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Foreclosure Filed June 4, 2021, and the Judgment, both entered on 
August 25, 2021, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, are vacated. The case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, January 30, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Keith M. Kiuchi, Presiding Judge
for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Clyde J. WadsworthAssociate Judge
Patricia J. McHenry andLisa K. Swartzfager(Cades Schutte) /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7 