NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000569
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ALBERT BATALONA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE CIRCUIT CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING PRISONER NO. 10-1-0096

(CRIMINAL NO. 99-1549))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant pro se Albert Batalona (Batalona)
 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
 
Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing"
 (FOF/COL/Order) entered July 1, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit  (circuit court). The circuit court denied 
Batalona's December 8, 2010 "Petition for Post-Conviction Relief," brought under Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
Rule 40 (Rule 40 Petition), without a hearing.
I.
 INTRODUCTION
 
On appeal, Batalona argues the circuit court erred in
 
denying his Rule 40 Petition without a hearing because he was
 deprived of effective assistance of counsel by David Klein
 
2
(Klein),  who represented him at trial and his October 23, 2000 
1
 The Honorable Collette Y. Garibaldi issued the FOF/COL/Order.
 
2
 Specifically, Batalona argues that Klein failed to do the following:
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2(...continued)
1. challenge the circuit court's erroneous refusal to
dismiss jurors and prospective jurors for cause;
 
2. raise claims of delay and the circuit court's failure to
"guide" the jury regarding "included offense," despite the
jury's request for clarification;
 
3. challenge the grand jury proceedings, which were held
while proceedings against him in federal court, stemming
from the same facts, were pending;
 
4. raise violations of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 701­
109(1)(a) [(2014 Repl.)] and/or double jeopardy regarding
his conviction on the use of a firearm in the commission of
 a separate felony, attempted robbery in the first degree
(Robbery 1), and prohibited firearm;
 
5. challenge the circuit court's failure to instruct the
jury to find Batalona guilty of only attempted murder in the
first degree (Attempted Murder 1) if they found the offense
was committed concurrently with Robbery 1;
 
6. challenge the joinder of two separate offenses in the
same count;
 
7. raise that the circuit court violated or interfered with
 
Batalona's right to "participate in his own defense" by
preventing him from accessing discovery materials;
 
8. show that [Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai' i's 
(State)] decision to prosecute him and not his co-
defendants, when the federal court still had jurisdictionover him, was relevant; 
9. challenge the State's decision to prosecute him and not
his co-defendants, prior to trial;
 
10. challenge the State's introduction of perjured
testimony;
 
11. challenge the introduction of an AR-15 gun clip as
evidence on the basis of evidence-tampering, unreliability,
and unorthodox recovery;
 
12. challenge the jury instructions on Attempted Murder 1;
 13. object to the jury instructions on "proof beyond a
reasonable doubt";
 
14. challenge the circuit court's refusal to instruct the
jury on the lesser-included offense of assault against a
police officer, despite the existence of a rational basis in
the evidence;
 
15. raise matters of critical importance to Batalona's
defense, such as the admission of prejudicial evidence and
failure to call an expert witness;
 
16. contest jury instructions on criminal attempt and
attempted murder;
 
17. present evidence of a highly exculpatory nexus between
two exhibits; and

 
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal (2000 Appeal) to the Hawai 'i Supreme Court (case no. 
23820) Further, Batalona argues that 
(1) the circuit court interfered with his right to
 
access discovery materials and, thus, prevented him from
 
intelligently preparing and filing state and federal post-
conviction petitions;
 
(2) his sentence to life in prison without parole was
 
cruel and unusual and outside of the court's discretion, and
 should have been commuted; and
 
(3) the court committed a manifest injustice, where
 
errors or omissions precluded Batalona from receiving the
 sentence in Count 2 that he would have been entitled to on
 retrial.
 
Batalona concedes the circuit court did not err in
 
denying his request for post-conviction relief on Grounds 11 and
 12 of his Rule 40 Petition.
 
This court vacates the FOF/COL/Order and remands this
 
case for a hearing on Ground 1 and Ground 20(F) in Batalona's
 Rule 40 Petition, and affirms the circuit court's denial of a
 hearing on the other twenty-one separate grounds, as well as the
 other subparts of Ground 20 in Batalona's Rule 40 Petition in
 that they are "patently frivolous and [are] without a trace of
 support either in the record or from other evidence submitted by
 [Batalona]." HRPP Rule 40(f).
II. GROUND ONE
 
In his Rule 40 Petition, Batalona asserted multiple
 
ineffective assistance of counsel claims. In Conclusions of Law
 4, the circuit court collectively denied a hearing on these
 claims, under State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348, 615 P.2d 101,
 104 (1980), after finding that these claims were patently
 
2(...continued)
 
18. present exculpatory evidence showing that he was inside
the bank when the shots were fired at the police officer,
outside.
 
Batalona also argues that Klein was ineffective for erroneously advising him
to not testify at trial.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
frivolous and without a trace of support, under HRPP 40(f) and
 
Dan v. State, 76 Hawai 'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994); that 
Batalona failed to point to any specific errors or omissions
 resulting from Klein's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and
 that Batalona's general claims were insufficient.
 
Klein represented Batalona at trial and the 2000
 
Appeal. "Where [a] petitioner has been represented by the same
 counsel both at trial and on direct appeal, no waiver of the
 issue of trial counsel's performance occurs because no realistic
 opportunity existed to raise the issue on direct appeal." 
Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 459, 848 P.2d 966, 975 (1993). 
The petitioner has the burden to show that counsel's assistance

 
was ineffective. Id. at 460, 848 P.2d at 975.
 
In Briones
, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated: 
In any claim of ineffective assistance of trial
counsel, the burden is upon the defendant to demonstrate
that, in light of all the circumstances, counsel's
performance was not objectively reasonable—i.e., within the
 
range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.
In [
Antone], we set forth a two-part test requiring
defendant to show specific errors or omissions reflectingcounsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, and that
these errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal
 or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense. An accused's potentially meritorious defenses
include the assertion of his constitutional rights. 

General claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and
 
every action or omission is not subject to inquiry.
Specific actions or omissions alleged to be error but which
had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the
defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny.
If, however, the action or omission had no obvious basis for
benefitting defendant's case and it resulted in the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense, then the knowledge held and
investigation performed by counsel in pursuit of an informed
decision will be evaluated as that information that, in
light of the complexity of the law and the factual
circumstances, an ordinarily competent criminal attorney
should have had. An informed, tactical decision will rarely
be second-guessed by judicial hindsight. If the record is
 unclear or void as to the basis for counsel's actions,
counsel shall be given the opportunity to explain his or her
actions in an appropriate proceeding before the trial court
judge.
 
74 Haw. at 463, 848 P.2d at 976-77 (citations, internal quotation
 
marks, parentheticals, brackets, ellipsis, and emphasis omitted).
 
In Ground 1, Batalona argued that Klein failed to
 
challenge the circuit court's failure to dismiss multiple jurors
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and prospective jurors for cause. He appeared to argue that the 
following nine members of the jury pool showed bias in favor of law enforcement and/or victims: Dumaoal, Wei, Chun, Sereno, Stone, Lopes, Fischer, Ka
'alele, and Nakama. 
Prior to jury selection, Dumaoal, Wei, Chun, Sereno, 
Stone, Lopes, and Fischer each filled out a jury qualification questionnaire and answered "Yes" to the question, "Are you related to, or close friends with any law enforcement officer?" In his Rule 40 Petition, Batalona appeared to assert that he used two of his four peremptory challenges to remove two of those seven jurors and would have used the rest to remove two more of the seven jurors, but Klein used them to remove Ka
'alele and 
Nakama. Ka 'alele and Nakama did not indicate on the jury 
questionnaire form that they were related to or close friends with an officer but, according to Batalona, seemed to be partial to law enforcement and/or victims based on what they said during voir dire. 
At voir dire, the circuit court engaged Nakama in the
 
following exchange:

 
[circuit court:] Miss Nakama, good morning. Can you
tell us what you remember reading, hearing or seeing about 
the case in the news?
 
[Nakama:]  That there was an armed robbery involving

guns and it was frightening because it was in my
neighborhood and there was shooting. And the suspects got
away and that they were caught, I don't know whether several
days later or a week later, and that one or two of them
might have been in the Kaimuki area.
 
[circuit court:]  
I will be instructing you and other
jurors that you can only decide the case on the evidence
that's presented in the courtroom and that outside
information cannot be used, that if you have any opinions
they have to be set aside and you have to start fresh on the
case. Would you be able to do that or would you be affected
or influenced by outside information or your own personal
reaction to the case?
 
[Nakama:] 
Truthfully, I think I would be more
affected by the information I've read and my -- my feelings. 
[circuit court:] 
Would you be able to set that aside
or would you have problems?
 
[Nakama:]  
I hope to be able to.
 
* 
* *
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[circuit court:] All right. You . . . said it was a
 
frightening experience because it was in my neighborhood? 
 
[Nakama:] Yes. My husband does banking there and the
girls and I are there a lot, we walk around the area.
 
[circuit court:] So your family through your husband?
 
[Nakama:] We use the one in Kahala but he takes money
out of there also.
 
[circuit court:] Have you and he discussed the case
at all to such an extent that you have expressed an opinion

or have expressed your feelings to him about what happened?
 
[Nakama:] Gosh, that was last year. I know we both
 
felt that it was a frightening experience to have guns in

our neighborhood that, you know, our daughters could be hurt
and other families, too. But that was last year, we haven't
discussed it since then.
 
[circuit court:] . . . . 

Would you be able to concentrate on focus your
attention only on courtroom evidence?
 
[Nakama:] Well, if I do serve as a juror, I hope to.

 
Klein questioned Nakama as follows:
 
[Klein:] You are of course aware that there were guns

involved?
 
[Nakama:] Oh, yes.
 
[Klein:]
 You were aware that shots had been fired?
 
[Nakama:] Yes.
 
[Klein:] And you heard [Batalona's] name mentioned in
connection with that?
 
[Nakama:] Yes.
 
[Klein:] The fact that you would be called to sit as
a juror in this case and to decide . . . the question is
whether or not based upon how you felt at the time and what
you had learned, do you think you could be fair to
[Batalona]?
 
[Nakama:]  
Well, I hope so.
 
[Klein:] Okay. So you're -- you feel confident that
you can, you can put that aside?
 
[Nakama:] You know, to be truthful, as a mother and a
wife I have really strong feelings already. I feel show me the facts to prove that this man is innocent. 
During voir dire, Ka 'alele stated that she had been 
working for two years as a clerk-typist for the Honolulu Police
 
Department Vehicle Maintenance Division. She had no personal
 contact with any police officers or personnel, other than to
 speak to them about car maintenance and repairs, and would have
 
6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no problem judging the credibility of the officers who testified
 
at trial.
 
In State v. Carvalho, 79 Hawai 'i 165, 880 P.2d 217, 
(App. 1994), this court stated: 
There are two kinds of challenges to jurors: "for
 
cause" and peremptory. "In all cases, any party may
challenge for cause any juror drawn for the trial." [HRS
§ 635–28 (1993)]. "For cause" includes challenges to the
"juror's qualifications, interest, or bias that would affect
the trial of the cause and . . . to any matter that might
tend to affect the proposed juror's verdict." HRS § 635–27
[(1993)]. A peremptory challenge is "the right to challenge
a juror without assigning, or being required to assign, a
reason for the challenge." Black's Law Dictionary 1136 (6th
ed. 1990).
 
Id. 79 Hawai 'i at 170 n.4, 880 P.2d at 222 n.4 (brackets 
omitted).
 
"The paramount question in determining whether to
 
excuse for cause a prospective juror is whether the defendant
 
would be afforded a fair and impartial trial based on the law and
 evidence, with the prospective juror as a member of the jury." 
State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai 'i 196, 203, 65 P.3d 143, 150 (2003) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated: 
[W]hen a juror is challenged on grounds that he has formed
an opinion and cannot be impartial, the test is whether the
nature and strength of the opinion are such as in law
necessarily raise the presumption of partiality. The
 prevailing rule, however, allows a person with preconceived
notions about a case to serve as a juror if he can lay aside
his impression or opinion and render a verdict based on the
evidence presented in court.
 
Id. at 204, 65 P.3d at 151 (brackets in original, citations,
 
internal quotation marks, and ellipses omitted).
 
It is unclear whether Klein would have succeeded in
 
dismissing Ka 'alele for cause, where Ka 'alele said she would have 
no problem judging the credibility of officers who testified and
 
who expressed no bias in favor of law enforcement. 
Iuli provides guidance. There, the supreme court held
 
that a juror should have been passed for cause because he
 indicated during voir dire that his association with law
 enforcement would cause him to be biased:
 
In response to the court's inquiry as to whether he would
try to be fair and impartial, Carvalho replied that "it may
be very difficult to be fair and impartial." In our view,
Carvalho's agreement with the prosecutor that he could treat
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
police officers like any other witness, in itself, did not
adequately rehabilitate him as a prospective juror.
Carvalho's responses to defense counsel's inquiries
demonstrated that he had preconceived notions and partiality
toward victims and police officers due to his association
with law enforcement. For example, as noted above, he
stated, "All of my background says that the arrest wasn't
made in vain." In response to defense counsel's question,
"So as you sit here and you look at Mr. Iuli, you go, well,
he must have done something right, he would be sitting in
the chair there," Carvalho nodded his head in the
affirmative.
 
Moreover, Carvalho explicitly stated that it would be
a "tough call" as to whether he could be fair. His
 statement, "I'll try to be honest," was ambiguous at best
and certainly does not expressly signify, as the prosecution
implies, that he would attempt to be fair and impartial. 
Furthermore, Carvalho did not assure the trial court
that he would base his decision solely upon the
evidence. . . . Carvalho's statements during voir dire were
express declarations of bias. Carvalho did not affirmatively
state that he could render a fair and impartial verdict.
 
Id. at 204-05, 65 P.3d at 151-52 (record reference omitted). 
In this case, Nakama stated that when she heard about
 
the robbery, she and her husband were frightened and concerned
 
that their daughters and other people in the neighborhood could
 be hurt. When asked if she would be able to decide the case
 solely on the evidence presented in court, she explicitly stated,
 "Truthfully, I think I would be more affected by the information
 I've read and my . . . feelings." Later, she stated, "[T]o be
 truthful, as a mother and a wife I have really strong feelings
 already. I feel show me the facts to prove that this man is
 innocent." Further, Nakama expressed hope that she could put
 aside her feelings, focus only on courtroom evidence, and be fair
 to Batalona was ambiguous at best and did not signify that she
 would attempt to be fair and impartial.
 
If Klein had succeeded in removing Nakama for cause, he 
would have preserved one of Batalona's peremptory challenges, which he could have used to remove another prospective juror. In State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i 195, 197-98, 948 P.2d 1036, 1038-39 
(1997), Kauhi challenged a prospective juror for cause on the ground that the juror was a deputy prosecuting attorney, employed by the same office that employed the attorney trying the case. The circuit court denied the challenge. Id. at 198, 948 P.2d at 
1039. Kauhi used his last peremptory challenge to excuse the juror, then requested two additional peremptory challenges and 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identified the jurors against whom he would utilize them. Id. 
The court denied the request. Id. 
On appeal, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in denying Kauhi's motion to 
dismiss the prosecutor-juror for cause, and the error prevented Kauhi from peremptorily challenging at least one of two additional prospective jurors; and, therefore, the trial court denied or impaired Kauhi's right to exercise his peremptory challenge. Id. at 200, 948 P.2d at 1041. The supreme court 
reversed the conviction and remanded the case for a new trial. Id. 
"[T]he right to exercise a peremptory challenge is one 
of the most important of the rights secured to the accused in a criminal case and the denial or impairment of that right is reversible error not requiring a showing of prejudice." Iuli, 
101 Hawai
'i at 204, 65 P.3d at 151 (citation, internal quotation 
marks, ellipsis and brackets omitted). Here, if Klein used a peremptory challenge where he could have succeeded in dismissing Nakama for cause, he may have denied or impaired Batalona's right to exercise one of his peremptory challenges. 
Based on the information before this court, Klein's
 
basis for not moving to dismiss Nakama for cause is unclear. The
 State points out, that the transcript of the final day of jury
 selection, on July 26, 2000, is missing from the record on
 appeal. Further, in his Declaration, attached to the State's
 Supplemental Answer to Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (HRPP
 Rule 40), Klein merely states the following with regard to
 Batalona's ineffectiveness-of-counsel claims: "[I]t is my
 position that any . . . failure to pursue any course of action .
 . . did not substantially impair a meritorious claim or defense,
 and/or resulted from a strategic or tactical decision in the
 course of litigation." This statement does not provide an
 adequate explanation. 
"If the record is unclear or void as to the basis for
 
counsel's actions, counsel shall be given the opportunity to
 explain his or her actions in an appropriate proceeding before
 the trial court judge." Briones, 74 Haw. at 463, 848 P.2d at
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
977. Because Batalona's argument on this point alleged facts
 
that, if proven, would entitle him to relief, the circuit court
 
erred by denying the Rule 40 Petition without a hearing on the
 issue. See HRPP Rule 40(f).
III. GROUND 20(F)
 
In Ground 20(F), Batalona argued Klein was ineffective
 
for failing to secure co-defendants Sean Matsunaga (Matsunaga)
 
and Jacob Travis Hayme's (Hayme) attendance at trial in violation
 
of Batalona's Right to Confrontation, where recordings of out–of­
court statements by Matsunaga and Hayme, inculpating Batalona on
 the Attempted Murder 1 charge, were played at trial.
 
In State v. Fields, 115 Hawai
'i 503, 513, 168 P.3d 955, 
965 (2007), as amended on denial of reconsideration (Oct. 10, 2007), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held, citing to Crawford v. 
Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), "To the extent that an out-of­court statement is testimonial in nature, such hearsay is admissible only where the declarant is unavailable, and only where the defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross-examine him about the statement." (Citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Among other things, plea allocutions are "undeniably testimonial under the sixth amendment." Id. And statements are 
"testimonial when the circumstances objectively indicate that there is no . . . ongoing emergency, and that the primary purpose of the interrogation is to establish or prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution." Id. 
(quoting Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813, 822 (2006) (format altered). 
In this case, in a motion in limine filed on July 17,
 
2000, the State sought to exclude a recorded statement by
 Matsunaga, whom counsel for the State indicated would not be
 testifying at trial. Counsel argued that the statement, that
 Matsunaga fired at Honolulu Police Officer Rosskopf (Officer
 
3
Rosskopf), conflicted with Matsunaga's plea allocution  and,
thus, was inherently untrustworthy and did not fit within any
 
3
 At trial, counsel for State explained that Matsunaga gave the plea
allocution in federal court on November 24, 1999, two days before he provided
his recorded statement. In the allocution, Matsunaga claimed Batalona fired
numerous rounds at Officer Rosskopf.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
hearsay exception.
 
Batalona opposed the motion in limine, arguing, among
 
other things, that Matsunaga's recorded statement was relevant to
 
show that Hayme and/or Matsunaga, not Batalona, shot at Officer
 Rosskopf.
 
Batalona argued that even if Matsunaga failed to
 
testify at trial, his recorded statement was admissible pursuant
 
4
to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(8) (1993)  because
Matsunaga made it pursuant to a police report, and Rule 804(b)(3)
 
5
(1993) because it was a statement against interest.
At a hearing on the State's motion in limine, on July
20, 2000, the circuit court ruled that, assuming Matsunaga and
 
Hayme were not testifying, Matsunaga's recorded statement that
 he, not Batalona, shot at Officer Rosskopf, was admissible as
 long as Matsunaga's plea allocution stating the opposite was also
 introduced to call into question the trustworthiness of the
 recorded statement.
 

 
The circuit court orally ruled that Hayme's recorded
 
statement, in which Hayme claimed Batalona shot at Officer
 
4
 HRE Rule 803(b)(8) provides:
 
(8)	 Public records and reports. Records, reports,
statements, or data compilations, in any form, of
public offices or agencies, setting forth (A) the
activities of the office or agency, or (B) matters
observed pursuant to duty imposed by law as to which
matters there was a duty to report, excluding,
however, in criminal cases matters observed by police
officers and other law enforcement personnel, or (C)
in civil proceedings and against the government in
criminal cases, factual findings resulting from an
investigation made pursuant to authority granted by
law, unless the sources of information or other
circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness.
5
 HRE Rule 804(b)(3) provides:
 
(3)	 Statement against interest. A statement which was at
 the time of its making so far contrary to the
declarant's pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so
far tended to subject the declarant to civil or
criminal liability, or to render invalid a claim by
the declarant against another, that a reasonable
person in the declarant's position would not have made
the statement unless the declarant believed it to be
 true. A statement tending to expose the declarant to
criminal liability and offered to exculpate the
accused is not admissible unless corroborating
circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of
the statement[.]
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rosskopf, was admissible as a statement against interest, an
 
exception to the prohibition against hearsay. Klein objected
 that Hayme's statement was exculpatory and therefore not a
 statement against interest, and did not fall under any other
 hearsay exception; however, the court did not alter its ruling.
 
On July 25, 2000, Batalona filed a supplemental motion
 
in limine, in which he sought an order prohibiting the State from
 introducing any part of Matsunaga or Hayme's respective
 statements pertaining to anyone's actions but their own, on the
 ground that otherwise, the statements would be hearsay and in
 violation of Batalona's Sixth Amendment rights.
 
At trial, Klein objected to the admission of
 
Matsunaga's recorded statement and plea allocution and Hayme's
 recorded statement on the ground that it would violate Batalona's
 Sixth Amendment rights. The circuit court orally ruled, "On the
 plea agreement and proffer from Matsunaga, there is no Sixth
 Amendment issue because the defense is calling him and you don't
 cross examine your own witness."
 
Klein introduced into evidence Exhibit 1, a redacted
 
version of Matsunaga's recorded statement. The recording was
 played to the jury, but there appears to be no transcript of it
 in the record on appeal. Further, although the State submitted
 the recording or a transcript of it as State's Exhibit 160; there
 appears to be no copy the record.
 
The record on appeal does include transcripts of the
 
portions of Hayme's and Matsunaga's respective recorded
 statements by counsels during closing arguments. The portions
 played indicated that in Hayme's recorded statement, he denied
 having fired his weapon at Officer Rosskopf.
 
With regard to Matsunaga's recorded statement, as the 
circuit court orally ruled, the statement could not have violated Batalona's Sixth Amendment rights because Batalona introduced it. On the other hand, Hayme's recorded statement was introduced by the State. Hayme's recorded statement was testimonial because it was given "to establish or prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution" of Batalona. Fields, 115 Hawai
'i 
at 514, 168 P.3d at 966. Unless Hayme was unavailable, Batalona 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had the right to cross-examine him at trial. Id. at 513, 168
 
P.3d at 965. It is unclear from the record if Hayme really was
 
unavailable. Although he apparently refused to testify, there
 does not appear to be any evidence that the State made a good
 faith effort to secure his appearance at trial. 
If Klein failed to subpoena Hayme, it may have resulted
 
in the withdrawal of substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense because, as the State conceded, Hayme fired
 five bullets from his weapon during the robbery, and Batalona,
 through cross-examination, may have cast reasonable doubt on
 whether Hayme's shots were directed at Officer Rosskopf. Klein's
 Declaration does not adequately address his decision to not
 subpoena Hayme. "If the record is unclear or void as to the
 basis for counsel's actions, counsel shall be given the
 opportunity to explain his or her actions in an appropriate
 proceeding before the trial court judge." Briones, 74 Haw. at
 
463, 848 P.2d at 977. Therefore, the circuit court should have
 held a hearing on this point.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The July 21, 2015 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 
Law, and Order Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
 Without a Hearing," entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded for a hearing on
 Ground 1 and Ground 20(F) of the December 8, 2010 "Petition for
 Post-Conviction Relief." The circuit court's denial of a hearing
 on all other grounds contained in the "Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief" is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 18, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Albert Batalona 
Petitioner-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge 
Brandon H. Ito Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13

 