 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000460 15-MAY-2025 08:06 AM Dkt. 81 SO 
NO.  CAAP
-22-0000460  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
HO‘OPONOPONO  O MĀKENA, an unincorporated association, MAUI 
TOMORROW FOUNDATION, a non-profit corporation, and SIERRA CLUB 
OF HAWAI‘ I, a non-profit corporation, Plaintiffs-Appellees,  
v.  
MAUI PLANNING COMMISSION, COUNTY OF MAUI, Defendant-Appellant, 
WAILEA RESORT SF-S PARTNERS, LP, a foreign limited partnership,  
Defendant-Appellee, and DOES 1-27,  Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT  COURT OF THE SECOND  CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 2CCV-21-0000177)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant-Appellant Maui Planning Commission, County 
of Maui (Commission )  appeals  from  the Circuit Court of the 
Second Circuit's ( circuit court )  "Order Granting Plaintiffs[-
Appellees'  Hoʻoponopono O Mākena , Maui Tomorrow Foundation, and 
Sierra Club of Hawai ʻi's  (collectively, Plaintiffs )]  Non-Hearing   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
  
 
  
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion for Award of Fees and Costs " (Order), 1 filed June 27, 
2022. 
In June 2021, Plaintiffs filed a "Complaint for 
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief " (Complaint ) against the 
Commission and Defendant -Appellee Wailea Resort SF -S Partners, 
LP (Wailea), 2 regarding Wailea's residential development project 
(Project) on the Island of Maui. The eight -count Complaint 
challenged the sufficiency of the Final Environmental Assessment 
(FEA) that Wailea had prepared pursuant to Hawaii Revised 
Statutes ( HRS) Chapter 3433 and the Commission's issuance of a 
Finding of No Significant Impact ( FONSI). Plaintiffs 
subsequently moved for summary judgment on all counts. The 
circuit court granted the motion as to counts IV (improper 
segmentation) and VIII (injunctive relief) , and denied the 
remaining counts as moot. 
The circuit court entered summary judgment in favor of 
Plaintiffs, and against the Commission and Wailea. The circuit 
court's "Amended Order Granting Summary Judgment in Favor of 
Plaintiffs and Denying Summary Judgment in Favor [sic] 
1 The Honorable Kirstin Hamman presided. 
2 Wailea has not appealed the circuit court's Order, or its 
underlying Judgment, and is a nominal appellee. 
3 Plaintiffs challenged, inter alia, the scope of the FEA, which 
segmented the Project from the developments of subsidiary companies owned by 
Wailea's parent company, Ledcor Development, LP. 
2   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants,"  (Amended Order) filed April 11, 2022, stated  in 
relevant part,  
As to Count IV, the [circuit court] ruled that 
[Wailea's]  [FEA]  regarding development of 23.1 acres of 
land located at Tax Map Key (TMK):  2:2-1-008:145 within the 
ahupuaʻa of Paeahu, within the District of Makawao, Moku of 
Honuaʻula, Island of Maui, Hawai ʻi to construct 57 homes and 
related infrastructure developments, through a condominium 
property regime known as the [Wailea]  project improperly 
segmented the [Wailea]  project from the larger program of 
which it is a part. Because the scope of the action in the 
environmental assessment was not properly placed before the 
[Commission] to consider, the [Commission] did not have 
sufficient information to enable it to consider fully the 
factors required for an environmental assessment and was 
not able to take a "hard look" at the environmental 
factors. Therefore, the [Commission's] [FONSI] was clearly 
erroneous.  
Because [the circuit court] finds as a matter of law  
the [FEA]  is insufficient because the project is improperly 
segmented, the [circuit court] need not address the other issues raised by the Plaintiff[s]. Therefore, although the [circuit court] grants both Plaintiffs' motions for summary 
judgment, the additional relief requested in Counts I, II, 
III, V, VI, and VII of the Complaint is denied as moot.  
As to Count VIII, the [circuit court] ruled that 
injunctive relief was warranted[.] 
. . . . 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED and DECREED 
that: 
(1) Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment on Counts 
I, II, III and VI of the Complaint, filed August 9, . . . 
2021, is GRANTED; 
(2) Plaintiff [s'] Motion for Summary Judgment on 
Counts IV, V, VII and VIII of the Complaint [,] filed 
August 9, . . . 2021, is GRANTED; 
(3) Plaintiffs' request for injunctive relief under 
Count VIII is GRANTED . . . as follows: The [Commission ] is 
enjoined from issuing any additional permits to [Wailea] 
that rely on the acceptance of the [FEA] and determination 
of a [FONSI]; 
(4) [Wailea's] Cross -Motion for Summary Judgment on 
Counts I, II, III and VI of the Complaint, filed October 5, 
2021, and the [Commission's] Joinder therein, filed October 
12, 2021, are DENIED; 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5) [Wailea's] Cross -Motion for Summary Judgment on 
Counts IV, V, VII and VIII of the Complaint, filed October 
5, 2021, and the [Commission's] Joinder therein, filed 
October 12, 2021, are DENIED; and 
(6) There are no remaining claims or issues to be 
resolved.  
(Emphasis added.) 
Plaintiffs  then filed "Plaintiff's Motion for  an Award 
of Fees and Costs"  (Motion), against the Commission and Wailea 
"jointly and severally,"  pursuant to HRS §  607-9  (2016)  and the 
private attorney general doctrine.   The circuit court granted 
the Motion  and entered the Order.   The Commission appealed  the 
Order.  
On appeal, the Commission raises two  points of error, 
contending that the circuit court abused its discretion by  
awarding fees and costs: (1)  "jointly and severally" against the 
Commission  as to Count IV; and (2) against the Commission  as to 
any of the remaining counts  that were denied as moot.    
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of 
attorneys'  fees and costs under the abuse of discretion 
standard. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 
117  Hawaiʻi 92, 105, 176 P.3d 91,  104  (2008). Upon careful 
review of the record, briefs,  and relevant legal authorities, 
and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and 
the issues raised by the parties,  we address  the Commission's  
points of error as follows.  
4   
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Commission  contends that Plaintiffs did not 
prevail on summary judgment  against  the Commission  because "the 
sole [Count] IV on which liability was ruled in this case does 
not pertain to any alleged conduct of the [Commission]." In its 
Amended Order, the circuit court ruled with regard to Count IV 
that,  the FEA  "improperly segmented [the Project] from the 
larger program of which it is a part." Given this, "the 
[Commission]  did not have sufficient information  to enable it to 
consider  fully  the factors required for an environmental 
assessment," and, therefore, "the [Commission's] [FONSI] was 
clearly erroneous."  
Improper segmentation of a project occurs when, 
pursuant to Hawaii Administrative Rules ( HAR) § 11-200.1-10,4 
"[a] group of actions [that] shall be treated as a single 
action" are improperly "segmented" into component parts. Rules 
4 Pursuant to HAR § 11-200.1-10: 
A group of actions shall be treated as a single 
action when: 
(1) The component actions are phases or increments of a 
larger total program; 
(2) An individual action is a necessary precedent to a 
larger action; 
(3) An individual action represents a commitment to a 
larger action; or 
(4) The actions in question are essentially identical and a 
single EA or EIS will adequately address the impacts of 
each individual action and those of the group of 
actions as a whole. 
5   
 
 
  
  
  
     
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
like HAR § 11-200.1-10  "are meant to keep applicants or agencies 
from escaping full environmental review by pursuing projects in 
a piecemeal fashion." Sierra Club v. Dep't  of Transp., 
115  Hawaiʻi 299, 338, 167 P.3d 292, 331 (2007). For purposes of 
environmental review,  
The proposed action must be described in its entirety and 
cannot be broken up into component parts which, if each is taken separately, may have minimal impact on the 
environment. Segmenting a project in this incremental way 
to avoid the preparation of an environmental impact 
statement is against the law.  
Id. (citation omitted). 
Pursuant to HRS chapter 343 and HAR chapter 11 -200.1, 
either a government agenc y or an "applicant" may request 
approval of an "action." HRS § 343 -5 (2022). An applicant is 
defined as "any person who, pursuant to statute, ordinance, or 
rule, officially requests approval for a proposed action." 
HRS § 343-2 (2022). This case involves an applicant action , in 
which Wailea submitted an improperly segmented FEA to the 
Commission . 
Because this is an applicant action, the Commission 
acted as the "the agency initially receiving and agreeing to 
process the request for [environmental review] approval." HRS 
§ 343-5(e) (2022). The dispositive question here is whether 
attorneys ' fees may be awarded against the Commission, acting 
solely in the capacity of the agency receiving the request for 
environmental approval , for its review of an applicant's 
6   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
improperly segmented FEA  and erroneous issuance of a FONSI. 
There is nothing in the record that indicates the parties 
presented argument on, or that the circuit court considered, 
this question.   And the parties do not cite to, nor are we aware 
of, any legal authority supporting the proposition that an agency acting solely in its regulatory capacity can be held 
liable for attorneys' fees based on its actions in reviewing and 
approving  an applicant's submission.5 
     6
We therefore vacate the Order and remand to the 
circuit court to address in the first instance whether 
Plaintiffs could be awarded attorneys' fees against a n agency 
that reviewed an applicant 's improperly segmented FEA and 
erroneously issued a FONSI . 
Moreover, because th e Order is silent as to the legal 
authority for its award of attorneys' fee s, we further instruct 
the circuit court on remand to expressly identify that legal 
authority . Plaintiffs' Motion cited HRS § 607 -9 and the private 
attorney general doctrine as the legal authority for its 
request. HRS § 607 -9 pertains only to costs , and does not 
5 Plaintiffs' Motion was filed as a non -hearing motion, such that 
the record regarding Plaintiffs ' fees request consists of the motion papers 
and Order. 
6    We note  that in Sierra Club v. Dep't  of Transp., 120  Hawai‛i 181, 
202  P.3d 1226  (2009), the Hawai‛ i Supreme Court held that attorneys '  fees may 
be awarded against an agency that itself proposed  an action under HRS c hapter 
343. Here, the question is whether attorneys '  fees can be awarded against an 
agency that reviewed  an applicant's FEA, and issued a FONSI,  pursuant to HRS 
chapter 343.  
7   
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support Plaintiffs ' request for fees. T o the extent that the 
circuit court awarded fees pursuant to the private attorney 
general doctrine , the circuit court failed to make findings 
necessary for application of the three-part test for determining 
whether Plaintiffs were entitled to such fees . The three -part 
test requires the court to assess: 
(1) the strength or societal importance of the public 
policy vindicated by the litigation, (2) the necessity for 
private enforcement and the magnitude of the resultant 
burden on the plaintiff, and (3) the number of people 
standing to benefit from the decision. 
Kaleikini v. Yoshioka , 129 Hawaiʻi 454, 462, 304 P.3d 252, 260 
(2013) (cleaned up). 
In the absence of such findings, we conclude that  the 
record is insufficient for us  to determine  whether the circuit 
court abused its discretion in awarding attorneys'  fees "jointly 
and severally"  against the Commission.   See  In re Elaine Emma 
Short  Revocable Living Tr. Agreement Dated July 17, 1984, 
147  Hawaiʻi 456,  465, 465 P.3d 903,  912 (2020) ("When  the lower 
court has failed to issue the requisite findings of fact to 
enable meaningful appellate review, it is not the function of 
the appellate court to conduct its own evidentiary analysis.")  
(cleaned up).   If the circuit court on remand awards  fees 
against the Commission pursuant to the private attorney general 
doctrine, the circuit court shall make such findings of fact and 
8   
 
 
    
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusions  of law  necessary for appellate review of the three-
part  private attorney general doctrine test.  
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Order and 
remand to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent 
with this summary disposition order.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, May 15, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Brian A. Bilberry,   
Deputy Corporation Counsel,  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
for Defendant-Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Bianca Isaki  and  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Christina Lizzi,  Associate Judge 
for Plaintiffs-Appellees.  
9 