FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DAT MINH TRAN, Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005233
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 95-0-002471)

 
JULY 14, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., AND FOLEY AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
In 1997, Defendant-Appellant Dat Minh Tran (Tran) was

 
sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole
 
after he was convicted of attempted first-degree murder. Tran
 was seventeen years old, and thus a juvenile, when he committed
 the offense, but the family court waived jurisdiction and he was
 prosecuted as an adult. When he was sentenced in 1997, Tran
 received the mandatory sentence applicable to his offense under
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 706-656(1) (1993), which then
 provided: "Persons convicted of first degree murder or first
 degree attempted murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment
 without possibility of parole."
 
After Tran's conviction and sentence were affirmed on
 
direct appeal and became final, the United States Supreme Court
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issued three decisions concerning juveniles under the Eight
 
Amendment's prohibition against "cruel and unusual punishments." 
These decisions established limitations on the imposition of the
 most severe penalties -- the death penalty and life without the
 possibility of parole -- on juvenile offenders. In Roper v.
 Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 578 (2005), the Court held that the death
 penalty could not be imposed on offenders who were juveniles
 (under the age of eighteen) when their crimes were committed. In
 Graham v. Florida, 560 U.S. 48, 74-75 (2010), the Court held that
 a juvenile offender could not be sentenced to life without the
 possibility of parole for a nonhomicide crime. Finally, in
 Miller v. Alabama, 132 S.Ct. 2455, 2469 (2012), the Court held
 that a sentencing scheme that mandates a sentence of life without
 the possibility of parole for juvenile offenders (even those who
 commit a homicide) violates the Eight Amendment. 
In the wake of these decisions, Tran filed a Petition
 
for Post-Conviction Relief. The Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  granted the Petition and set aside
Tran's sentence of life without the possibility of parole. 
The
 
Circuit Court subsequently resentenced Tran to life with the
 possibility of parole. 
After Tran was resentenced and his opening brief was 
filed, the 2014 Hawai 'i Legislature enacted Act 202 "to abolish 
life imprisonment without the possibility of parole as a sentencing option for those convicted for offenses committed while under the age of eighteen." 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 202 (Act 202), § 1 at 694. Act 202 amended HRS § 706-656(1) so that it now provides: "Persons under the age of eighteen years at the time of the offense who are convicted of first degree murder or first degree attempted murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole." 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 202, § 2 at 694. Act 202 applies to "proceedings arising on or after its effective date [(July 2, 2014)] and to 
1/ The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proceedings that were begun but not concluded before its
 
effective date." 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 202, § 6 at 695 
(emphasis added).
 
Tran appeals from the Amended Judgment which
 
resentenced him to life imprisonment with the possibility of
 parole on his conviction for attempted first-degree murder. On
 appeal, Tran argues that: (1) the Circuit Court erred in severing
 and reforming HRS § 706-656 (in response to Miller, Graham, and
 Roper and before it was amended by Act 202) to require the
 imposition of a sentence of life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole; and (2) the Circuit Court abused its
 discretion in failing to consider the mitigating factors of youth
 in resentencing him. Tran also argues that the 2014 amendment to
 HRS § 706-656(1) by Act 202 to require a sentence of life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole for juvenile
 offenders is unconstitutional because it fails to provide for
 individualized sentencing and consideration of the mitigating
 factors of youth.
 
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that
 
the Legislature's 2014 amendment of HRS § 706-656(1) effectively
 eliminates the need to address Tran's severability arguments. We
 reject Tran's claim that the Circuit Court's sentence of life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole and the amended HRS 
§ 706-656(1) are unconstitutional. We therefore affirm Tran's
 sentence.
 
BACKGROUND
 
Tran's conviction stemmed from an incident that
 
occurred on October 7, 1995. A dispute arose between individuals
 in a red truck and a group consisting of Tran and his friends,
 who were in two cars. A chase through Waik
iki involving the red
 
truck and the two cars ensued. Tran was a passenger in one of
 the cars. During the chase, Tran stood up in the car with a gun,
 stuck his head and hand out the open sunroof, and fired at least
 two shots at the red truck. One shot went through the truck's
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
front windshield, rear view mirror, and rear windshield and
 
struck a passenger riding in the bed of the truck in the right
 armpit area. Although the passenger was injured, he did not die
 from the gunshot wound. A second shot, which did not strike
 anyone, went through the truck's grill and radiator and was found
 on the passenger side by the door.
 
Tran was seventeen years old at the time of the alleged 
offense. The family court waived jurisdiction and Tran was
 prosecuted as an adult. Tran was charged with attempted murder
 in the first degree, in violation of HRS § 707-701(1)(a) (1993)
 
2
and HRS § 705-500 (1993) (Count 1);  attempted murder in the
2/ At the time of the alleged offense, as it does now, HRS § 707­
701(1)(a) provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of murder in the first
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the death
of:
 
(a)	 More than one person in the same or separate
incident[.]
 
At the time of the alleged offense, as it does now, HRS § 705-500
provided:
 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if
the person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which would
constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances
 were as the person believes them to be; or
 
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the
circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct
intended to culminate in the person's commission of
the crime.
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of the
crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime if,
acting with the state of mind required to establish liability with
respect to the attendant circumstances specified in the definition
of the crime, the person intentionally engages in conduct which is
a substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step under
this section unless it is strongly corroborative of the
defendant's criminal intent.
 
In addition, HRS § 705-502 (1993) provided at the time of the alleged
offense, as it does now, that "[a]n attempt to commit a crime is an offense of
the same class and grade as the most serious offense which is attempted." 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
second degree with respect to each of the three individuals in
 
the red truck, in violation of HRS § 707-701.5(1) (1993) and HRS 
§ 705-500 (Counts 2, 3, and 4); and place to keep loaded firearm,
 in violation of HRS § 134-6(c) and (e) (Supp. 1995) (Count 5). 
The jury found Tran guilty as charged on Counts 1 and
 
5. On October 14, 1997, the Circuit Court sentenced Tran to life
 imprisonment without the possibility of parole on Count 1, which
 was the mandatory sentence then in effect for anyone convicted of
 attempted first-degree murder. The Circuit Court sentenced Tran
 to a concurrent term of ten years of imprisonment on Count 5,
 with a mandatory minimum term of ten years. 
Tran filed a direct appeal of his Judgment of 
conviction and sentence. On October 6, 1998, the Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court issued a summary disposition order affirming Tran's Judgment. Tran filed petitions for post-conviction relief in 2000, 2003, and 2005, which were all denied. 
On December 14, 2012, after the United States Supreme
 
Court's decision in Miller, Tran filed his fourth petition for
 post-conviction relief. On July 31, 2013, the Circuit Court
 granted the petition. On August 2, 2013, the Circuit Court
 issued an order setting aside Tran's sentence of life
 imprisonment without the possibility of parole on Count 1 and
 scheduling the case for resentencing on that count. 
On October 16, 2013, after hearing arguments from the
 
parties, the Circuit Court resentenced Tran on Count 1 to life
 imprisonment with the possibility of parole. The Circuit Court
 concluded that pursuant to Graham, which precluded juvenile
 offenders from being sentenced to life without parole for
 nonhomicide crimes, Tran could not be sentenced to life without
 parole. The Circuit Court also construed Miller to mean that as
 applied to a juvenile, the portion of HRS § 706-656 which
 mandated the imposition of a sentence of life without parole was
 unconstitutional. The Circuit Court concluded that after
 excising the unconstitutional portion of HRS § 706-656, what was
 left and what came closest to the legislature's intent as far as
 
5
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 706-656 was concerned was a sentence of life imprisonment
 
with the possibility of parole. The Circuit Court ruled that it
 could not "go below" a sentence of life with the possibility of
 parole and imposed that sentence on Tran.
 
The Circuit Court filed its Amended Judgment on October
 
16, 2013, which sentenced Tran to life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole on Count 1 and reimposed the concurrent
 ten-year term of imprisonment it previously imposed on Count 5.
3
 
This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
When Tran was originally sentenced in 1997, he received
 
the sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility of
 parole that was mandated by HRS § 706-565(1) (1993) for his
 attempted first-degree murder conviction. At the time Tran
 committed this offense, HRS § 706-656(1) (1993) provided:
 "Persons convicted of first degree murder or first degree
 attempted murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment without
 possibility of parole."
 
Tran's resentencing and the subsequent amendment to HRS
 
§ 706-656(1) was prompted by a trilogy of decisions by the United
 States Supreme Court, Roper, Graham, and Miller, which applied
 the Eight Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual
 punishment in cases involving juvenile offenders sentenced to
 death and life without the possibility of a parole. These cases
 provide the backdrop for Tran's challenge to the Circuit Court's
 resentencing him to life with the possibility of parole, and we
 begin with a discussion of the three cases.
 
A.
 
In Roper, the Court held that the Eighth Amendment
 
forbids the imposition of the death penalty on offenders who
 committed their crimes when they were under the age of eighteen. 
3/ Tran had already served his sentence on Count 5 by the time his
Amended Judgment was filed, and Count 5 is not at issue in this appeal.
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Roper, 543 U.S. at 578.4 The Court noted that "[b]ecaue the
 
death penalty is the most severe punishment, the Eighth Amendment
 
applies to it with special force." Id. at 568. The Court
 
concluded that the differences between juveniles and adults
 "demonstrate that juvenile offenders cannot with reliability be
 classified among the worst offenders[,]" and that in light of the
 diminished culpability of juveniles, there was no adequate
 penological justification for imposing the death penalty on
 juvenile offenders. Id. at 569-73.
 
B.
 
In Graham, the Court held that the Eighth Amendment
 
prohibits a life without parole sentence for a juvenile offender
 who did not commit homicide. Graham, 560 U.S. at 74-75. In
 
support of its decision, the Court stated that:
 
Roper established that because juveniles have lessened
culpability they are less deserving of the most severe
punishments. As compared to adults, juveniles have a "'lack
of maturity and an underdeveloped sense of responsibility'";
they "are more vulnerable or susceptible to negative
influences and outside pressures, including peer pressure";
and their characters are "not as well formed."
 
Id. at 68 (citations omitted). The Court noted that "life
 
without parole is 'the second most severe penalty permitted by
 law'" and that "life without parole sentences share some
 characteristics with death sentences that are shared by no other
 sentences[,]" in that a sentence of life without parole "alters
 the offender's life by a forfeiture that is irrevocable" and
 "deprives the convict of the most basic liberties without giving
 hope of restoration[.]" Id. at 69-70 (citations omitted). "Life
 
without parole is an especially harsh punishment for a
 juvenile[,]" who will on average serve more time and a greater
 percentage of his or her life in prison than an adult. Id. at
 
70. The Court concluded that none of the justifications for
 
penal sanctions -- retribution, deterrence, incapacitation, and
 
4/ The Eight Amendment's prohibition against cruel ane unusual
punishment is applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment.
Roper, 543 U.S. at 560.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rehabilitation -- provides an adequate justification for the
 
imposition of life without parole for juvenile nonhomicde
 offenders. Id. at 71-74.
 
The Court explained that:
 
A State is not required to guarantee eventual freedom
to a juvenile offender convicted of a nonhomicide crime.
What the State must do, however, is give [such a defendant]
some meaningful opportunity to obtain release based on
demonstrated maturity and rehabilitation. . . . The Eighth
Amendment does not foreclose the possibility that persons
convicted of nonhomicide crimes committed before adulthood
 will remain behind bars for life. It does prohibit States
from making the judgment at the outset that those offenders
never will be fit to reenter society.
 
Id. at 75. The Court summarized its holding by stating: "A State
 
need not guarantee the [juvenile nonhomicide] offender eventual
 release, but if it imposes a sentence of life it must provide him
 or her with some realistic opportunity to obtain release before
 the end of that term." Id. at 82.
 
C.
 
In Miller, the Court held that a sentencing scheme that
 
imposes a mandatory sentence of life without parole on those
 under the age of eighteen at the time of their crimes violates
 the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against "cruel and unusual
 punishments," even when the crime committed was a homicide. 
Miller, 132 S.Ct. at 2460, 2469. The Court relied upon two
 strands of precedent. The first strand, exemplified by Roper and
 Graham, imposed "categorical bans on sentencing practices based
 on mismatches between the culpability of a class of offenders and
 the severity of a penalty." Id. at 2463. The Court stated that
 
"Roper and Graham establish that children are constitutionally
 different from adults for purposes of sentencing. Because
 juveniles have diminished culpability and greater prospects for
 reform . . . 'they are less deserving of the most severe
 punishments.'" Id. at 2464 (citation omitted).
 
The Court stated that the second strand of precedent,
 
which demanded individualized sentencing when imposing the death
 penalty, was made relevant by Graham's treatment of life
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment without parole as akin to the death penalty. Id. at
 
2467. Graham noted that life without parole and the death
 
penalty share characteristics that are shared by no other
 
sentences and that life without parole is especially harsh on
 juveniles who will almost inevitably spend more time in jail than
 adults. Id. at 2466 (citing Graham, 560 U.S. at 69-70). The
 
Court in death penalty cases requires that "capital defendants
 have an opportunity to advance, and the judge or jury a chance to
 assess, any mitigating factors, so that the death penalty is
 reserved only for the most culpable defendants committing the
 most serious offenses." Id. at 2467. The Court concluded that a
 
similar rule, permitting the sentencer to consider the mitigating
 factors associated with juvenile offenders who have committed
 homicides, "should apply when a juvenile confronts a sentence of
 life (and death) in prison." Id. at 2467-2468.
 
Applying the two strands of precedent, the Court held
 
that: 
Graham, Roper, and our individualized sentencing
decisions make clear that a judge or jury must have the
opportunity to consider mitigating circumstances before
imposing the harshest possible penalty for juveniles. By
requiring that all children convicted of homicide receive
lifetime incarceration without possibility of parole,
regardless of their age and age-related characteristics and
the nature of their crimes, the mandatory sentencing schemes
before us violate this principle of proportionality, and so
the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment.
 
Id. at 2475. The Court declined to impose a categorical bar on a
 
sentence of life without parole for juvenile homicide offenders,
 but noted that "appropriate occasions for sentencing juveniles to
 this harshest possible penalty will be uncommon." Id. at 2469. 
Although declining to foreclose a sentencer's ability to impose
 life without parole on juvenile offenders in homicide cases, the
 Court required the sentencer in such cases to "take into account
 how children are different, and how those differences counsel
 against irrevocably sentencing them to a lifetime in prison." 
Id. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
The Circuit Court resentenced Tran after Roper, Graham,
 
and 
Miller had been decided, but before the Legislature amended 
HRS § 706-656(1) to change the mandatory sentence for juvenile
 
offenders convicted of first-degree murder and attempted first-
degree murder from life without the possibility of parole to life
 with the possibility of parole. Thus, the Circuit Court was
 faced with having to resentence Tran under a statute that the
 United States Supreme Court had determined was unconstitutional
 as applied to juvenile offenders like Tran, without the benefit
 of specific guidance from the Legislature on how it would address
 the Supreme Court's rulings.
 
The following rules apply when a statutory provision
 
has been found unconstitutional.

 
When a court determines that a provision of a law is
unconstitutional, prior to invalidating the entirety of the
law, the court must first start "with a presumption that the
[unconstitutional] enactment is severable from the remainder
of the section or act." Hamad v. Gates, 732 F.3d 990,
1000–01 (9th Cir.2013) cert. denied, ––– U.S. ––––, 134

S.Ct. 2866, 189 L.Ed.2d 810 (2014). As a general rule,
courts are to refrain from invalidating more of a statute
than is necessary, because "a ruling of unconstitutionality
frustrates the intent of the elected representatives of the
people." Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of N. New England, 546
U.S. 320, 329, 126 S.Ct. 961, 163 L.Ed.2d 812 (2006).
 
Ruggles v. Yagong, 135 Hawai 'i 411, 431, 353 P.3d 953, 973 
(2015) (brackets ommitted). The presumption of severability 
is overcome only if something "in the statute's text or
historical context makes it 'evident' that [the
Legislature], faced with the limitations imposed by the
Constitution, would have preferred" no statute at all to a
statute with the invalid part excised. Free Enterprise Fund
v. Pub. Co. Accounting Oversight Bd., ––– U.S. ––––, 130
S.Ct. 3138, 3162, 177 L.Ed.2d 706 (2010) (quoting Alaska
Airlines, 480 U.S. at 684, 107 S.Ct. 1476). In conducting
this inquiry, "we must retain those portions of the Act that
are (1) constitutionally valid, (2) capable of functioning
independently, and (3) consistent with [the Legislature's]
basic objectives in enacting the statute." Booker, 543 U.S.
at 258–59, 125 S.Ct. 738 (internal citations and quotation
marks omitted). [The Legislature's] intent serves as the
basis for this severability test. Alaska Airlines, 480 U.S.
 
at 685, 107 S.Ct. 1476.
 
Hamad v. Gates, 732 F.3d 990, 1001 (9th Cir. 2013).
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Circuit Court, based on its application of
 
severability principles, reformulated HRS § 706-656(1) in exactly

 
the same way that the Legislature eventually did in amending HRS
 
§ 706-656(1). Construing HRS § 706-656(1) in light of Graham and
 Miller 
and its view of the Legislature's intent in enacting the
 
statute, the Circuit Court ruled that it was required to impose a
 sentence of life with the possibility of parole in resentencing
 Tran.
 
III.
 
In his opening brief, Tran argues that the Circuit

 
Court erred in determining that HRS § 706-656 was severable and
 in construing the statute to require imposition a sentence of
 life with parole after the unconstitutional portion was severed. 
He also contends that the Circuit Court violated Miller in
 resentencing him without considering the mitigating factors of
 his youth at the time he committed the attempted first-degree
 murder. After Tran filed his opening brief, the Legislature
 amended HRS § 706-656(1) to address Miller, Graham, and Roper. 
The Legislature amended the statute to remove the mandatory
 sentence of life without the possibility of parole for juvenile
 offenders convicted of first-degree and attempted first-degree
 murder, and it instead imposed a mandatory sentence of life with
 the possibility of parole for such juvenile offenders. In his
 reply brief, Tran argues that the amended HRS § 706-656(1) is
 unconstitutional under Miller because it imposes a mandatory
 sentence on juvenile offenders without requiring individualized
 consideration of the mitigating factors of youth. 
The Legislature's amendment of HRS § 706-656(1) in 2014 
effectively eliminates the need to address Tran's severability arguments. The Legislature's amendment of HRS § 706-656(1) in exactly the same way that the Circuit Court severed the statute provides compelling evidence that the Legislature would have preferred the statute as severed and reformed by the Circuit Court to no statute at all. See State v. Jess, 117 Hawai
'i 381, 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
412-13, 184 P.3d 133, 164-65 (2008). In any event, we construe
 
the provision of Act 202 that makes the 2014 amendments to HRS 
§ 706-656(1) applicable to "proceedings that were begun but not
 concluded before its effective date," 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 202, § 6 at 695, to require that we apply the amended HRS § 706­656(1) to this appeal. Tran's resentencing proceeding was begun
 before Act 202's effective date but was still pending on appeal
 when Act 202 went into effect. Thus, Tran's resentencing
 proceeding had not been concluded before Act 202's effective
 date. 
IV.
 
We focus our attention on Tran's principal argument,
 
which is that his new sentence of life with the possibility of
 parole is unconstitutional. Tran contends that the new sentence
 imposed by the Circuit Court and the amended HRS § 706-656(1),
 which mandates this sentence, are unconstitutional because the
 Circuit Court did not consider, and the amended HRS § 706-656(1)
 does not require a court to consider, the mitigating factors of
 youth in imposing the sentence of life with the possibility of
 parole. Tran reads Miller as requiring a sentencing court to
 conduct individualized sentencing that considers the mitigating
 factors of youth whenever a juvenile offender is sentenced. 
Under Tran's interpretation of Miller, which he urges this court
 to adopt, all sentencing schemes that impose mandatory sentences
 would be unconstitutional as applied to juvenile offenders.
 
We disagree with Tran's interpretation of Miller. We
 
conclude that under the Supreme Court's precedents, the Circuit
 Court's resentencing of Tran to life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole and HRS § 706-656(1), as amended in 2014 by
 Act 202 to its current form, are constitutional.
 
V.
 
While Tran focuses on Miller in his arguments, we
 
conclude that the Supreme Court precedent most directly
 applicable to this case is Graham. In Graham, the Supreme Court
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
established a categorical bar on the imposition of life without
 
the possibility of parole on juvenile offenders for nonhomicide
 crimes. Graham, 560 U.S. at 74-75. In support of its holding,
 
the Court noted that juveniles are less culpable than adults
 because they lack maturity, they are more susceptible to negative
 influences, and their characters are not well formed. Id. at 68. 
It also noted the extreme severity of the punishment of life
 without parole, especially for juveniles, which made it akin to a
 death sentence. Id. at 69-70. 
While categorically barring a sentence of life without
 
parole for juvenile nonhomicide offenders, the Supreme Court in
 Graham did not bar the imposition of mandatory penalties on
 juvenile offenders or require a court to consider the mitigating
 factors of youth at the time it imposed sentence. Indeed, the
 Supreme Court did not require a State "to guarantee eventual
 freedom to a juvenile offender convicted of a nonhomicide crime." 
Id. at 75. Rather, the Supreme Court concluded that what the
 State must do to comply with the Eight Amendment is to give
 juvenile nonhomicide offenders "some meaningful opportunity to
 obtain release based on demonstrated maturity and
 rehabilitation." Id. Thus, the Supreme Court held: "A State
 
need not guarantee the [juvenile nonhomicide] offender eventual
 release, but if it imposes a sentence of life it must provide him
 or her with some realistic opportunity to obtain release before
 the end of that term." Id. at 82 (emphasis added).
 
Here, as the Circuit Court apparently found, Tran was
 
convicted of a nonhomicide offense -- Tran's offense of attempted
 first-degree murder did not result in the death of any victim. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court was prohibited from sentencing Tran
 to life without the possibility of parole based on Graham's
 categorical bar to this sentence for juvenile nonhomicide
 offenders. The Circuit Court resentenced Tran to life with the
 possibility of parole, the sentence now mandated by HRS § 706­656(1). This sentence is permissible under Graham as long as
 
13
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tran is provided with some meaningful or realistic opportunity to 
obtain release based on demonstrated maturity and rehabilitation before the end of his term. Tran does not contend that under Hawai
'i's parole system, he will be denied a meaningful or 
realistic opportunity to obtain release based on demonstrated maturity and rehabilitation before the end of his life term.
5 
Tran therefore has not shown that the Circuit Court's sentence of life with the possibility of parole is unconstitutional.
6 In 
challenging the constitutionality of the current version of HRS § 706-656(1), Tran also has not overcome the presumption of constitutionality that attaches to legislative enactments or satisfied his burden of showing that HRS § 706-656(1), as amended in 2014, is unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt. See 
Peroutka v. Cronin, 117 Hawai
'i 323, 326, 179 P.3d 1050, 1053 
(2008). 
VI.
 
Tran's reliance on Miller in arguing that his current
 
sentence and HRS § 706-656(1), as amended in 2014 and now in
 effect, are unconstitutional is misplaced. In Miller, the
 Supreme Court reasoned that a sentence of life without parole for
 a juvenile offender was akin to the death penalty, for which
 individualized sentencing and the opportunity to present
 
5/
 The Hawai 'i Paroling Authority (HPA) has established "Guidelines For
Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment" (HPA Guidelines) that it considers
in setting the minimum term of imprisonment a prisoner must serve beforebecoming eligible for parole. The HPA Guidelines contain three levels of punishment, and in determining a prisoner's level of punishment, the HPAconsiders a variety of criteria, including the nature of the offense, thedegree of injury/loss to persons or property, and the offender's criminalhistory. The HPA Guidelines provide the following minimum-term ranges ofimprisonment for a prisoner, like Tran, who is sentenced to life imprisonmentwith the possibility of parole: Level 1 -- 5 to 10 years; Level 2 -- 10 to 20years; and Level 3 -- 20 to 50 years. 
6/ We note that courts have held that Graham prohibits sentences which
are "de facto" life sentences without parole where a juvenile offender is
required to serve an extraordinary length of time before being considered for
parole. 
See State v. Ragland
, 836 N.W.2d 107, 118-22 (Iowa 2013). We do not
 
preclude the possibility that a juvenile offender, such as Tran, may be able
challenge his sentence as a de facto life without parole sentence based on the
actions of the paroling authority. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mitigating factors was required, in concluding that imposing a
 
mandatory sentence of life without parole on juvenile offenders
 was prohibited. Miller 132 S.Ct. at 2466-69. In other words,
 
the Court analogized life without parole for juvenile offenders
 to the death penalty to show why the sentence of life without
 parole could not be mandatorily imposed on juvenile offenders
 without individualized sentencing to consider the mitigating
 factors of youth. The Court did not require individualized
 sentencing or prohibit the imposition of mandatory sentences for
 juvenile offenders in all cases. Nor did the Court purport to
 overrule Graham, decided just two years earlier, which held that
 a life sentence for juvenile offenders was permissible as long as
 he or she was provided with some realistic opportunity to obtain
 release before the end of that term. 
Our conclusion that Miller's references to
 
individualized sentencing for juvenile offenders is limited to
 sentences of life without parole is confirmed by the Supreme
 Court's recent decision in Montgomery v. Louisiana, 136 S.Ct. 718
 (2016). In Montgomery, the Supreme Court considered the question
 of whether Miller should be applied retroactively to juvenile
 offenders whose convictions and sentences had become final before
 Miller was decided. Montgomery, 136 S.Ct. at 725. The Court
 
held that Miller announced a new substantive rule of federal
 constitutional law and therefore applied retroactively to all
 cases, even cases that had become final before Miller was
 decided. Id. at 734, 736-37. 
In support of its decision, the Court noted that
 
applying Miller retroactively would not require States to
 relitigate sentences in every case in which juveniles had
 received a mandatory sentence of life without parole, but that a
 Miller violation could be remedied by making juvenile homicide
 offenders eligible for parole. Id. at 736. It also cited with
 
approval a Wyoming statute which was amended after Miller to make
 juvenile offenders sentenced to life imprisonment eligible for
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parole after serving 25 years of incarceration. Id. The Court
 
stated as follows:
 
Giving Miller retroactive effect, moreover, does not
require States to relitigate sentences, let alone
convictions, in every case where a juvenile offender
received mandatory life without parole. A State may remedy
a Miller violation by permitting juvenile homicide offenders
to be considered for parole, rather than by resentencing
them. See, e.g., Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 6–10–301(c) (2013)
(juvenile homicide offenders eligible for parole after 25
years). Allowing those offenders to be considered for
parole ensures that juveniles whose crimes reflected only
transient immaturity -- and who have since matured -- will
not be forced to serve a disproportionate sentence in
violation of the Eighth Amendment.
 
Id. (emphasis added).
 
The Supreme Court's statements in Montgomery  make clear
 
that Miller does not require individualized sentencing or
 
consideration of the mitigating factors of youth in every case
 involving a juvenile offender, but only where a sentence of life
 imprisonment without parole is imposed on a juvenile offender. 
Individualized sentencing is not required and mandatory sentences
 may be imposed for a juvenile offender provided that if a
 sentence of life imprisonment is imposed on a juvenile offender,
 he or she is given a realistic opportunity to obtain release
 before the end of that life term.  Here, the Legislature in
 
amending HRS § 706-656(1) in 2014 and the Circuit Court in
 resentencing Tran to life with the possibility of parole did
 precisely what the Supreme Court said in Montgomery would be
 sufficient to remedy a Miller violation. Accordingly, Tran's
 claim, based on Miller, that his current sentence and HRS § 706­656(1), as amended in 2014 and now in effect, are
 unconstitutional is without merit.
7
 
7/ We note that courts from other jurisdictions have agreed with our
analysis that Miller only requires individualized sentencing for juvenile
offenders where a sentence of life without the possibility of parole is
imposed and have upheld sentences of life with parole imposed under
circumstances similar to Tran's case. See Commonwealth v. Brown, 1 N.E.3d 259
(Mass. 2013); Turner v. State, 443 S.W.3d 128 (Tex. Crim. App. 2014);
Commonweath v. Okoro, 26 N.E.3d 1092 (Mass. 2015); Ouk v. State, 847 N.W.2d
698 (Minn. 2014). 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Amended
 
Judgment, which resentenced Tran to life imprisonment with the
 
possibility of parole.
 
On the briefs:
 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
17
 