FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
POFOLK AVIATION HAWAII, INC. and HALE O 'LELE CORP.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION FOR THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
GLENN M. OKIMOTO, FORD FUCHIGAMI, and SIDNEY A. HAYAKAWA,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN AND/OR JANE DOES 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003857
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0787-03)

 
OCTOBER 24, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Pofolk Aviation Hawaii, Inc.
 
(Pofolk Aviation) and Hale O 'lele Corp. (Hale O 'lele), (together,
Plaintiffs) appeal from (1) the August 1, 2013 "Order Denying
 
Plaintiffs Pofolk Aviation Hawaii, Inc. and Hale O 'lele Corp. 
Motions for Temporary and Permanent Injunctions" (Order Denying
Injunctions); (2) the September 24, 2013 "Order Denying
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs' Claim for a Permanent Injunction and Approving the
 
Voluntary Dismissal of All Other Claims and Counter Claims,"
 (Dismissal Order); and (3) the September 24, 2013 Judgment
 
(Judgment) all entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1
 
(circuit court).
 Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred by: 
(1) incorrectly applying Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 261-12 (2007 Repl.) in the Order Denying Injunctions by
 determining Plaintiffs were unlikely to succeed on the merits of
 their case;
2
 
1	 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.
 
2	 HRS § 261-12 provides in pertinent parts:
 
§261-12 Rules, standards.  (a) Powers to adopt. The
director of transportation may perform such acts, issue and amend
such orders, adopt such reasonable general or special rules and
procedures, and establish such minimum standards, consistent with
this chapter, as the director deems necessary to carry out this
chapter and to perform the duties assigned thereunder, all
commensurate with and for the purpose of protecting and insuring
the general public interest and safety, the safety of persons
operating, using, or traveling in aircraft, and the safety of
persons and property on land or water, and developing and
promoting aeronautics in the State. No rule of the director shall
apply to airports or air navigation facilities owned or operated
by the United States.
 
In furtherance of the duties assigned under this
chapter, the director may adopt rules relating to:
 
(1)	 Safety measures, requirements and practices in
or about the airport premises;
 
(2)	 The licensing and regulation of persons engaged
in commercial activities in or about the airport
premises;
 
(3)	 The regulation of equipment and motor vehicles
operated in or about the airport operational
area;
 
(4)	 Airport security measures or requirements, and
designation of sterile passenger holding areas
and operational areas;
 
(5)	 The regulation of motor vehicles and traffic;
 
(6)	 Any other matter relating to the health, safety
and welfare of the general public and persons
operating, using, or traveling in aircraft.
 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) determining that the process by which Defendants-
Appellees Department of Transportation for the State of Hawai 'i 
(DOT), Glenn Okimoto (Okimoto), Ford Fuchigami (Fuchigami), and 
Sidney A. Hayakawa (Hayakawa) (collectively, Defendants) adopt 
written procedures includes an informational hearing and 
opportunity for the public to comment before procedures are adopted; and 
(3) concluding that Defendants duly exercised their 
power to impose landing fees on flight operations at the Dillingham Airfield on O
'ahu by and through its adopted 
procedures. 
I.
 
The DOT Airport Division operates a single 5,000 foot 
runway primarily for commercial glider and sky diving operations at Dillingham Airfield in Mokuleia, O
'ahu (Dillingham Airfield) 
under a lease from the United States Army (Army Lease). 
Plaintiffs are Hawai 'i corporations whose operations are based 
out of Dillingham Airfield. 
Clause 32 of the Army Lease, titled "Additional Site
 
Conditions," provides "Dillingham Airfied shall be used by and
 
under the authority of the lessee [DOT] for the sole purpose of
 operating an airport[.]" According to Hayakawa, the
 Administrative Services Officer for DOT, Airports Division, the
 term of the lease was for five years, ending July 5, 2014.
 
By letter dated December 17, 2012, Eric A. Seitz 
(Seitz), counsel for Frank Hinshaw (Hinshaw), Pofolk Aviation and 
Hale O
'lele's principal, wrote to Okimoto in his capacity as 
2(...continued)
(d) Conformity to federal legislation and rules. No
rules, orders, or standards prescribed by the director shall
be inconsistent with, or contrary to, any act of the
Congress of the United States or any regulation promulgated
or standard established pursuant thereto.
 
(e) How made. All rules having the force and effect of
law, shall be adopted by the director pursuant to chapter
91.
 
(f) Distribution. The director shall provide for the
publication and general distribution of all of its rules and
procedures having general effect.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Director of Transportation with the DOT. Seitz stated Hinshaw
 
was willing to file all required reports and pay all past and
 future landing fees that were lawfully owed.
 
By letter dated February 20, 2013, Fuchigami, Deputy
 
Director of DOT Airports Division, wrote to Hinshaw informing him
 that Pofolk Aviation was delinquent in its reporting since the
 end of November 2012 and its payment of landing fees to DOT in
 the amount of $267,261.36. DOT stated it would forego its
 recovery rights for thirty days if Pofolk Aviation tendered
 payment of the previously billed amount of $50,837.99, payment of
 the previously unbilled amount of $214,152.10, and a full 
up-to-date report of all landings. Fuchigami also attached an
 accounting sheet listing airport landings dating from April 2005
 and ending June 2013.
 
By letter dated February 26, 2013, Fuchigami wrote to 
Hinshaw in his capacity with Hale O
'lele, informing him that the 
DOT concluded: 
all landings reported by [Hale O' lele] since 2005 as "non­
revenue" landings were, in fact, subject to the payment of
landing fees to [the DOT]. Additionally, [the DOT] isconcerned that [Hale O' lele] may have been operating between
2007 and 2011, and after November 2012, during which time nolandings of any kind were reported. 
Fuchigami stated Hale O 'lele owed $2,271.27 plus interest in the 
amount of $952.81, which was to be paid no later than March 11, 
2013. 
By letter dated February 28, 2013, Seitz responded by
 
submitting the monthly landing reports from December 2012 and
 January 2013, and $50,837.99 as partial payment for disputed
 landing fees, noting that the payment was made under protest.
 
By letter dated March 1, 2013, Hayakawa informed
 
Hinshaw the DOT concluded that Pofolk Aviation's interpretation
 of what qualifies as a flight exempt from landing fees was
 "incorrect" and extended the DOT's offer to forego its rights to
 recovery for another thirty days due to errors in its earlier
 February 2013 letter.
 
On March 14, 2013, Plaintiffs filed their "Complaint
 
for Return of Funds Paid Under Protest, Declaratory and
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Injunctive Relief" (Complaint). Plaintiffs alleged HRS § 261­
12(a), which provides "[n]o rule of the director shall apply to
 
airports or air navigation facilities owned or operated by the
 United States[,]" precluded the DOT from enforcing rules
 requiring payment of landing fees for operations at Dillingham
 Airfield. Plaintiffs sought: (1) a return of $50,837.99 paid
 under protest, along with interest; (2) a declaratory judgment
 that landing fees set forth under Hawaii Administrative Rules
 
3
(HAR) § 19-16.1-3 (am. 2000)  were inapplicable to Dillingham
Airfield and therefore Plaintiffs were exempt from such fees; and
 
(3)
 injunctive relief preventing Defendants from taking further
 
action to impose these fees on Plaintiffs.
 
On April 8, 2013, Plaintiffs filed their "Motion for a 
Preliminary and Permanent Injunction" (Motion for Injunction) 
restraining and preventing Defendants "from imposing illegal and 
unauthorized landing fees on Plaintiffs for landings at Dillingham Airfield . . . ." Plaintiffs argued that landing fees imposed under HAR § 19-16.1-3 on Pofolk Aviation and Hale O
'lele 
were "clearly invalid, unauthorized[,] and exceed [the DOT's] grant of statutory authority because this airfield is an airport or air navigation facility owned by the United States." 
On April 8, 2013, Defendants filed their "Answer of 
[Defendants] in their Official Capacities" (Answer) to 
Plaintiffs' Complaint and a "Counterclaim by [Defendants] in 
Their Official Capacities Against [Pofolk Aviation and Hale O
'lele] to [the Complaint]" (Counterclaim). Defendants' 
Counterclaim alleged Plaintiffs had accrued landing fee obligations and asked the circuit court to award the DOT judgment 
3
 HAR § 19-16.1-3, provides:
 
§19-16.1-3 Airports system landing fee. There shall be
 
imposed an airports system landing fee under this chapter for the
purpose of recovering costs attributable to the airfield activity
center; this fee shall be based on landings at an airport in the
airports system. The airports system landing fee for an overseas
landing at an airport in the airports system shall be $2.980 per
one thousand pounds of approved maximum landed weight. The
airports system landing fee for an interisland landing at an
airport in the airports system shall be $0.954 per one thousand
pounds of approved maximum landed weight.
 
5
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Plaintiffs for unpaid landing fees, interest, and
 
penalties in an amount to be determined at trial; declare the DOT
 is empowered by law to impose landing fees and charges at
 Dillingham Airfield; and other relief deemed appropriate.
 
On April 25, 2013, Defendants filed their "Memorandum
 
in Opposition to Plaintiffs' [Motion for Injunction]"

 
(Opposition). Defendants argued that Plaintiffs could not
 
prevail on the merits of their case because landing fees at
 
Dillingham Airfiled were not imposed by "rule" but "by virtue of
 duly adopted [DOT] Procedures, which are expressly authorized by
 [HRS § 261-12(a)]." Defendants pointed out that HRS §261-7(e)
 (2007 Repl.) "explicitly empowers [the DOT] to 'fix and regulate,
 from time to time, reasonable landing fees for aircraft . . . and
 other reasonable charges for the use and enjoyment of the
 airports . . . .'"
4 Defendants argued the statute should be
 
4 HRS § 261-7, provides in relevant part:
 
§261-7 Operation and use privileges.
. . . .
 
(e) The department may fix and regulate, from time to
time, reasonable landing fees for aircraft, including the
imposition of landing surcharges or differential landing
fees, and other reasonable charges for the use and enjoyment
of the airports and the services and facilities furnished by
the department in connection therewith, including the
establishment of a statewide system of airports landing
fees, a statewide system of airports support charges, and
joint use charges for the use of space shared by users,
which fees and charges may vary among different classes of
users such as foreign carriers, domestic carriers,
interisland carriers, air taxi operators, helicopters, and
such other classes as may be determined by the director, for
the purpose of meeting the expenditures of the statewide
system of airports set forth in section 261-5(a), which
includes expenditures for capital improvement projects
approved by the legislature.
 
In setting airports rates and charges, including
landing fees, the director may enter into contracts, leases,
licenses, and other agreements with aeronautical users of
the statewide system of airports containing such terms,
conditions, and provisions as the director deems advisable.
 
If the director has not entered into contracts,
leases, licenses, and other agreements with any or fewer
than all of the aeronautical users of the statewide system
of airports prior to the expiration of an existing contract,
lease, license, or agreement, 
the director shall set and
(continued...)

 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interpreted pursuant to HRS § 1-18 (2009 Repl.), titled "Or",
 
"and", which provides: "Each of the terms 'or' and 'and', has the
 meaning of the other or of both."
 
Attached to the Defendants' Opposition was a
 
declaration from Hayakawa, in which he declared "[s]eparate and
 apart from creating rules pursuant to [HRS] Chapter 91, [the DOT]
 has established a process for establishing written procedures for
 the operations of the airport system" and "[t]he requirement for
 aeronautical users such as [P]laintiffs to pay landing fees at
 Dillingham Airfield, is established by [the DOT] Procedures." 
Hayakawa also declared that if the DOT was prohibited from
 applying its rules, procedures, and operations at Dillingham
 Airfield, they "would have to seriously consider closing the
 Airfield until necessary and appropriate procedures are in place,
 or until [HRS] 261-12 is amended" and that such a shutdown "may
 constitute a breach of the [DOT's] lease with the Army[.]"
 
Defendants also appended a copy of DOT Procedure No.
 
1.1 ("Updating Airports Division Procedures") and DOT Procedure  
 
No. 4.5 ("Schedule of Rates and Charges"), which included a
 
4(...continued)
impose rates, rentals, fees, and charges pursuant to this
subsection without regard to the requirements of chapter 91;
provided that a public informational hearing shall be held
on the rates, rentals, fees, and charges.
 
The director shall develop rates, rentals, fees, and
charges in accordance with a residual methodology so that
the statewide system of airports shall be, and always
remain, self-sustaining. The rates, rentals, fees, and
charges shall be set at such levels as to produce revenues
which, together with aviation fuel taxes, shall be at least
sufficient to meet the expenditures of the statewide system
of airports set forth in section 261-5(a), including
expenditures for capital improvement projects approved by
the legislature, and to comply with covenants and agreements
with holders of airport revenue bonds.
 
The director may develop and formulate methodology in
setting the various rates, rentals, fees, and charges
imposed and may determine usage of space, estimate landed
weights, and apply such portion of nonaeronautical revenue
deemed appropriate in determining the rates, rentals, fees,
and charges applicable to aeronautical users of the
statewide system of airports.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
schedule for rates and charges for operations at Dillingham
 
Airfield.
 
On April 26, 2013, Plaintiffs filed their "Answer to
 
Counterclaim."
 
At its May 9, 2013 hearing on Plaintiffs' Motion for
 
Injunction, the circuit court asked Seitz to address what
 "irreparable harm" would befall Plaintiffs and Seitz affirmed
 "this is just economic harm[.] But we're talking about some
 $250,000 in fees . . . ."  The circuit court denied the Motion
 
for Injunction, stating its belief that genuine issues of
 material fact existed "regarding the intent of [HRS §] 261-12" in
 reference to the "and" and "or" language raised by Defendants. 
The circuit court held the following colloquy with Defendants'
 counsel, Deputy Attorney General Jack A. Rosenzweig (Rosenzweig): 
[THE COURT]: [HRS §] 261-7(e) convinces the court
that [the DOT] has the authority, the statutory authority,
to fix and regulate the reasonable landing fees for aircraft
at the various airports and/or navigational facilities. It
 also goes on to state that "the services and facilities
furnished by [the DOT] in connection herewith."
 
What's convincing to the court is the remainder of
that paragraph whereby it states "director shall set and
impose rates, rentals, fees, charges pursuant to this
subsection without regard to the requirements of chapter
91." Chapter 91 is the [HAR]. The court is not inclined to
 adopt the expansive request regarding that procedures are
rules and orders. Specifically, HAR needs certain
requirements to change those rules. I believe procedures and
acts by the executive branch are done differently, although,
[Rosenzweig], you're saying there is due process with
regards to the procedures, correct? 
[ROSENZWEIG]:
 That's correct, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  All right. So looking at the facts that
are undisputed with regards to that, if I look at the
three-part test for a preliminary injunction, the court
doesn't believe that you've met the first part which is
likely to succeed on the merits. There may be an issue as to
calculation of the fees, but with regards to the DOT having
the statutory authority to impose the landing fees even on
Dillingham, which the land is owned by the U.S. Army, court
is convinced that they do have that authority. So that fails
the first part.
 
The second part which is irreparable injury, like I
said, Mr. Seitz, I don't believe this is a case of
irreparable injury. Your client can get economic damages in
several different fashions which would be refunds, which
would be suing for lost profits, business valuation, things
of that nature, so it clearly goes against the general
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
definition of irreparable harm. So the court is not
convinced of that.
 
And then finally, public interest. This is not a case
 
that, I think, it goes against your client's interest in a
sense that the public is better served with having airport
facilities available to it. And if the State were not
 allowed to collect the landing fees pursuant to the statute,
that goes against public interest because then the
taxpayers, they are further burdened for that.
 
So for those reasons, the court is going to deny the
preliminary injunction and the permanent injunction.
Permanent injunction can be denied. It's without prejudice.
At some point in time, if this case continues forward, you
can raise that issue again.
 
On August 1, 2013, the circuit court filed its Order
 
Denying Injunctions, which included findings that: 
2.	 Dillingham Airfield is owned by the United States and,
through the United States Army, is leased to the DOT
for purposes of operating an airport facility.
 
. . . .

 
4.	 HRS § 261-12(a) empowers [the] DOT as follows:
 
"§261-12 Rules, standards. (a) Powers to adopt. The
director of transportation may perform such acts, issue and
amend such orders, adopt such reasonable general or special
rules and procedures, and establish such minimum standards,
consistent with this chapter, as the director deems
necessary to carry out this chapter and to perform the
duties assigned thereunder, all commensurate with and for
the purpose of protecting and insuring the general public
interest and safety, the safety of persons operating, using,
or traveling in aircraft, and the safety of persons and
property on land or water, and developing and promoting
aeronautics in the State. No rule of the director shall
 apply to airports or air navigation facilities owned or
operated by the United States." (Emphasis added[.])
 
The Order Denying Injunctions concluded there are
"genuine issues of material fact regarding the factual context of
 
the dispute that must be resolved before a ruling on the merits
 can be made" and that it was "unable to determine if it is
 appropriate to apply [HRS] §1-18 in interpreting the last
 sentence of [HRS] §261-12." The circuit court also found "it is
 not a legal requirement that DOT landing fees be established
 through the Administrative Rule making process" and concluded
 that the DOT required Plaintiffs to pay landing fees pursuant to
 written procedures that the DOT was empowered to adopt under
 
 
9

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10HRS § 261-12.  The circuit court concluded:
VI.The requirement for aeronautical users such as
Plaintiffs to pay landing fees at Dillingham Airfield is
established by duly promulgated [DOT] Procedures.  Procedure
4.5, Schedule of Rates and Charges of the Airports Division
Procedures provides in pertinent part []:
"4.5.01 PURPOSE .  The purpose of this procedure
is to establish a schedule of rental rates and charges for
the use of facilities and services of the public airports
operated by the State Airports Division.
* * * 
4.5.03 APPLICABILITY.  This procedure applies to
the Property Management and Land Acquisition staff of the
State Airports Division and users of State Airports Division
facilities.
* * *
4.5.04 PROCEDURES.
* * *
E.  Airport System Fees and Charges . . .  Any
aircraft operator who is not a party to an Airport-Airline
Lease, landing at a state airport, shall pay airports
systems fees and charges as established by [Hawaii]
Administrative Rules of the Department of Transportation[.]"
The Order Denying Injunctions further provided: 
RULING
Based upon the foregoing Findings and Conclusions, the
Court finds that Plaintiffs are unlikely to succeed on the
merits, a condition for the granting of a preliminary
injunction.
The Court further finds that the requirement of
'irreparable injury' has not been satisfied in that
Plaintiffs' harm would be economic in nature that can be
remedied by actions for refunds, lost profits, business
valuations and remedies of a similar nature.
Finally, the Court determines that the public interest
does not favor the granting of the temporary injunction. 
The public is better served by having airport facilities
available to it.  The continued operation of Dillingham
Airfield would be threatened if [the] DOT was unable to
collect landing fees to support the cost of the operations
at the facility.
For the foregoing reasons,  Plaintiffs' Motion for a
Preliminary and Permanent Injunction are DENIED, without
prejudice. 
On August 27,2013, Plaintiffs filed a "Motion for Leave
to File Interlocutory Appeal From [the Order Denying
Injunctions]."FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 24, 2013, the parties filed a "Stipulation
 
and Order," which noted that parties had stipulated to a
 
procedure for resolving outstanding issues.
 
On September 24, 2013, the circuit court filed its
 
Dismissal Order in which it approved the stipulation. The
 circuit court ordered: the hearing on Plaintiffs' Motion for
 Injunction on September 25, 2013 would be deemed a consolidated
 hearing on the merits of Plaintiffs' cause of action for a
 permanent injunction; Plaintiffs' claim for a permanent
 injunction was denied; Defendants' Counterclaim was voluntarily
 dismissed without prejudice; and all other claims, counterclaims,
 and defenses were voluntarily dismissed without prejudice. The
 circuit court entered Judgment on September 24, 2013.
 
On October 8, 2013, Plaintiffs filed their notice of
 
appeal.
 
II.
 
Plaintiffs' appeal seeks reversal of the circuit 
court's orders and judgment denying their requested injunctive relief. Given the parties' stipulation and the circuit court's order thereto, the circuit court ultimately ruled that Plaintiffs' claim for permanent injunction was denied based on the reasoning in the Order Denying Injunctions. We therefore review the denial of Plaintiffs' request for permanent injunction. "[T]he appropriate test in this jurisdiction for determining whether a permanent injunction is proper is: (1) whether the plaintiff has prevailed on the merits; (2) whether the balance of irreparable damage favors the issuance of a permanent injunction; and (3) whether the public interest supports granting such an injunction." Office of Hawaiian 
Affairs v. Hous. & Comm. Dev. Corp. of Hawaii (HCDCH), 117 Hawai
'i 174, 212, 177 P.3d 884, 922 (2008) (emphasis added); 
rev'd on other grounds by Hawaii v. Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 556 U.S. 163 (2009). We review the circuit court's denial of injunctive relief to Plaintiffs under an abuse of discretion standard. See Waters of Life Local Sch. Bd. v. Charter Sch. 
Review Panel, 126 Hawai
'i 183, 185-86, 268 P.3d 436, 438-39 (App. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2011, as corrected Oct. 27, 2011) ("Generally, the granting or
 
denying of injunctive relief rests with the sound discretion of
 the trial court and the trial court's decision will be sustained
 absent a showing of a manifest abuse of discretion." (citations
 omitted)). 
Plaintiffs contend the circuit court incorrectly
 
interpreted HRS § 261-12(a) by determining landing fees imposed
 by DOT's Procedure No. 4.5.04E at Dillingham Airfield are not
 barred by HRS § 261-12(a). DOT Procedure No. 4.5.04E states
 "[a]ny aircraft operator . . . landing at a state airport shall
 pay airports system fees and charges as established by [the HAR]
 of the [DOT]." According to Plaintiffs, because Procedure No.
 4.5.04E does not itself set forth the landing fees, but rather
 applies those fees set forth in HAR § 19-16.1-3 the circuit court
 erred by concluding the DOT had made no "rule" in violation of
 HRS § 261-12(a). Plaintiffs further contend DOT Procedure
 4.5.04E requires payment of airports system fees and charges "as
 established by [the HAR]" and thus "DOT Procedure No. 4.5.04E
 constitutes an application of DOT Rule §19-16.1-3 in violation of
 HRS §261-12(a)[.]"
 
Plaintiffs' contention concerns the circuit court's
 
interpretation of HRS § 261-12(a) as applying to administrative
 "rules" and not "procedures" in concluding the DOT was empowered
 "to impose landing fees on fight [sic] operations at Dillingham
 Airfield by and through its [Procedure No. 4.5.04E]." An
 appellate court
 
generally reviews questions of statutory interpretation de
novo, �Olelo v. Office of Info. Practices, 116 Hawai' i 337,
344, 173 P.3d 484, 491 (2007), but, "[i]n the case of . . .
ambiguous statutory language, the applicable standard ofreview regarding an agency's interpretation of its owngoverning statute requires this court to defer to theagency's expertise and to follow the agency's constructionof the statute unless that construction is palpably
erroneous," Vail v. Employees' Ret. Sys., 75 Haw. 42, 66,
856 P.2d 1227, 1240 (1993). 
Gillan v. Gov't Employees Ins. Co., 119 Hawai 'i 109, 114, 194 
P.3d 1071, 1076 (2008). An ambiguity exists "[w]hen there is 
doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute," or if the statute "is 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
capable of being understood by reasonably well-informed people in 
two or more different senses." Farmer v. Admin. Dir. of Court, 
State of Haw., 94 Hawai 'i 232, 236, 11 P.3d 457, 461 (2000) 
(citation omitted). 
In the instant case, the DOT's employee, Hayakawa,
 
declared HRS § 261-12(a) empowered the DOT to "adopt such
 
reasonable general or special rules and procedures . . . as the
 
director deems necessary to carry out this chapter and to perform
 
duties assigned thereunder[.]" Hayakawa represented that at
 Dillingham Airfield, revenues generated from landing fees and
 other charges from aircraft operators, pursuant to the DOT
 procedures, are part of a calculation of rates and fees in
 compliance "with the statutory mandate that the statewide system
 of airports be financially self-sustaining."
5
 
The DOT interpreted the limitation of HRS § 261-12(a)
 
(2007 Repl.) on the DOT's authority to apply its rules to a
 federally owned airport as inapposite to DOT's authority to
 impose landing fees at Dillingham Airfield pursuant to the DOT
 procedures. Hayakawa declared the DOT had established its
 written procedures "[s]eparate and apart from creating rules
 pursuant to [HRS] Chapter 91" and HRS § 261-12 "has never been
 interpreted by [the DOT] as prohibiting [the DOT] from operating
 it as a state airport facility, collecting fees, charges and
 rents imposed by its Procedures . . . ."
 
5 Hayakawa referenced HRS § 261-7(e), which provides in pertinent
part:
 
The director shall develop rates, rentals, fees, and
charges in accordance with a residual methodology so that
the statewide system of airports shall be, and always
remain, self-sustaining
. The rates, rentals, fees, and
charges shall be set at such levels as to produce revenues
which, together with aviation fuel taxes, shall be at least
sufficient to meet the expenditures of the statewide system
of airports set forth in section 261-5(a), including
expenditures for capital improvement projects approved by
the legislature, and to comply with covenants and agreements
with holders of airport revenue bonds.
 
(Emphasis added.)

 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In assessing the DOT's construction of HRS § 261-12(a),
 
we note that "[a]lthough not controlling, the uniform practical
 
construction of a statute by those charged with carrying out the
 statute is entitled to much weight." Chun v. Employees' Ret.
 
Sys., 61 Haw. 596, 602, 607 P.2d 415, 419 (1980) (citing Keller
 v. Thompson, 56 Haw. 183, 532 P.2d 664 (1975); Territory v. Honolulu Rapid Transit & Land Co., 23 Haw. 387 (1916)); see also Fratinardo v. Employees' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawaii, 129 Hawai
'i 107, 115-16, 295 P.3d 977, 985-86 (App. 2013). 
Our assessment of the DOT's practices is further 
informed by Hayakawa's declarations that the DOT "has always exercised control" over Dillingham Airfield operations, users, and tenants; its users "regularly paid the assessed landing fees[;]" and "[t]his litigation is the first time Plaintiffs, or anyone else has claimed that they are not obligated to pay such fees because the Airfield is owned by the federal government." Hayakawa's declaration constituted evidence of the DOT's consistent and generally unchallenged practice of assessing landing fees and charges against users of Dillingham Airfield. Hawai
'i courts will not overturn administrative agency practices 
that have been 
consistent and generally unchallenged . . . except for very
cogent reasons if the scope of the command is indefinite and
doubtful . . . . The practice has peculiar weight when it
involves a contemporaneous construction of a statute by the
men charged with the responsibility of setting its machinery
in motion, of making the parts work efficiently and smoothly
while they are yet untried and new.
 
Treloar v. Swinerton & Walberg Co., 65 Haw. 415, 424, 653 P.2d
 
420, 426 (1982) (quoting Norwegian Nitrogen Products Co. v. U.S.,
 288 U.S. 294, 315 (1933)).
 
According much weight to the DOT's construction of HRS
 
§ 261-12(a) and in light of their consistent practice of
 assessing landing fees at Dillingham Airfield, we conclude
 Plaintiffs' contention does not establish the DOT's
 interpretation was palpably erroneous and the circuit court did
 not err by determining that the DOT's assessment of landing fees
 at Dillingham Airfield against Plaintiffs did not constitute a
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of HRS § 261-12(a)'s prohibition against applying the
 
DOT "rules" to federally owned or operated airports.
 
Plaintiffs further contend the circuit court erred by
 
determining DOT's procedures included an informational hearing
 and opportunity for the public to comment before procedures are
 adopted. HRS § 261-7(e) states that DOT shall set rates,
 rentals, fees, and charges without regard to requirements of HRS
 Chapter 91, "provided that a public informational hearing shall
 be held on the rates, rentals, fees, and charges."
 
In the Order Denying Injunctions, the circuit court
 
stated "[DOT] has in place a process for adopting written
 procedures which it is empowered to do by the language of [HRS].
 §261-12. The procedure process includes an informational hearing
 and opportunity for the public to comment before procedures are
 adopted." Defendants made an offer of proof in the circuit court
 that Hayakawa would testify that public hearings and comments
 occur. At a May 9, 2013 hearing, Defendants' counsel, Rosenzweig
 made an offer of proof as to what Hayakawa would testify; "[w]hat
 he would testify to essentially is that the procedure process
 with [the DOT] . . . is something more than just cranking out
 edicts and orders. It's a formal process that involves public
 notice and public hearing, and these procedures are, in fact,
 published and become the policy of [the DOT]." Seitz stated that
 he would stipulate that Hayakawa would so testify. This
 stipulated offer of proof supported the circuit court's finding
 that the DOT procedures included a public comment and
 informational hearing, and we therefore conclude the finding did
 not constitute clear error. 
Plaintiffs do not prevail on the merits of their claim
 
that DOT violated HRS § 261-12(a) by imposing charges and fees on
 Plaintiffs' operations at Dillingham Airfield; do not meet the
 first element of the test for a permanent or a preliminary
 injunction; and the circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
 denying their request for a permanent injunction. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm (1) the August 1, 
2013 "Order Denying Plaintiffs Pofolk Aviation Hawaii, Inc. and 
Hale O 'lele Corp. Motions for Temporary and Permanent 
Injunctions"; (2) the September 24, 2013 "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Claim for a Permanent Injunction and Approving the Voluntary Dismissal of All Other Claims and Counterclaims"; and (3) the September 24, 2013 Judgment all entered in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit.
 
On the briefs:

 
Eric A. Seitz
 
Della Au Belatti
 Sarah R. Devine
 for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Michael S. Vincent
 
Jack Rosenzweig
Deputy Attorneys General
for Defendants-Appellees.
 
16
 