  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000393
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SEAN GLOVER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1559)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Sean Glover ("Glover") appeals from
 
(1) the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ("Judgment") filed
 
February 6, 2013 and (2) the Mittimus; Warrant of Commitment to
 Jail, filed February 6, 2013 by the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1/ Glover was convicted by a jury of
 
Robbery in the First Degree, Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 ยง 708-840(1)(a) and (1)(b)(i).
2/
 
1/
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2/
 HRS ยง 708-840(1) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the
first degree if, in the course of committing theft or non-
consensual taking of a motor vehicle:
 
(a)	 The person attempts to kill another or
intentionally and knowingly inflicts or attempts
to inflict serious bodily injury upon another;
 
(b)	 The person is armed with a dangerous instrument
and:
 
(i)	 The person uses force against the person
of anyone present with intent to overcome
that person's physical resistance or
physical power of resistance[.]
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. ยง 708-840(1) (Supp. 2012).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Glover asserts that (A) the Circuit Court
 
reversibly erred in refusing to admit two Honolulu Police
 
Department 458 forms ("HPD 458 forms") into evidence, and (B)
 that he was afforded ineffective assistance of trial counsel on
 the basis that defense counsel failed to (1) file a motion to
 suppress identification; (2) cross-examine the victim, William
 Andrew Owens ("Owens") regarding his testimony in connection with
 Wal-Mart security video clips; (3) cross-examine Owens about a
 discrepancy in his description of the second suspect; and (4) lay
 a proper foundation for the admission of the HPD 458 forms. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 affirm the Judgment and resolve Glover's points of error as
 follows:
 
(A) Glover contends that the HPD 458 forms, containing
 
Owens's description of the alleged assailant and the second
 suspect, were admissible under Hawaii Rules of Evidence ("HRE")
 Rule 613(b) as a prior witness statement. The State concedes
 that the forms were admissible under HRE Rules 802.1(1)(B) and
 613(b). We agree. 
Nonetheless, the error was harmless. The jury heard
 
testimony from Owens about the forms, and Owens was cross-
examined on their content and the inconsistencies between his
 description of the assailant on the night of the incident and the
 description that he provided at trial. Although they were not
 admitted as exhibits, Owens and Officer Claude Izuka referred to
 the HPD 458 forms in their testimony. The inconsistencies in the
 descriptions were also fully-developed through testimony. Under
 the circumstances, the jury was able to assess Owens's
 identification of the assailant, and thus Glover was afforded a
 meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense. Cf. State
 v. DeLeon, 131 Hawai' i 463, 319 P.3d 382 (2014) (defendant was 
not afforded the opportunity to present a complete defense where the jury was precluded entirely from hearing evidence central to his self-defense argument). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The HPD 458 forms that Glover sought to introduce would
 
have duplicated Owens's and Officer Izuka's testimony. Glover
 
points to no authority requiring that the jury be provided with
 written exhibits that are duplicative of trial testimony in order
 to ensure a fair trial. Glover also claims that there was a
 danger that the jury would place an undue emphasis on Owens's
 identification, because the jury had documentary evidence from
 the State in the form of video and photographs supporting the
 identification, but no documentary evidence from the defense
 contradicting the identification. Again, however, he cites to no
 authority suggesting that a fair trial requires that the jury
 have documentary evidence from both parties.
 
Therefore, Glover fails to establish that the Circuit 
Court's decision not to admit the HPD 458 forms amounts to reversible error. In consideration of the record as a whole, there is no "reasonable possibility that [the] error might have contributed to conviction." State v. Gano, 92 Hawai' i 161, 176, 
988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999) (quoting State v. Heard, 64 Haw. 193, 194, 638 P.2d 307, 308 (1981)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
(B) Glover's ineffective assistance of counsel
 
arguments do not warrant vacation of his sentence. (1) Glover
 alleges that his defense was substantially impaired because his
 counsel failed to file a motion to suppress identification in a
 case where Glover's sole defense was misidentification. 
According to Glover, this should be per se ineffective
 assistance.
 
In order to establish ineffective assistance of 
counsel, a defendant must show, among other things, "a possible 
impairment . . . of a potentially meritorious defense."  State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) (citing 
State v. Christian, 88 Hawai' i 407, 419, 967 p.2d 239, 251 
(1998)). The record is not sufficiently developed to show 
whether Glover would have had a potentially meritorious argument to suppress the identification had trial counsel filed such a motion. We therefore deny this claim of ineffective assistance 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
without prejudice to Glover raising it in a petition under 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40. 
(2) As to the Wal-Mart security video, Glover asserts
 
that his "wrong man" defense was substantially impaired by
 counsel's failure to "pound home" the difference between Owens's
 descriptions to Officer Izuka and Officer Jason Kubo and the Wal-
Mart security video evidence. He contends that after Owens
 narrated the video shown to the jury, Owens should have been
 cross-examined on his various descriptions of the assailant and
 the second suspect regarding their clothing and build, as
 compared to what was shown in the video. 
Glover himself admits, however, that defense counsel
 
conducted "an excellent cross examination" of Owens on other
 issues. The mere failure to "pound home" discrepancies that had
 already been pointed out by defense counsel at trial, and that
 were later argued during closing argument, does not rise to the
 level of ineffective assistance of counsel. See Silva, 75 Haw.
 
at 441, 864 P.2d at 593 ("Lawyers require and are permitted broad
 latitude to make on-the-spot strategic choices in the course of
 trying a case."). Owens's argument on this point is therefore
 without merit.
 
(3) Glover further alleges that defense counsel was
 
ineffective because he cross-examined Owens on discrepancies in
 Owens's description regarding the color of the second suspect's
 shirt, but not his hat. This argument fails for the same reasons
 as the above point. Counsel highlighted for the jury several
 discrepancies between Owens's description of the second suspect
 and the appearance of Glover's companion on the Wal-Mart security
 video. Under the circumstances, defense counsel's failure to
 also cross-examine Owens on the color of the second suspect's hat
 does not rise to the level of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
See, e.g., id. at 442, 864 P.2d at 594 ("Although it could be
 argued that eliciting testimony regarding [the complaining
 witnesses's] bad eyesight may have strengthened [the defendant's]
 case, on balance, we conclude that defense counsel's failure to
 do so does not rise to the level of ineffective assistance of
 counsel.").
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) Since we have concluded above that the Circuit
 
Court's failure to admit the HPD 458 forms into evidence was
 
harmless, Glover has not shown that any failure of counsel to lay
 a proper foundation regarding the forms impaired a potentially
 meritorious defense.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence filed February 6, 2013, and the Mittimus; Warrant of Commitment to Jail, filed February 6, 2013, are affirmed without prejudice to Glover filing a subsequent Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 petition on his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel on the basis of counsel's failure to file a motion to suppress identification. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 23, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Jacob M. Merrill 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting AttorneCity & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. y,
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 