NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000110
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHRISTINE McCOMAS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC CR. NO. 11-1-0137K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Christine McComas (McComas) appeals
 
from the "Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence," filed on
 
November 9, 2011 in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (family
 court).
1 McComas was convicted of Abuse of Family or Household
 
Members, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709­906(1) (Supp. 2012).
2
  
1 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.
2 HRS § 709-906(1) stated:
 
§709-906 Abuse of family or household members;
penalty. (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly
or in concert, to physically abuse a family or household
member or to refuse compliance with the lawful order of a
police officer under subsection (4). The police, in
investigating any complaint of abuse of a family or
household member, upon request, may transport the abused
person to a hospital or safe shelter.
 For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former
spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons who have a
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, McComas alleges that she received
 
ineffective assistance of counsel because (1) trial counsel only
 
provided a copy of a police report two days prior to trial,
 (2) trial counsel failed to discuss the content of the police
 report with her, (3) trial counsel failed to discuss available
 defenses, (4) trial counsel failed to prepare for trial and only
 met with her for five minutes two days prior to trial, and
 (5) trial counsel failed to meet with her and her husband John
 McComas (John), the complaining witness. McComas further claims
 that she received ineffective assistance of counsel because trial
 counsel failed to inform her that the State would not offer a
 plea bargain if her case proceeded in district court and that she
 would have received a plea bargain if she demanded a jury trial. 
In her Reply Brief, McComas claims that trial counsel's failure
 to request a mental examination, pursuant to HRS § 704-404 (1993
 and 2013 Supp.), constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Additionally, McComas claims that the family court
 
plainly erred by convicting her because her conviction is
 contrary to the legislative intent of HRS § 709-906, that the
 family unit should be retained and the abusing spouse should not
 be branded a criminal.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve McComas's points of error as follows:
 
(1) We first address McComas's claim that she received
 
ineffective assistance of trial counsel because (a) trial counsel
 only provided a copy of a police report two days prior to trial,
 (b) trial counsel failed to discuss the content of the police
 report with her, (c) trial counsel failed to discuss available
 defenses, (d) trial counsel failed to prepare for trial and met
 
2(...continued)
child in common, parents, children, persons related by
consanguinity, and persons jointly residing or formerly
residing in the same dwelling unit.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with her for five minutes two days prior to trial, and (e) trial
 
counsel failed to meet with her and John. McComas argues that
 these alleged errors had the prejudicial effect of trial counsel
 being unable to develop a coherent self-defense argument because
 testimony would have shown that John, the complaining witness,
 filled out the Domestic Violence Statement Form in the heat of
 the moment; John did not tell the police about his physical
 actions toward McComas immediately prior to her alleged physical
 abuse; John exaggerated the effects of her actions on him; John
 was aware he provoked McComas; and John called the police because
 he was concerned about McComas's emotional and psychological well
 being due to medication that she was taking, not to report
 physical abuse.
 
We consider the following standards:
 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competence
demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has
 the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel
and must meet the following two-part test: 1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (footnote, citations and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
McComas fails to carry her burden of establishing the
 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 defense. At trial, McComas's trial counsel argued that McComas
 acted in self-defense by claiming that John physically harmed
 McComas after inviting her into his house. Contrary to McComas's
 assertion, her trial counsel could not show that John filled out
 the Domestic Violence Statement Form in the heat of the moment. 
John testified that he called the police within a half an hour
 after the incident, that the police arrived an hour and a half
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after he called them, and that he then filled out the form. A
 
two-hour delay between the incident and completion of the form
 does not demonstrate that John filled out the form in the heat of
 the moment.
 
There was also evidence of John's physical actions
 
toward McComas immediately prior to her physical abuse of him. 
John himself testified about his actions, stating that after
 McComas refused his verbal request to leave, he "grabbed ahold of
 her and shoved her out." John stated that he grabbed her arms to
 force her out of the house. On cross-examination, McComas's
 trial counsel asked questions to underscore John's testimony that
 he grabbed McComas first and that he failed to include these
 actions in his written statement. John's testimony explained his
 actions prior to the abuse by McComas. 
Further, McComas's trial counsel did not fail to elicit
 
testimony from John that he might have exaggerated the effects of
 McComas's actions on him. Contrary to the Domestic Violence
 Statement Form, John testified that there were no scratch marks
 on his wrist, he did not feel pain when McComas struck him, and
 any red marks on him were the result of a struggle between them. 
Trial counsel also elicited testimony from John that he grabbed
 McComas first. Trial counsel had evidence to support McComas's
 self-defense claim and that John was not harmed by McComas's
 actions. 
John also testified as to the circumstances after
 
McComas left and why he called the police. He testified that
 McComas called him afterward and told him that she was upset. 
After the telephone call, John felt that he should report the
 incident because he could tell in her voice that she was upset. 
John then called the police. After the police arrived, John
 voluntarily completed the Domestic Violence Statement Form which
 lead to the charge against McComas.
 
McComas further claims that she received ineffective
 
assistance of counsel because trial counsel failed to inform her
 that the State would not offer a plea bargain to the charge in
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
district court, but she would have received a plea bargain if she
 
demanded a jury trial. McComas's claim is based solely on her
 affidavit in support of a motion for a new trial, in which she
 stated that "I have subsequently been informed and believe that
 the State of Hawaii does not plea bargain domestic abuse cases at
 the District Court level, and that I would have had a better
 chance of getting a plea bargain if I had demanded a jury trial." 
McComas does not indicate from whom she received the alleged
 information, and the record does not substantiate it in any way.
 
McComas's claim that trial counsel should have sought a 
mental examination, pursuant to HRS § 704-404, was raised for the first time in her Reply Brief. Therefore, this point of error is waived. State v. Mark, 123 Hawai
'i 205, 230, 231 P.3d 478, 503 
(2010); Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(d) 
("The reply brief shall be confined to matters presented in the answering brief.") 
Thus, based on the above and having reviewed the record
 
in this case, we cannot conclude that McComas has demonstrated
 specific errors or omissions by her trial counsel reflecting a
 lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, or that such errors or
 omissions resulted in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of
 a potentially meritorious defense.
 
(2) McComas also claims that her conviction disregards
 
the legislative intent in enacting HRS § 709-906, and therefore,
 it constitutes plain error. McComas argues inter alia that both
 she and John did not want McComas to be convicted, and she claims
 that the charge should have been dismissed, continued, or
 deferred until rehabilitation was completed, without the
 necessity of branding her a "criminal." She relies on a
 legislative committee report from 1973, when HRS § 709-906 was
 first enacted. See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 828, in 1973 Senate
 
Journal, at 960.
 
McComas essentially claims that she should not be
 
convicted under HRS § 709-906 because the legislative intent was
 for accused persons to be rehabilitated instead of found guilty
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of a criminal offense. For statutory construction, the following
 
guides our analysis:
 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists.
 
State v. Bayly, 118 Hawai 'i 1, 6, 185 P.3d 186, 191 (2008) 
(citation omitted). Based on the plain language of HRS § 709­
906(1), "[i]t shall be unlawful for any person . . . to
 
physically abuse a family or household member[.]" (Emphasis
 added). The legislature clearly intended that abusers be charged
 and, if found guilty, convicted. The penalties set forth in
 HRS § 709-906 are mandatory, not discretionary. 
See HRS § 709­
906(5), (7) and (8). We therefore need not go beyond the plain
 language of the statute.
 
Even considering legislative history, we note that the
 
Supplemental Commentary for HRS § 709-906 (1993) states in part:
 
Act 266, Session Laws 1980, amended subsections (2)
and (3) to authorize a police officer to make an
arrest or take the actions specified in subsection (3)
regardless of whether the physical abuse occurred in
the officer's presence or not. The changes to this
section and the enactment of § 709-907 were intended
to expand the protection and remedies available to a
spouse who is the victim of non-felonious offense
against the person committed by the other spouse.
While recognizing the expertise of the family court,
the conference committee stated that "your Committee
is concerned that family court administrative policies
may be diverting an inordinate number of petitions for
summonses to counseling, and respectfully recommends
that the court review its policy to ensure that the
remedy the law creates not be vitiated by undue
reluctance to employ it." Conference Committee Report
No. 29-80 (33-80).
 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 709-906 provides that an abuse victim,
 
through prosecutors, can petition the family court for a penal
 summons or arrest warrant. However, it appears that in 1980, the
 legislature expressed its concern that a number of cases against
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
alleged abusers were being sent to counseling by the family court
 
instead of employing the remedies under the statute. The
 legislative history from 1973 that McComas cites must therefore
 be viewed in context given the more recent legislative committee
 report from 1980. See Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 29-80, in 1980 House
 
Journal, at 1085.
 
In support of her argument for a dismissal, McComas
 
also argues that "the physical abuse was of a minuscule nature,
 did not cause any physical manifestation of injury or damage to a
 person's body other than a red mark," the parties are married,
 the parties reconciled, neither party sought a temporary
 restraining order, and neither party wanted to go forward with
 the case. 
McComas did not argue below that her conduct was de
 
minimis and that the case should be dismissed, pursuant to
 HRS § 702-236 (1993).
3 Therefore, her argument based on de
 
minimis conduct is waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). Moreover, the
 family court found Officer Cory Gray's testimony and John's
 written statement to be credible and John's oral testimony and
 
3 HRS § 702-236 states:
 
§702-236 De minimis infractions. (1) The court may
dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the
conduct alleged and the nature of the attendant
circumstances, it finds that the defendant's conduct:
 (a)	 Was within a customary license or tolerance, which
was not expressly refused by the person whose
interest was infringed and which is not
inconsistent with the purpose of the law defining
the offense; or
 (b)	 Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil
sought to be prevented by the law defining the
offense or did so only to an extent too trivial to
warrant the condemnation of conviction; or
 (c) 	Presents such other extenuations that it cannot
 
reasonably be regarded as envisaged by the
legislature in forbidding the offense.
 (2) The court shall not dismiss a prosecution under
subsection (1)(c) of this section without filing a written
statement of its reasons.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
McComas's testimony not credible. John's Domestic Violence 
Statement Form stated that he had scratches and felt pain from the incident. "It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or household member[.]" HRS § 709-906(1). The term "physical abuse" in HRS § 709-906(1) means "to maltreat and connotes such treatment as will injure, hurt or damage a person." State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai
'i 413, 416, 
903 P.2 718, 721 (App. 1995) (citation omitted). Thus, contrary to McComas's claim, there was injury and hurt which constituted physical abuse under HRS § 709-906. 
The fact that the parties were married goes to an
 
essential element of the offense. In 2011, HRS § 709-906(1)
 stated "'family or household member' means spouses or reciprocal
 beneficiaries, former spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, 
persons who have a child in common, parents, children, persons
 related by consanguinity, and persons jointly residing or
 formerly residing in the same dwelling unit." The State must
 prove that John and McComas were family or household members. 
Thus, being married does not support dismissal of the charge. 
Further, there is nothing in the statute that minimizes the
 offense because the parties reconciled and neither party obtained
 a temporary restraining order.
 
The State also correctly points out that recantation by 
a witness does not necessarily warrant an acquittal because the trier of fact may accept or reject any witness's testimony in whole or in part and determine that the truth lay in a prior inconsistent statement. State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
'i 289, 303-04, 
926 P.2d 194, 208-09 (1996). At trial, John denied any injury and pain as a result of the incident despite the Domestic Violence Statement Form that stated otherwise. The family court noted that both John and McComas were not being entirely truthful, which it attributed to their relationship and attempt to reconcile. Instead, the family court found John's Domestic Violence Statement Form more credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is 
the province of the trier of fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 
Hawai'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (internal quotation 
marks, citation, and brackets omitted) (block quote format changed). 
McComas's conviction did not contravene the legislative
 
intent of HRS § 709-906 and it was not plain error for the
 district court not to dismiss, continue or defer her charge.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment
 
Guilty Conviction and Sentence, filed on November 9, 2011 in the
 Family Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 27, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Jo Kim 
M. Kanani Laubach 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Linda L. Walton 
County of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
9
 