NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000020
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LINCOLN PHILLIPS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-1430)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J. and Leonard, J.,
with Reifurth, J., dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lincoln Phillips appeals from a
 
December 12, 2011 "Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence"
 
1
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
court) convicting him of attempted murder in the second degree.
 
Phillips was convicted of attempting to murder his wife with a
 
hammer at his residence.
 
Phillips contends the circuit court erred when it:
 (1)
 denied his motion to suppress evidence of a hammer 
recovered from his garage as a violation of his rights under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, 
section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution; 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) denied his motion to suppress evidence of clothing 
recovered from a trash can in his garage as a violation of his 
rights under the Fourth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution and Article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution; and 
(3) ordered him to pay restitution of $5,730 in funeral
 
expenses and $800 in costs to transport the wife's body, for a
 total of $6,530 in violation of HRS ยง 706-646 (2012 Repl.).
 
For purposes of our disposition of this case, the
 
pertinent finding of fact (FOF), and conclusion of law (COL) in
 
the circuit court's December 31, 2009 "Findings of Fact, and
 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
[Phillips's] Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements" are as
 
follows:
 
[FOF] 1. Honolulu Police Officer Jon Tokunaga arrived
at 91-2006 Kaioli Street, Unit #5004, Ewa Beach, City and
County of Honolulu, Hawaii (hereinafter, "residence"), at
about 4:12 a.m. on September 3, 2008. [Phillips] had called
police to report that he had discovered wife injured to the
head when he came home that morning. Tokunaga went upstairs
and saw the [wife] injured in the bedroom. He then was
 
assigned by his supervisor to look in the immediate vicinity
of the residence for possible weapons. Tokunaga knew no
other facts and had no suspects in mind. In the residence's
 garage, Tokunaga saw a hammer whose handle was wet and which
bore a spot of what appeared to be blood on its head sitting
atop a cooler, which was not wet.
 
* * *
 
[COL] 4.
 A police officer has probable cause when
facts and circumstances within his knowledge and of which he
has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient to
warrant a person of reasonable caution in the belief that a
crime has been committed. Section 803-5, Hawaii Revised
 Statutes. Under the plain view doctrine, where a
governmental agent is engaged in a lawful intrusion and
inadvertently observes evidence of a crime, the seizure of
such evidence does not require further constitutional
protection. State v. Jenkins, 93 [Hawai' i] 87, 103 (2000).
Here, [Phillips] called police to investigate the
circumstances of wife's head injuries at his residence.
Hence, when Officer Tokunaga, who had been sent to the
residence by dispatch in response to [Phillip's] telephone
call, saw a hammer, appearing partially wet and bearing what
appeared to be blood, atop coolers near the residence's
garage door, he was lawfully within the garage and had
probable cause to believe that the hammer, in the context of
wife's head injuries, was evidence of a crime, to wit, the
reasonably trustworthy information that police had when they
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
discovered the hammer was sufficient to warrant a person of
reasonable caution in the belief that the hammer was
 evidence of a crime involving [Phillip's] wife in the
upstairs bedroom.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The circuit court held the hammer was properly seized 
in plain view. "Three factors are required to merit a legitimate 
plain view observation: (1) prior justification for the 
intrusion: (2) inadvertent discovery; and (3) probable cause to 
believe the item is evidence of a crime or contraband." State v. 
Meyer, 78 Hawai' i 308, 314, 893 P.2d 159, 165 (1995) (emphasis 
added). In Meyer, the Hawai' i Supreme Court cited with approval 
the dissent by Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, in Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128, 110 S. Ct. 2301 (1990): 
[t]he rationale behind the inadvertent discovery requirement
is simply that we will not excuse officers from the general
requirement of a warrant to seize if the officers know the
location of evidence, have probable cause to seize it,
intend to seize it, and yet do not bother to obtain a
warrant particularly describing that evidence.
 
Meyer, 78 Hawai' i at 314 n.6, 893 P.2d at 165 n.6 (quoting 
Horton, 496 U.S. at 144-45, 110 S.Ct. at 2312). 
Officer Tokunaga was ordered by his supervisor to
 
search the premises for the weapon used in the attack on the
 
wife. Phillips had told the police his wife was attacked in
 
their residence. Officer Tokunaga found the hammer while looking
 
for the weapon used in the attack. He had probable cause to
 
seize it and he intended to seize it. A warrant certainly could
 
have been obtained to search the premises given that an attempted
 
murder appeared to have taken place there.
 
The discovery of the hammer pursuant to Officer
 
Tokunaga's search cannot be described as inadvertent. 
Inadvertent is defined as unintentional. Merriam-Webster's
 
Collegiate Dictionary, 585 (10th edition 2000). The search and
 discovery of the hammer was certainly intentional. The
 
intentional search and seizure of the hammer under the plain view
 
doctrine was not valid under Meyer. Therefore, the circuit court
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erred in not suppressing the evidence of the hammer, and this 
error cannot be considered harmless. See State v. Pauline, 100 
Hawai'i 356, 378, 60 P.3d 306, 328 (2002). The State makes no 
argument that it would have been harmless error. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 12, 2011
 
"Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit is vacated and this case is
 
remanded for a new trial. Phillips's other points on appeal are
 
moot.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
4
 