NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000351
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TED DEOLIVEIRA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0571)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth, J.,
with Ginoza, J., dissenting and concurring)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ted DeOliveira (DeOliveira) appeals
 
from a December 16, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
1
entered by the First Circuit Court (Circuit Court).  DeOliveira
 
was convicted of Burglary in the First Degree in violation of HRS
 
§ 708-810(1)(c) (2014) (Count I) and Assault in the Third Degree
 
in violation of HRS § 707-712(1) (2014) (Count II). He was
 
sentenced to ten years imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of
 
three years and four months on Count I and thirty days
 imprisonment on Count II, sentences to run concurrently.
 
DeOliveira appeals only as to Count I, arguing that the

 
Circuit Court erred when it: (1) failed to instruct the jury
 that it could not find DeOliveira guilty of Burglary in the First
 Degree based on his assault of Anne Angyal (Angyal), because
 
Burglary in the First Degree requires the "intent" to commit a
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crime in the burgled building, and the State charged DeOliveira
 
only with a reckless state of mind in Count II; (2) failed to
 provide the jury with a special verdict form asking, in the event
 that the jury found DeOliveira guilty of Burglary in the First
 Degree, that it indicate which underlying crime against a person
 or property rights it believed DeOliveira intended to commit; and
 (3) denied his motion for judgment of acquittal on Count I based
 on insufficient evidence.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve DeOliveira's points of error as follows:
 
(1&2) HRS § 708-810(1)(c) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the first
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a
crime against a person or against property rights, and:
. . . . 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the building
is such a dwelling.
 
Thus, to convict DeOliveira of Burglary in the First
 
Degree, the jury had to find that DeOliveira intentionally
 
entered or remained unlawfully in Angyal's residence "with intent
 to commit therein a crime against a person or against property
 rights." Id. "[T]he crime intended to be committed on the
 
premises does not have to be committed in order to make the act
 of entering or remaining the crime of burglary, only the intent
 must be formed." State v. Robins, 66 Haw. 312, 314, 660 P.2d 39,
 
41 (1983). While proof that the underlying crime actually
 occurred may tend to show an intent to commit that crime, the
 State is not required to prove that the crime was completed in
 order to prove that the defendant had the intent to commit it. 
Additionally, "[a] burglary conviction . . . can be based upon a
 showing of intent to commit any crime. A showing of intent to
 commit some particular crime is not required." State v. Motta,
 
66 Haw. 89, 94, 657 P.2d 1019, 1022 (1983).
 
Here, the State argued two alternatives, i.e.
 
DeOliveira intended to commit the theft of some recording
 
2
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
equipment from Angyal's apartment or that he intended to assault
 
Angyal. With regard to the latter, DeOliveira argues that
 because the State charged him in Count II under HRS § 707­711(1)(b) (2014) ("recklessly causes serious or substantial
 bodily injury to another"), its theory was that he recklessly
 (rather than intentionally or knowingly) caused serious or
 substantial bodily injury to Angyal. 
Thus, he contends, the Circuit Court should have
 
instructed the jury that it could not find him guilty of First
 Degree Burglary based on his assault of Angyal, because First
 Degree Burglary requires that the defendant enter or remain
 unlawfully in a building "with intent to commit therein a
 crime[.]" In other words, because the State did not charge
 
DeOliveira with "intentional" assault, his assault of Angyal
 
could not have been the underlying intended crime supporting the
 burglary verdict. DeOliveira argues that, therefore, had the
 
Circuit Court provided the requested instructions and verdict
 
form, "if the jury replied that the basis [for the burglary] was
 the assault against Anne Angyal, the court could have acquitted
 Mr. DeOliveira on the burglary count because it would have been
 an inconsistent verdict. The fact that no such instructions nor
 verdict forms were given made the court's instructions
 insufficient and erroneous and allowed for inconsistent
 verdicts."
 
When faced with a claim that verdicts are inconsistent, the
court must search for a reasonable way to read the verdicts
as expressing a coherent view of the case, and must exhaust
this effort before it is free to dismiss the jury's verdict
and remand the case for a new trial. The consistency of the
jury verdicts must be considered in light of the judge's
instructions to the jury.
 
Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai 'i 475, 489, 904 P.2d 489, 503 (1995) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The State argues that its theory was not that
 
DeOliveira was reckless with respect to his conduct, but rather
 
that he was reckless with respect to the degree of injury his
 conduct was likely to cause to Angyal. HRS § 702-206(3) (2014)
 differentiates between acting "recklessly" with respect to one's
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conduct and with respect to a result of that conduct.2 During
 
the trial, the State argued that DeOliveira intended to hit
 
Angyal, but that he was reckless as to the result of his conduct
 "when he consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable
 risk that punching [Angyal] would cause [her injuries]." 
Accordingly, the State's decision to charge DeOliveira with a
 "reckless" state of mind under HRS § 707-711(1)(b) would not, as
 DeOliveira contends, produce an inconsistent verdict with respect
 to the burglary charge.
 
Additionally,
 
HRS § 702–208 (1993) provides in relevant part that "[w]hen
the law provides that recklessness is sufficient to
establish an element of an offense, that element also is
established if, with respect thereto, a person acts
intentionally or knowingly." "Since intent, knowledge,
[and] recklessness . . . are in a descending order of
culpability, this section establishes that it is only
necessary to articulate the minimal basis of liability for
the more serious bases to be implied. The proposition is
essentially axiomatic." Commentary on HRS § 702–208
(internal quotation marks and footnote omitted).
 
State v. Holbron, 80 Hawai 'i 27, 40, 904 P.2d 912, 925 (1995). 
Thus, a jury's conviction need not rest on the same
 
state of mind charged by the prosecution, so long as the jury
 
finds that the defendant possessed a state of mind reflecting no
 less culpability than that required under the statute and all the
 
2
 HRS § 702-206(3) provides, in relevant part:
 
(3) "Recklessly."
(a) 	A person acts recklessly with respect to his conduct
when he consciously disregards a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the person's conduct is of the
specified nature.
(b) 	A person acts recklessly with respect to attendant
circumstances when he consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that such
circumstances exist.
 
(c) 	A person acts recklessly with respect to a result of
his conduct when he consciously disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct
will cause such a result.
 
(d) 	A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this section if, considering the nature and
purpose of the person's conduct and the circumstances
known to him, the disregard of the risk involves a
gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a
law-abiding person would observe in the same
situation.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
elements of the charge are satisfied. The jury in this case
 
could have arrived at a guilty verdict on the assault charge
 based on a finding that DeOliveira possessed a knowing or
 intentional state of mind. Therefore, the jury instruction
 requested, that the jury could not find DeOliveira guilty of
 Burglary in the First Degree based on his assault of Angyal,
 would have been inaccurate and/or misleading. Moreover, as noted
 above, the requisite intent is the "intent to commit therein a
 crime against a person or property rights", which may be
 independent of the crime, if any, actually committed therein.
 
DeOliveira further argues that a special verdict form
 
was necessary to determine whether the jury based the burglary
 verdict on the assault, because if it had, the Circuit Court
 could have acquitted DeOliveira based on the inconsistency of the
 burglary and assault verdicts. The supreme court has held:
 
When the evidence indicates that several distinct
 
criminal acts have been committed, but [the] defendant is
charged with only one count of criminal conduct, jury
unanimity must be protected. . . . . The [prosecution] may,
in its discretion, elect the act upon which it will rely for
conviction. Alternatively, if the jury is instructed that
all 12 jurors must agree that the same underlying criminal
act has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, a unanimous
verdict on one criminal act will be assured. When the
 [prosecution] chooses not to elect, this jury instruction
must be given to ensure the jury's understanding of the
unanimity requirement.
 
State v. Mahoe, 89 Hawai 'i 284, 291, 972 P.2d 287, 294 (1998) 
(brackets in original) (quoting State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai 'i 1, 31, 
928 P.2d 843, 873 (1996)). 
Here, the Circuit Court gave the following unanimity
 
instruction to the jury:
 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the purpose
of showing that there is more than one intent upon which
proof of an element of an offense may be based. In order
 for the Prosecution to prove an element, all twelve jurors
must unanimously agree that the same intent has been proved
beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
This instruction was sufficient to ensure that all
 
twelve jurors agreed that DeOliveira possessed the requisite
 
intent to commit "a crime against a person or against property
 rights." 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, DeOliveira also argues that, with respect to
 
Count II, the Circuit Court should not have instructed the jury
 
on the lesser included offense of Assault in the Third Degree by
 mutual affray because mutual affray requires mutual consent,
 which is inconsistent with the reckless state of mind charged in
 Count II, and further confuses the requisite intent required in
 Count I. However, while Assault in the Third Degree is a lesser
 included offense of Assault in the Second Degree, as the supreme
 court has explained:
 
mutual affray, HRS § 707–712(2), is not a lesser included
offense of Assault in the Third Degree, but rather, a
mitigating defense to Misdemeanor Assault in the Third
Degree. . . .
Hawai'i Jury Instructions Criminal (HAWJIC) 9.21
relating to mutual affray Assault in the Third Degree statesthat "[w]hen an Assault in the Third Degree instruction issubmitted to the jury, the court must also submit a mutualaffray instruction and special interrogatory where there isany evidence that the fight or scuffle was entered into bymutual consent." (Emphasis added.) Accordingly, we holdthat the court must submit a mutual affray instruction tothe jury where there is any evidence in the record that theinjury was inflicted during the course of a fight or scuffleentered into by mutual consent, as indicated in HAWJIC 9.21. 
State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai 'i 78, 95-96, 253 P.3d 639, 656-57 
(2011) (footnote omitted). DeOliveira argues that the "mutual 
consent" required for the jury to find that "mutual affray" mitigation applied is inconsistent with the reckless state of mind alleged in the original Assault in the Second Degree charge. However, as discussed supra, 
HRS § 702–208 (1993) provides in relevant part that "[w]hen
the law provides that recklessness is sufficient to
establish an element of an offense, that element also is
established if, with respect thereto, a person acts
intentionally or knowingly."
 
Holbron, 80 Hawai 'i at 40, 904 P.2d at 925. 
In the instant case, the Circuit Court gave an
 
instruction that the jury could alternatively find DeOliveira
 
guilty in Count II of the lesser included offense of Assault in
 the Third Degree. Because there was some evidence in the record
 that the injury to Angyal occurred in the course of a fight or
 scuffle entered into by mutual consent, the Circuit Court
 correctly instructed the jury on the mitigating defense of mutual
 affray. Id. at 40, 904 P.2d at 925. The jury found that the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State had failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
 
DeOliveira and Angyal did not enter into a scuffle by mutual
 consent. We find no error in this regard, and for the same
 reasons articulated above, do not find this verdict to be
 inconsistent with the jury's verdict on Count I.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's refusal to provide 
the requested jury instructions and/or special verdict form was not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading. State v. Walton, 133 Hawai
'i 66, 83, 324 P.3d 876, 
893 (2014). Thus, the Circuit Court did not err. 
(3) DeOliveira argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal on the Burglary in the First Degree charge in Count I because there was insufficient evidence of his intent to commit a crime upon entering or remaining unlawfully in Angyal's residence. However, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, and in full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, there was sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case so that a reasonable mind might have fairly concluded DeOliveira's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Foster, 128 Hawai
'i 18, 
25, 282 P.3d 560, 567 (2012). Thus, the Circuit Court did not err when it denied DeOliveira's motion for judgment of acquittal as to Count I. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's December 16, 
2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 25, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Brandon K. Flores 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
7
 