NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000386
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF EDWARD VON BARAVALLE
 
also known as Edward V. Baravalle
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(PROBATE NO. 09-1-0664)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Appellant-Beneficiary Kyoko Kouda a.k.a. Kyoko von
 
Baravalle (Kouda) appeals from two judgments (collectively, March
 
16, 2012 Judgments) of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
sitting in Probate (Probate Court)  :  (1) the March 16, 2012
 
Judgment on Order Denying Kouda's Cross-Petition to Set Aside (1)

 
Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Petition for Probate
 
of Will and Appointment of Personal Representative or in the
 Alternative for Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment of
 Personal Representative Filed March 25, 2010; and (2) Judgment on
 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Petition for Probate
 of Will and Appointment of Personal Representative or in the
 Alternative for Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment of
 Personal Representative Filed March 25, 2010 (Judgment on Cross-
Petition); and (2) the March 16, 2012 Judgment on Order Granting
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H. M. Chan presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Part and Denying in Part Petition for Instructions (Judgment
re Instructions).
 
Kouda raises four points of error, asserting that the
 
Probate Court erred when it: (1) denied her Cross-Petition to
 
Set Aside (1) Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Petition
 for Probate of Will and Appointment of Personal Representative or
 in the Alternative for Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment
 of Personal Representative Filed March 25, 2010; and (2) Judgment
 on Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Petition for
 Probate of Will and Appointment of Personal Representative or in
 the Alternative for Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment of
 Personal Representative Filed March 25, 2010 (Kouda's Cross-
Petition); 
(2) denied (in part) Personal Representative-Appellee
 
Rodney Sato's (Sato's) Petition for Instructions, with respect to
 Sato's (renewed) request to admit the August 23, 1996 purported
 
holographic will (Purported Will) of Decedent Edward von
 
Baravalle (Baravalle) to probate as Baravalle's last will and
 
testament (see March 16, 2012 Order Granting in Part and Denying
 
in Part Petition for Instructions (Order re Instructions)); 
(3) denied Kouda's Cross-Petition "without considering
 
the newly discovered heirs-at-law;" and 
(4) appointed Sato as personal representative for
 
Baravalle's estate (the Estate) "without considering the newly
 
discovered heirs-at-law."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Kouda's points of error as follows:
 
In essence, Kouda's first three points of error
 
challenge the Probate Court's refusal to set aside its earlier
 denial of Sato's request to admit the Purported Will to probate,
 which denial was set forth in the Probate Court's March 25, 2010
 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Petition for Probate
 of Will and Appointment of Personal Representative or in the
 Alternative for Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Personal Representative (March 25, 2010 Order) and March 25, 2010
 
Judgment on the March 25, 2010 Order (March 25, 2010 Judgment). 
In her opening brief, Kouda's primary argument is that
 
the Purported Will was a valid holographic will which the Probate
 
Court should have admitted to Probate. Kouda does not deny that
 she received actual notice of Sato's initial petition, which led
 to the March 25, 2010 Order and March 25, 2010 Judgment. Nor
 does Kouda deny that she did not appeal the March 25, 2010 Order
 or the March 25, 2010 Judgment. Instead, Kouda argues that the
 March 25, 2010 Order and Judgment are void because, although she
 received proper notice, Baravalle's three children from prior
 marriages did not receive notice, and, essentially, that her
 failure to challenge the March 25, 2010 Order should be excused
 because "she believed she was going to receive everything" from
 the Estate.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 560:3-106 (2006)
 
provides that, with respect to probate proceedings where notice
 is required, "[a]n order is binding as to all who are given
 notice of the proceeding though less than all interested persons
 are notified." Additionally, in a case where an order of
 intestacy has been entered, HRS ยง 560:3-412(2) (2006) provides
 that a court may reconsider its determination of heirs "if it is
 shown that one or more persons were omitted from the
 determination and it is also shown that the persons . . . were
 given no notice of any proceeding concerning the decedent's
 estate, except by publication." A court may also vacate a
 previous order of intestacy as provided for by statute. HRS ยง
 560:3-412(2),(3). Thus, although a court may reconsider the
 status of an omitted heir who was not given notice of a probate
 proceeding, a final order entered in that proceeding is not void
 and is still binding on all who received notice. Having
 carefully considered all of Kouda's arguments, we conclude that
 the Probate Court did not abuse its discretion when it refused to
 set aside the March 25, 2010 rulings rejecting the Purported
 Will.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Kouda's final point of error on appeal, she contends
 
that the Probate Court erred when it appointed Sato as personal
 
representative for the Estate. In addition to later signing a
 receipt for the notice of hearing on the matter, on November 10,
 2009, Kouda signed two submissions, a "Declination, Nomination
 and Joinder" and a "Declaration of Kyoko von Baravalle" in Sato's
 initial petitions both stating that she hereby joins in Sato's
 petition for appointment and "declines to serve as such personal
 representative, renounces that right, and nominates and requests
 the Court to appoint Rodney Sato as personal representative,
 
without bond." Although Kouda blames Sato for failing to
 
identify Baravalle's children in the initial petition, and
 disputes Sato's assertion that he was first informed of the
 decedent's two sons in a letter from Kouda's attorney dated
 December 6, 2010, it does not appear that Kouda opposed his
 appointment or petitioned the Probate Court for Sato's removal as
 the personal representative. Kouda's contention as to Sato's
 appointment is without merit.
 
For these reasons, the Probate Court's March 16, 2012
 
Judgments are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 18, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Junsuke Otsuka 
(Otsuka & Associates)
for Beneficiary-Appellant
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Kenn N. Kojima 
for Beneficiaries-Appellees

RICHARD TAKESHI VON BARAVALLE
 and KARL KAZUTO VON BARAVALLE
 
4
 