NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0001106
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JULIANA ZHANG, Claimant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND
NATURAL RESOURCES, Employer-Appellee, Self-Insured
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEAL BOARD
 
(CIVIL NO. AB-2003-365 (2-94-41072))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Juliana Zhang (Zhang) appeals pro se
 
from a Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB)
 
December 6, 2011 Decision and Order that affirmed in part,
 
reversed in part, and modified in part several decisions by the
 Director of Labor and Industrial Relations (the Director)
 
regarding Zhang's claim for workers' compensation benefits from
 
Employer-Appellee State of Hawai
'i, Department of Land and 
Natural Resources (DLNR). 
It appears that Zhang raises the following points of
 
error on appeal:1
 
1
 Zhang's Opening Brief fails to comply with the requirements of
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3), in that she does
not provide "[a] concise statement of the case," nor does she "append[] to the
brief a copy of the judgment, decree, findings of fact and conclusions of law,order, opinion or decision relevant" to her points on appeal. In addition,Zhang's Opening Brief fails to comply with the requirements set forth in HRAPRule 28(b)(7), which states that the appellant's opening brief should include
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) the LIRAB erred by failing to find that DLNR
 
committed fraud against Zhang;
 
(2) the LIRAB erred by denying Zhang temporary total
 
disability (TTD) payments, medical benefits, and "other benefits"
 
after May 5, 2004;
 
(3) the LIRAB erred by crediting the opinion of Dr.
 
Streltzer and by determining that DLNR presented substantial
 
2
evidence to overcome the HRS § 386-85 (1993)  presumption
regarding Zhang's medical condition/diagnosis of dysthymia;
 
(4) the LIRAB erred regarding its permanent partial
 
disability (PPD) benefits decision;
 
(5) the LIRAB erred by denying Zhang's request for a
 
change in her workers' compensation "average weekly wage" (AWW); 
(6) the LIRAB erred by determining that DLNR did not
 
violate HRS § 386-142;
 
(7) the LIRAB erred by denying Zhang (in its September
 
29, 2009 Order Granting Motion to Compel, in Part) "full
 discovery" regarding her termination;
 
1(...continued)
an argument section "containing the contentions of the appellant on the points
presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the authorities,statutes and parts of the record relied on," and contains lengthy "Issuespresented for Review," rather than a concise statement of points of errormeeting the requirements stated in HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). 
We nevertheless have 
attempted to review this case on the merits. See O'Connor v. Diocese of 
Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994) (stating that "the
policies of this court are to permit litigants to appeal and to have theircases heard on the merits, where possible" (citations omitted)). 
2	 HRS § 386-85 states the following:
 
§ 386-85 Presumptions. In any proceeding for
the enforcement of a claim for compensation under this
chapter it shall be presumed, in the absence of
substantial evidence to the contrary:
 
(1)	 That the claim is for a covered work
 injury;
 
(2)	 That sufficient notice of such injury has
been given;
 
(3)	 That the injury was not caused by the
intoxication of the injured employee; and 
(4)	 That the injury was not caused by the
wilful intention of the injured employee
to injure oneself or another. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(8) the LIRAB erred by failing to recognize her 
entitlement to vacation and sick leave credits, as well as her 
rights and benefits as a member of the Hawai 'i Government 
Employees Association (HGEA); and 
(9) the award of attorney's fees to Zhang's attorney,
 
Wayne Mukaida (Mukaida), should not be included in the present
 
appeal.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Zhang's points of error as follows:
 
(1) On August 24, 2010, Zhang filed a "fraud
 
complaint" against the DLNR with the Disability Compensation
 Division (DCD) pursuant to HRS § 386-89(b) (1993), which states
 
that "[t]he director may at any time, either of the director's
 
own motion or upon the application of any party, reopen any case
 on the ground that fraud has been practiced on the director or on
 any party and render such decision as is proper under the
 circumstances." 
HRS § 386-87(c) (1993) provides:
 
The [LIRAB] shall have power to review the findings of
fact, conclusions of law and exercise of discretion by the
director in hearing, determining or otherwise handling of
any compensation case and may affirm, reverse or modify any
compensation case upon review, or remand the case to the
director for further proceedings and action. 
In this case, however, it does not appear that the
 
Director made any ruling on the issue of Zhang's fraud complaint. 
Thus the LIRAB had no decision to review. Further, it does not
 appear that LIRAB was asked to remand the matter to the Director
 or otherwise take any action on Zhang's fraud complaint.
 Therefore, the issue of Zhang's August 24, 2010 fraud complaint
 is not properly before us, and the LIRAB did not err by failing
 to find that the DLNR committed fraud against Zhang. See
 
Kalapodes v. E.E. Black, Ltd., 66 Haw. 561, 565, 669 P.2d 635,
 637 (1983) ("[t]his court will not consider issues for the first
 time which were not presented to the [LIRAB]" (citation
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
omitted)); see also HRS § 386-87(c) (explaining the LIRAB's
 
powers of review).
 
(2) Zhang contends that she "had rights to VR
 
[Vocational Rehabilitation] and TTD, the entire period [of] May
 2004 to present" and that this entitled her to receive "2/3 wages
 [in] TTD payments" during that period. Zhang also argues that
 the LIRAB was incorrect in finding that there were "no medical
 treatment plans after May 5, 2004," which seems to be a reference
 
3 4 
to the LIRAB's Finding of Fact (FOF) 47 and FOF 48  in its
Decision and Order, though she fails to identify as erroneous any
 of the LIRAB's FOFs in this section.
 
Zhang points to only one instance in the record where

 
there was allegedly a valid disability certification after May 5,
 2004 — an August 9, 2005 Workers' Compensation Treatment Plan
 written by Dr. Adam-Terem. This document, though, did not
 comport with the HRS § 386-96(a)(2) requirement that it include
 the "dates of disability" because it simply constituted a plan
 for future treatment and did not specify any range of time the
 document was supposed to cover. Similarly, although there were
 other medical reports dated after May 5, 2004 (i.e., the reports
 by Dr. Reed and Dr. Smolenski), these also were insufficient
 under HRS § 386-96 because the reports were based on a review of
 previous records and did not involve "giv[ing] any treatment or
 render[ing] any service" to Zhang. See HRS § 386-96. Therefore,
 
upon review of the entire record, given the lack of adequate
 disability certification evidence after May 5, 2004, and the
 deference afforded to the LIRAB "[w]hen mixed questions of law
 and fact are presented," we conclude that the LIRAB's FOFs 47 and
 48 were supported by "substantial evidence" (and hence not
 clearly erroneous) and that the LIRAB did not clearly err
 
3
 FOF 47 states that "[t]here are no medical certifications that
[Zhang] was temporarily and totally disabled as a result of the June 20, 1994
work injury for the period after May 5, 2004."
 
4
 FOF 48 states that "[t]he [LIRAB] finds, therefore, no evidence
that [Zhang] was temporarily and totally disabled after May 5, 2004."
 
4
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
regarding its TTD decision in Conclusion of Law (COL) 4.  See 
Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawai 'i 402, 406, 38 P.3d 570, 574 
(2001). 
Zhang also claims that she should be awarded TTD based
 
6
on her entitlement to VR and that the LIRAB erroneously denied
her "medical and other benefits." These arguments are without
 
merit. First, Zhang provides no evidence or authority, legal or
 otherwise, as to how the LIRAB erroneously denied her "medical
 and other benefits." Therefore, these arguments are deemed
 waived. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). Zhang's argument that she was
 
entitled to TTD benefits because she was entitled to be enrolled
 in VR services fails, inter alia, because she neglects to provide
 any evidence that she was enrolled in VR after May 5, 2004, and
 we find none.
 
(3) Zhang argues that the LIRAB clearly erred by 
crediting the opinion of Dr. Jon Streltzer (Streltzer) and by 
determining that DLNR presented substantial evidence to overcome 
the statutory presumption regarding Zhang's medical condition/diagnosis of dysthymia.
7 As the LIRAB recognized and 
applied in this case, and as stated in HRS § 386–85 (1993), Hawai
'i workers' compensation law contains a strong presumption 
in favor of employee claims. HRS § 386–85 provides that for all workers' compensation claims "it shall be presumed, in the absence of substantial evidence to the contrary . . . [t]hat the claim is for a covered work injury." This places a "heavy burden" on the employer, imposing "the burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of persuasion." Van Ness v. 
5 The LIRAB's COL 4 states the following: The [LIRAB] concludes
that [Zhang] was not entitled to [TTD] benefits after May 5, 2004 for lack of
disability certification. The [LIRAB] makes no determination of [Zhang's]
entitlement to TTD benefits after September 18, 2009, as TTD may be related to
re-enrollment in VR."
 
6
 The LIRAB's FOF 46 in its December 6, 2011 Decision and Order
stated the following: "The [LIRAB] finds, therefore, that [Zhang] is entitled
to further VR services."
 
7
 Dr. Jon Streltzer, a psychiatrist, defines dysthymia as a "chronic
enduring mild depression."  Similarly, Dr. Rosemary Adam-Terem (Dr. Adam-Terem), a Hawai' i-licensed clinical psychologist, describes dysthymia as "a
pervasive, low-grade depression." 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State of Haw., Dep't of Educ., 131 Hawai 'i 545, 558, 319 P.3d 
464, 477 (2014) (citing Lawhead v. United Air Lines, 59 Haw. 551, 
559, 584 P.2d 119, 124 (1978) and Akamine v. Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408, 495 P.2d 1164, 1166 (1972)). 
"In order to overcome the HRS § 386–85(1) presumption 
of work-relatedness, the employer must introduce substantial evidence to the contrary." Igawa, 97 Hawai
'i at 407, 38 P.3d at 
575. "The term substantial evidence signifies a high quantum of
 
evidence which, at the minimum, must be relevant and credible
 evidence of a quality and quantity sufficient to justify a
 conclusion by a reasonable [person] that an injury or death is
 not work connected." Id. (citations and internal quotation
 
marks omitted). 
Zhang does not challenge the LIRAB's findings
 
concerning her medical diagnoses; instead she challenges the
 weight given to Dr. Streltzer's opinion and, ultimately, the
 sufficiency of the evidence in favor of the employer. As stated
 by the LIRAB, Zhang first sought treatment from Dr. Mirikitani,
 who diagnosed her as suffering major depression with agitation,
 insomnia, and fatigue. Dr. Adam-Terem, Zhang's treating
 psychologist, initially provided an Axis 1 diagnosis in 1994 of
 major depression and a generalized anxiety disorder. Dr. Adam-
Terem, who continued to treat Zhang, later provided a diagnosis
 of dysthymia. 
At employer's request, Dr. Streltzer examined Zhang in
 
August 2002 and provided a detailed report regarding that
 examination (and his review of Zhang's treatment records) in
 which he opined, inter alia, that Zhang had no Axis 1 disorder,
 but met the criteria for a "Paranoid Personality Disorder with
 Narcissistic Traits." Although noting that dysthymia was a
 possibility, Dr. Streltzer opined Zhang did not present with
 continuous depressive symptoms and that Dr. Adam-Terem's notes
 were consistent with his diagnosis because they focused on
 personality disorder issues including paranoia and entitlement
 issues. Dr. Streltzer also opined that, in 1994, Zhang may have
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suffered from a depressive disorder or an adjustment reaction to
 
the loss of her job.
 
In 2005, Dr. Adam-Terem changed Zhang's diagnosis to
 
major depression in partial remission. Although Dr. Adam-Terem
 expressed some agreement with Dr. Streltzer, she disagreed
 regarding the dysthymia diagnosis because Zhang's personality
 factors were not problematic until the work-stress situation, but
 also noted that Zhang had "improved greatly."
 
Also in 2005, Dr. Daniel Reed (Dr. Reed) conducted a
 
review at Zhang's request. Dr. Reed opined that the
 documentation suggested a major depressive episode that likely
 resolved to dysthymia "currently" and that it was unlikely that
 work stress alone accounted for Zhang's residual problems. 
Rather, it was likely Zhang suffered a mood disorder concurrent
 with her personality traits.
 
Based on all of the evidence before it, the LIRAB
 
credited the opinion of Dr. Streltzer over the opinions of Dr.
 Adam-Terem and Dr. Reed with regard to the diagnosis of
 dysthymia. Accordingly, the LIRAB found that the employer had
 presented substantial evidence to overcome the presumption with
 regard to a diagnosis of dysthymia, although finding that the
 employer had not presented the substantial evidence necessary to
 overcome the presumption regarding Zhang's earlier diagnosis of
 major depression and adjustment disorder, both in remission.
 
Upon careful review, we conclude that the LIRAB's 
findings are supported by substantial evidence sufficient to overcome the strong presumption in favor of Zhang related to Zhang's medical condition/diagnosis of dysthymis. The LIRAB did not clearly err in crediting the opinion of Dr. Strelter over the opinion of Dr. Adam-Terem and somewhat equivocal opinion of Dr. Reed. It is well established that, in workers' compensation cases, "the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are within the province of the trier of fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro v. 
Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai
'i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2001). The LIRAB's assessment of the weight of evidence in this
 
case is not clearly erroneous.
 
(4) Zhang also raises the issue of PPD benefits;
 
however, it is unclear whether she is alleging error by the LIRAB
 in this regard and, if so, what that error entails. In addition
 to attacking DLNR for not settling the case, Zhang simply states
 that "[t]he [LIRAB] does not decide PPD in the December 6, 2011
 Decision" and that it is up to the Intermediate Court of Appeals
 (ICA) to decide "whether this case be remanded for the [Director]
 
to determine [PPD] at a later date."  Because Zhang does not cite
 
evidence or explain how the LIRAB erred regarding PPD, or even
 
whether she is challenging their decision, this matter is waived. 
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed
 waived.") 
(5) The issue of AWW is governed by HRS § 386-51
 
(Supp. 2013), which states in relevant part that: "Average
 weekly wages shall be computed in such a manner that the
 resulting amount represents most fairly, in the light of the
 employee's employment pattern and the duration of the employee's
 disability, the injured employee's average weekly wages from all
 covered employment at the time of the personal injury." The
 LIRAB addressed the issue of AWW in its FOFs 51-55 and its COL 6,
 where the LIRAB concluded that "that the Director did not err in
 denying [Zhang's] request for a change in her [AWW]" and that the
 AWW "was correctly computed at $651.00." Zhang does not explain
 how exactly she arrived at the figure of $738.50 or why the
 LIRAB's determination of AWW was clearly erroneous. 
FOF 52 in the LIRAB's Decision and Order states that a
 
"Notification of Personnel Action dated September 24, 1993 noted
 a monthly salary rate of $2,608.00, a shortage differential of
 $207.00 and a salary adjustment 'diff' of $6.00." FOF 54 states
 that although a new monthly salary of $2,712.00 was set to begin
 on July 1, 1994, the salary as of June 30, 1994 was $2,608.00. 
In FOF 55, the LIRAB correctly calculated AWW based on the
 numbers from the September 24, 1993 Notification of Personnel
 Action, which the LIRAB found "to be the best evidence of
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Zhang's AWW] at the time of her June 20, 1994 work injury. 
Zhang does not substantively challenge any of these FOFs on appeal, and they are thus considered binding. See Bhakta v. 
Cnty. of Maui, 109 Hawai
'i 198, 202 n.2, 124 P.3d 943, 947 n.2 
(2005). Accordingly, we conclude that the foregoing FOFs provide substantial evidence to support the LIRAB's COL 6 and that the LIRAB did not clearly err regarding its AWW decision. See Igawa, 
97 Hawai
'i at 406, 38 P.3d at 574. 
(6) Zhang asserts that the LIRAB erred by determining
 
that DLNR did not violate HRS § 386-142, noting only that she was
 terminated after she filed her workers' compensation claim and
 after the date of her injury. In making this assertion, Zhang
 
8 9
appears to challenge FOF 58  and COL 7.  Zhang provides no
 
further argument, facts, or authority supporting her assertion
 that the LIRAB erred, instead asking this "Court to spell out ANY
 evidence of any action to terminate Zhang or to question her work
 authorization initiated PRIOR to June 20, 1994." We conclude
 that this argument is without merit.
 
(7) Zhang asserts that the LIRAB erred by denying

 
Zhang (in its September 29, 2009 Order Granting Motion to Compel,
 In Part) "full discovery" regarding her termination. Zhang fails
 to identify how the LIRAB erred and under what legal authority
 she was entitled to "full discovery."
10 Rather, Zhang limits her
 
argument to unsupported allegations of fraud, the possibility of
 "black" files, and to general complaints about the deficiencies
 of the INS "warning notice." She makes statements such as the
 
8 The LIRAB's FOF 58 states the following: "The [LIRAB] finds that
[Zhang's] termination from employment was not solely the result of her
industrial injury of June 20, 1994."
 
9
 The LIRAB's COL 7 states the following: "The [LIRAB] concludes,
considering Section 386-142, [HRS], that [Zhang's] termination from employment
was not solely the result of her industrial injury of June 20, 1994. There is
 no evidence to support this contention."
 
10
 Although Zhang claims that she was denied "full discovery" and
that "the [LIRAB's] Order essentially limited [her] discovery to 'personnel
records[,]'" the LIRAB's September 29, 2009 Order actually extended beyond
that, stating that discovery was to include "all documents, including
personnel records relevant to the issues on appeal, or which may be reasonably
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence." 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
warning notice was "a concocted document" and that it "stinks[]
 
and was cooked up between DLNR and INS to cover the State of
 Hawaii 'employer' ass, probably at DLNR's behest, to help defeat
 Zhang's claims against DLNR." She also neglects to include any
 citations to legal authority supporting her entitlement to
 further discovery in this matter, and her few record citations
 are to the LIRAB's September 29, 2009 Order itself and to her
 initial discovery request letter. We conclude that this argument
 is without merit.
 
(8) It does not appear that any issues related to
 
Zhang's vacation, sick leave, and/or other benefits were
 presented to the LIRAB or even within its jurisdiction in this
 matter. Zhang is not entitled to any appellate relief related to
 these benefits.
 
(9) Zhang contends that it was error to include the
 
award of Mukaida's attorney's fees in the present appeal, arguing
 that "[t]he correct appeal of the Director decision on the DCD
 approved fees lies with the LIRAB, not with the [ICA]."
11
 
However, it is undisputed that "the attorney's fee order by the
 DCD on January 18, 2012 [] was not appealed to the LIRAB" and is
 not now before the ICA. See Kalapodes, 66 Haw. at 565, 669 P.2d
 
at 637 ("[t]his court will not consider issues for the first time
 which were not presented to the [LIRAB]" (citation omitted)). 
Therefore, this argument is without merit.
 
11
 The Director issued its Approval of Attorney's Fees on January 18,
2012.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For these reasons, the LIRAB's December 6, 2011
 
Decision and Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 15, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Juliana Zhang 
Claimant-Appellant Pro Se
 Presiding Judge

James E. Halvorson Steve E. Miyasaka Deputy Attorneys GeneralState of Hawai
'i 
for Employer-Appellee,
Self-Insured Associate Judge
Associate Judge

 
11
 