NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005414
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TREVOR B. JACKSON, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CHRISTY L. JACKSON , Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 10-1-0028)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Trevor B. Jackson (Husband) appeals
 
from an "Order Denying in Part and Granting in Part Plaintiff's
 
Motion to Enforce Divorce Decree" filed September 27, 2013, and
 an "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion to Reconsider Order Denying
 in Part and Granting in Part Plaintiff's Motion to Enforce
 Divorce Decree," filed on October 21, 2013 in the Family Court of
 
1
the Third Circuit  (family court).
Husband contends the family court erred when it made
 
conclusions of law regarding Defendant-Appellee Christy L.
 Jackson's (Wife) duties under the divorce decree.
2
 
1 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided.
 
2 Husband's Second Amended Opening Brief does not fully comply with
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) despite an Order for
Sanctions from this court detailing, inter alia, which portions of the
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as relevant
 statutory and case law, we resolve Husband's point of error as
 follows and affirm.
 
On November 26, 2012, the family court entered a
 
Divorce Decree. There was no appeal from the Divorce Decree. On
 May 7, 2013, Husband filed "Plaintiff's Motion to Enforce Divorce
 Decree" (Motion to Enforce). On September 27, 2013, the family
 court filed an "Order Denying in Part and Granting in Part
 Plaintiff's Motion to Enforce Divorce Decree." The family court
 granted Husband's "request for a judgment in the amount of any
 unpaid child support arising from [Wife's] obligation to pay
 child support until the parties' children attained the age of
 18[.]" The family court denied all of Husband's remaining claims
 and Husband appeals with respect to several of these claims.
1. Post-High School and Medical/Dental Expenses.
  
Husband contends that the family court erred when it did not
 require Wife to pay child support for the children beyond the age
 of eighteen and did not require Wife to reimburse Husband for
 half of the children's medical and dental expenses. 
Husband
 
contends it would be unfair and inequitable for Husband to bear
 the expenses for post-high school education and medical and
 dental expenses alone. 
Husband proposed, prior to the final Divorce Decree, to
 
include provisions where Husband and Wife would share in the
 expenses of post-high school education and medical and dental
 expenses. 
However, because those terms were not agreed to in the
 
original settlement agreement entered on the record on August 10,
 
2(...continued)
argument section required citations to the record. 
This alone raises the 
potential for dismissal of the appeal and/or waiver of issues sought to be
raised. Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558
(1995). However, because we seek to address cases on the merits wherepossible, we address Husband's arguments to the extent they are discernable.Id. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2010, the provisions regarding post-high school education and
 
medical and dental expenses were not included in the final
 Divorce Decree. Husband did not appeal from the Divorce Decree. 
Thus, Husband's Motion to Enforce essentially requested that the
 family court modify the Divorce Decree to include the sharing of
 the costs of post-high school education and medical and dental
 expenses.
 
The family court has continuing authority to modify 
"its orders providing for the support, maintenance, and education of the children of the parties upon a showing of a change in the circumstances of either party . . . since the entry of any prior order relating to the support, maintenance, and education." Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 580-47(c) (2006). The party requesting modification must prove the alleged change in circumstances. DeMello v. DeMello, 87 Hawai
'i 209, 213, 953 P.2d 
968, 972 (App. 1988). 
A petition to modify an order for child support cannot
be based on the same set of facts that were before the court
 
when the original order was made. There must have been a
 substantial and material change in the relevant
circumstances which were before the court when it made the
 original order. 
Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. App. 501, 505, 653 P.2d 1167, 1170 (1982).
 
In his Motion to Enforce, Husband asserted that he is
 
entitled to reimbursement from Wife because Husband incurred
 
expenses associated with post-high school education and medical
 and dental expenses. However, Husband did not offer any evidence
 as to how the circumstances at the time of his Motion to Enforce
 were materially different from when the family court entered the
 Divorce Decree. 
Therefore, the family court did not abuse its
 
discretion when it ordered Wife to only pay unpaid child support
 until the children attained the age of 18 and denied the claims
 for post-high school education and medical and dental expenses.
2. Mortgage, Car Insurance, and Gas Card Payments. 
Husband contends that the family court erred when it denied his
 Motion to Enforce regarding mortgage, car insurance, and gas card
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
payments. Husband contends that he is entitled to be reimbursed
 
because Wife violated the terms of the August 10, 2010 settlement
 agreement.
 
The Divorce Decree provides that until Husband
 
disburses funds to Wife from his deferred compensation plan, Wife
 "shall be entitled to occupy the marital residence." In
 addition, Husband "shall be responsible for maintaining the
 mortgage on the marital residence." Similarly, under the Divorce
 Decree, Husband was required to maintain Wife's car insurance and
 pay Wife's gas card until funds were disbursed from the deferred
 compensation plan.
 
Regarding the mortgage payments, in his declaration in
 
support of his Motion to Enforce, filed May 7, 2013, Husband
 stated that from September 2010 to the time of the Motion to
 Enforce, he had paid $21,545.70 in mortgage payments. As a
 result, Husband requested that the family court order Wife to
 reimburse Husband $21,545.70 for mortgage payments for the period
 of September 2010 through May 2013.
 
The record indicates that Husband withdrew the money
 
owed to Wife ($11,852.96) from the deferred compensation plan on
 April 15, 2013. The record does not indicate what date if any
 Wife received the money. However, even if Wife had received the
 payment on April 15, 2013 she would not have had to vacate the
 marital residence until May 15, 2013. Thus, at the time Husband
 filed the Motion to Enforce, on May 7, 2013, Wife was not in
 violation of the Divorce Decree. Based on the information before
 it at that time, the family court did not abuse its discretion
 when it denied Husband's Motion to Enforce with regard to the
 mortgage payments.
3
 
Regarding the car insurance, in his declaration in
 
support of the Motion to Enforce, Husband attested that he paid
 the car insurance through December 30, 2010. Because Husband did
 
3
 There is no transcript in the record on appeal as to the hearing on
Husband's Motion to Enforce.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not provide evidence that he paid car insurance beyond April 15,
 
2013, when Husband withdrew the funds from his deferred
 compensation plan, the family court did not abuse its discretion
 when it denied Husband's Motion to Enforce with regard to the car
 insurance.
 
Regarding the gas card, Husband's declaration in
 
support of his Motion to Enforce stated that he maintained Wife's
 gas card until June 20, 2011. Again, Husband did not establish
 that he paid for Wife's gas card after he withdrew Wife's share
 of the deferred compensation plan. Thus, the family court did
 not abuse its discretion when it denied Husband's Motion to
 Enforce with regard to the gas card.
3. Water Bill.  Husband contends that the family court
 
erred when it denied his Motion to Enforce with regard to
 payments made for the water bill at the marital residence.
 
Husband's declaration in support of his Motion to
 
Enforce states that he paid the water bill for the duration that
 Wife occupied the marital residence and requested that the family
 court order Wife to reimburse Husband $868.26 for the water bill
 payments. The Divorce Decree does not address which party was
 responsible for payments of the water bill. Thus, there was
 nothing for the family court to enforce within the Divorce
 Decree, and the family court did not abuse its discretion in
 denying Husband's Motion to Enforce with regard to the water bill
 payments.
 
4. Marital Debt.  Husband contends that the family
 
court erred when it denied his Motion to Enforce regarding
 reimbursement of marital debt. Husband contends that equity
 would require Wife to pay for half of the marital debt.
 
The Divorce Decree states "[t]he parties shall equally
 
divide all marital debt including credit card debt." In his
 declaration in support of the Motion to Enforce, Husband asserted
 that he paid a total of $14,944.47 to pay off the marital credit
 cards and thus requested that Wife pay to Husband half of what he
 paid in the amount of $7,472.23.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attached to his Motion to Enforce, Husband submitted
 
several different credit card statements with various balances.
 
Although Husband asserts that he paid the credit card balances,
 the credit card statements do not show that they were fully paid
 or that Husband paid the amount that he claimed. Therefore, it
 was within the family court's discretion to deny Husband's Motion
 to Enforce regarding marital debt.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
 
in Part and Granting in Part Plaintiff's Motion to Enforce
 Divorce Decree" filed September 27, 2013 and the "Order Denying
 Plaintiff's Motion to Reconsider Order Denying in Part and
 Granting in Part Plaintiff's Motion to Enforce Divorce Decree,"
 filed on October 21, 2013, in the Family Court of the Third
 Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 9, 2016. 
On the brief: 
Lionel M. Riley,
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
6
 