NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000571
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOHN A. PACHECO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-245)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John A. Pacheco (Pacheco) timely
 
appeals from the July 6, 2011 Final Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
1
(circuit court),  convicting him of seven counts of Sexual
Assault in the First Degree against a minor under fourteen in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (Supp.
 
2011).2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Pacheco's points of
 
error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
2
 In relevant part, HRS § 707-730 states, "(1) A person commits the
offense of sexual assault in the first degree if: (b) [t]he person knowingly
engages in sexual penetration with another person who is less than fourteen
years old."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) Testimony of Alex Bivens, Ph.D. (Dr. Bivens).
 
(a) We conclude that each challenged aspect of Dr.
 
Bivens's testimony was helpful to the jury and relevant to
 
provide context to evaluate the behavior of the Child where
 
normal indicia of reliability may not apply. State v. Batangan,
 
71 Haw. 552, 557-58, 799 P.2d 48, 52 (1990) (citations omitted)
 ("Expert testimony '[e]xposing jurors to the unique interpersonal
 
dynamics involved in prosecutions for intrafamily child sexual
 
abuse,' 'may play a particularly useful role by disabusing the
 
jury of some widely held misconceptions . . . so that it may
 
evaluate the evidence free of the constraints of popular
 
myths.'") Pacheco failed to present any evidence below or
 
authority on appeal that establishes this is no longer the case. 
(b) Pacheco did not demonstrate that Dr. Bivens's
 
testimony improperly bolstered Child's credibility or profiled
 
Pacheco as a child molester. Dr. Bivens did not opine on the
 
credibility of Child and testified that he did not know the
 
particulars of, nor was he given evidence pertaining to, this
 
case.
 
To the extent that Pacheco argues Dr. Bivens's
 
testimony was admitted in violation of Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 
(HRE) Rule 403,
3 the determination of whether unfair prejudice
 
occurred is left to the discretion of the trial court, and is
 only reviewed here for an abuse of that discretion. Kaeo v.
 
Davis, 68 Haw. 447, 454, 719, P.2d 387, 392 (1986) (HRE Rule 403
 is a determination well-suited to a trial court's exercise of
 
discretion because it requires a "delicate balance between
 
probative value and prejudicial effect.") Pacheco's results-
based claim that Dr. Bivens's testimony was the functional
 
equivalent of directly opining about Child's credibility is not
 
supported by the record.
 
3
 HRE Rule 403 states that "[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence."
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c) Pacheco fails to demonstrate how the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in allegedly not following its own limiting
 
instruction to avoid creating a "profile" of a sex offender with
 
which the jury could compare Pacheco's actions. The circuit
 
court instructed that the expert testimony should be "tailored
 
toward explaining why victims of child sex abuse do not disclose
 
as soon as the sexual abuse occurs" and "why there might be a
 
delay in disclosure." The circuit court clearly stated that the
 
prosecution should limit the "specific percentages used with
 
respect to various variables that . . . might be used to draw an
 
inference that based upon those variables that the defendant is
 
probably guilty" but did not clearly limit the use of statistical
 
data.
 
Pacheco does not show how the circuit court failed to
 
follow its own guidance in directing the use of statistical data. 
The circuit court did not delineate a clear limit on the use of
 
statistical data at the motions hearing but ruled on the State's
 
questioning of Dr. Bivens throughout the trial process. The
 
trial judge is in the best position to make a determination on
 
the admission of evidence and to interpret its own ruling. The
 
circuit court was within its discretion to allow the statistical
 
data presented by the State's expert witness.
 
(d) Pacheco claims that the State "neglected to offer
 
Dr. Bivens to the circuit court for qualification," and as a
 
result, "all of his testimony regarding case studies, statistics,
 
and the actions of 'child molesters' became improper lay witness
 
testimony." However, Pacheco did not object to the lack of
 
formal qualification of Dr. Bivens as an expert witness at the
 
time he testified to his qualifications, nor did Pacheco
 
challenge Dr. Bivens's actual qualifications.
 
Because the issue was not preserved for appeal by a 
timely objection, "[t]he general rule provides that issues not 
properly raised on appeal will be deemed to be waived." Hill v. 
Inouye, 90 Hawai' i 76, 82, 976 P.2d 390, 396 (1998) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Accordingly, "evidentiary 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
objections . . . not raised during trial will not be considered 
on appeal." Baily v. Sanchez, 92 Hawai' i 312, 316, 990 P.2d 
1194, 1198 (App. 1999). 
Pacheco also argues that, because Dr. Bivens was not
 
properly qualified as an expert, his testimony, which required
 "specialized knowledge," was improper under HRE Rule 702. As
 
Dr. Bivens's credentials as an expert were not properly
 
challenged, we need not address this argument. 
(2) Prior bad acts evidence.
 
(a) Child testified that the first time Pacheco
 
sexually assaulted her, he told her that she "couldn't tell
 anyone, and that if [she] did then [the] family would [be] broken
 
apart and he would go to jail." Child also testified that "part
 
of the reason [she] was scared of telling anyone earlier about
 
what [Pacheco] was doing to [her was] because [of her] knowledge
 
that he may have had a gun."
 
Admission of prior bad act evidence is reviewed under 
an abuse of discretion standard. See State v. Fetelee, 117 
Hawai'i 53, 62–63, 175 P.3d 709, 718–19 (2008). Prior bad act 
evidence under HRE Rule 404(b) is admissible when it is 
(1) relevant and (2) more probative than prejudicial. This
 
testimony was relevant, HRE Rule 401, because it helped establish
 
reasons Child delayed reporting the offenses, was probative to
 
other facts of consequence, such as intent, knowledge and absence
 
of mistake or accident under HRE Rule 404(b).
4
 
The testimony about the alleged prior sexual assaults
 
was not substantially different than the acts alleged in the
 
instant offenses. The mere possession of a gun is not a prior
 
bad act and the circuit court so instructed the jury after
 
Child's testimony. Thus, the evidence was not of a type likely
 
4
 HRE Rule 404(b) prohibits the use of evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts "to prove the character of a person in order to show action in
conformity therewith" but does allow such evidence where "probative of any
other fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident." 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to cause "overmastering hostility" outweighing the probative 
value of the evidence. See Behrendt, 124 Hawai' i 90, 108, 237 
P.3d 1156, 1174 (2010). 
In light of Dr. Bivens's testimony regarding the 
reasons for delayed reporting, Pacheco argues, relying on the dissenting opinion in Behrendt, that because the State had no 
need for the bad acts evidence to provide an explanation for 
Child's delayed disclosure, "the incremental probative value" of 
the prior acts was not great and therefore violated HRE Rule 403. 
124 Hawai' i at 115, 237 P.3d at 1181 (quoting State v. Castro, 69 
Haw. 633, 644, 756 P.2d 1033, 1041 (1988). However, the majority in Behrendt found that the prior bad acts evidence gave context 
to the relationship, and that the need for this context 
outweighed the prejudicial effect. See Behrendt at 108, 123 P.3d 
at 1174. 
(b) Pacheco contends that the limiting instruction
 
with respect to his alleged prior sexual assaults and his gun
 possession was fatally erroneous because it "flatly told the jury
 
that the prior incidents 'occurred,'" which "leaves the
 
impression that some prior adjudication must have preceded the
 
trial, wherein [Pacheco] was actually found to have abused
 
[Child] in the past." This interpretation is not borne out when
 
the instruction is read in full. The instruction stated:
 
[Y]ou may hear, [] evidence of alleged sexual contacts
 
between [Child] and the defendant which occurred prior to
the alleged incidents charged in this case.
 
You may not use evidence of the alleged prior
incidents to find that defendant was a bad person and
therefore must have committed the offenses charged in this
 case.
 
You may use evidence of the alleged prior incidents
only as follows.
 
First, for the purpose of assisting you in
understanding the relationship over time between [Child] and
the defendant; and, second, for the purpose of assisting you
in understanding the timing of [Child]'s allegations of –­against defendant of sexual assault.
 
(emphasis added).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furthermore, no objection was made to the instruction 
at the time. As a general rule, jury instructions to which no 
objection has been made at trial will be reviewed only for plain 
error. State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 
(2006) (quoting State v Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 
637, 642 (1998)). Pacheco has failed to establish plain error 
here. 
(3) Cumulative effect of alleged errors. As we 
conclude that the circuit court did not err with regard to 
substantive points of error discussed above, we do not find any 
denial of due process or the right to a fair trial in the 
cumulative effect of the circuit court's decisions. See State v. 
Tierney, 124 Hawai' i 425, 245 P.3d 498, No. 29993 2010 WL 5407351 
at *3 (App. Dec. 29, 2010) (SDO). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the July 6, 2011 Final
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court
 of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 30, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Summer M.M. Kupau,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
 
Darien W.L.C. Nagata
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai' i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 