NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-13-0006029 and CAAP-13-0004020
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TERRI POLM, INDIVIDUALLY, AND AS PERSONAL
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF B.M.,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
MATTHEW MCVEIGH and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0548)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Department of Human Services, State 
of Hawai 'i (DHS) appeals from the September 17, 2013 Final 
Judgment and the December 3, 2013 First Amended Final Judgment, 
both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 (circuit
 
court
).
 
On appeal, DHS contends that sixteen of the circuit

 
court's seventy-one Findings of Fact (FOF) are clearly erroneous
 
and eight of the circuit court's thirty-seven Conclusions of Law
 
(COL) are wrong. Although not raised in its points on appeal,
 
DHS also contends (1) that a third-party's actions constituted a
 
superseding, intervening criminal act so to limit DHS's liability
 and (2) that the circuit court awarded damages that were not
 supported by the evidence.
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The minor decedant (Decedent) was born on July 8, 2008 
in Honolulu, Hawai 'i to Matthew McVeigh (Mr. McVeigh) and his 
wife, April McVeigh (Mrs. McVeigh) (together, McVeighs). The 
McVeighs also had a daughter (Daughter) who was approximately two 
years old when the Decedent was born. 
On or about August 22, 2008, the Decedent's primary 
care physician, Naro L. Torres, M.D. (Dr. Torres), saw the 
Decedent because he was acting fussy with apparent pain and 
inability to use his right arm. Dr. Torres requested the McVeighs take the Decedent to the Kapi
'olani Medical Center for 
Women and Children (KMCWC) to have his arm examined. The 
Decedent was diagnosed with a fractured right humerus (upper 
arm). When questioned about how the Decedent sustained the injury, the McVeighs told the staff at KMCWC that they did not know what caused his injury and that the only possible cause might have been an automobile accident that occurred on or about August 13, 2008. The staff at KMCWC rejected the McVeighs' automobile accident explanation, however, because the nature of the Decedent's injury was not consistent with the McVeighs' timeline of events. 
In response to the Decedent's injury, KMCWC conducted a
 
Multi-Disciplinary Team (MDT) case conference that included
 
various professionals, such as Guardian Ad Litems and Volunteer
 
Guardian Ad Litems (VGAL), social-workers, military
 
representatives, and medical staff. The MDT determined that the
 
Decedent had likely suffered abuse resulting in his fractured
 arm. The perpetrator of the Decedent's injury was not
 identified.
 
Because there was no adequate explanation for the
 
Decedent's injury, the Honolulu Police Department was contacted
 and a case was opened with Child Welfare Services (CWS) of the
 
DHS for suspected severe child abuse and neglect. On August 23,
 
2008, the Decedent and the Daughter were removed from the
 McVeighs' household and placed in the custody of DHS. A
 supervised case was instituted in the Family Court of the First
 Circuit (family court) and the McVeighs signed a voluntary
 
relinquishment of custody of the Decedent and the Daughter. The
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family court appointed a VGAL for the Decedent and a VGAL social
 
worker, Jessie Addison (Addison).
 
Based on recommendations from CWS, the family court
 
placed various conditions on both the McVeighs. The family court
 required that Mr. McVeigh attend anger management and parenting
 classes and that Mrs. McVeigh undergo drug rehabilitation for her
 methadone addiction.
 
On or about February 25, 2009, DHS returned the
 
Decedent and the Daughter to the McVeigh home under continued DHS
 supervision and monitoring. Gwenson Yuen (Yuen) took over as
 
case manager for the McVeighs' case in February 2009, the same
 
month that the Daughter and the Decedent were returned to the
 McVeigh household. As a DHS case manager, Yuen was responsible
 for insuring that the McVeighs complied with the conditions CWS
 imposed and was responsible for the safety of the Decedent and
 the Daughter. Yuen worked out of the Leeward Branch of the Child
 Protective Services (CPS) Department of DHS. His supervisor at
 
the time was Jalene-Ann Mastin (Mastin), a social worker who
 
holds a master's degree in social work.
 
On June 19, 2009, approximately four months after the
 
Decedent was returned to the McVeigh household, Yuen and Addison
 
observed a bruise to the corner of the Decedent's left eye and
 left cheek area (June 19 bruise). Upon questioning, Mr. McVeigh
 
explained that the Decedent had fallen when he was learning how
 
to walk and hit the corner of a table. Yuen did not personally
 visit the McVeigh house to ascertain whether Mr. McVeigh's story
 was credible.
 
Addison, as the Decedent's VGAL social worker, kept
 
careful notes of the injury. Yuen, however, did not log the June
 19 bruise into the CPS mandatory record keeping system (CPSS) as
 
required pursuant to the DHS's codified procedures called the
 
Green Book. In addition, Yuen did not perform a "Child Risk
 Assessment" using the Child Risk Assessment Matrix.
 
On August 4, 2009, Mr. McVeigh took the Decedent to the
 
Makalapa Naval Health Clinic (Makalapa Clinic) and saw Nuzhat
 
Bokhari, M.D. (Dr. Bokhari) because the Decedent exhibited cold
 
symptoms. Dr. Bokhari examined the Decedent and ordered x-rays
 
to rule out any bony lesions to the Decedent's old fractured arm,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which was ruled out. Dr. Bokhari diagnosed the Decedent with an
 
upper respiratory infection and prescribed medications.
 
On August 5, 2009, at approximately 1:01 p.m., Yuen
 
recorded the following into the DHS Log of Contacts:
 
Consult with Elliot Plourde in Intake. [Yuen] followup with
report of re-harm.
 
The Decedent taken to the [Makalapa Clinic]. Nurse, Lt.
Lisa Barnes reports [y]esterday visit with [the Decedent]
for sore throat. Medicine given to father, [Mr. McVeigh].
Nurse reports x-ray yesterday also taken. Shows only old
fractures. Nurse confirms no abuse or neglect. Child
 released to father. (Note: PCP Dr. Nuzhat [Bokhari]).
 
Report back to Elliot Plourde status of Makalapa Clinic.
 
Also on August 5, 2009, at approximately 1:45 p.m., a
 
report of concern (August 5 Report) was made to DHS intake
 
worker, Elliot Plourde (Plourde), with the CPS Hotline. The
 
caller was the Decedent's babysitter, Keysha Cordona (Cordona).
 
Cordona reported that she had been babysitting the Decedent and
 
the Daughter the past two months. She reported the following:
 
(1)	 Approximately one (1) month ago (early July 2009),
[Cordona] observed a black eye on [the Decedent].
When questioned by [Cordona], Mr. McVeigh stated that
"[the Decedent] fell while learning to walk."
 
(2)	 Approximately two (2) weeks ago, [Cordona] observed a
"1 inch long L shaped bruise/red mark on [the
Decedent's] right temple." When questioned by
[Cordona], Mr. McVeigh stated "he fell."
 
(3)	 Approximately 1 or 2 weeks ago, [Cordona] observed a
"½ inch long bruise between [the Decedent's] right
index finger and thumb and a small bruise on his right
wrist." When questioned by [Cordona], Mr. McVeigh
said that [the Decedent] must have fallen or bumped
his hand on something.
 
Plourde recorded Cordona's report of possible re-harm in the
 
August 5 Report. In that five page report, Plourde noted the
 following "recent concerns":
 
(
1) [The Decedent] was fussy on 8/3/09. [The Decedent]
reportedly would not drink his bottle but did eat baby
food. Concerns were reported to Mr. McVeigh when he
picked up [the Decedent and Daughter].
 
(2)	 On 8/4/09, [the Decedent] was noted to be fussy again
and [could] be "coming down with something." [Cordona]
called Mr. McVeigh and asked him to take [the
Decedent] to the doctor as he was not well.
 
(3)	 Mr. McVeigh reportedly made an appointment for 8/5/09
at 1330 hours, but changed it to 8/4/09. [Cordona]
reported that Mr. McVeigh took [the Decedent] to the
Makalapa Clinic on 8/4/09 and "had a few x-rays and
was prescribed amoxicillin." Mr. McVeigh returned
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[the Decedent] to the babysitter and he returned to
work.
 
(4) On 8/5/09, [Cordona] observed [the Decedent] to be
"fussy and unable to hold his bottle or lift his
 
arms.
 
The concern regarding the Decedent's inability to lift his arms
 
prompted Cordona to call the CPS Hotline on August 5, 2009.
 
After the August 5 Report, Plourde recommended that the
 
Decedent be seen by his primary care physician and undergo a
 complete body examination for possible re-harm. The examination
 would determine if the Decedent was being abused and the extent
 of his injuries, including what was wrong with his arms or
 shoulders. The circuit court determined that there is no
 credible evidence that Mr. McVeigh ever took the Decedent to
 visit the Makalapa Clinic on August 5, 2009 pursuant to Yuen's
 direction.
2
 
In addition, even though the Green Book required the
 
August 5 Report be referred to the assessment (investigation) CWS
 unit, Yuen told Plourde that he would look into the matter
 himself and did not refer the August 5 Report to the assessment
 unit. Instead, Yuen told Plourde that he would let Plourde know
 whether or not a new intake should be opened. Furthermore, Yuen
 did not perform an assessment of the Decedent using the Child and
 Family Assessment Matrix, DHS 1517 and did not report the August
 5, 2009 reported bruises to the VGAL social worker, Addison.
 
On September 18, 2009, the Decedent, then 14 months
 
old, was found unresponsive, limp, and not breathing in his crib. 
The Decedent was taken to KMCWC and where died two days later on
 September 20, 2009. The cause of death was determined to be
 intracranial injury due to abusive head trauma. The Decedent's
 
2
 During the trial, Yuen testified that "when he learned of
[Cordona's] concerns, he instructed Mr. McVeigh on August 5, 2009 to take [the
Decedent] to the Makalapa Clinic to be examined and that Mr. McVeigh
complied." He also testified that "he spoke to Nurse Barnes, who confirmed
that there was no abuse to, or neglect of, [the Decedent]." Yuen's testimony
is inconsistent with the evidence in the record. At 1:01 p.m. on August 5,
Yuen recorded in the DHS Log of Contacts that he (1) spoke to nurse Lt. Lisa
Barnes at the Makalapa Clinic and that (2) she reported "no abuse or neglect."
His entry could not have been a follow-up to his instructions to Mr. McVeigh
to have [the Decedent] examined for possible re-harm because the August 5
Report of re-harm was not made until 1:45 p.m. of the same day. Based on the
 evidence admitted, the circuit court concluded that Yuen's August 5, 2009
entry into the Log of Contacts referred to [the Decedent's] August 4, 2009
doctor's visit for a cold and not for a body examination for possible re-harm.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
head trauma resulted from Mr. McVeigh violently shaking or
 
striking him, which caused his brain to be impacted by the inside
 of his skull. There was no evidence as to how much shaking or
 striking was involved or how long the shaking or striking lasted. 
The medical examiner indicated the Decedent would have become
 unresponsive at, or close to, the time that his head injury was
 inflicted. Mr. McVeigh was convicted in the United States Navy
 General Court Martial of the following crime:
 
Matthew R. McVeigh did on or about 18 September 2009, by
culpable negligence, while perpetrating an offense directly
affecting the person of [the Decedent], to wit: a battery,
unlawfully kill [the Decedent] by striking the head and
shaking the body of [the Decedent] with his hands. (Ellipses
and brackets omitted.)
 
On March 18, 2011, the Decedent's grandmother, Terri
 
Polm (Polm) filed a Complaint in this wrongful death action3
 
3
 Hawai'i's wrongful death statute is found in Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 663-3 (Supp. 2013), which provides: 
§ 663-3. Death by wrongful act. (a) When the death of a
person is caused by the wrongful act, neglect, or default of any
person, the deceased's legal representative, or any of the persons
enumerated in subsection (b), may maintain an action against the
person causing the death or against the person responsible for the
death. The action shall be maintained on behalf of the persons
enumerated in subsection (b), except that the legal representative
may recover on behalf of the estate the reasonable expenses of the
deceased's last illness and burial.
 
(b) In any action under this section, such damages may be
given as under the circumstances shall be deemed fair and just
compensation, with reference to the pecuniary injury and loss of
love and affection, including:
 
(1) Loss of society, companionship, comfort, consortium,or protection; 
(2) Loss of marital care, attention, advice, or counsel; 
(3) Loss of care, attention, advice, or counsel of areciprocal beneficiary as defined in chapter 572C; 
(4) Loss of filial care or attention; or 
(5) Loss of parental care, training, guidance, oreducation, suffered as a result of the death of the person; 
by the surviving spouse, reciprocal beneficiary, children, father,
mother, and by any person wholly or partly dependent upon the
deceased person. The jury or court sitting without jury shall
allocate the damages to the persons entitled thereto in its
verdict or judgment, and any damages recovered under this section,
except for reasonable expenses of last illness and burial, shall
not constitute a part of the estate of the deceased. Any action
brought under this section shall be commenced within two years
from the date of death of the injured person, except as otherwise
provided.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against DHS and Mr. McVeigh on behalf of herself and the
 
Decedent's estate, alleging that DHS was negligent in its
 oversight of the Decedent's case. On May 6, 2013, the circuit
 court dismissed Polm's individual claim under HRS § 663-3 and
 Polm's claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress.
 Polm's remaining claims on behalf of the Decedent's estate
 proceeded to a five day non-jury trial beginning July 2, 2013.
 
On August 7, 2013, the circuit court entered its
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order finding DHS 50%
 liable of the total awarded amount of $250,000.00 in damages to
 Polm, as personal representative of the Decedent's estate. The
 circuit court determined that DHS had a duty
 
(1) [to] provide [the Decedent] with competent prompt, and
ample protection from harm, (2) to prepare and maintain
required information in DHS's records, and (3) to conduct an
appropriate and professionally competent investigation
pursuant to [HRS] Chapter 587 (the Child Protective Act),
the Hawaii Administrative Rules [(HAR)], and the Green Book
following the [August 5 Report] of apparent potential
serious re-harm to [the Decedent] made by babysitter
[Cordona].
 
The circuit court further determined that, 
(1) under principles of respondeat superior, DHS
 
breached its duty to the Decedent when it did not adequately
 investigate the August 5 Report of re-harm to the Decedent, did
 not investigate the circumstances relevant to the reported
 bruises stated in the August 5 Report, and did not follow the
 procedure set forth in DHS's own Green Book;
 
(2) that DHS's failure to properly document the
 
Decedent's June 19 bruise was negligent because when DHS received
 the August 5 Report, DHS staff and social workers did not realize
 that the report pertained to a different injury or new harm than
 the June 19 bruise;
 
(3) that DHS was negligent when it failed to inform the
 
VGAL of the Cordona's August 5 Report; and
 
(4) that the DHS's negligence was a legal cause of the
 
Decedent's death.
 
The circuit court awarded damages for conscious pain
 
and suffering and the loss of enjoyment of life to Polm, as
 representative to the Decedent's estate. On September 17, 2013,
 the circuit court entered its Final Judgement (Final Judgment).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 21, 2013, DHS filed its notice of appeal
 
from the Final Judgment, in case no. CAAP-13-0004020. On
 
November 12, 2013, the circuit court entered its "Order Granting
 in Part and Denying in Part 'Plaintiff's Motion to Alter or Amend
 Judgment,' Filed September 24, 2013," (Amended Judgment) in which
 
Polm was awarded additional costs of $2,651.37, jointly and
 
severally against Mr. McVeigh and DHS, and $4,856.06, severally
 against DHS. On December 3, 2013, entered the First Amended
 Final Judgment.
 
On December 11, 2013, DHS filed a second Notice of
 
Appeal from the Final Judgment and the First Amended Final
 Judgment in this instant proceeding, case no. CAAP-13-0006029. 
On January 21, 2014, case no. CAAP-13-0006029 and case no. CAAP­13-0004020 were consolidated under case no. CAAP-13-0006029.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Findings of Fact
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and ellipses omitted). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has] defined 
'substantial evidence' as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
B. Conclusions of Law
 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate]
court ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial court's
FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct rule of
law will not be overturned. However, a COL that presents
mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the
clearly erroneous standard because the court's conclusions
are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each
individual case.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. The circuit court's FOFs were not clearly erroneous.
 
DHS contends the following FOFs are clearly erroneous:
 
20, 21, 23, 29, 31, 32, 35, 37, 39, 44, 47, 48, 57, 60, 62, and
 
67.
 
1. FOF 20
 
20. Although Gwenson Yuen had the title of "social
worker", Mr. Yuen was not a licensed social worker nor did
Mr. Yuen ever obtain any college degrees in the area of
social work or ever attend any college or university courses
in social work; all of Mr. Yuen's social worker training was
on the job. As a social worker for a governmental agency,
Mr. Yuen was not required to be licensed as a social worker.
 
DHS contends that "[t]he court simply was wrong - the
 
uncontradicted evidence was [Yuen's] testimony that his 'title
 
was CASP, child abuse specialist . . . I was not a social
 worker. . . . I have not been a social worker, by that title.'"
 While Yuen did testify that his title was child abuse specialist,
 even Yuen often referred to himself as a social worker during his
 testimony. Thus, even if DHS's contention is true, we fail to
 see how such an error prejudiced DHS and hold that the error
 would have been harmless. See Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule
 
(HRE) 103(a) (Supp. 2013).
 
2. FOF 21
 
21. [Yuen] did not consider that the Decedent was
removed from the McVeigh household due to suspected child
abuse, even though it was contained in the case files and
records of [the Decedent] and [Daughter]. He thought [the
Decedent] was removed because of neglect.
 
DHS contends "[Yuen] actually testified that his
 
understanding when he received the case was that 'neither
 
[parent] can be ruled out as the perpetrator of harm [the broken
 arm].'" (Brackets in original.)
 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support
 
the circuit court's finding that Yuen believed the children were
 removed because of neglect.  Yuen was asked on direct if the case
 
was a neglect case, Yuen answered, "The issues were supported by
 
the family service plan, which pointed to parenting classes,
 which would point to neglect issues." In addition, several other
 witnesses testified that, based on Yuen's deposition, he
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misunderstood the Decedent's case to be a neglect case. "[I]t is
 
well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues
 dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
 evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Inoue v.
 
Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i 86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App. 2008) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). FOF 21 is not
 clearly erroneous. 
3. FOF 23
 
23. The VGAL social worker kept careful notes of the
injury; however, [Yuen] did not log the injury (including
its location and description) into the CPS mandatory record
keeping system known as CPSS, which was required so that any
social worker or CPS worker at any time, when checking [the
Decedent's] case on the CPSS, would be able to see his case
history including the details of any injury or abuse and
reports of harm. [Yuen] also did not perform a "Child Risk
Assessment" using the Child Risk Assessment Matrix and
complete the required DHS forms such as DHS 1507 ("Report
[of harm] On Active Case" ("Case Management Case")) or form
DHS 1506 ("Report on Active Case" ("Assessment Case") [sic]
for the June 19, 2009 left black eye/cheek injury to [the
Decedent].
 
On appeal, DHS does not argue that Yuen did, in fact,
 
perform a "Child Risk Assessment" using the Child Risk Assessment
 
Matrix. Instead, DHS contends that "[Yuen] was not required to
 complete such an assessment matrix since the doctor had confirmed
 that there was no abuse or neglect." DHS's argument is an
 attempt to justify why Yuen did not perform an assessment using
 this matrix. Insofar as DHS does not present a discernible
 argument challenging the facts contained in FOF 23, we deem DHS's
 challenges to this finding waived. See Kaho
'ohanohano v. Dep't 
of Human Servs, State of Hawaii, 117 Hawai 'i 262, 297 n.37, 178 
P.3d 538, 573 n.37 (2008); see also Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed
 
waived."). 
4. FOFs 29, 31, 32, and 39
 
29. The August 5, 2009 entries in the Log of Contacts
by social worker [Yuen] and intake worker [Plourde] is
confusing and shows the inaccuracy and sloppiness of DHS
record-keeping. It is not possible for [Yuen] to have had a
conversation with [Plourde] on August 5, 2009 at 1:01 p.m.
about a "report of re-harm" that was not made until 1:45
that same day. DHS did not offer any plausible explanation
of this anomaly in the Log of Contacts record. Logic and
common sense dictates that CPS intake worker, [Plourde], who
received the emergency call from [Cordona] at 1:45 p.m. on
August 5, 2009, could not have reported [Cordona's] concerns
to [Yuen] until sometime after 1:45 p.m. on August 5, 2009.
Therefore, either [Plourde's] report of his conversation
with [Cordona] at 1:45 p.m. is wrong or [Yuen's] report of
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
his activities at 1:01 p.m. is wrong. However, in either
event, DHS failed to offer any candid explanation for the
confused state of the record in its Log of Contacts for
August 5, 2009.
 
. . . .
 
31. [Yuen] reported in the August 5, 2009 Log of
Contacts that he spoke to nurse Lt. Lisa Barnes, who
reported "no abuse or neglect." This conversation was not
 based upon an August 5, 2009 visit by [the Decedent] to the
Makalapa Clinic in response to the August 5, 2009 report by
babysitter [Cordona]. Lt. Barnes' report is based upon [the
Decedent's] August 4, 2009 visit to the Makalapa Clinic for
a cold, not for possible re-harm or injury. The [circuit]
court knows this to be true because, in [Yuen's] August 5,
2009 Log of Contacts entry, he states: "Nurse, Lt. Lisa
Barnes reports yesterday
 visit with [the Decedent] for sore
throat. . . . Nurse reports x-ray  yesterday  also taken.
Shows only old fractures. Nurse confirms no abuse or
 neglect. [The Decedent] released to father." Exhibit O at
 page 000764 (emphasis added). "Yesterday refers to August
4, 2009, not August 5, 2009.
 
What is curious is that [Yuen] appeared to rely upon

an opinion by Lt. Barnes of "no abuse or neglect" that is
based upon an August 4, 2009 wellness examination and not an
August 5, 2009 possible re-harm or injury evaluation. This
 indicates that (1) [Yuen] erroneously relied upon a
statement by Lt. Barnes of "no abuse" that was not based
upon the August 5, 2009 report of concerns by babysitter
[Cordona] and (2) [Yuen] did not successfully arrange to
have Mr. McVeigh take [the Decedent] to be examined by a
medical professional in response to [Cordona's] August 5,
2009 reports of concerns. The [circuit] court finds that
[Yuen] either (1) miscommunicated with Lt. Barnes, (2)
failed to verify with Lt. Barnes that Mr. McVeigh followed
through with his direction to take [the Decedent] to see the
doctor on August 5, 2009, (3) improperly relied exclusively
upon information from Mr. McVeigh that he took [the
Decedent] to see a doctor on August 5, 2009 and that Lt.
Barnes informed him that there was no abuse without
 verifying Mr. McVeigh's information, or (4) is
misrepresenting the substance of his August 5, 2009 Log of
Contacts entry regarding an August 5, 2009 visit to Makalapa
Clinic and what Lt. Barnes stated. In any event, the
[circuit] court finds that any statement of "no abuse" that
is attributed to Lt. Barnes has no basis in fact and any
reliance by DHS upon what Nurse Barnes is alleged to have
stated was erroneous, baseless, ill-advised, and constituted
malfeasance.
 
32. [Plourde] recommended on August 5, 2009 that [the
Decedent, then 13 months old, be seen by his primary care
physician and undergo a complete body examination to
determine whether [the Decedent] was being abused and the
extend of [the Decedent's] injuries, including what was
wrong with [the Decedent's] arms/shoulders.
 
. . . .
 
39. [Yuen] was not an assessment worker, not trained
in assessment, and did not refer the report of harm received
on August 5, 2009 to the assessment unit, nor did [Yuen]
review the August 5, 2009 report with the assessment unit
supervisor, [Mastin] which was also required by the DHS
Green Book. Rather, [Yuen] concluded, based upon faulty or
erroneous information, that the August 5, 2009 report of
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
harm from [the Decedent's] babysitter did not warrant an
investigation regarding [the Decedent's] safety. He did not
 initiate a new intake to inquire into or investigate whether
other action or intervention was appropriate to provide for
[the Decedent's] safety.
 
[Yuen] placed near-exclusive, almost mechanical
reliance upon a medical opinion of re-harm in order to
determine whether he should initiate a new intake. He did
 not speak of participating in making a qualitative
determination in conjunction with his supervisor regarding
whether a new intake or other investigatory or protective
action should have been taken in response to [Cordona's]
report. He testified that even if he knew that the August
5, 2009 report of injuries constituted new injuries to [the
Decedent], he would have initiated a new intake if there was
a medical opinion of re-harm. He did not speak in terms of
the intricate and qualitative decision making process that
the Green Book established for the protection of at-risk
children in need of protection. [Yuen's] approach
effectively defers the new intake initiation decision making
to medical personnel, who in this case did not have the
complete information if they did, in fact, examine the
Decedent] on August 5, 2009 pursuant to [Cordona's] report.
This is an unacceptable departure from the qualitative
process of data evaluation, investigation, and assessment of
child safety that the Green Book establishes.
 
DHS provides no discernible argument as to why these
 
FOFs are clearly erroneous. Thus, we deem DHS's challenge to
 
these findings waived. See Kaho 'ohanohano, 117 Hawai 'i at 297 
n.37, 178 P.3d at 573 n.37; see also HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
5. FOF 35
 
FOF 35 states that "[Yuen] did not perform an
 
assessment of [the Decedent] using the Child and Family
 Assessment Matrix, DHS 1517, as required by the Green Book."
 DHS argues that "[t]he uncontradicted evidence was that the
 matrix was to be used by the intake section, not by [Yuen]."
 
In the circuit court's unchallenged FOF 38, the circuit
 
court considered this exact argument and determined that "there

 
is no question that all of the requirements set forth in the
 Green Book did apply to, and bind, defendant DHS." The circuit
 court determined that Yuen's disclaimer that Section 7 of the
 Green Book did not apply to him "neither vindicate[d] or
 provide[d] anything of probative value to the [circuit] court."
 Section 7.3.1(A)(3) of the Green Book specifically requires that
 "[a]ll reports on active child protection cases, regardless of
 the age of the child, will be assessed by using the Child and
 Family Assessment Matrix, DHS 1517." DHS does not dispute these
 findings and they are, therefore, binding on this court. See
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai 'i 450, 
459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002). The circuit court did not clearly
 
err in finding that the Green Book required an assessment of the
 Decedent and that no assessment was conducted.
 
6. FOF 37
 
37. According to the DHS Green Book § 7.3.1.B for
reports of harm or threatened harm to a child who is already
under DHS supervision for prior abuse, "[i]f the report
meets the criteria for investigation pursuant to
departmental procedures, the report needs to be sent to an
assessment CWS unit for immediate crisis intervention
 response." Green Book § 7.3.2.B further provides:
 
All reports on active cases that warrant investigation
shall be sent to the assessment (investigation) CWS
unit for appropriate action. . . .
 
The only role of the assessment CWS social worker for
reports of re-harm is to either confirm or not confirm
the report and insure the safety of the child. . . .
 
All reports are to be sent to the assessment CWS unit
supervisor for review and assignment pursuant to unit
procedures. . . .
 
(Brackets and emphases in original.)
 
DHS does not challenge the accuracy of the circuit
 
court's recitation of Sections 7.3.1(B) and 7.3.2(B) of the Green
 
Book. Instead, DHS contends that "[s]ince the Makalapa [C]linic
 had not found any child abuse or neglect there was no indication
 of 'reharm' and that the babysitter's call had been
 unsubstantiated; thus there was no basis for a new intake." 
DHS's argument attempts to justify why DHS did not initiate a new
 intake for the Decedent and does not dispute the facts contained
 within FOF 37. DHS provides no discernible argument as to why
 FOF 37 is clearly erroneous and, therefore, DHS's challenge to
 FOF 37 is deemed waived. See
 Kaho'ohanohano, 117 Hawai 'i at 297 
n.37, 178 P.3d at 573 n.37; 
see also HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
7. FOF 44
 
44. [Yuen] did not report and record the location and
description of [the Decedent's] [June 19 bruise] into the
mandatory CPSS reporting system. Had he done so, he and
other DHS employees or agents, including [Mastin], could
have realized on August 5, 2009, that there was evidence of
multiple incidents of black eyes to [the Decedent]. Such
 information would indicate possible severe, ongoing physical
abuse to [the Decedent], which would have resulted in the
initiation of a crisis response or new intake on Augsut 5,
2009.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DHS contends that "[t]he [circuit court's] finding is
 
pure speculation regarding what more likely than not would have
 
happened since (i) there was no expert testimony regarding what
 likely would have occurred, and (ii) there was no evidence of
 'multiple incidents of black eyes,' but, rather one incident that
 the guardian ad litem and the social worker agreed did not result
 from child abuse or neglect and an unsubstantiated report made
 one month after an alleged incident." (Emphasis omitted.)
 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support
 
the circuit court's finding of what would have happened if Yuen
 properly recorded the Decedent's injuries. Yuen testified that
 the CPSS registry system is "a logging system that the social
 workers and the administration supervisors use, so that [they're]
 all on the same page." Yuen also agreed that one of the purposes
 of the CPSS registry system was "so that any worker, case worker
 for [DHS], who has any contact or involvement with the children's
 case, can go into the CPSS system and see whatever has occurred
 leading up to that point[.]" DHS does not dispute that Yuen did
 not log the June 19 bruise in to the CPSS system. Similarly,
 Polm's expert witness, Heidi Staples (Staples), a social worker
 
and the director of the Center for Child Welfare employed my the
 
University of California Los Angeles, testified that the
 documentation in the Decedent's case was "shockingly limited" and
 "absolutely not" sufficient.
 
On appeal, DHS does not challenge the following: (1) 
from FOF 41, Yuen did not know the black eye reported by the
 Decedent's babysitter, Cordona, on August 5, 2009 was a new and
 different injury from the Decedent's June 19 bruise; (2) from FOF
 41, Yuen's failure to log the June 19 bruise in the CPSS system
 as one explanation for why he did not know that the bruises
 reported in Cordona's August 5 Report were new injuries; (3) from
 FOF 43, Yuen's supervisor, Mastin, was also unaware that the
 Decedent sustained the new injuries that were in the August 5
 Report because the June 19 bruise was not properly recorded in
 the CPSS system; and (4) from FOF 42 and 43, had Yuen or Mastin
 known of the possible re-harm to the Decedent, they would have
 initiated a crisis response.
 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"It is well settled that the [circuit court], sitting
 
as the trier of fact, is free to make all reasonable and rational
 
inferences under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
 evidence." See Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113
 
Hawai
'i 332, 352, 152 P.3d 504, 524 (2007) (internal quotation 
makes and citation omitted). The circuit court reasonably
 inferred that if Yuen had properly logged the June 19 bruise in
 the CPSS system, other DHS employees could have determined that
 the August 5 Report of bruises were new and different from the
 Decedent's June 19 bruise and, therefore, would have initiated a
 crisis response. FOF 44 is not clearly erroneous.
 
8. FOFs 47 and 48
 
47. The information regarding the [June 19 bruise]
was not properly and timely reported by the intake worker or
the social worker as required by law to appropriate child
welfare professionals or to the [family court].
 
48. The information regarding the July 2009 black
eye, which was reported on August 5, 2009 by babysitter
[Cordona], was not properly and timely reported by the
social worker as required by law to other appropriate child
welfare professionals or to the [family court].
 
The information regarding [the Decedent's] July 2009
black eye, which was reported by [Cordona], should have been
reported to the [family court] in the September 21, 2009
Safe Family Home Report. However, it was not included in
that report. [Family court] . . . ordered an investigation
into the August 5, 2009 report of a black eye to [the
Decedent].
 
DHS investigated the matter and prepared a Safe Family
Home Report dated September 27, 2009, which reported to the
[family court] for the first time, the information [Cordona]
reported to DHS on August 5, 2009.
 
Although the DHS Safe Family Home Reports of September
21 and 27, 2009 were both prepared after [the Decedent] died
on September 20, 2009, the failure to report [the
Decedent's] July 2009 black eye until [family court] ordered
an investigation into the July 2009 black eye incident,
together with the failure of the social worker to report
critical information to the VGAL, the VGAL social worker,
and supervisor Mastin indicate a failure of DHS to properly
document and report significant, relevant information, and
support the finding and conclusion that DHS breached its
duty to ensure the proper implementation of the standards
established by the Green Book and the law that applies to
child welfare matters.
 
On appeal, DHS contends that "[t]here is no basis to
report to the Family Court regarding an unsubstantiated report. 
Should this [c]ourt rule that in the future DHS refer every
 unsubstantiated report of child abuse or neglect to the Family
 Court, and should the Legislature agree to provide funding for
 
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the additional employees that DHS would need to undertake that
 
work, DHS would comply."
 
The circuit court found that Yuen did not properly
 
record the June 19 bruise in the CPSS system and did not
 investigate or assess Cardona's August 5 Report of bruises as
 required under the Green Book. Staples testified that the "case
 carrying social worker" is required to investigate reports of
 harm, but that the policy in place also requires the intake or
 assessment worker to investigate the reports of harm. This
 policy was a "checks-and balances-situation, to make sure that
 serious injuries, especially to cases that were already active,
 were thoroughly investigated." Yuen concluded, based on faulty
 information, that no investigation was necessary without
 consulting someone trained in assessment and without reviewing
 that report with Mastin, the assessment unit supervisor, as
 required under the Green Book. The circuit court found that Yuen
 did not follow the established policy.
 
There is evidence in the record showing that the errors
 
in the handling of the Decedent's case was not the result of lack
 of staffing or funding, but, instead, was the result of Yuen's
 failure to follow the reporting procedures in the Green Book. 
Staples testified that "[t]here were skilled people in [DHS]" and
 that "the supervisor was one of them, but they weren't being
 given the information by [Yuen], so they couldn't follow up on
 all these red flags." Insofar as Yuen did not follow Green Book
 procedures to determine whether the reports of re-harm were
 unsubstantiated, FOFs 47 and 48 are not clearly erroneous.
 
9. FOF 57
 
57. The failure [of] DHS to properly document
injuries to [the Decedent] and to properly disseminate such
information to other child welfare professionals working on
[the Decedent's] case was a substantial factor that
prevented the intricate and extensive procedures established
by the Green Book and the applicable law to be engaged to
provide for the protection of [the Decedent] in the instant
case.
 
Competent and consistent documentation and
communication are critical in high risk cases such as [the
Decedent's] case. DHS failed to perform competent and
consistent documentation and communication by and between
various DHS employees, other child welfare professionals,
and the [family court].
 
DHS employees and agents also failed to exercise
reasonably appropriate judgment in its handling of [the
 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Decedent's] case. DHS employees' failures actually
prevented or hampered other child welfare professionals from
doing their jobs to protect [the Decedent].
 
DHS contends that "[t]here was no expert testimony to
 
support the Finding of a 'substantial factor'" and that "[t]here
 
is no evidence that 'DHS employees' failures actually prevented
 or hampered other child welfare professionals from doing their
 jobs to protect [the Decedent]." (Emphasis omitted.) We
 disagree.
 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support 
the circuit court's determination that Yuen's failure to follow the procedures in the Green Book was a substantial factor in preventing the Decedent from receiving necessary protection. 
Polm's expert witness, Staples, testified that Yuen's lack of 
oversight and decision to not assign the case to the assessment unit "prevented others from following policy and from stepping in and possibly saving this child[.]" Staples based her opinion specifically on her review of DHS's policy on how new referrals to the agency should be handled on active cases. The VGAL social worker, Addison, also stated that "[t]he approach of [her] unit is always more on the conservative side" and, in instances of confirmed abuse, her unit follows the "approach of removing the children from the home, until such time either the [family court] determines, or the medical professionals determine, exactly what happened." We decline to review the circuit court's credibility determination. See Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i at 101, 185 P.3d at 849. 
FOF 57 is not clearly erroneous. 
10. FOF 60
 
60. DHS relied excessively and improperly upon a Navy
social worker's home visits and upon DHS office visits in
place of home visits by [Yuen]. DHS failed to make
 necessary home visits with its own social workers, thereby
compromising the accuracy of DHS's assessment and evaluation
of the safety of [the Decedent's] home environment. This is
 particularly true in the instance case because the question
regarding whether Mr. or Mrs. McVeigh caused the fracture to
[the Decedent's] arm in 2009 was never answered and the only
possible explanation for that injury offered by the McVeighs
(a motor vehicle accident) was medically ruled out as a
possible cause of that injury.
 
DHS contends that "[t]here was no expert testimony to
 
support the Finding that 'DHS relied excessively and improperly'
 
on a Navy social worker's home visits nor that home visits by the
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Navy social worker and office visits with the DHS social worker
 
compromised 'the accuracy of DHS's assessment and evaluation.'" 
In support of its contention, DHS reasons that "[t]he capacity of
 DHS social workers to make as many visits as they would like to
 make and their reliance on the sometimes better trained federal
 social workers are direct results of Legislative decisions
 regarding funding of DHS positions."
 
While Section 4.7.1(A)(2) of the Green Book indicates
 
that face-to-face contacts may be made by other CWS staff or by
 private service providers, it also indicates that "[t]he CWS
 social worker will have the ultimate responsibility to evaluate
 the risk factors in the home based on the reports of others and
 well as [sic] himself/herself." The Green Book explicitly states
 that "[t]he CWS social worker needs to be the main evaluator of
 the family home and situation." Staples and Grant Teruya, the
 DHS case manager assigned to the case before Yuen, both testified
 that visits by Navy personnel was part of the process in
 determining the Decedent's safety, but that those visits did not
 absolve DHS's responsibility for ensuring the Decedent's safety
 and were not a replacement for home visits. In fact, Yuen
 himself testified that he did not believe that there is a rule
 that would permit him to rely upon a federal, Navy social worker
 to conduct a home visit in place of his own home visits.
 
Section 4.7.1(B) of the Green Book states that
 
"[o]ffice visits can . . . be used in place of monthly home
 visits if home visits are not possible or necessary on a monthly
 time table." The circuit court determined, however, that "the
 DHS social workers should not use office visits to replace the
 need for home visits as the DHS social worker will lose the
 advantage of seeing the child and the family in their own home
 environment, which allows for a better, more accurate assessment
 of the family functioning and safety."
 
The circuit court found in the unchallenged FOF 59,
 
that "[m]onthly home visits are required by Section 4 of the
 Green Book." Yuen had office visits with the McVeighs, but made
 no home visits because he relied on the Navy social worker, to
 make home visits with the family. Polm's expert witness,
 Staples, determined that Yuen's failure to make any home visits
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was below the standard of care for a case manager of the 
Decedent's case–-a case which required hypervigilance. Based on the evidence in record, the testimony of Staples, and the requirements as set forth in the Green Book, the circuit court's determination that Yuen relied "excessively and improperly" on the home visits of the Navy social worker and office visits is not clearly erroneous. See Estate of Klink, 113 Hawai
'i at 352, 
152 P.3d at 524. 
DHS also contends the circuit court's finding that
 
"'the only possible explanation for [the broken arm] offered by
 the McVeighs (a motor vehicle accident) was medically ruled out
 as a possible cause of that injury' is completely wrong since the
 uncontradicted evidence was that the children's pediatrician
 concluded that it [sic] the broken arm more likely than not was
 the result of the Decedent's sister playing with him or the
 mother's inattention." DHS does not contend the McVeighs offered
 another possible explanation for how the Decedent broke his arm. 
Instead, DHS argues that the doctor "concluded" that the broken
 arm was a result of the Decedent playing with the Daughter or
 Mrs. McVeigh's inattention.
 
No doctor reached a conclusion as to what caused the
 
Decedent injury, as DHS suggests. On October 21, 2008, Tripler
 Army Medical Center physician Tamara M. Grigsby, M.D. noted that
 "although the humeral fracture is indetermine in nature, the
 circumstantial information obtained in this case increases the
 likelihood that an unsupervised sibling or inexperienced,
 inattentive mother may have inadvertantly [sic] fractured the
 arm." (Emphasis added.)
 
Even assuming arguendo that the McVeighs offered
 
additional explanations for how the Decedent could have broken
 his arm and assuming arguendo that the circuit court's finding
 overlooked those proffered explanations, we fail to see how such
 an error prejudiced DHS. The record indicates that, when the
 Decedent's case was first referred to DHS, not even DHS gave
 merit to the McVeighs' explanations because the Decedent's case
 was ultimately classified as a "confirmed threat of abuse or
 neglect" case. Any omissions as to other proffered explanations
 constitute harmless error. See HRE Rule 103(a).
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
11. FOF 62
 
62. Whether DHS employees truly and competently
conducted home visits personally, deferred such
responsibilities to Navy personnel, or conducted family
visits in DHS's offices, if such regular, monthly visits
were, indeed, performed competently by DHS or its agents,
DHS should have noticed at least some of the signs of
possible re-harm to [the Decedent] that babysitter [Cordona]
reported on August 5, 2009.
 
1. 
Approx. July 5, 2009:
	 black eye;
 
2.
	 Approx. June 21, 2009: 1" L shaped
bruise/red mark to
right temple; and
 
3.
	 Approx. June 21-28, 2009: ½" bruise between
 
right index finger
and thumb, and a
small bruise to
 right wrist.
 
This means that from mid-June 2009 to mid-July 2009, no one

from DHS observed [the Decedent] so as to notice what the
babysitter reported on August 5, 2009 as signs of re-harm or
injuries to [the Decedent]. Defendant DHS offered no
 explanation why the indications of injuries reported by
[Cordona] were not observed by DHS and recorded or otherwise
documented in DHS records. DHS failed in both its
 obligation to detect signs of possible re-harm or injury to
[the Decedent] and to timely, properly, and accurately
document, report, and record such possible re-harm or
injuries in DHS's records. These failures fall below the
 standard of care for DHS that are established by law.
 
DHS contends that "[t]he [circuit court] treated the
 
hearsay, belated reports of the babysitter as facts despite the
 
actual facts that no medical personnel substantiated the
 babysitter's report, and during this period the DHS social worker
 conducted office visits on July 1 and July 23 (twice as
 frequently as required), and the Decedent went to the doctor for
 routine visits on July 20 and July 22." DHS contends that,
 contrary to the circuit court's finding in FOF 62, it did offer
 an explanation for why DHS did not discover signs of re-harm
 between mid-June and mid-July 2009. DHS contends that it did not
 observe indications of re-harm because the "injuries simply did
 not exist."
 
DHS stipulated to the admission of the DHS Log of
 
Contacts from May 29, 2009 to September 21, 2009 into evidence,
 which included Cordona's August 5 Report of re-harm. "It is the
 general rule that evidence to which no objection has been made
 may properly be considered by the trier of fact[.]" 
See State v.
 
Manipon, 2 Haw. App. 492, 497, 634 P.2d 598, 603 (1981). DHS
 
20

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to raise a proper objection to the admission of Cordona's
 
August 5 Report into evidence. Therefore, its argument on appeal
 fails. Id.
 
Furthermore, the circuit court's unchallenged FOF 28 
noted that "[n]o evidence was introduced to dispute or contradict the veracity or accuracy of [Cordona's] report," which indicated that she saw bruises on the Decedent between mid-June and mid-July 2009. Given that the circuit court did not err in relying on her August 5 Report, DHS's argument that the court erred because DHS presented evidence contrary to the circuit court's findings also fails. See Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i at 101, 185 P.3d at 
849. FOF 62 is not clearly erroneous.
 
12. FOF 67
 
67. [The Decedent's] death would not have occurred if
[the Decedent] were removed from his family by DHS. DHS did
 
have the opportunity and authority to remove [the Decedent]
from the McVeigh family after the [August 5 Report] of
alleged re-harm or injury to [the Decedent] by his
babysitter, [Cordona]. DHS negligently failed to discharge
its duties owed to [the Decedent] in response to the [August
5 Report] by [Cordona].
 
DHS contends that "[t]here was no expert testimony to
 
support the [circuit court's] speculation on what more likely
 
than not would have happened based on the State's alleged
 negligence."
 
Polm's expert witness, Staples, testified that Yuen's
 
lack of oversight "essentially . . . prevented others from
 following policy and from stepping in and possibly saving this
 child[.]" She described the Decedent's cases as a "case that
 cried out for hypervigilance" and that, "in [her] opinion, [the
 Decedent] should not have been returned to the parents, but if
 that had already occurred and then a social worker takes over
 that case, the social worker must be acutely aware of what were
 the issues that brought this case into court and into the
 agency." She believed that DHS has "skilled people" working
 there and an "array of services," but that Yuen failed to share
 the necessary information so that others could follow-up. FOF 67
 is not clearly erroneous.
B. The circuit court's COLs are not wrong.
 
DHS challenges the following COLs: 12, 13, 16, 17, 18,
 
20, 21, and 28.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1.	 COL 12
 
12. DHS was also required to obtain a written
psychiatric report, psychological report, or other
multidisciplinary consultant team evaluation of the child,
or appropriate family members when the actual or potential
threat to the child is believed to be serious and one or
 more of the following conditions exist:
 
(1)	 It is difficult to determine whether abuse or
 neglect has occurred[.]
 
. . . .
 
[DHS] shall make a social study of the child and
family to determine:
 
(1)	 Whether abuse, neglect, exploitation, or
harm did or will occur;
 
(2)	 The extent of or threat of harm to the
 child;
 
(2)	 [sic] The potential risk of future or
continued harm to the child[;]
 
(3)	 If important changes need to take place in
the family before the child may be
expected to have safe and adequate
care; . . .
 
. . . .
 
(8)	 How much departmental supervision is
needed . . . .
 
DHS contends the circuit court's "conclusion is 
directly contrary to the uncontradicted fact that DHS had 
obtained psychological examinations of both parents and the psychologist concluded that his 'only reservation about [Mrs. McVeigh's] ability to function effectively as a parent is the unexplained injury to her son,' and that he did 'not have reservations about [Mr. McVeigh's] ability to function effectively as a parent, other than the unexplained injury to his son.'" (Ellipses omitted.) DHS does not challenge the circuit court's determination that DHS was required to obtain a written psychiatric report, psychological report, or other multidisciplinary consultant team evaluation of the Decedent or other family members. Instead, DHS attempts to challenge whether it had met its responsibility to obtain such a report or evaluation. Because DHS presents no discernable argument against COL 12, DHS's contention is waived. 
See Kaho 'ohanohano,  117 
Hawai'i at 297 n.37, 178 P.3d at 573 n.37; see also HRAP Rule 
28(b)(7). 
22

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. COL 13
 
13. DHS has a duty in 2009, through September, to (1)
provide [the Decedent] with competent, prompt, and ample
protection from harm, (2) to prepare and maintain required
information in DHS's records, and (3) to conduct an
appropriate and professionally competent investigation
pursuant to [HRS] Chapter 587 (the Child Protective Act),
the [HAR], and the Green Book following the [August 5
Report] of apparent potential serious re-harm to [the
Decedent] made by babysitter [Cordona].
 
DHS contends that "DHS complied with the [HAR] § 17­
920.1-11(a) . . . by evaluating 'the report of complaint to 
insure that it is based on fact,' . . . and by taking 'action as soon as possible in order to provide immediate protection to the child.'" DHS argues that it complied with the HAR because it "immediately contacted [the Decedent's] doctor's nurse and determined that the babysitter's report was unsubstantiated." DHS does not challenge what duties it owed the Decedent, as articulated in COL 13, but instead argues that it did not breach its duty. Because DHS presents no discernable argument against COL 13, DHS's contention is waived. See Kaho
'ohanohano, 117 
Hawai'i at 297 n.37, 178 P.3d at 573 n.37; see also HRAP Rule 
28(b)(7). 
3. COLs 16 and 17
 
16. DHS breached its duty to [the Decedent] to
adequately investigate the report of apparent re-harm made
on August 5, 2009 and failed to take adequate steps to
protect [the Decedent] who at 13 months of age was
defenseless and completely vulnerable to repeated abuse.
 
17. DHS breached its duty to [the Decedent] to
adequately investigate or otherwise evaluate the
circumstances relevant to the [August 5 Report] of apparent
re-harm, which report was received by DHS just one month
before [the Decedent's] death.
 
DHS contends that it "immediately contacted [Mr.
 
McVeigh] to take [the Decedent] to the doctor, learned that [Mr.
 
McVeigh] had taken [the Decedent] one day earlier and confirmed
 with the nurse that no child abuse or neglect was noted." The
 circuit court, however, found that "any statement of 'no abuse'
 that is attributed to [nurse] Lt. Barnes has no basis in fact and
 any reliance by DHS upon what Nurse [Lt.] Barnes is alleged to
 have stated was erroneous, baseless, ill-advised, and constituted
 malfeasance." Because FOFs upon which the circuit court relied
 are not clearly erroneous, COLs 16 and 17 are not wrong.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4. COLs 18, 20, and 21
 
18. DHS breached its duties to [the Decedent] set
forth in DHS's own Green Book requiring the DHS to perform a
child risk assessment for [the Decedent] and to initiate a
crisis intervention to protect [the Decedent] following the
reports of severe harm, including a black eye to [the
Decedent's] left eye observed in June 2009 and facial/head
bruising to [the Decedent's] right eye/face observed in July
2009.
 
. . . .
 
20. DHS failed to inform the VGAL of the report of
apparent re-harm received on August 5, 2009. The VGAL kept
careful notes of the location of the [June 19 bruise]
suffered by [the Decedent] and would have been able to
apprise DHS staff and social workers that the July 2009
black eye/bruising reported on August 5, 2009 to [the
Decedent's] right face/head was a new injury and thus a
crisis intervention, including calling 911 and removing [the
Decedent] from the abusive home, should have been initiated.
 
21. DHS further breached its duty to protect [the
Decedent], to take custody of and remove him from the
McVeigh home, and to conduct a reasonable and competent
investigation of the reports of suspected child abuse in the
weeks leading up to the death of [the Decedent].
 
DHS contends that "[s]ince the babysitter's report was
 
unsubstantiated by the doctor, DHS had no legal basis for taking
 
any further action." DHS relied on Yuen's determination that
 Cordona's August 5 Report was "unsubstantiated" to support its
 argument that Yuen was not required to investigate or further
 assess reports of re-harm to the Decedent.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court in Kaho 'ohanohano determined 
4 5
that the Child Protective Act,  the HAR,  and DHS's Green Book
establish the level of care DHS owes to children under its
 supervision. Kaho
'ohanohano, 117 Hawai 'i at 297, 178 P.3d at 573. 
The circuit court determined that Yuen did not follow the Green
 Book procedures in determining whether Cardona's August 5 Report
 was substantiated or unsubstantiated. Instead, Yuen diverted
 from the procedures in the Green Book and conducted his own
 assessment of Cardona's August 5 Report that "placed near-
exclusive, almost mechanical reliance upon a medical opinion of
 re-harm in order to determine whether he should initiate a new
 intake." The circuit court found that Yuen's approach
 "effectively defers the new intake initiation decision making to
 
4
 HRS §§ 587-1 et seq. (2006 Repl.) (repealed September 1, 2010).
 
5
 HAR §§ 17-920.1 et seq. (repealed December 9, 2010) . 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical personnel, who in this case did not have the complete
 
information if they did, in fact, examine [the Decedent] on
 August 5, 2009 pursuant to [Cordona's] report." Based on the
 medical opinion, Yuen determined the babysitter's report was
 unsubstantiated even though he was not trained in assessment, did
 not follow the standard Green Book procedure for assessing
 reports of re-harm, and did not consult with a DHS employee who
 was trained in assessment.
 
Polm's expert witness, Staples, testified that Yuen's
 
response to the bruises reported in the August 5 Report fell
 below the required standard of care and was not reasonable given
 the high-risk nature of the Decedent's case. Furthermore, the
 circuit court found that Yuen's actions to be "an unacceptable
 departure from the qualitative process of data evaluation,
 investigation, and assessment of child safety that the Green Book
 establishes." Given that Yuen failed to follow even the minimal
 standard of care necessary to ensure the Decedent's safety by
 referring the case to a someone trained in assessment and failed
 to assess the credibility of the report of re-harm pursuant to
 established Green Book procedure, DHS's continued reliance on the
 report being "unsubstantiated" is misguided. Thus, COLs 18, 20,
 and 21 are not wrong.
 
5. COL 28
 
COL 28 concludes that "Defendant DHS's negligence was a
 
legal cause of [the Decedent's] death." DHS contends that
 "[t]here was no expert testimony to support what more likely than
 not would have occurred but for the State's alleged negligence
 and thus the conclusion is not based on any evidence and instead
 is a mere expression of the court's constant speculation." 
(Emphasis omitted.) DHS's contention is false given that
 Staples, testified that departures from the standard of care were
 a factor in the Decedent's death and that the Decedent's death
 was avoidable had proper procedure been followed. Furthermore,
 Staples, testified that Yuen's lack of oversight "prevented
 others from following policy and from stepping in and possibly
 saving [the Decedent.]"
 
In Kaho
'ohanohano, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated that 
an "actor's negligent conduct is a legal cause or harm to another 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if (a) his or her conduct is a substantial factor in bringing 
about the harm, and (b) there is no rule of law relieving the actor from liability because of the manner in which his or her negligence has resulted in the harm." 
Kaho'ohanohano, 117 Hawai 'i 
at 305, 178 P.3d at 581 (quoting 
Mitchell v. Branch, 45 Haw. 128, 
132, 363 P.2d 969, 973 (1961) (block quote format altered)). The circuit court was not wrong in concluding that DHS's negligence was the legal cause of the Decedent's death. COL 28 is not wrong.
C.	 Mr. McVeigh's criminal act was not an intervening,
superseding cause of the Decedent's death, so as to limit
DHS's liability.
 
DHS contends that "[t]he intervening superseding
 
criminal conduct of Mr. McVeigh was not reasonably foreseeable,
 
thus the State cannot be liable for it."
 
Absent a special relationship, Hawai
'i courts have been 
reluctant to extend liability when a third party's criminal act is involved. See Wolsk v. State, 68 Haw. 299, 301-02, 711 P.2d 
1300, 1302 (1986) (holding that the state is not liable to victims of a third-party's criminal act when no special relationship exists between the State and the victim); Kau v. City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 6 Haw. App. 370, 373-74, 722 P.2d 1043, 1046-47 (1986) (holding that a municipality is not liable for criminal acts of third-party where there is no special relationship between the municipality and victim); Seibel v. City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 61 Haw. 253, 257-58, 602 P.2d 532, 536 (1979) (holding that the city has no duty to control the behavior of a third-party where there is no special relationship between city and victim). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held, however, 
that when a defendant has a special relationship with the victim of a crime, the defendant has a duty to protect the victim from unreasonable risk of harm and is, therefore, liable for foreseeable criminal acts. See Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, 
Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 386-87, 742 P.2d 377, 384-85 (1987) (holding that the hotel had a special relationship with a hotel guest so as to have a duty to protect the guest from any foreseeable criminal acts). The test to determine if a third-party's criminal act was foreseeable is whether "there is some 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probability of harm sufficiently serious that [a reasonable and
 
prudent person] would take precautions to avoid it." Id. at 388,
 
742 P.2d at 385 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
The supreme court has already determined, in 
Kaho'ohanohano, that there is a special relationship between DHS, 
DHS social workers and children suspected of abuse. The supreme court held that, based on the Child Protective Act and the regulatory mandates, the legislature "has created a duty flowing to children specifically identified to DHS as being the subject of suspected abuse." Id. at 290, 178 P.3d at 566. DHS is, 
therefore, "obligated to protect that specific class of children from a specific kind of harm that will likely continue if the statutory duty is ignored." Id. DHS's duty to the protected the 
class of children extends to third-party criminal acts, if such acts are reasonably foreseeable. See Knodle, 69 Haw. at 386-87, 
742 P.2d at 384-85. 
It is undisputed that the Decedent fell within the 
class of children DHS is statutorily obligated to protect and that DHS had a duty to prevent further abuse to him. See 
Kaho
'ohanohano, 117 Hawai 'i at 290, 178 P.3d at 566. The relevant 
question on appeal is whether Mr. McVeigh's criminal abuse of the Decedent was not foreseeable so to be an intervening superseding cause of the Decedent's death. See Knodle, 69 Haw. at 386, 742 
P.2d at 384. 
DHS argues that Mr. McVeigh's criminal actions were not
 
foreseeable and, therefore, it should not be liable for the
 Decedent's death. In support of its argument, DHS reasons that
 "[f]rom [the Decedent's] birth until his death, Mr. McVeigh was
 cooperative, responsible, and regularly took [the Decedent] to
 the doctor if he seemed sick or injured" and, thus, DHS could not
 have anticipated that Mr. McVeigh would cause serious harm to the
 Decedent.
 
DHS was involved in the Decedent's case because in 2008 
it recognized a probability of harm to the Decedent and became statutorily required to take precautions to avoid such harm. See 
Kaho
'ohanohano,  117 Hawai 'i at 290, 178 P.3d at 566. From the 
time the Decedent's case was opened until the time of his death, DHS determined that the perpetrator of the Decedent's 2008 broken 
27

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arm was unknown and considered both Mr. and Mrs. McVeigh, the
 
Decedent's caregivers at the time, to be possible perpetrators of
 his harm.
 
Given the Decedent's vulnerable age when he suffered
 
his broken arm and that his perpetrator remained unknown, the
 Decedent's case was deemed to be a particularly "high-risk case." 
Based on that understanding, DHS required that both Mr. and Mrs.
 McVeigh meet various conditions in order to reunite with the
 Decedent. The McVeighs also remained under DHS supervision up
 until the Decedent's death.
 
Polm's expert witness, Staples, testified that the
 
Decedent's case was serious, so Yuen should have been
 "inquisitive" and "vigilant" of both Mr. and Mrs. McVeigh. She
 further testified that DHS placed too much focus on Mrs. McVeigh
 and not enough focus on Mr. McVeigh, especially given that the
 perpetrator of the Decedent's injury was unknown. Staples
 testified that Yuen considered Mrs. McVeigh as "the problem."
 Conversely, Mr. McVeigh was "cooperative" and "likeable," so Yuen
 "relied on [him]." Yuen saw Mr. McVeigh's cooperation as
 protection, but Staples testified that "to assume that one is not
 abusing their child because they're acting cooperatively with the
 social worker is in error." Staples also testified that "there
 were red flags" and "indicators" that Yuen should have picked up
 on or investigated, which he did not. Such red flags included
 the stress the father was under from his job, Mrs. McVeigh's
 methadone addiction, doctor reports that the McVeighs were inept
 at meeting the children's needs during doctor visits, and the
 nature of the August 4 doctor visit report, which Staples
 described as "concerning." Mr. McVeigh's criminal act was
 foreseeable and not an intervening superseding act so to limit
 DHS's liability.
D.	 The circuit court's award of general damages was supported
by sufficient evidence.
 
DHS challenges the circuit court's award of damages. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that 
[a] finding of an amount of damages is so much within the
exclusive province of the jury that it will not be disturbed
on appellate review unless palpably not supported by the
evidence, or so excessive and outrageous when considered
with the circumstances of the case as to demonstrate that
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the jury in assessing damages acted against the rules of law
or suffered their passions or prejudices to mislead them.
 
Brown v. Clark Equipment Co., 62 Haw. 530, 536, 618 P.2d 267,
 
271-72 (1980) (quoting Vasconcellos v. Juarez, 37 Haw. Terr. 364)
 (1946). "A similar test is used in a jury-waived case and the
 inquiry on review is limited to whether, upon the evidence
 adduced, reasonable men could have come to the same conclusion as
 the jury, or the trial court in a jury-waived case." Kang v.
 
Harrington, 59 Haw. 652, 663, 587 P.2d 285, 292 (1978) (citations
 and internal quotation marks omitted). This "test is the same
 whether general or punitive damages are concerned." Id. at 63,
 
587 P.2d at 292-93. 
"General damages encompass all the damages which 
naturally and necessarily result from a legal wrong done." Dunbar v. Thompson, 79 Hawai
'i 306, 315, 901 P.2d 1285, 1294 
(App. 1995) (citing Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 50, 451 P.2d 814, 819 (1969)). "Such damages follow by implication of law upon proof of a wrong and include such items as physical or mental pain and suffering, inconvenience, and loss of enjoyment which cannot be measured definitively in monetary terms." Dunbar, 79 Hawai
'i at 315, 901 P.2d at 1294 (citations omitted); 
see HRS § 663-8.5 (1993)6. 
The circuit court determined that "the estate of [the
 
Decedent] sustained general damages for conscious pain and
 suffering prior to his unresponsiveness on September 18, 2009 and
 the loss of enjoyment of life[.]" The circuit court awarded a
 total of $250,000 in general damages to Polm, as representative
 of the Decedent's estate, without indicating how much it was
 awarding for each class of general damages.
 
6
 HRS § 663-8.5 provides
 
§ 663-8.5 Noneconomic damages; defined. (a)
Noneconomic damages which are recoverable in tort
actions include damages for pain and suffering, mental
anguish, disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life,
loss of consortium, and all other nonpecuniary losses
or claims.
 
(b) Pain and suffering is one type of
noneconomic damage and means the actual physical pain
and suffering that is the proximate result of a
physical injury sustained by a person.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. Pain and Suffering
 
DHS contends that "[s]ince [the Decedent] lost
 
consciousness almost instantly (based on the report of the
 
medical examiner . . .), any claim for pain and suffering must be
 limited to damages for a few seconds of consciousness."
 
"[T]he question of damages for pain and suffering
 
should be viewed as one of fact. The jury must determine whether
 and to what extent conscious pain and suffering were sustained." 
Ferreira v. Gen. Motors Corp., 4 Haw. App. 12, 18, 657 P.2d 1066,
 1071 (1983) (block quote format altered) (quoting Rohlfing v.
 Moses Akiona, Ltd., 45 Haw. 373, 397, 369 P.2d 96, 108 (1961),
 overruled on other grounds by Greene v. Texeira, 54 Haw. 231,
 505 P.2d 1169 (1973)). See Kang, 59 Haw. at 663, 587 P.2d at
 
292-93 (stating that the same analysis is used in a jury-waived
 trial).
 
The circuit court concluded that "[the Decedent]
 
experienced conscious pain and suffering from the shaking or
 impact to which his father subjected him on or about September
 18, 2009, which led to [the Decedent's] death two days later."
 Although the autopsy report indicated that the Decedent became
 "unresponsive at, or close to, the time he suffered his head
 trauma[,]" the circuit court determined that the Decedent "was
 old enough to experience the fright, pain, suffering, emotional
 duress and distress, confusion, and trauma that resulted from
 being physically attacked by his father, up until the time [the
 Decedent] was rendered unresponsive." DHS did not challenge
 these conclusions.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has determined that pain and 
suffering is measured by what the trier of fact "considers will reasonably compensate the plaintiff for the pain and suffering or anguish in light of the intensity and extend thereof as disclosed by the evidence." Barretto v. Akau, 51 Haw. 383, 394, 463 P.2d 
917, 923 (1969) (ellipsis, citation, and internal quotation marks omitted). Based on the conscious pain and suffering that the Decedent experienced prior to his unresponsiveness, the circuit court's award of pain and suffering was not erroneous. 
30
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Loss of Enjoyment of Life
 
DHS contends that "since [the Decedent] lost
 
consciousness almost immediately and there was no evidence of how
 
he had enjoyed life or how he would have enjoyed life, only

 
minimal damages could be awarded" for loss of enjoyment of life. 
DHS argues that, like damages for pain and suffering, damages for
 loss of enjoyment of life should also be limited "to the period
 between an injury and the loss of consciousness."
 
In Ozaki v. Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Discovery Bay, 
87 Hawai
'i 273, 954 P.2d 652 (App. 1998) aff'd in part, rev'd in 
part on other grounds by, 87 Hawai 'i 265, 954 P.2d 644 (1998), 
this court specifically held that recovery for loss of enjoyment of life is available in wrongful death actions. Id. at 289, 954 
P.2d at 668. This court noted that "[t]o hold otherwise would permit one who is merely injured by a tortfeasor to recover damages for loss of enjoyment of life but prevent the estate of one who dies from his or her injuries from a similar recovery." Id.; see HRS § 663-7 (1993).
7 The court noted that 
[t]his view was vividly expressed in Jones v. Shaffer, 573
So.2d 740, 746 (Miss. 1990)(concurring opinion), which
stated:
 
A person tortiously injured, and permanently disabled
in consequence, may recover for the diminished joy of
living. If this view does not hold for wrongful death
cases, our law gives off unfortunate incentives. We
invite the tortfeasor who runs over a pedestrian to
back up and do it again and be sure his victim is
dead.
 
Ozaki, 87 Hawai 'i at 289, n.36, 954 P.2d at 668 n.36. 
"[I]t is generally accepted that unless the survival
 
statute limits damages, the recovery is the same one the decedent
 
would have been entitled to at death." Id. at 288, 954 P.2d at
 
7
 HRS § 663-7 provides:
 
§ 663–7. Survival of cause of action.
 
A cause of action arising out of a wrongful
act, neglect, or default, except a cause of
action for defamation or malicious
 prosecution, shall not be extinguished by
reason of the death of the injured person.
The cause of action shall survive in favor of
 the legal representative of the person and
any damages recovered shall form part of the
estate of the deceased.
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
667 (brackets, citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
DHS argues that a decedent's damages for loss of enjoyment of
 life should, in fact, be limited by death. Insofar as DHS's
 argument runs counter to our holding in
 Ozaki, we decline to
 
adopt DHS's approach and hold that, under HRS § 663-7, a
 decedent's recovery for loss of enjoyment of life is not limited
 by death. 
IV. CONCLUSION

 
The September 17, 2013 Final Judgment and the December
 
3, 2013 First Amended Final Judgment both entered in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Caron M. Inagaki
Randolph R. Slaton
Henry S. Kim
(on the reply brief)
Dana A. Barbata
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Paul V.K. Smith

 
Christopher A. Dias
(Schutter Dias & Smith)
and
 John S. Carroll for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
32

 