NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000087
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NINO ABRIGO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-01924)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Nino Abrigo (Abrigo) appeals from
 
the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment"
 
entered on December 30, 2016 in the District Court of the First
 Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court),
1 convicting him of
 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant under
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1).
 
On appeal, Abrigo contends that the district court
 
erred in denying Abrigo's motion to strike Officer Ostachuk's
 testimony related to the standardized field sobriety test (SFST)
 and alleged traffic violations.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
 
Abrigo argues that the district court improperly
 
dismissed Abrigo's motion to strike Officer Ostachuk's testimony
 regarding Abrigo's results on the SFSTs, because at the time of
 Officer Ostachuk's testimony at trial, Officer Ostachuk had no
 present recollection of administering the SFSTs to Abrigo.
 During the trial proceedings on December 15 and 30, 2016, Officer
 Ostachuk indicated several times that he did not presently recall
 Abrigo's performance on the SFSTs, but his testimony regarding
 Abrigo's performance on the SFSTs was based only on what Officer
 Ostachuk had written in his SFST form.
2
 
Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 612 indicates that "a
witness may use a writing to refresh his memory for the
purpose of testifying . . . ." A writing, such as a policereport, used to refresh a witness's memory is ordinarily not
submitted into evidence. 3 J. Wigmore, Evidence in Trial at 
Common Law  § 763, at 142 (Chadbourn rev. ed. 1970). When 
used to refresh the witness's present recollection, a
writing is solely employed to jog the memory of the
testifying witness. 1 J. Strong, McCormick on Evidence  § 9,
at 29 (4th ed. 1992). Accordingly, when a writing is used
to refresh a witness's recollection, the witness shouldtestify from "a memory thus revived," resulting in testimonyfrom present recollection, not a memory of the writing
itself. Id. "A witness's recollection must be revived 
after he or she consults the particular writing or object
offered as a stimulus so that . . . the resulting testimonyrelates to a present recollection." 3 J. Weinstein & M. 
Berger, Weinstein's Evidence  ¶ 61201, at 612-16 (1995). If 
the writing fails to rekindle the witness's memory, the
witness cannot be permitted to testify as to the contents ofthe writing unless the writing is otherwise admitted into
evidence. 28 C. Wright & V. Gold, Federal Practice and 
Procedure: Evidence  § 6183, at 463 (1993). 
Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai' i at 144, 906 P.2d at 630 (brackets 
omitted).
 
Here, it is clear that Officer Ostachuk's testimony
 
regarding Abrigo's performance on the SFSTs was not from a
 
present recollection. However, the State of Hawai' i (State) 
2
 Although defense counsel incorrectly asked Officer Ostachuk several
times if he had an "independent recollection" of the SFSTs rather than a
"present recollection" of the SFSTs, Officer Ostachuk's testimony leads us to
the conclusion that the he did not have a "present recollection" of Abrigo's
perfomance on the SFSTs at the time he testified, as he indicated that his
testimony was based only on what he had recently read in his report. See
 
State v. Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai 'i 138, 144, 906 P.2d 624, 630 (App. 1995). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that Officer Ostachuk's testimony on Abrigo's performance
 
on the SFSTs was admissible rather as a past recollection
 recorded under HRE Rule 802.1(4), which provides:
 
The following statements previously made by witnesses who
testify at the trial or hearing are not excluded by the
hearsay rule:
 
. . . 
(4) Past recollection recorded. A memorandum or record
 
concerning a matter about which the witness once had
knowledge but now has insufficient recollection to enable
the witness to testify fully and accurately, shown to have
been made or adopted by the witness when the matter was
fresh in the witness' memory and to reflect that knowledge
correctly. If admitted, the memorandum or record may be
read into evidence but may not itself be received as an
exhibit unless offered by an adverse party. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
A record or memorandum is admissible as an exception to the
hearsay rule if the proponent can show that the witness once
 
had personal knowledge of the matter, that the record or
memorandum was prepared or adopted by him when it was fresh
in his memory, that it accurately reflected his knowledge,
and that the witness currently has insufficient recollection
to enable him to testify fully and accurately[.]  The
 
witness may testify either that he remembers making an
accurate recording of the event in question which he now no
longer sufficiently remembers, that he routinely makes
accurate records of this kind, or, if the witness has
entirely forgotten the exact situation in which the
recording was made, that he is confident from the
circumstances that he would not have written or adopted such
description of the facts unless that description truly
described his observations at the time.
 
State v. Keohokapu, 127 Hawai' i 91, 106, 276 P.3d 660, 675 (2012) 
(quoting M. Graham, Federal Practice and Procedure: Evidence §
 
7046 at 486–91 (interim ed. 2006)) (emphasis added).
 
We have noted that the purpose of the past recollection
 
recorded hearsay exception "is not to refresh the memory of a
 witness who then testifies with his testimony becoming the
 evidence. Its purpose is to provide that recorded recollection,
 which satisfies certain requirements, may be used as evidence
 when the witness now has insufficient recollection to testify."
 State v. Bloss, 3 Haw. App. 274, 278, 649 P.2d 1176, 1179 (1982)
 (quoting 11 J. Moore, Evidence, § 803(5)(5) (2nd ed. 1982)).
 
The facts in Bloss are similar to the facts in the
 
instant case. In Bloss, a police officer, Officer Barros, issued
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the defendant a parking citation. At trial, Officer Barros had
 
insufficient recollection to enable him to testify fully and
 accurately as to the time the parking citation had been issued.
 After looking at the parking citation at trial, Officer Barros
 testified that the time he recorded on the citation was 7:00 a.m.
 In concluding that the requirements of HRE Rule 802.1(4) were met
 as to Officer Barros' testimony, we reasoned that "the traffic
 citation . . . was a record concerning [defendant]'s parking
 violation, of which [Officer] Barros once had personal knowledge
 but at trial had insufficient recollection to enable him to
 testify fully and accurately. The citation was made by Barros
 when the matter was fresh in his memory, in fact
 contemporaneously, and accurately reflected Barros' knowledge of
 the matter." Id.
 
Similarly, in this case, the SFST form filled out by
 
Officer Ostachuk was a record concerning Abrigo's OVUII charge of
 which Officer Ostachuk once had personal knowledge but at trial
 had insufficient recollection to enable him to testify fully and
 accurately. Officer Ostachuk testified that he filled out the
 SFST form at the same time he administered the SFSTs to Abrigo,
 and that he regularly makes accurate records of this kind,
 thereby evidencing that the SFST form accurately reflected
 Officer Ostachuk's knowledge of the matter. Thus, we conclude
 that the requirements of HRE Rule 802.1(4) were met.
 
Abrigo further argues that Officer Ostachuk's testimony 
on the SFST results violated Abrigo's right to confrontation and cross-examination. Our supreme court has adopted the approach set forth in Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), which recognizes that "a witness who appears at trial and testifies satisfies the confrontation clause, even though the witness claims a lack of memory that precludes them from testifying about the subject matter of their out-of-court statement." State v. 
Delos Santos, 124 Hawai' i 130, 145, 238 P.3d 162, 177 (2010). In 
other words, "Hawai' i's confrontation clause, like its federal 
counterpart, is not implicated where . . . the hearsay declarant 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
attends trial and is cross-examined about his or her prior 
out-of-court statement." State v. Fields, 115 Hawai' i 503, 517, 
168 P.3d 955, 969 (2007). 
In the instant case, despite his inability to presently 
recall Abrigo's performance on the SFSTs, Officer Ostachuk appeared at Abrigo's trial and Abrigo was able to cross-examine Officer Ostachuk about the SFST form and his inability to "independently" recall Abrigo's performance on the SFSTs. Therefore, we conclude that the admission of Officer Ostachuk's testimony on the SFSTs did not violate the confrontation clause because Officer Ostachuk appeared for cross-examination at trial. See Delos Santos, 124 Hawai' i at 144, 238 P.3d at 176. 
Based on the foregoing, the "Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" entered by the district
 court on December 30, 2016 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 25, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 