NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0001006
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ALYSSA M. BAILEY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JOHN ANTHONY SIRACUSA and SANDRA G. SIRACUSA,
dba METRO MOTORS, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0278-02)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Alyssa M. Bailey (Bailey) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed July 10, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the
1
First Circuit  (circuit court) in favor of Defendants-Appellees
 
John Anthony Siracusa (
Siracusa) and Sandra G. Siracusa, after a
 
bench trial.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Bailey's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
Bailey first contends the circuit court erred by
 
failing to find Siracusa's statement that a vehicle sold to her
 
by Siracusa, co-owner of Metro Motors, "was in good working
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order" was false. In light of undisputed evidence that the
 
vehicle was driven for 6,657 miles during the eight month period
 
after it was sold to Bailey, and the unchallenged finding that
 
except for an oil change Bailey did not repair or service the
 
vehicle the entire time she owned it, the circuit court's finding
 
that the vehicle was in "good working order" was not clearly
 
erroneous. Chun v. Bd. of Trustees of the Employees' Ret. Sys.
 
of the State of Hawai 'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005).
 
Bailey's second contention is that Siracusa's statement
 
that the vehicle was in good working order misled her in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 480-2 (2008 Repl.).2
 
Under HRS § 480-2:
 
A deceptive act or practice is (1) a representation,
omission, or practice that (2) is likely to mislead
consumers acting reasonably under the circumstances where
(3) the representation, omission, or practice is material.
The representation, omission, or practice is material if it
is likely to affect a consumer's choice. Whether
 information is likely to affect a consumer's choice is an
objective inquiry, turning on whether the act or omission is
likely to mislead consumers as to information important to
consumers in making a decision regarding the product or
service.
 
2
 HRS § 480-2 provides:
 
§480-2 Unfair competition, practices, declared unlawful.
(a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive
acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce
are unlawful.
 
(b) In construing this section, the courts and the
office of consumer protection shall give due consideration
to the rules, regulations, and decisions of the Federal
Trade Commission and the federal courts interpreting section
5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C.
45(a)(1)), as from time to time amended.
 
(c) No showing that the proceeding or suit would be in
the public interest (as these terms are interpreted under
section 5(b) of the Federal Trade Commission Act) is
necessary in any action brought under this section.
 
(d) No person other than a consumer, the attorney
general or the director of the office of consumer protection
may bring an action based upon unfair or deceptive acts or
practices declared unlawful by this section.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nakamura v. Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., 122 Hawai 'i 238, 247­
48, 225 P.3d 680, 689-90 (2010) (citations and internal quotation 
marks omitted). 
"Any contract or agreement" that violates HRS § 480-2 
"is void and is not enforceable at law or in equity." HRS § 480­
12 (2008 Repl.). The first and third elements of a deceptive act 
or practice are present in Siracusa's statement, because it 
represented the condition of the vehicle and the vehicle's 
condition at the time of sale was material (i.e., likely to 
affect a consumer's choice). See Nakamura, 122 Hawai 'i at 247­
48, 225 P.3d at 689-90. Whether Siracusa's statement was "likely to mislead consumers acting reasonably under the 
circumstances[,]" the second element, presents a mixed question 
of law to fact that we address under a "clearly erroneous" 
standard. Id.; and see Chun, 106 Hawai
'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 
353.
 
Siracusa asserts that he informed Bailey, "there is no 
such thing as a perfect used car" and explained Metro Motors' disclaimer, stating, "used means used." Moreover, the Buyer's 
Guide provided to Bailey and signed by her clearly stated the car 
was being purchased "as is - no warranty." These statements were 
part of the record the circuit court considered when it reviewed 
the circumstances under which Bailey alleges she was misled by 
Siracusa's statement that the vehicle was in good working order. 
Because the circuit court could have reasonably concluded that a 
customer who was acting reasonably under these circumstances 
would not likely be led to believe the vehicle had no defects, we 
conclude the circuit court did not clearly err by rejecting 
Bailey's claim under HRS § 480-2. See Nakamura, 122 Hawai
'i at 
247, 225 P.3d at 689. 
Bailey's third contention is that the circuit court's
 
conclusion that she failed to prove she incurred economic damages
 as a result of Siracusa's statements constitutes reversible
 
error. The circuit court did not err in finding Bailey "offered
 
no evidence of economic damages resulting from the sale of the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Subject Vehicle" and concluded "[Siracusa] did not engage in any
 
act or omission that legally caused [Bailey] to sustain any
 
damages."3
 
Bailey's final contention is that the circuit court
 
reversibly erred by failing to find "actionable confusion
 
resulted from the way the particular form [Purchase Order and
 
Invoice] was completed" and that the allegedly confusing form
 
constituted an actionable claim under HRS § 481A-3(a)(12) (2008
 
Repl.). Under HRS § 481A-3(a)(12):
§481A-3 Deceptive trade practices.  (a) A person
engages in a deceptive trade practice when, in the course of
the person's business, vocation, or occupation, the person:
 
. . . . 
(12) Engages in any other conduct which similarly
creates a likelihood of confusion or of
 misunderstanding.
 
Bailey points out that the words "IS A" are not
 
"crossed out" in the Purchase Order and Invoice and alleges this
 
created a likelihood of confusion regarding whether she had a 3­
day right to rescind the purchase. We acknowledge that the
 
document alone is not conclusive because, although there are
 
markings around the words "IS A," those markings do not actually
 
cross through the words. Therefore the circuit court's FOF 10 is
 
erroneous to the extent it finds that Siracusa "scratched out"
 
the words "IS A." However, this error was harmless because there
 
was testimonial evidence to support the material finding that
 
Bailey was informed that there was no three day right to rescind
 
the sale.
 
The Purchase Order and Invoice presents ambiguous
 
evidence of the right to rescind because neither "IS A" nor "IS
 
NO" is emphasized or negated. Although the Purchase Order and
 
Invoice failed to definitively indicate whether the agreement
 
included a right to rescind, the record shows that Siracusa and
 
3
 Bailey paid $3,300 for the vehicle and received $4,818.38 for the
same vehicle from her insurance company after the vehicle was stolen and
damaged beyond repair. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Metro Motors mechanic Hugo Allen (Allen) orally informed Bailey
 
that she would not have a right to rescind the agreement within
 
three days. Siracusa stated: 
I explained to [Bailey] that since the sale of the Subject
Vehicle was not a door to door sale, she did not have a
three day right to rescind the sale. In fact, I told
[Bailey] that METRO MOTORS never allows the rescission of a
car purchase, but rather extends customers a six month
exchange privilege. 
Siracusa's statement was corroborated by Allen. In the
 
context of a fact finder's credibility determination, the Ninth
 
Circuit held, 
[s]o long as there remains substantial evidence supporting
the [fact finder's] conclusions on credibility and the error
does not negate the validity of the [fact finder's] ultimate
credibility conclusion, such is deemed harmless and does not
warrant reversal.
 
Carmickle v. Comm'r, Soc. Sec. Admin., 533 F.3d 1155, 1162 (9th
 
Cir. 2008) (original brackets, citations, internal quotation
 
marks and ellipses omitted). 
Because substantial evidence supports the circuit
 
court's conclusion that the parties' agreement did not include a
 
right to rescind, we hold that the circuit court's finding that
 
the words "IS A" were "scratched out" on the Purchase Order and
 
Invoice was a harmless error and does not warrant reversal of the
 
circuit court's judgment. See id.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed July 10, 
2012 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 10, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Charles S. Lotsof
 
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Philip R. Brown
Effie Steiger
Justin M. Chu
 (Law Offices of Philip R. Brown)
for Defendants-Appellees.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
6
 