  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL ROBERT LAWRENCE, Defendant-Appellant
and
 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Party-in-Interest-Appellee.
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000378
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 99-0-0675)

 
NOVEMBER 30, 2016

 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FOLEY and LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Robert Lawrence (Lawrence) with the 
second-degree murder of Melchor Talaro Tabag (Tabag). Lawrence 
killed Tabag, a vacuum cleaner salesperson who had been 
demonstrating products at Lawrence's home, by striking Tabag in the head with a hammer and stabbing him in the neck and chest. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lawrence subsequently dismembered Tabag's body. In 2002, after a
 
jury-waived bench trial, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court)  found Lawrence not guilty of second-degree
murder by reason of physical or mental disease, disorder, or

 
defect. Based on testimony that Lawrence presented a risk of
 danger to others, the Circuit Court ordered him committed to the
 custody of the Director of the Department of Health (Director) to
 be placed in an appropriate institution for custody, care, and
 treatment. The Circuit Court entered its "Judgment of Acqutial
 and Commitment" which reflected these rulings on April 3, 2002.
 
On December 18, 2013, the Director filed a motion for 
an order authorizing the involuntary administration of psychotropic medication to Lawrence. 
The motion was based on a 
request by Thomas L. Cook, M.D. (Dr. Cook), Lawrence's treating psychiatrist at the Hawai
'i State Hospital. After an evidentiary 
2
hearing, the Circuit Court  granted the motion and filed its
"Order Granting [Director's] Motion for an Order Authorizing the

 
Involuntary Administration of Medication" (Medication Order) on
 December 26, 2013.
 
Lawrence appeals from the Medication Order. 
On appeal,
 
Lawrence contends that the Circuit Court erred in issuing the
 Medication Order because there was insufficient evidence to
 support it. We disagree and affirm the Circuit Court. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In the morning of March 27, 1999, Tabag, a vacuum
 
cleaner salesperson, demonstrated his products to Lawrence at a
 home that Lawrence shared with his parents. Lawrence's mother
 later saw Tabag's body lying on the floor with a stream of blood
 on his left forehead. Lawrence was there and was holding a
 hammer in his right hand. Lawrence's mother became scared and
 
1The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided.
 
2The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
locked herself in her bedroom. Lawrence left the residence with
 
Tabag's body and drove away in Tabag's car. 
The police later arrested Lawrence after seeing him
 
drive into a gas station in Tabag's car. From the car, the
 police recovered a dagger type knife, bone saw, and claw hammer
 which appeared to have blood on them. The bone saw also appeared
 to have flesh and hair on it. Lawrence later admitted that he
 had "chopped up" Tabag's body and stated that he felt "high" when
 he killed Tabag. 
The State filed a criminal Complaint against Lawrence,
 
charging him with the second-degree murder of Tabag.
 After a jury-waived bench trial, the Circuit Court found that the
 State proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Lawrence "struck
 Melchor Tabag on the head with a hammer, stabbed him in the neck
 and chest, and caused the death of Melchor Tabag"; that Lawrence
 engaged in this conduct intentionally or knowingly; and that
 Lawrence intended or knew that his conduct would result in
 Tabag's death. 
The Circuit Court, however, further found that Lawrence
 
was not guilty of the charged second-degree murder by reason of
 physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect. The Circuit
 Court ruled that Lawrence had proven by a preponderance of the
 evidence the affirmative defense that (1) at the time of the
 charged offense, he was suffering from a physical or mental
 disease, disorder, or defect; and (2) as the result of such
 physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect, he lacked
 substantial capacity either to appreciate the wrongfulness of his
 conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law
 (hereinafter, the "insanity defense"). In support of its
 insanity defense ruling, the Circuit Court cited the opinions of
 mental health experts who treated or examined Lawrence that
 Lawrence suffered from schizophrenia and that he believed killing
 Tabag was part of his "mission." To support its finding that
 Lawrence suffered from schizophrenia and was not malingering, the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court cited evidence that while in custody after his
 
arrest, Lawrence's symptoms improved after the administration of
 anti-psychotic medication, but that six weeks after the
 medication was stopped, Lawrence showed psychotic symptoms which
 included "uncontrollable thoughts to chop up people[,]" and that
 Lawrence's symptoms again improved when the medication was
 resumed. The Circuit Court found that Lawrence had proven by a
 preponderance of the evidence that 
at the time of the alleged offense, the Defendant was acting
pursuant to a delusion as to his mission and that he lacked
substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his
conduct and that he lacked substantial capacity to conform
his conduct to the requirements of the law, due to a
physical or mental disease, disorder or defect.
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court adjudged Lawrence not
 
guilty based on his insanity defense. In addition, based on the
 
testimony that Lawrence presented a risk of danger to others, the
Circuit Court ordered that Lawrence be "committed to the custody
 of the Director . . . to be placed in an appropriate institution
 for custody, care and treatment." On April 3, 2002, the Circuit
 Court entered its Judgment of Acquittal and Commitment, which
 acquitted Lawrence based on his insanity defense and ordered him
 committed to the custody of the Director, pursuant to Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 704-411(1)(a) (1993).
3
   
 
3When the Circuit Court entered its Judgment of Acquittal and
Commitment, HRS § 704-411(1)(a) provided, in relevant part: 
(1) When a defendant is acquitted on the ground of physical
or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding responsibility,
the court shall, on the basis of the report made pursuant to
section 704-404, if uncontested, or the medical or psychological
evidence given at the trial or at a separate hearing, make an
order as follows:
 
(a)	 The court shall order the defendant to be committed to
 the custody of the director of health to be placed in
an appropriate institution for custody, care, and
treatment if the court finds that the defendant
 presents a risk of danger to oneself or others and
that the defendant is not a proper subject for
conditional release; . . . .
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
From the time that the Circuit Court entered its 
Judgment of Acquittal and Commitment in 2002, Lawrence has 
remained in custody, either at the Hawai 'i State Hospital (HSH) 
or at the Halawa Correction Facility (Halawa). Lawrence was apparently prosecuted for assaulting an HSH physician in 2008, and he was incarcerated at Halawa until November 2013. Lawrence has a history of violent behavior while in custody, and the Circuit Court has issued a series of orders authorizing his involuntary medication. 
A.
 
On December 12, 2007, while Lawrence was committed at
 
HSH, the Director filed the first motion for an order authorizing
 the involuntary administration of medication to Lawrence. The
 motion asserted that Lawrence's inconsistency in taking, and his
 refusal to take, medication had resulted in "aggressive,
 assaultive and dangerous behaviors which renders him an imminent
 danger to other patients and staff at HSH." The Director's
 proposed treatment plan described numerous incidents of
 Lawrence's violent behavior as well as his delusional thoughts,
 including Lawrence's attacking multiple patients without
 provocation, making threats against patients and staff, and
 maintaining a belief that his "work" included the killing of
 others. The most recent incident described in the proposed
 treatment plan occurred on December 1, 2007. During that
 incident, Lawrence made threatening comments to HSH staff, and
 when staff members approached him to offer emergency medications,
 Lawrence refused to take the medications, and an altercation
 ensued. Lawrence hit several staff members, and as a result of
 the altercation, four staff members suffered injuries, including
 broken ribs, dental damage, facial bruising and neck strain, and
 a dislocated shoulder.
4
 
4In addition to the December 1, 2007, incident, the proposed treatment
plan described the following incidents: On November 23, 2007, Lawrence was
(continued...)
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court issued an order granting the State's
 
motion on December 19, 2007, finding, among other things, that 
Lawrence was "dangerous to others in that he has threatened and
 assaulted staff members and other patients[.]" The Circuit
 Court's 2007 order authorized the involuntary administration of
 medication to Lawrence until December 19, 2008. Lawrence did not
 appeal the 2007 order.
 
B.
 
On December 11, 2008, the Director filed a second
 
motion for an order authorizing the involuntary administration of
 medication to Lawrence based on his "continued violent and
 assaultive behaviors towards others." In support of the motion,
 the Director asserted that Lawrence continued to refuse
 medications and detailed two specific incidents of violence
 engaged in by Lawrence in 2008. In one incident, Lawrence,
 shortly after being released from restraints, punched another
 patient in the head four or five times, without provocation, and
 stated he would do so again in the future. In the second
 incident, again without provocation and without any signs that he
 was upset or angry, Lawrence repeatedly punched an HSH staff
 physician in the head and face after the physician had completed
 a physical examination of Lawrence.
 
On December 19, 2008, the Circuit Court issued an order
 
granting the State's motion, which authorized the involuntary
 administration of medication to Lawrence until December 19, 2009. 
4(...continued)
found by a nurse holding another patient in what Lawrence referred to as a
choke hold position, and Lawrence said he planned to "choke him . . . out[.]"
On November 17, 2007, Lawrence assaulted another patient, and Lawrence stated
that "he better respect me or he's gonna get it." On October 18, 2007,
Lawrence assaulted another patient with no apparent provocation. On September
23, 2007, Lawrence made threats to another patient and staff and attempted to
assault a staff member. On September 16, 2007, Lawrence assaulted another
patient without provocation. On April 30, 2007, Lawrence assaulted another
patient. On April 9, 2007, Lawrence assaulted another patient.
 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lawrence did not appeal the 2008 order.5
 
C.
 
Lawrence was apparently prosecuted for assaulting the 
HSH physician during the 2008 incident. He was incarcerated at
 
Halawa and remained there until November 2013. Lawrence's
 psychiatric records from Halawa indicate that he was "delusional,
 depressed, and had homicidal ideations at times," and that a
 psychiatrist had determined that high doses of antidepressant and
 antipsychotic medications were necessary. Lawrence, however,
 consented to take and was compliant with his prescribed
 medications while at Halawa, and therefore, no order authorizing
 the involuntary administration of medication had been sought
 while he was at Halawa.
 
D.
 
On November 29, 2013, Lawrence was returned to HSH from
 
Halawa. Immediately upon Lawrence's return, he refused all
 psychotropic medications. "Lawrence refused to sign all
 paperwork including the consent to receive medication[,]" stating
 that "[m]edications don't do anything for me. I've learned to be
 good without them." Despite these assurances, Lawrence began
 engaging in threatening behavior from the day of his return. 
Lawrence engaged in three threatening incidents that
 
involved Mario Espenal (Espenal), a psychiatric technician
 assigned to Lawrence's unit, Unit H.
6 Espenal had no contact
 
with Lawrence prior to Lawrence's readmission to HSH on November
 29, 2013.
 
In the first incident, which occurred on the day
 
Lawrence was readmitted to HSH, Espenal asked Lawrence to step
 outside Lawrence's room so Espenal could unlock the bathroom
 
5On March 9, 2009, after a further hearing, the Circuit Court issued an
order amending its 2008 order authorizing the involuntary administration of
medication to Lawrence to include the involuntary administration of
electroconvulsive therapy. Lawrence did not appeal the 2009 amended order.
 
6Unit H is an Administrative Segregation Unit, which "is a unit designed
for those inmates . . . considered dangerous among the regular unit
population." 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
door. Lawrence complied, but later approached Espenal and
 
stated, "I don't know you, but I didn't like the way you told me
 to step out of my room. Didn't like the way you spoke to me." 
Lawrence then paused, looked Espenal directly in the eyes, and
 said, "Don't do it again." Based on Lawrence's tone and
 confrontational manner, Espenal felt threatened, and based on
 Espenal's background and training, he interpreted Lawrence's
 statements as a threat. Espenal activated his PMT emergency
 alarm system, which sent out a hospital-wide distress call. When
 Lawrence saw what Espenal was doing, he said, "Go ahead and push
 your little PMT alarm[,]" smirked at Espenal, and went back in
 his room. 
The second incident occurred on December 11, 2013. 
Espenal observed Lawrence standing in a line talking to a staff
 member whom Lawrence appeared to know. Lawrence greeted the
 staff member and then told him, "Hey, you better put these new
 guys in check . . . before I catch another murder charge." 
Lawrence emphasized the last part of this remark. Espenal
 interpreted Lawrence's statement to be directed at Espenal and
 other new staff members in Unit H.
 
The third incident occurred on December 12, 2013. 
Espenal observed Lawrence become upset when a female staff member
 advised Lawrence that he could not do his laundry. Lawrence told
 the female staff member, "Fuck you, Bitch . . . . I'm gonna do my
 laundry anyway" and attempted to walk past her. Another staff
 member closed the access door, and an additional staff member
 arrived. Lawrence then relented, but as he walked away, he
 looked at Espenal and the female staff member and said, "You'll
 see what's gonna happen to you." Espenal viewed Lawrence's
 statement as a threat.
 
In addition to the three incidents involving Espenal, a
 
search of Lawrence's room on December 11, 2013, revealed that he
 was concealing contraband in his room. The search was prompted
 by reports of missing pens, which were a cause for concern
 because in Lawrence's unit, "any sharp object can be considered a
 
8
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
weapon." During the search, two pens and a highlighter were
 
found in Lawrence's room as well as other contraband, including
 staples, a metal earring, a cord made of various fabrics, and
 small plastic bags. Plastic bags are considered contraband
 because they can be tied together to form a cord or noose. 
Patients in Unit H are informed that they are not allowed to keep
 pens and cords. Lawrence denied that the contraband found in his
 
room had been there before the search was conducted. 
III.
 
A.
 
On December 18, 2013, the Director filed a third motion
 
for an order authorizing the involuntary administration of
 
medication based on concerns regarding Lawrence's dangerousness.
 Attached to the motion was a proposed treatment plan prepared by
 Dr. Cook, a Staff Psychiatrist and Lawrence's treating
 psychiatrist at HSH. In the proposed treatment plan, Dr. Cook
 
recounted Lawrence's violent and dangerous behavior during his
 
prior commitment at HSH:
 
This is [Lawrence's] third time at Hawaii State Hospital.
Formerly, Mr. Lawrence exhibited frequent violence towards
staff and peers. In the course of 2007 he assaulted staff
 and other patients at least eight times, and often when he
had just been taken out of restraints. He spoke of punching
other patients as a "job" that he was hired to do. He spoke
of a list of one hundred people he intended to kill. At
 times he said he was a "hit man" hired by the Hawaii State
Hospital, and he spoke as if he was on staff at the
hospital. He had at one time snuck into another patient's
room, and was found lying on another patient's back, holding
him in a choke hold. When interviewed later, he said he had
trouble deciding whether to rape or kill him.
 
Dr. Cook reported that since being readmitted to HSH on November
 
29, 2013, Lawrence had tested unit rules by asking other patients
 for their food wrappers, had spoken in a grandiose manner similar
 to his prior admissions, and had boasted about "sneaking [drugs]
 into prison." Dr. Cook also described the November 29, 2013,
 threat against Espenal. Dr. Cook stated that "due to
 [Lawrence's] current presentation and his considerable history of
 violence, it is not possible to treat him safely without
 medication." 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Cook's proposed treatment plan described the
 
effects of various recommended medications, including
 
antipsychotic medications, that may be used to treat Lawrence,
 and contained the following analysis:
 
4. Medical Appropriateness of Recommended Medications:
 
The above-recommended medications are current standards of
 
care and are used to treat patients with psychotic symptoms,
mood symptoms, and agitation. These medications, singly or
in combination, should stabilize Mr. Lawrence's dangerous
behavior and psychiatric symptoms, enabling the patient to
participate in treatment to restore baseline level of
functioning and return safely to the community on
conditional release.
 
5. Less Restrictive Alternatives:
 Other alternative, less intrusive treatments such as
supportive one-to-one therapy, milieu therapy, the token
economy, and Mall program have not been sufficient to
restore baseline level of functioning and for safe return to
the community. These interventions may be efficacious in
conjunction with medication, but are not effective
substitutes for medication.
 
6. Specific Medications or Treatment Are Essential for the
Patient's Safety and for the Safety of Others:
 The patient's dangerous behaviors are most likely
exacerbated by mental illness and are not likely to improve
or stabilize without treatment.
 
Untreated mental illness often becomes refractory. In
 
addition, current evidence supports the view that untreated
psychotic symptoms are associated with irreversible cell
loss in the brain that medications can prevent. Evidence
 has shown that prognosis for function decreases in direct
correlation with duration of time psychotic symptoms remain
untreated.
 
The proposed treatment plan concluded by stating:
 
Mr. Lawrence has a long term delusional belief that he is a
hit-man with a mandate to kill one hundred people. He was
 demonstrably dangerous before at our hospital and at Halawa
he was taking medication that he is now refusing to take.
He is again talking in a grandiose fashion and testing
limits with us. He has behaved dangerously already.
 
It is my professional opinion he will become violent soon,
and that he cannot be safely treated without medication.
 
(Formatting altered.)
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on the Director's 2013
 
motion on December 26, 2013, during which the Director presented
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the testimony of Espenal and Dr. Cook, and Dr. Cook's proposed
 
treatment plan was admitted in evidence. Lawrence did not
 present any of his own evidence.
 
At the hearing, Espenal testified about the three
 
incidents concerning Lawrence. Dr. Cook, who the parties
 stipulated was an expert in the field of psychiatry, provided his
 medical opinion that the proposed treatment plan was necessary
 and appropriate. Dr. Cook explained his concerns regarding
 Lawrence's dangerousness, confirmed that the recommended
 medications in the proposed treatment plan were medically
 appropriate, and explained why less intrusive alternatives were
 insufficient.
 
With respect to the danger posed by Lawrence, Dr. Cook
 
testified that "previous acts of violence [were] the highest
 indicator of risk of future acts of violence." Dr. Cook
 referenced Lawrence's history of violence, including numerous
 assaults during Lawrence's prior commitment at HSH and recent
 incidents involving Espenal, which Dr. Cook characterized as cold
 or veiled threats of assault, and the discovery of prohibited
 contraband in Lawrence's room. Dr. Cook also referenced
 Lawrence's "whole clinical picture," the diagnosis of a disorder
 that includes psychosis with agitation, and Lawrence's recent
 refusal to take psychotropic medications upon readmission to HSH
 after having been compliant in taking such medications while
 incarcerated at Halawa.
 
As to medical appropriateness, Dr. Cook confirmed that
 
the proposed treatment plan, which identified recommended
 medications, including antipsychotic medications, was "the only
 effective treatment" to forestall dangerousness. While
 acknowledging that in addition to their positive therapeutic
 benefits, the proposed medications had potentially adverse side
 effects, including some life-threatening conditions, Dr. Cook
 opined that the recommended medications were appropriate for
 Lawrence's treatment. 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Dr. Cook further opined that less intrusive
 
alternatives were either unavailable or would be ineffective. 
Dr. Cook identified seclusion and restraints as possible less
 intrusive alternatives, but explained that these alternatives,
 unlike medication, would not treat Lawrence's diagnosis. Dr.
 Cook also identified milieu therapy, animal therapy, recreational
 therapy, and psychotherapy as less intrusive alternatives, but
 noted that these alternatives, without medication, would be
 insufficient to treat Lawrence's psychosis and could only be used
 after the safety concerns presented by Lawrence were addressed. 
The Circuit Court granted the Director's motion and
 
issued the Medication Order on December 26, 2013. In the
 Medication Order, the Circuit Court found that: (1) Lawrence "is
 mentally ill in that he suffers from Schizoaffective Disorder,
 Most Recently Depressed, Poly Substance Dependence
 (Methamphetamine and Alcohol) in Remission in a Controlled
 Environment, Poly Substance Abuse (Cannabis, Cocaine) in
 Remission, and Antisocial [P]ersonality Disorder"; (2) Lawrence
 "is dangerous to others in that he has threatened to assault
 staff"; (3) the treatment plan proposed by Dr. Cook for Lawrence
 "is medically appropriate and the treatment described in the plan
 is in [Lawrence's] medical interest"; and (4) "[e]ven considering
 other less intrusive treatment alternatives, . . . involuntary
 administration of antipsychotic medication to [Lawrence] is
 essential to forestall [Lawrence's] danger to others, and is in
 [Lawrence's] best interest." Based on these findings, the
 
Circuit Court granted the Director's motion and authorized the
 
involuntary administration of medication in accordance with the
 treatment plan for one year, until December 26, 2014, subject to
 further order of the Circuit Court. Lawrence appeals from the
 Medication Order.
7
 
7Although the Medication Order terminated on December 26, 2014,
Lawrence argues, and we agree, that our review of the issues involved in this
appeal is not precluded on the ground of mootness. Lawrence has been
 committed to the custody of the Director for an indefinite period and is
likely subject to future requests by the Director for involuntary medication.
(continued...)
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)7
See Washington v. Harper, 494 U.S. 210, 218-19 (1990) (holding that the  
cessation of involuntary medication did not ren der a prisoner's case moot, as  
he continued to suffer from schizophrenia and i t was likely that involuntary  
medication of the prisoner with antipsychotic d rugs would recur, but for the 
decision being reviewed).
8We issued an order directing the parties in this case to address the
issue of appellate jurisdiction in their appellate briefs. 
9The supreme court in these cases did not indicate that it was
exercising appellate jurisdiction on some basis unique to the supreme court. 
13DISCUSSION
I.
At the outset, we consider whether the Medication Order
is an appealable order such that we may exercise jurisdiction
over this appeal.8The Hawai #i Supreme Court has implicitly held
that orders regarding the involuntary medication of a pretrial
defendant and orders relating to the release or commitment of a
defendant found not guilty based on an insanity defense are
appealable orders by exercising appellate jurisdiction over such
orders.  For example, in State v. Kotis , 91 Hawai #i 319, 984 P.2d
78 (1999), the supreme court exercised appellate jurisdiction and
reviewed an order authorizing the involuntary administration of
antipsychotic medications to a defendant found incompetent to
proceed to trial.  In State v. Miller, 84 Hawai# i 269, 933 P.2d
606 (1997), the supreme court reviewed an order denying the
motion of a defendant found not guilty based on an insanity
defense for conditional release or discharge from custody, and in
State v. Burgo , 71 Haw. 198, 787 P.2d 221 (1990), the supreme
court reviewed an order revoking the conditional discharge of a
defendant found not guilty based on an insanity defense. 
Although the supreme court did not specifically address appellate
jurisdiction in these cases, it presumably would not have decided
the cases on the merits if the contested orders were not
appealable.9  
A.
Lawrence appeals from the Medication Order pursuant to
HRS § 641-11 (Supp. 2015), which provides, in relevant part:  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Any party aggrieved by the judgment of a circuit court
in a criminal matter may appeal to the intermediate
appellate court, subject to chapter 602, in the manner andwithin the time provided by the rules of court. The
 sentence of the court in a criminal case shall be the
 judgment. 
As this case illustrates, a defendant found not guilty
 
based on an insanity defense may be committed to the custody of
 
the Director and thereby suffer the deprivation of his or her
 liberty for a prolonged, and indeed an indefinite, period of
 time. We conclude that a judgment of acquittal and commitment
 based on an insanity defense, as was entered against Lawrence in
 this case, constitutes a "sentence" for purposes of HRS § 641-11,
 and accordingly, the Medication Order constitutes an appealable
 post-judgment order.
 
Our conclusion is consistent with Miller and Burgo, in
 
which the supreme court exercised appellate jurisdiction over
 post-judgment orders issued after the defendants were found not
 guilty based on an insanity defense and were committed to the
 custody of the Director. Our conclusion is also consistent with
 the decisions of other jurisdictions that have held that the
 commitment of a defendant following an insanity acquittal
 constitutes a "sentence" or should be treated as a sentence. See
 
In re Personal Restraint of Well, 946 P.2d 750, 752-73 (Wash.
 1997) (concluding that an order of commitment imposed on a
 defendant after he was acquitted by reason of insanity
 constituted a "sentence" and a "judgment"); Connelly v.
 Commissioner of Correction, 780 A.2d 903, 913 (Conn. 2001)
 (concluding that the time spent by a defendant in custody after
 he was acquitted by reason of insanity should be treated as a
 "sentence" for purposes of applying a statute providing credit
 for time served).
10
 
10
State v. Baxley, 102 Hawai' i 130, 73 P.3d 668 (2003), is
distinguishable and does not require a contrary conclusion. In Baxley, the
supreme court did not decide whether a judgment of acquittal and commitmentbased on an insanity defense constituted an appealable judgment under HRS§ 641-11. Baxley, who was acquitted of Counts 1, 2, and 3 based on aninsanity defense, argued that he should have been acquitted of Count 3 based
(continued...)
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A post-judgment order is appealable in its own right if 
it meets the requirements of finality. See State v. Johnson, 96 
Hawai'i 462, 469, 32 P.3d 106, 113 (App. 2001); Foo v. State, 106 
Hawai'i 102, 102 P.3d 346 (2004) (reviewing a post-judgment order 
in a criminal case). Here, the Medication Order ended the post-
judgment proceedings, leaving nothing further to be accomplished, and was a final order. See Johnson, 96 Hawai
'i at 469, 32 P.3d 
at 113. As noted, a judgment of acquittal and commitment based on an insanity defense can result in prolonged deprivation of a defendant's liberty. In addition, the involuntary administration of medication constitutes a significant infringement on an individual's rights and interest in bodily integrity. It would be anomalous to construe HRS § 641-11 to preclude an appeal under the circumstances of this case. See Burgo, 71 Haw. at 202, 787 
P.2d at 223 ("[T]his court will not interpret a statute in a manner which produces an absurd result.") 
C.
 
We alternatively conclude that if a judgment of
 
acquittal and commitment based on an insanity defense is not an
 appealable judgment under HRS § 641-11, then the Medication Order
 is appealable under the collateral order doctrine. This
 conclusion is consistent with Kotis, in which the supreme court
 reviewed an order, like the Medication Order, that authorized the
 involuntary administration of antipsychotic medication.
 
10(...continued)
on insufficiency of the evidence to prove the charge, rather than based on
insanity. Id. at 131, 73 P.3d at 669. The supreme court concluded that
because Baxley would remain in the custody of the Director of Health pursuant
to his insanity acquittals on Counts 1 and 2, he could not show that he was
aggrieved by the judgment entered on Count 3. Id. at 133-34, 73 P.3d at 671­
72. The supreme court held that it lacked appellate jurisdiction to address
Baxley's arguments because he was not aggrieved by the trial court's judgment,
and not based on a conclusion that a judgment of acquittal and commitment
based on an insanity defense was not a sentence or an appealable judgment
under HRS § 641-11. The supreme court also held that it lacked jurisdiction
over Baxley's challenge to the trial court's consideration of certain records
in making its commitment decision because he failed to seek a post-acquittal
hearing provided for in HRS § 704-411 to address the issue of dangerousness.
Id. at 134-35, 73 P.3d at 672-73. The supreme court stated that the "proper
route" was for Baxley to seek a post-acquittal hearing provided for by the
statute. Id. at 135, 73 P.3d at 673. 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
An order is appealable under the collateral order
 
doctrine "if it: (1) fully disposes of the question at issue; (2)
 
resolves an issue completely collateral to the merits of the
 case; and (3) involves important rights which would be
 irreparably lost if review had to await a final judgment." State
 
v. Baranco, 77 Hawai
'i 351, 353-54, 884 P.2d 729, 731-32 (1994). 
Here, the Medication Order fully disposes of the
 
question of whether Lawrence can be subjected to involuntary
 medication, which is an issue completely collateral to the merits
 of his underlying criminal case. Moreover, if no final judgment
 was entered in Lawrence's case because his judgment of acquittal
 and commitment is not considered to be a "sentence" for purposes
 of HRS § 641-11, then Lawrence would never be able to obtain
 appellate review of the Medication Order, which overrides his
 right to refuse medication and his liberty interest in bodily
 integrity, if appellate review had to await the entry of a final
 judgment. 
II.
 
We now turn to the merits of Lawrence's appeal. 
Lawrence contends that there was insufficient evidence to support
 the Medication Order. We disagree.
 
In Kotis, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court established a 
three-part test that the trial court must apply in evaluating a request to involuntarily medicate a criminal defendant with antipsychotic drugs, where the request is based on a claim that the medication is necessary because the defendant poses a danger to himself or herself or others. In order to grant such involuntary medication request, the trial court must find: "(1) that the defendant actually poses a danger of physical harm to himself or herself or others; (2) that treatment with antipsychotic medication is medically appropriate, that is, in the defendant's medical interest; and (3) that, considering less intrusive alternatives, the treatment is essential to forestall the danger posed by the defendant." Kotis, 91 Hawaii at 334, 984 
P.2d at 93. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The standard of review on appeal is whether there is
 
substantial evidence in the record to support the trial court's
 
findings regarding the three-part test. Id. at 328, 345, 984
 
P.2d at 87, 104. Based on the applicable standard of review, we
 conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support the
 Medication Order.
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court found that Lawrence "is dangerous to
 
others in that he has threatened to assault staff[.]" This
 finding satisfied the first prong of the three-part test which
 requires the trial court to find "that the defendant actually
 poses a danger of physical harm to himself or herself or
 others[.]" There was substantial evidence in the record to
 support the Circuit Court's finding.
 
The record shows that Lawrence has a past history of
 
extreme violence. His underlying criminal prosecution involved
 Lawrence's killing of Tabag by hitting him on the head with a
 hammer and stabbing him in the neck and chest, and then
 dismembering Tabag's body. While committed to HSH, Lawrence
 engaged in numerous assaults on other patients and staff,
 including an assault on an HSH physician for which he was
 apparently prosecuted and imprisoned at Halawa. Although
 Lawrence was compliant in taking prescribed antipsychotic
 medication while imprisoned at Halawa, he refused such medication
 upon his release from prison and readmission to HSH. Immediately
 upon his return to HSH, Lawrence engaged in threatening incidents
 described by Espenal, and Lawrence was also found with contraband
 in his room that could potentially be used as weapons.
 
Lawrence disputes the characterization of his conduct 
in the incidents described by Espenal as threats of violence, and Lawrence attempts to draw innocuous inferences from his behavior. However, matters concerning the weight and credibility of the evidence and the inferences to be drawn are for the trier of fact, State v. Kam, 134 Hawai
'i 280, 287, 339 P.3d 1081, 1088 
(Hawai 'i App. 2014), and the Circuit Court found that Lawrence 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"has threatened to assault staff." Lawrence also suggests that
 
recent physical violence is required in order to find that he
 actually poses a danger of physical harm to others and that
 threatening conduct is not enough. Lawrence, however, provides
 no authority to support this suggestion. Lawrence's conduct in
 the incidents described by Espenal must be viewed in the context
 of Lawrence's long history of violence and the discovery of
 contraband that could be used as weapons in his room. We
 conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support the
 Circuit Court's finding of Lawrence's dangerousness to others and
 to satisfy the first prong of the three-part test. 
B.
 
With respect to the two remaining prongs of the test,
 
we conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the
 Circuit Court's findings: (1) that the proposed treatment plan is
 medically appropriate and in Lawrence's medical interest; and (2)
 that, considering less intrusive alternatives, the involuntary
 administration of antipsychotic medication to Lawrence is
 essential to forestall the danger he poses to others. 
Dr. Cook, Lawrence's treating psychiatrist at HSH, was
 
qualified, without objection, as an expert in the field of
 psychiatry, and his proposed treatment plan was introduced in
 evidence. In his proposed treatment plan, Dr. Cook provided an
 explanation of why the proposed treatment plan was medically
 appropriate, in Lawrence's medical interest, and essential to
 forestall the danger Lawrence posed to others. Dr. Cook opined,
 among other things, that the recommended medications, "singly or
 in combination, should stabilize Mr. Lawrence's dangerous
 behavior and psychiatric symptoms"; that less intrusive
 alternatives "are not effective substitutes for medication"; and
 that Lawrence's dangerous behaviors "are not likely to improve or
 stabilize without [the proposed] treatment." 
At the hearing on the Director's motion, Lawrence
 
deferred to Dr. Cook's expertise on matters relating to the
 second and third prongs of the three-part test. Lawrence's
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel stated: "I'm not trying to make any argument that it was
 
a less intrusive alternative means to achieve the results
 intended or that they proposed medications not appropriate. Uh,
 that's their ball park. I'm not, you know, trying to win the
 case on that -- on those issues." We conclude that there was
 sufficient evidence to support the Circuit Court's findings and
 to satisfy the second and third prongs of the three-part test.
 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
Medication Order.
 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry
First Deputy Solicity General
Department of the Attorney General
for Party-in-Interest-Appellee
 
19
 