NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP NO. 11-0000595
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CHEYNE DE LA GARZA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-0421(4); S.P.P. NO. 10-1-0021(4))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Cheyne De La Garza (De La Garza),
 
appeals pro se from the Findings of Fact, Conclusion of Law, and
 
Order Dismissing Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Rule 40
 
HRPP) to Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Judgment or to Release
 
Petitioner from Custody, and Order (Order Denying Rule 40
 
Petition), filed on July 28, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
Second Circuit (Circuit Court).  The Circuit Court denied
 
without a hearing De La Garza's Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or
 
Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody
 
(Petition), and his Motion to Add New Ground (Petition
 
Supplement). The court found that the issues presented were
 
"patently frivolous, and without a trace of support either in the
 
record or from other evidence submitted by [De La Garza]."
 
On appeal, De La Garza's brief fails to properly 
identify points of error in accordance with Hawai
'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). Nevertheless, to the 
1
 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extent they are discernible, we have reviewed the issues raised
 
by De La Garza.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve De La Garza's appeal as follows:
 
The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that De La 
Garza's arguments regarding the Hawai' i Paroling Authority's 
(HPA)fixing of his minimum term after the second hearing were 
patently frivolous and without merit. 
The HPA did not err by holding the second hearing 
because the victim was not given notice of the first hearing and, 
therefore, was not afforded the opportunity to appear at the 
first hearing and present a written statement or oral comments, 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 706-669(7) (Supp. 
2011). See HRS § 706-669(7) (stating that "the [minimum term] 
hearing shall be opened to victims or their designees or 
surviving immediate family members who may present a written 
statements or make oral comments") and "Supplemental Commentary 
of HRS § 706-669" (stating that the statute was amended to 
clarify that victims may present written statement or oral 
comments at minimum term hearings because victims "should be 
allowed to be heard and to be present at the hearings" and 
"victims were entitled to be heard when the crimes . . . were 
against persons"); Williamson v. State, 97 Hawai' i 183, 189, 195, 
35 P.3d 210, 216, 222 (2001) (stating that the HPA has broad discretion in establishing minimum terms and does not abuse its 
discretion or violate a prisoner's due process rights, where it 
conducts a hearing pursuant to HRS § 706-669 and determines the 
minimum term based on its guidelines); Coulter v. State, 116 
Hawai'i 181, 186, 172 P.3d 493, 498 (2007) (holding that HPA's 
amended-term order did not "cure" HPA's initial violation of Guidelines, where HPA consisted of different members at time it 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issued amended order and correction came nine months after HPA
 
issued original order, and HPA did not hold new hearing before­
hand). De La Garza cites to no authority for the notion that the
 
HPA was prevented from holding the second hearing for that
 
purpose more than six months after he was committed to the
 
custody of the Director of the Department of Public Safety, and
 
we find none. 
The HPA did not err in assessing De La Garza's 
punishment at Level III and fixing his minimum terms of 
imprisonment at five years, in its March 30, 2010 Notice and 
Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment. De La Garza 
fails to show that the HPA did not consider his criminal history, 
character, or exemplary behavior in setting his minimum term. 
The HPA was within its discretion to find that De La Garza 
"displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and 
welfare of others" after taking into consideration the victim's 
statement. See HPA Guidelines; Williamson, 97 Hawai' i at 189, 
195, 35 P.3d at 216, 222. De La Garza argues that the injuries of the victim in this case are comparable to those of victims in 
other criminal cases involving Kidnapping and Assault 1 
convictions. However, that determination is within the province 
of the HPA, which is uniquely qualified to compare victims' 
injuries given that it sets the minimum term of imprisonment for 
every person sentenced to prison for an indeterminate term. See 
HPA Guidelines; Williamson, 97 Hawai' i at 189, 195, 35 P.3d at 
216, 222. 
The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that De La
 
Garza failed to raise a colorable ineffective assistance of
 
counsel claim. Because the HPA did not err in holding the second
 
hearing past the sixty-day deadline set forth in HRS § 706­
669(1), counsel was not ineffective for failing to object to the
 
second hearing on that basis. De La Garza cites to no authority
 
stating that an inmate's counsel may not appear by telephone at a
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
minimum term hearing, and we find none. De La Garza fails to 
argue how counsel's appearance by phone, per se, constituted a 
specific error or omission reflecting his lack of skill, 
judgment, or diligence, or "the withdrawal or substantial 
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) (internal 
quotation marks, citations, and footnote omitted). At the second 
hearing, counsel actively participated in the proceedings, 
including voicing numerous objections. There is no right to 
cross-examine witnesses at a minimum term hearing. Turner v. 
Hawaii Paroling Authority, 93 Hawai' i 298, 305, 1 P.3d 768, 775 
(App. 2000). De La Garza's claim that his counsel was 
ineffective for not appealing the Order Denying Rule 40 Petition 
is patently frivolous and without merit because the record shows 
that counsel no longer represented De La Garza subsequent to the 
second hearing. 
De La Garza waived his remaining arguments by failing 
to raise them in the Petition or Petition Supplement. Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40(a)(3) ("[A]n issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and understandingly failed to raise it 
and it could have been raised . . . in a prior proceeding . . . 
."). 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 28, 2011
 
Order Denying Rule 40 Petition is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 20, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Cheyne De La Garza
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se Presiding Judge 
Artemio C. Baxa Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 