____________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-13-0000427 and CAAP-13-0000428
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NO. CAAP-13-0000427
 
(TRUST NO. 06-1-0044)
 
In the Matter of the T.H.G. MARITAL TRUSTS
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000428
 
(TRUST NO. 02-1-0030)
 
In the Matter of the THOMAS H. GENTRY REVOCABLE TRUST
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Kiana E. Gentry (Kiana) appeals
 
from two judgments in separate but related trust cases, both
 
titled "Final Judgment Re: Order Denying Petitioner Kiana E.
 Gentry's Petition to Enforce Settlement Agreement and Appoint
 Receiver, Filed on August 26, 2010" (together, Enforcement
 
Judgments) and both entered on March 25, 2013 in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court). The Enforcement
 
Judgments were entered in 
In re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust,
 
T. No. 02-1-0030 (Revocable Trust Matter) and In re T.H.G.
 
Marital Trusts, T. No. 06-1-0044 (Marital Trust Matter), which
 
involve the Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust (Trust) and one of
 
the Trust's subtrusts, the T.H.G Marital Trust (Marital Trust).
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided, unless otherwise
indicated.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Kiana contends the circuit court erred in
 
(1) denying her petitions seeking enforcement of the terms of a
 
settlement agreement (Petitions to Enforce) and (2) refusing to
 
hold an evidentiary hearing or trial after denying her Petitions
 
to Enforce.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Trust Summary
 
In November 1994, Thomas H. Gentry (Gentry) was in a
 
boating accident that left him in a coma until he passed away on
 January 15, 1998. At the time of Gentry's accident, he was the
 trustee of the Revocable Trust. The beneficiaries of the Trust
 included Norman H. Gentry, Tania V. Gentry, Mark T. Gentry, Corin
 S.N.M. Gentry-Balding, and Candes S.N.M. Gentry (Gentry's
 children from previous marriages), Kiana (Gentry's third spouse), 
Angel Vardas (Kiana's daughter from a previous marriage), Arielle
 Gentry and Race Gentry (Gentry's adult grandchildren), and all
 minor and unborn issue of Gentry. After Gentry's death, Mark L.
 Vorsatz (Vorsatz) and the First Hawaiian Bank (FHB) (together,
Co-Trustees) became trustees for the Trust. The terms of the
 
Trust were set forth in a trust document entitled, "Restatement
 
of the Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust Dated February 11, 1986"
 (Trust Document). In the Trust Document, Gentry instructed that
 
"[t]he Trustee shall distribute the balance of the trust to my
 
issue who survive me," subject to other conditions set forth in
 the document.
 
The Trust Document also provided for the creation of
 
several subtrusts, including the Marital Trust.
2 The Marital
 
Trust names Gentry's spouse as the "primary beneficiary of the
 trust." The conditions that Gentry established for the Marital
 Trust are as follows:
 
4.1 If my spouse survives me for any period of time
(and-my spouse shall be deemed to have survived me if we
should die simultaneously or under such circumstances as to
render it difficult or impossible to determine who survived
the other), or if any of her issue survives me, the Trustee
shall distribute one third of the trust estate (before
reduction for any estate, inheritance, generation-skipping,
 
2
 The other subtrusts of the Trust are a generation skipping
subtrust (GST) and certain subtrusts for the children.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or other transfer taxes payable out of the trust estate) to
a separate trust, designated as the "Marital Trust[.]" 
In January 1995, Norman H. Gentry, under durable power
 
of attorney for Gentry, petitioned the circuit court for the
 
formation of the Marital Trust. The circuit court granted the
 petition.
3 Kiana was Gentry's spouse at the time of his death
 
and, therefore, became the sole beneficiary of the Marital Trust.
B. Procedural History
 
On December 7, 2007, the Co-Trustees and beneficiaries
 
of the Trusts, including Kiana, (collectively, Parties) met
 
before the circuit court to review and agree upon the essential
 
terms of an agreement to settle various trust disputes. At the
 time the Parties met, they had filed various pleadings in the
 Revocable Trust Matter and the Marital Trust Matter. The two
 cases were not consolidated in the circuit court.
 
On December 21, 2007, the Parties executed a written
 
settlement agreement (Settlement Agreement). The Settlement
 
Agreement provided, "Unless otherwise dealt with in this
 
[Settlement] Agreement, all of the claims, objections and
 responses filed in the [trial proceedings] will be dismissed with
 prejudice[.]"
 
Central to this appeal are terms found in Paragraph 6
 
and 7 of the Settlement Agreement, which require the Co-Trustees
 to sell certain assets owned by the Trusts within thirty months
 from the December 21, 2007 effective date of the Settlement
 Agreement. In relevant part, the Settlement Agreement provides:
 
6. ORDERLY DISPOSITION OF ASSETS.
 
A. The [P]arties agree to the orderly disposition
of certain assets of the Trusts. These assets are the
 
Trusts' interests in TG California Company, Gentry-Pacific,
Ltd., Gentry Properties and Gentry Homes, Ltd. The Co-
Trustees will sell these entities or their assets within a
 30-month period from the Effective Date, with one 18-month
extension permitted if supported by good cause as approved
[sic] the Court. One or more of Gentry's children and/or
their issue are not prohibited from purchasing any entity or
asset from the Trusts or from the entities for full fair
 market value.
 
B. With respect to the Trusts' ownership of
Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., this interest will not be sold until
Gentry Investment Properties or its assets have been sold.
 
3
 The Honorable Herbert K. Shimabukuro presided.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
When Gentry Properties' assets are sold and that entity is
liquidated, and all expenses associated with Gentry
Properties are paid, Gentry Pacific will make a dividend
distribution of all of its cash to the shareholders of
 Gentry Pacific. Thereafter, Gentry Investment Properties
will make a guaranteed payment to Gentry-Pacific, Ltd.,
sufficient to cover Gentry-Pacific, Ltd.'s reasonable
operating expenses for no longer than the aforesaid 30-month
period.
 
. . . .
 
7. GENTRY INVESTMENT PROPERTIES. Gentry Investment
Properties [(GIP)] will not be subject to the disposition
parameters of paragraph 6 above. As soon as practicable, the
Trust's interests in GIP will be distributed to the marital
 subtrust, Gentry's Children (free of trust), and to the GST
subtrust, Pro Rata. Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., will remain as the
general partner of GIP for the aforesaid 30-month period.
The [P]arties will use their best efforts to assure that
Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., and/or GIP will not use GIP's
accumulated income or sales proceeds to start or acquire any
new businesses, or to acquire additional real property, or
to construct intract improvements. The intent of the
 [P]arties is that GIP will dispose of its assets over time
(unspecified) in a commercially reasonable manner. In doing
so, GIP is not precluded from constructing infrastructure in
order to facilitate sales, provided, however, that such
improvements may be made only to obtain a final subdivision
map and/or to satisfy the requirements of specific buyers
under written contracts or as required by law.
Infrastructure includes, but is not limited to, roads,
walkways, drainage systems, utilities and other construction
consistent with the land use entitlements of the particular
property being improved. Obtaining a final subdivision map
includes the ability to post or, if necessary, perform under
a bond for the required public improvements.
 
On August 26, 2010, Kiana filed the Petitions to
 
Enforce the terms of the Settlement Agreement in both the
 
Revocable Trust Matter and the Marital Trust Matter, contending
 that the Co-Trustees had not disposed of the Trust Assets within
 the thirty-month deadline. Kiana requested the circuit court
 order the Co-Trustees to abide by the terms of the Settlement
 Agreement, while identifying Paragraphs 6 and 7 as the specific
 provisions that she wished to have enforced.
 
On November 9, 2010, the Co-Trustees filed two nearly
 
identical oppositions to Kiana's Petitions to Enforce in the
 Revocable Trust Matter and the Marital Trust Matter. The
 Co-Trustees' oppositions stated that the Co-Trustees would file
 "a Petition for Instructions that details the steps they have
 taken in the administration of the Trust in general, and the
 implementation of the [S]ettlement [A]greement in particular."
 The Co-Trustees' oppositions also stated that the Co-Trustees'
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
petitions "will seek instructions for either (a) a distribution
 
of the remaining trust assets to the beneficiaries and subtrusts
 on a pro-rata basis, or (b) an order approving their resignation
 and release and the appointment of a successor trustee(s)"
 (Petition for Pro Rata Distribution). A review of the record
 
indicates that on December 1, 2010, the Co-Trustees only filed a
 
Petition for Pro Rata Distribution in the Revocable Trust Matter,
 but not in the Marital Trust Matter.
 
The Co-Trustees' Petition for Pro Rata Distribution,
 
filed in the Revocable Trust Matter, requested pro rata
 distribution of the remaining Trust Assets. Specifically, the
 Co-Trustees requested that one-third of the Trust's assets, which
 included interests in equities, real estate, and notes and
 receivables (collectively, Trust Assets), be distributed to Kiana
 
as the sole beneficiary of the Marital Trust, while the remaining
 
two-thirds of the Trust Assets be distributed to each of Gentry's
 five children.
4 In the alternative, if the beneficiaries of the
 
Trust decided to proceed with the administration of the Trust,
 the Co-Trustees requested approval of their resignation as
 trustees.
 
On December 16, 2010, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on Kiana's Petition to Enforce in the Marital Trust Matter. At
 the hearing, Kiana argued that the Co-Trustees should be ordered
 to liquidate or sell the Marital Trust Assets to satisfy the
 intent of the Settlement Agreement. The Co-Trustees, however,
 argued that they could not satisfy the terms of the Settlement
 Agreement because they had already failed to sell the Trust
 Assets within the thirty-month deadline and that various factors,
 including unfavorable market conditions, prevented them from
 selling the assets in the near future.
 
On October 7, 2011, the circuit court held another
 
hearing on several petitions filed in the Revocable Trust Matter,
 including Kiana's Petition to Enforce and the Co-Trustee's
 Petition for Pro Rata Distribution.
 
4
 On February 3, 2011, the Co-Trustees filed a supplemental
liquidation plan to their Petition for Pro Rata Distribution that further
clarified the Co-Trustees' plan to dispose of the Trust Assets. Kiana
 objected to the Co-Trustees' liquidation plan on March 9, 2011.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 25, 2013, without explanation, the circuit
 
court denied Kiana's two Petitions to Enforce in separate written
 
orders and entered its Enforcement Judgments holding the same. 
On the same day and also without explanation, the circuit court
 issued an order and final judgment granting in part the Co­Trustee's Petition for Pro Rata Distribution in the Revocable
 Trust Matter (Distribution Judgment), thus permitting the Co-
Trustees to make a pro rata distribution of the shares of certain
 
Trust Assets without requiring the Co-Trustees to liquidate or
 sell the underlying asset. In part, the Distribution Judgment
 provided that of the 49,000 Gentry Pacific shares, 16,333.333
 shares were to go to the Marital Trust while each of Gentry's
 five children would receive 6,533.333 shares. The Distribution
 Judgment also provided that of the Trust's ninety percent
 membership interest in Gentry Properties, a thirty percent
 membership interest was to go to the Marital Trust and each of
 Gentry's five children would receive a twelve percent membership
 interest.
 
On April 24, 2013, Kiana filed two separate notices of
 
appeal from each of the Enforcement Judgments. Kiana did not
 appeal from the circuit court's Distribution Judgment in the
 Revocable Trust Matter.
 
C. Appellate Court Review
 
In In re Gentry Revocable Trust, No. CAAP–13–0000428 
(App. Oct. 22, 2014) (mem.), this court dismissed Kiana's 
Revocable Trust Matter appeal as moot because she failed to appeal the circuit court's Distribution Judgment along with the Enforcement Judgment. Id. at *4. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
vacated our opinion and remanded this case to this court, holding that Kiana's appeal was not moot because (1) the circuit court retained the authority to vacate its Distribution Judgment if Kiana chose to seek post-judgment relief in the future; (2) the appellate courts can still grant Kiana relief by distributing the proceeds from the Trust Assets pro rata, instead of distributing the shares of the assets pro rata as ordered in the Distribution 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
Judgment;  and (3) Kiana's Petitions to Enforce embraced
different subject matters than those disposed of in the circuit 
court's Distribution Judgment. In re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable 
Trust, 2016 WL 3541634, No. SCWC–13–0000428, *12-15 (June 28, 2016), reconsideration denied, 138 Hawai
'i 50, 375 P.3d 1288 
(2016). 
On remand, this court consolidated the Revocable Trust
 
Matter with the Marital Trust Matter.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Appellate review of an order denying a motion to 
enforce a settlement agreement is the same as it would be for a motion for summary judgment. See Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 
56, 64, 828 P.2d 286, 292 (1991); see also Moran v. Guerreiro, 97 Hawai
'i 354, 371, 37 P.3d 603, 620 (App. 2001). "A motion for 
summary judgment should not be granted where there is a factual question as to the existence, validity, and terms of the alleged settlement agreement, and where such a dispute exists, a trial or an evidentiary hearing to resolve the dispute is required." Gilmartin v. Abastillas, 10 Haw. App. 283, 296, 869 P.2d 1346, 1352 (1994); see Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 64-65, 828 P.2d at 292.
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Validity and Enforceability of the Settlement Agreement
 
Kiana contends the circuit court erred when it denied
 
her Petitions to Enforce. Kiana argues that "[s]ince the
 [circuit] court refused to enforce the Settlement Agreement, the
 only logical conclusion is that it found it invalid since all
 valid settlement agreements must be enforced." The circuit
 court, however, never made a finding of invalidity and the Co-
Trustees do not dispute that the Settlement Agreement is valid
 and enforceable on appeal.
 
5
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court noted "[t]he Distribution Judgment calls
for shares of Gentry Pacific and Gentry Properties to be distributed among
trustees—shares that no longer exist because the [Gentry Properties, GPP,Inc., and GPP Corporation (collectively, GPP Companies)] have beenliquidated." In re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust
, No. SCWC-13-0000428 at 
*14. The supreme court took judicial notice of a "certified copy of thewarranty deed transferring the Gentry Pacific Design Center property from GPPto the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, recorded at the Land Court on August 20,2012." 
Id. at *14 n.8. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
While it is true that a circuit court may deny a motion
 
to enforce a settlement agreement if the court finds the
 
agreement is invalid or unenforceable, see Miller, 9 Haw. App. at
 63-64, 828 P.2d at 291, that is not the only reason for a court
 to refuse to enforce such a motion. For example, a court should
 refuse to grant a motion to enforce a settlement agreement if
 there remain questions of fact on how to interpret the terms of
 the settlement agreement. See Gilmartin, 10 Haw. App. at 296, 869
 P.2d at 1352. Therefore, Kiana's argument that "[s]ince the Co-
Trustees agreed that the Settlement Agreement is enforceable,
 they should have been required to follow its terms" is without
 merit.
 
B. Genuine Issues of Material Fact
 
Although both Parties agree that they are bound to the
 
terms of the Settlement Agreement, they disagree on how to
 
interpret the agreed upon terms.
 
As previously noted, a motion to enforce a settlement 
agreement should not be granted where there is a factual question as to the existence, validity, and terms of the alleged settlement agreement. See Gilmartin, 10 Haw. App. at 296, 869 
P.2d at 1352. Because settlement agreements are a "species of contract law," we apply contract principles when interpreting the settlement agreement's terms. See Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai
'i 
462, 481, 143 P.3d 1, 20 (2006) (stating that settlement agreements are "simply a species of contract law"); see also Wittig v. Allianz, A.G., 112 Hawai
'i 195, 201, 145 P.3d 738, 744 
(App. 2006); Standard Mgmt., Inc. v. Kekona, 99 Hawai 'i 125, 133­
34, 53 P.3d 264, 272-73 (App. 2001). 
Where the terms of a contract are ambiguous, the ambiguity
raises the question of the parties' intent, which is aquestion of fact that will often render summary judgment[or, in the case before us, enforcement of the settlementagreement] inappropriate. Found. Int'l, Inc. v. E.T. IgeConstruction, Inc., 102 Hawai' i 487, 497, 78 P.3d 23, 33
(2003); Hanagami v. China Airlines, Ltd., 67 Haw. 357, 364,688 P.2d 1139, 1145 (1984). If the language of a contract isunambiguous, however, the interpretation of the contractpresents a question of law to be decided by the court.Found. Int'l, Inc., 102 Hawai' i at 497, 78 P.3d at 33;
United States v. 0.35 Of An Acre Of Land, 706 F.Supp. 1064,1070 (S.D.N.Y. 1988). 
In addition, the determination of whether a contract
contains ambiguous terms is a threshold question of law for
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9the court to decide.  Found. Int'l, Inc., 102 Hawai# i at 496,
78 P.3d at 32;  0.35 Of An Acre Of Land,  706 F.Supp. at 1070.
A contract term or phrase is ambiguous only if it is capable
of being reasonably understood in more than one way. Cho
Mark Oriental Food, Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 520,
836 P.2d 1057, 1063–64 (1992). The parties' disagreement
over the meaning of a contract's terms does not render clear
language ambiguous. Found. Int'l, Inc. , 102 Hawai# i at 497,
78 P.3d at 33. "Nor does ambiguity exist where one party's
view strains the contract language beyond its reasonable and
ordinary meaning." Seiden Assocs., Inc. v. ANC Holdings,
Inc., 959 F.2d 425, 428 (2d Cir. 1992) (quotation marks and
brackets omitted). Under the parol evidence rule, the court
may not resort to extrinsic evidence to determine the
parties' intent where the contract's language is
unambiguous. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co. , 74
Haw. 85, 124–25, 839 P.2d 10, 31 (1992).
Wittig, 112 Hawai# i at 201-02, 145 P.3d at 744-45; see Miller, 9
Haw. App. at 64, 828 P.2d at 292 (reviewing a motion to enforce a
settlement agreement as if it were a motion for summary
judgment).  
The Settlement Agreement provides, in relevant part:
6.ORDERLY DISPOSITION OF ASSETS.
A.The [P]arties agree to the orderly disposition
of certain assets of the Trusts.  These assets are the
Trusts' interests in TG California Company, Gentry-Pacific,
Ltd., Gentry Properties and Gentry Homes, Ltd.  The Co-
Trustees will sell these entities or their assets within a
30-month period from the Effective Date, with one 18-month
extension permitted if supported by good cause as approved
the Court. . . .
B.With respect to the Trusts' ownership of
Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., this interest will not be sold until
[GIP] or its assets have been sold.  When Gentry Properties'
assets are sold and that entity is liquidated, and all
expenses associated with Gentry Properties are paid, Gentry
Pacific will make a dividend distribution of all of its cash
to the shareholders of Gentry Pacific. Thereafter, Gentry
Investment Properties will make a guaranteed payment to
Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., sufficient to cover Gentry-Pacific,
Ltd.'s reasonable operating expenses for no longer than the
aforesaid 30-month period.
. . . .
7.GENTRY INVESTMENT PROPERTIES.  Gentry Investment
Properties will not be subject to the disposition parameters
of paragraph 6 above. As soon as practicable,
the Trust's interests in GIP will be distributed to the
marital subtrust, Gentry's Children (free of trust), and to
the GST subtrust, Pro Rata. Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., will
remain as the general partner of GIP for the aforesaid
30-month period. The [P]arties will use their best efforts
to assure that Gentry-Pacific, Ltd., and/or GIP will not use
GIP's accumulated income or sales proceeds to start or
acquire any new businesses, or to acquire additional real
property, or to construct intract improvements. The intent
of the [P]arties is that GIP will dispose of its assetsNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
over time (unspecified) in a commercially reasonable
manner.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The Co-Trustees argue that because they failed to sell 
the Trust Assets within the thirty-month time period, as required 
under the Paragraph 6(A), the terms of the Settlement Agreement "could no longer be accomplished" as Kiana requested. The Settlement Agreement is silent on what steps the Parties would take if the Co-Trustees did not meet the thirty-month deadline provided under Paragraph 6(A).
6 The uncertainty on how to 
proceed once the deadlines set forth in the Settlement Agreement can no longer be met creates an ambiguity in the Settlement Agreement. But cf. Eastman v. McGowan, 86 Hawai
'i 21, 27-28, 946 
P.2d 1317, 1323-24 (1997) (holding that a settlement agreement was unambiguous and there was no genuine issue of fact where the agreement stated that if defendants did not complete the condominium project and obtain a Certificate of Occupancy by a specific date, defendants were required to return the personal representative's downpayment and the estate would have no further obligations under agreement). 
Furthermore, during the October 7, 2011 hearing before
 
the circuit court, the Co-Trustees maintained that they could not
 sell GIP because third parties owned controlling interests in the
 company and the Co-Trustees could not "sell the stock of third-
party shareholders who never signed the settlement agreement[.]"
7
 
6
 We note that on June 21, 2010, beneficiary Corin S.N.M. Gentry-
Balding filed a petition requesting an eighteen-month extension for the Co-
Trustees to effectuate the terms of the Settlement Agreement, as provided
under Paragraph 6(A) of the Settlement Agreement. The petition stated "[g]ood
cause exists for the extension because the administration is not complete, and
the initial 30-month period of the Settlement Agreement will expire on June
21, 2010." Kiana opposed the petition, arguing that "(1) there is no
provision within the Settlement Agreement that allows a beneficiary to
petition this court for an extension of time to effectuate the terms of the
Settlement Agreement; and (2) an extension of time will only increase the
costs of administering the Trusts for the beneficiaries[.]" The circuit court
 denied the request for an extension and, on appeal, neither party argues that
an eighteen-month extension should have been granted. 
7
 We note that the Co-Trustees' Petition for Pro Rata Distribution
 
stated that "[a]t the time of execution of the Settlement Agreement, Gentry
Pacific was the manager of GIP. Following the distribution of GIP to the
(continued...)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kiana responded that GIP's controlling interests were in the 
hands of third parties because "the trustees took it upon themselves to issue a pro rata distribution of GIP during the pendency of the settlement period" and that it "was their doing, so they cannot now say that it's impossible because that was their doing." Kiana's position appears to ignore the terms of Paragraph 7 of the Settlement Agreement, which instructs that "[a]s soon as practicable, the Trust's interests in GIP will be distributed to the marital subtrust, Gentry's Children (free of trust), and to the GST subtrust, Pro Rata." If the Co-Trustees are unable to sell GIP because they adhered to the Settlement Agreement's requirement that they make a pro rata distribution of interests in GIP, then the Settlement Agreement's terms effectively undermine its own requirement that the Co-Trustees sell GIP. See In re Lock Revocable Living Trust, 109 Hawai
'i 
146, 152, 123 P.3d 1241, 1247 (2005) ("[A]n ambiguity arises from the use of words of doubtful or uncertain meaning or application." (quoting Hokama v. Relinc Corp., 57 Haw. 470, 474–75, 559 P.2d 279, 282 (1977)). 
Although Kiana professes to want the Settlement
 
Agreement "enforced in its entirety", her arguments in support of
 her Petitions to Enforce essentially ask the circuit court to
 order the sale of the Trust Assets irrespective of the
 limitations of Paragraph 6(B) and Paragraph 7. We find no
 authority for the circuit court to ignore one provision of the
 Settlement Agreement to effectuate another. To permit the
 circuit court to ignore the limitations of Paragraph 6(B) and
 Paragraph 7 would render the court guilty of "pick[ing] and
 choos[ing]" which provision of the Settlement Agreement to
 follow, just as Kiana alleges the Co-Trustees tried to do. The
 terms of the Settlement Agreement are ambiguous because there is
 uncertainty as to the interpretation of the terms of the
 
7(...continued)
beneficiaries and subtrusts, a majority interest of GIP replaced Gentry

Pacific with NTM LLC as manager." The Co-Trustees' Petition for Pro Rata
 
Distribution also indicated that "GIP was distributed to the beneficiaries and
 subtrusts, and is no longer within the control of the Trust."
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlement Agreement and it is unclear how the Parties intended
 
to resolve such disputes when they entered into the agreement.
 
As this court acknowledged in Miller, a "motion to
 
enforce settlement must be denied where it appears that there is
 a question of fact. A contrary conclusion would deny a litigant
 due process of law." Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 64, 828 P.2d at 292
 
(ellipsis and emphasis omitted) (quoting Mancina v. Hoar, 129
 
Cal. App.3d 796, 797 (Cal. Ct. App. 1982)). Because questions of
 fact remain on how to effect the terms of the Settlement
 Agreement, the circuit court did not err in denying Kiana's
 Petitions to Enforce. See Gilmartin, 10 Haw. App. at 296, 869
 
P.2d at 1352; cf. Hanagami, 67 Haw. at 363-64, 688 P.2d at 1144­45 (holding that the circuit court did not err in denying-in-part
 employer's motion for summary judgment where the terms of the
 indemnification clause were not "so definite and unambiguous that
 there [was] no room for interpretation"); Miller, 9 Haw. App. at
 69-71, 828 P.2d at 294-95 (holding that the circuit court erred
 in granting a motion to enforce a settlement agreement where a
 question of fact remained as to whether there was a valid
 compromise agreement between the parties).
C. Evidentiary Hearing
 
Kiana contends that, if there were questions of fact,
 
the circuit court was required to hold an evidentiary hearing or
 
jury trial before denying her Petitions to Enforce. When there
 is a genuine issue of material fact as to the terms of a
 settlement agreement, the court is required to hold a trial or an
 evidentiary hearing to resolve the dispute. Gilmartin, 10 Haw.
 
App. at 296, 869 P.2d at 1352 ("A [motion to enforce a disputed
 settlement agreement] should not be granted where there is a
 factual question as to the existence, validity, and terms of the
 alleged settlement agreement, and where such a dispute exists, a
 trial or an evidentiary hearing to resolve the dispute is
 required."); see Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 71, 828 P.2d at 295
 (holding that the lower court was required to hold a trial or
 evidentiary hearing where a question of fact remained as to
 whether there was a compromise agreement between the parties).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kiana agreed to a jury-waived trial before entering 
into the Settlement Agreement. Therefore, Kiana was not entitled 
to a jury trial to resolve the issues of fact.8 Cf. Moran, 97 
Hawai'i at 371, 37 P.3d at 620 (noting that questions of fact may 
be decided by a jury "where the right to a jury trial has been asserted"). Kiana's waiver of her right to a jury trial does not obviate the need for an evidentiary hearing where genuine issues of fact remain and where Kiana requested a jury trial on the issues of fact presented by the Settlement Agreement. See 
Safeway, Inc. v. Nordic PCL Const., Inc., 130 Hawai
'i 517, 532, 
312 P.3d 1224, 1239 (App. 2013) (holding that the circuit court was required to hold an evidentiary hearing to resolve genuine issues of material fact as to the existence of an arbitration agreement, even if neither party to the alleged agreement requested a hearing); Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 65 n.9, 828 P.2d at 292 n.9 (rejecting Appellees' argument that Defendants had waived any right to an evidentiary hearing to resolve questions of fact as to the enforceability of a settlement agreement where Defendants' attorney "stated that her clients wished to speak on their own behalf at the hearing" and where Defendants expressed a desire "to go to trial and have a full hearing of all the claims"). 
Therefore, the circuit court erred in not holding an
 
evidentiary hearing to resolve questions of fact regarding the
 interpretation and enforcement of ambiguous terms in the
 Settlement Agreement. See Gilmartin, 10 Haw. App. at 296, 869
 
P.2d at 1352; see also Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 69-71, 828 P.2d at
 294-95.
 
We remand these consolidated cases back to the circuit
 
court for an evidentiary hearing on any ambiguous terms,
 including any provisions that may prevent the Co-Trustees from
 effectuating the terms of the Settlement Agreement. To the
 
8
 Although Kiana preferred to resolve the Settlement Agreement
disputes through mediation, the record indicates that Kiana's counsel orally
requested a jury trial to resolve questions relating to the interpretation of
the Settlement Agreement's terms.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extent that the satisfaction of the Settlement Agreement may be 
impacted by the circuit court's unchallenged Distribution Judgment, we direct the circuit court's attention to the recent Supreme Court of Hawai
'i opinion, In re Thomas H. Gentry 
Revocable Trust, 2016 WL 3541634, No. SCWC–13–0000428, for guidance. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The "Final Judgment Re: Order Denying Petitioner Kiana
 
E. Gentry's Petition to Enforce Settlement Agreement and Appoint
 Receiver, Filed on August 26, 2010" entered in 
In re Thomas H.
 
Gentry Revocable Trust, T. No. 02-1-0030 and the "Final Judgment
 Re: Order Denying Petitioner Kiana E. Gentry's Petition to
 Enforce Settlement Agreement and Appoint Receiver, filed on
 August 26, 2010" entered in In re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable
 Trust, T. No. 02-1-0030, both entered on March 25, 2013 in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit are vacated and these cases
 are remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 21, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Margery S. Bronster
Jae B. Park
 (Bronster Hoshibata)
for Petitioner-Appellant Kiana E.Gentry.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Carroll S. Taylor

(Law Office of Taylor, Leong & Chee)
for Respondents-Appellees Mark L.Vorsatz and First Hawaiian Bank,
and
 Alan T. Yoshitake
 (Seyfarth Shaw)
for Respondent-Appellee FirstHawaiian Bank.
 
14
 