NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-14-0000844 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
KAPAHUKULA KALE VOORHEES, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-13-01793) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Kapahukula Kale Voorhees (Voorhees) 
appeals from the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment 
(
Judgment) entered by the District Court of the Third Circuit 
(District Court)  on April 22, 2014. Voorhees contends that the 
District Court erred by: 1
1. admitting the arresting officer's testimony about 
the results of the horizontal gaze nystagmus  (HGN) test 
performed on Voorhees; 2
1 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo presided. 
2 Nystagmus is a well-known physiological phenomenon
that has been defined by one medical dictionary as "an
involuntary rapid movement of the eyeball, which maybe horizontal, vertical, rotatory, or mixed, i.e., oftwo varieties." HGN or jerk nystagmus is a particulartype of nystagmus "characterized by a slow drift,usually away from the direction of gaze, followed by aquick jerk or recovery in the direction of gaze."Stated otherwise, it "is the inability of the eyes tomaintain visual fixation as they are turned from sideto side." . . . [I]t has been well-documented throughresearch studies over the years that alcoholintoxication affects eye movement and nystagmusbecomes more pronounced with alcohol consumption. 
State v. Ito, 90 Hawai #i 225, 230-31, 978 P.2d 191, 196-97 (App. 1999)
(citations omitted). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. finding Voorhees guilty of Operating a Vehicle 
Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) despite there being 
insufficient evidence of impairment; 
3. finding Voorhees guilty of Refusal to Submit to a 
Breath, Blood, or Urine Test (Count 5); and 
4. finding that Voorhees knowingly, intelligently, 
and voluntarily waived the right to a jury trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we reverse the Judgment as to Count 5 only. 
The Judgment is otherwise affirmed. 
I. 
On July 17, 2013, a complaint was filed in the District 
Court charging Voorhees with OVUII (Count 1), driving without a license (Count 2), operating an uninsured vehicle (Count 3), resisting arrest (Count 4), refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or urine test (Count 5), and failing to obey a police officer (Count 6). The charges arose from an incident that allegedly took place on June 15, 2013. 
On September 30, 2013, Voorhees pleaded not guilty and 
waived his right to a jury trial. Voorhees' jury-waived trial began on January 7, 2014, and continued on April 22, 2014. The District Court found Voorhees guilty on Counts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, but not guilty on Count 6, and entered the Judgment accordingly. In this appeal, Voorhees challenges the Judgment on the grounds that he did not knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily waive his right to a jury trial. He also specifically challenges the Judgment as to Counts 1 (OVUII) and 5 (refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or urine test); he does not specifically challenge the Judgment as to Counts 2 (driving without a license), 3 (conditions of operation and registration of motor vehicles), or 4 (resisting arrest). 
2 A. Voorhees Waived His Right to a Jury Trial NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. 
We address this issue first because it is potentially 
dispositive of Voorhees' entire appeal. 
The validity of a criminal defendant's waiver of his or her
right to a jury trial presents a question of state andfederal constitutional law. We answer questions ofconstitutional law by exercising our own independentconstitutional judgment based on the facts of the case.Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under theright/wrong standard. 
State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai# i 465, 468-69, 312 P.3d 897, 
900-01 (2013) (ellipsis and citation omitted). 
A criminal defendant is statutorily entitled to a trial 
by jury when the potential penalty for the charged crime is 
imprisonment for six months or more.  HRS § 806–60 (1985). A 
criminal defendant may also waive the right to a jury trial. HRS § 806-61 (1985). 3
Generally, the waiver shall be either by written consent
filed in court or by oral consent in open court entered onthe record. HRPP [Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure] Rule
23(a). Although the rule indicates the waiver may be givenby written or oral consent, the rule does not relieve thecourt of its obligation to ensure, through an appropriateoral colloquy in court, that the waiver was knowingly,intelligently, and voluntarily given. In other words, whilethe defendant may execute a written waiver form, the courtshould also engage in an oral colloquy with the defendant to 
3 In Gomez-Lobato the supreme court also noted: 
In certain cases, this court has recognized the right to a
jury trial under the Hawai #i Constitution for particular
offenses even though the maximum authorized terms ofimprisonment do not exceed six months. In this regard, ifthe maximum term of imprisonment for a particular offensedoes not exceed thirty days, it is presumptively a pettyoffense to which the right to a jury trial does not attach.
This presumption can only be overcome in extraordinary
cases, when [1] consideration of the treatment of theoffense at common law, [2] the gravity of the offense, and[3] the authorized penalty for the offense, unequivocallydemonstrates that society demands that persons charged withthe offense at issue be afforded the right to a jury trial.If the maximum authorized term of imprisonment for anoffense is more than thirty days but not more than 180 days,no presumption applies, and the three factors set forthabove must be considered to determine whether the right to ajury trial attaches. 
130 Hawai #i at 469 n.5, 312 P.3d at 901 n.5 (quotation marks and citations
omitted). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish that the waiver was knowing, intelligent, and
voluntary. Lastly, where it appears from the record that adefendant has voluntarily waived a constitutional right to ajury trial, the defendant carries the burden ofdemonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence thathis/her waiver was involuntary. 
Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai# i at 469, 312 P.3d at 901 (quotation 
marks, brackets and some citations omitted). In this case, the 
District Court engaged in the following colloquy with Voorhees: 
THE COURT: Mr. Voorhees, have you talked to your
attorney about your right to a jury trial? 
MR. VOORHEES: Yes. 
THE COURT: Do you understand what a jury trial is? MR. VOORHEES: Yes. THE COURT: Do you wish to give up your right to a jury
trial? 
MR. VOORHEES: Yes. THE COURT: Did you read and understand this written
waiver form? 
MR. VOORHEES: Yes, I did. THE COURT: Are these your initials in paragraphs 2
through 6? 
MR. VOORHEES: Yes, they are. THE COURT: Is this your signature on the back? MR. VOORHEES: Yes. THE COURT: If you give up your right to a jury, the
trial will be held in this court without a jury. 
Do you
understand? 
MR. VOORHEES: Yes. 
THE COURT: [Deputy Public Defender], do you certify
that your client’s waiver is made knowingly and voluntarily? 
[DEPUTY PUBLIC DEFENDER]: I so certify. 
THE COURT: I’ll accept this waiver and order defendant
to return November 4th at 2 o’clock for a pretrial
conference. 
The "written waiver form" referred to by the District Court was 
titled "Waiver of Jury Trial" and filed on September 30, 2013. It stated: 
I understand that I have the constitutional right to a
jury trial. Furthermore, I understand that a jury trial is
a trial in the Circuit Court before a judge and a jury and 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that I can participate in the process of selecting a jury of
twelve (12) citizens from the Third Circuit. This jurywould hear the evidence in my case, and then decide if I amguilty or not guilty. Finally I understand that in orderfor me to be convicted by a jury, their vote must beunanimous. 
I know that if I give up my right to a jury trial, the
trial will be held in this Court before a judge who alonewould decide if I am guilty or not guilty. I request thatmy case be tried by a judge. 
Voorhees initialed both paragraphs, which recited each of the 
four Duarte-Higareda elements.  The Waiver of Jury Trial also 
stated: 4
I acknowledge that Judge Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. . . .
questioned me personally in open court to make sure that I
knew what I was doing and understood this form before Isigned it. 
It was signed by Voorhees in two places and initialed by Voorhees 
in a total of six places. It was also signed by Voorhees' defense counsel, who certified: 
As counsel for defendant and as an officer of the 
Court, I certify that I have read and explained fully the
foregoing, that I believe that the defendant understands thedocument in its entirety, that the statements containedtherein are in conformity with my understanding of thedefendant's position, that I believe that the defendant'swaiver is made voluntarily and with intelligentunderstanding of the nature of the charge and possibleconsequences, and that the defendant signed this form in mypresence. 
In this case, unlike in Gomez-Lobato where the defendant spoke 
Spanish and required the assistance of a Spanish-language interpreter, Voorhees understood and fluently spoke the English language; he demonstrated this when he testified in his own defense without an interpreter. We hold that Voorhees has not satisfied his "burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the 
4 In United States v. Duarte-Higareda, 113 F.3d 1000 (9th Cir.
1997), the federal appellate court held, among other things, that the trial
court was required to inform the defendant that: "(1) twelve members of thecommunity compose a jury, (2) the defendant may take part in jury selection,(3) a jury verdict must be unanimous, and (4) the court alone decides guilt orinnocence if the defendant waives a jury trial." 113 F.3d at 1002. Althoughthe Hawai #i Supreme Court "has advised the trial courts to conduct Duarte-
Higareda's suggested colloquy, [it has] rejected the argument that such acolloquy is required in every case." Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai #i at 470-71, 312
P.3d at 902-03 (citing State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai #i 63, 69, 996 P.2d 268, 274
(2000)) (other citations ommited). 
5 1. Voorhees did not object to the
police officer's qualifications. B. The District Court Did Not Err in 
Admitting Evidence of the HGN Test NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence that his[ ] waiver [of the right to a jury trial] was 
involuntary." Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai# i at 469, 312 P.3d at 901 
(citation omitted). 
"[A]s long as the HGN test is properly administered and 
scored by a qualified officer, the HGN test does appear to be a fairly reliable indicator of alcohol impairment." 
Ito, supra 
n.2, 90 Hawai# i at 238, 978 P.2d at 204 n.2 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Before HGN test results can 
be admitted into evidence in a particular case, it must be shown that (1) the officer administering the test was duly qualified to conduct the test and grade the test results, and (2) the test was performed properly. Id. at 244, 978 P.2d at 210 (citations omitted). 
The police officer who performed the HGN test on 
Voorhees on June 15, 2013, Officer Joshua Pa (Officer Pa) 
testified that the HGN test is part of the standard protocol used 
by the Hawai# i County Police Department (HCPD) when conducting a 
DUI checkpoint. Officer Pa learned to administer the HGN test in June 2011 during recruit training with HCPD. He attended forty hours of training and a six-hour "wet-lab test." He passed both. Since recruit training he has had no "refresher training" on the HGN test, but he has conducted "close to forty" HGN tests and testified that he had "[a]ctual training, I do it in the field." That is consistent with the 1984 NHTSA Instruction Manual, which explicitly directs police officers to "[p]ractice until you can consistently estimate 45 degrees. Check yourself monthly with [an 8" x 15" square template or cardboard with a diagonal line drawn from one corner to another to demark 45 degrees] to be sure that your accuracy has been sustained." Ito, 90 
Hawai# i at 244 
n.10, 978 P.2d at 210 n.10 (quoting 1984 NHTSA Instruction Manual, reprinted in 1 Defense of Drunk Driving § 10.99[2], app. at 10–92 (emphasis added)). Voorhees did not object when the 
6 2. Voorhees did not object to the question
about his performance on the HGN test. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State asked Officer Pa whether he was certified and qualified to 
conduct the test under the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) standards. Cf. State v. Ferrer, 95 
Hawai# i 409, 424, 23 P.3d 744, 759 (App. 2001) ("As in Ito and 
Mitchell, the State failed to elicit testimony from the officer 
that the training he received met the requirements of the NHTSA."). Nor did defense counsel ask to voir dire Officer Pa on his qualifications to perform the HGN test or to or evaluate the results. Under these circumstances, we hold that Voorhees' failure to object constituted a waiver of any objection to Officer Pa's qualifications to perform and evaluate the HGN test. Hawaii Rules of Evidence (
HRE) Rule 103(a)(1) (Supp. 2006).  See 
also, State v. Villena, 140 Hawai# i 370, 379 n.8, 400 P.3d 571, 
580 n.8 (2017) (failure to object at trial constitutes waiver of error). 5
[The validation of the FSTs results] applies ONLY  WHEN THE 
TESTS ARE ADMINISTERED IN THE PRESCRIBED, STANDARDIZED
MANNER; AND ONLY  WHEN THE STANDARDIZED CLUES ARE USED TO 
ASSESS THE SUSPECT'S PERFORMANCE; AND, ONLY  WHEN THE 
STANDARDIZED CRITERIA ARE EMPLOYED TO INTERPRET THAT PERFORMANCE. 
IF ANY ONE OF THE STANDARDIZED FIELD SOBRIETY TEST ELEMENTS 
IS CHANGED, THE VALIDITY IS COMPROMISED . 
Ito, 90 Hawai# i at 244, 978 P.2d at 210 (quoting 1995 NHTSA 
Student Manual, reprinted in part in 1 Defense of Drunk Driving § 
10.06[5], at 10-27). (brackets and emphasis in original) (footnote omitted). 
The only equipment needed to administer the HGN test is a
stimulus, such as a pen, penlight, or the officer's finger.The stimulus is positioned about twelve to fifteen inches in 
5 HRE Rule 103 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Effect of erroneous ruling. Error may not be
predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidenceunless a substantial right of the party is affected, and: 
(1) Objection. In case the ruling is one admittingevidence, a timely objection or motion to strikeappears of record, stating the specific groundof objection, if the specific ground was notapparent from the context[.] 
7 C. There Was Substantial Evidence of Impairment NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
front of a suspect's eyes. As the officer gradually moves
the stimulus towards the suspect's ear and out of thesuspect's field of vision, the officer observes thesuspect's eyeballs to detect three signs of intoxication: anangle of onset of nystagmus (measured from the suspect'snose) of forty-five degrees or less; distinct or pronouncednystagmus at the eye's maximum horizontal deviation; and theinability of the eyes to smoothly pursue the stimulus. The officer scores one point for each sign of intoxication pereye, the maximum score being six points. A person who takesthe HGN test and receives a score of four or more points isclassified as having a BAC of over 0.10 percent. 
Id. at 231-32, 978 P.2d at 197-98 (footnote and citations 
omitted). Officer Pa testified about the procedure he followed and what he looked for. The State concedes that Officer Pa never testified how far away from the suspect's eyes he was trained to place the stimulus, or how far away from Voorhees' eyes he actually placed the stimulus (a finger on his left hand). However, he did describe how he conducted the test for onset nystagmus: 
That one you use a stimulus and move it from the
center of the face, or the nose area. And, say, if you're
doing it on their left eye, you move it, the stimulus, yeah,my finger, slowly where it would take approximately fourseconds to get from the middle of the eye to about the sideof the shoulder. You move it slowly, and then you can seethe eyes start the nystagmus. 
. . . . 
But you'll be able to see it prior to the forty-five
-- . . . –- which is approximately the shoulder. 
Again, Voorhees did not object when the State asked Officer Pa, 
"could you please describe how the defendant performed on this test[?]" We hold that Voorhees waived any objection that there was no foundation for the police officer's testimony about the HGN test results. HRE Rule 103(a)(1); see also, Villena, 140 Hawai# i at 379 n.8, 400 P.3d at 580 n.8. 
Voorhees contends that the District Court erred by 
finding him guilty of OVUII because there was insufficient evidence that he was impaired. When reviewing the sufficiency of evidence on appeal, we apply the following deferential standard of review: 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The courts have long held that evidence adduced in the
trial court must be considered in the strongest lightfor the prosecution when the appellate court passes onthe legal sufficiency of such evidence to support aconviction; the same standard applies whether the casewas before a judge or a jury. Substantial evidence is evidence which a reasonable mind might accept asadequate to support the conclusion of the fact finder.Matters related to the credibility of witnesses andthe weight to be given to the evidence are generallyleft to the factfinder. The appellate court willneither reconcile conflicting evidence nor interferewith the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses' credibility or the weight of the evidence.Thus, we need not necessarily concur with a trialcourt's particular finding in order to sustain aconviction. 
State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai# i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 
2000) (citations, quotation and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
The Hawai# i OVUII statute provides, in relevant part: 
§ 291E-61 [Supp. 2012]. Operating a vehicle under the
influence of an intoxicant 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the personoperates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an 
amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
HRS § 291E-1 (2007) provides: 
"Impair" means to weaken, to lessen in power, to
diminish, to damage, or to make worse by diminishing in somematerial respect or otherwise affecting in an injuriousmanner. 
The District Court recited its findings and conclusions as 
follows: 
Find the defendant guilty of Count 1, Operating a
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant. 
The testimony at trial indicates that the defendant
was operating a motor vehicle on Henry Street, in Kailua-
Kona, approaching a roadblock at a slow rate of speed. He stopped in the roadway for about five seconds, and thenproceeded at a slow rate of speed to the roadblock site. 
Officer Pa testified that the defendant was the 
operator of the motor vehicle; he had red, watery, glassyeyes, slurred speech, and a strong odor of alcohol emanating
from his breath. The HGN test was conducted. He showed six 
of six clues. No other field tests were conducted, because 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant became uncooperative and combative and refused to
perform any other field tests. And by his own testimony, heknew he was going to get arrested, so he went to hisgirlfriend to get a cigarette. 
Voorhees argues, and the State concedes, that there "was no 
testimony that [Voorhees] exhibited 'slurred speech,' and the trial court's finding that there was such was error." 
Voorhees also argues that his performance on the HGN 
test is relevant only to the issue of probable cause, and is not admissible as proof of impairment, citing Mitchell, 94 Hawai# i at 
396-97, 15 P.3d at 322-23. In Mitchell, we noted: 
We have previously held that the results of a[n] HGN
test are probative of probable cause, provided that the HGN
test was properly administered. "[W]e conclude that HGNtest results have been sufficiently established to bereliable and are therefore admissible as evidence that police had probable cause to believe that a defendant wasDUI." State v. Ito, 90 Hawai #i 225, 241, 978 P.2d 191, 207
(App. 1999). 
Id. Mitchell did not decide the issue of whether or not HGN test 
results were admissible to prove impairment. 
In Ito, we observed that: 
The vast majority of courts across the country that have
considered the issue have had no difficulty concluding thatas long as the proper foundational prerequisites are met,HGN test results may be admitted as evidence of probablecause to arrest a person for DUI, although not to proveintoxication or that a defendant's BAC exceeded a particularpercentage. 
90 Hawai# i at 232-33, 978 P.2d at 198-99 (citing cases). But we 
also noted that: 
"The bulk of the scientific research indicates that the potential error rate of a properly administered HGN test islower than all [FSTs] that are routinely admitted intoevidence." State v. Ruthardt, 680 A.2d 349, 360(Del.Super.Ct. 1996). For example, the most recent NHTSAresearch indicates that the HGN test has a sixty-fivepercent accuracy rate in detecting suspects with 0.08percent BAC or higher. NHTSA FSTs Validation Study at 17. The walk-and-turn and the one-leg-stand tests, on the otherhand, boast only a sixty-one percent and forty-five percentsuccess rate, respectively. Id. Although concerns existabout whether a test was properly administered by an officerin the field who was not properly trained, these concerns goto the weight of the evidence rather than its admissibility.See, e.g., State v. Ruthardt, 680 A.2d at 360; City of Fargov. McLaughlin, 512 N.W.2d at 707. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 240, 978 P.2d at 206. The scope of our holding in Ito 
was: 
In light of the foregoing analysis, we conclude that
HGN test results have been sufficiently established to be
reliable and are therefore admissible as evidence that police had probable cause to believe that a defendant wasDUI. Since the issue was not presented, we do not decidewhether HGN test results are admissible at trial as evidence of a defendant's intoxication. 
Id. at 241, 978 P.2d at 207 (underscoring added). See also, 
Ferrer, 95 Hawai# i at 424, 23 P.3d at 759 ("Even if HGN test 
results are admissible as substantive evidence of intoxication at a DUI trial . . . .") (emphasis added). We need not decide that legal issue in this case, either, because Voorhees introduced the issue himself at trial. 
Voorhees' defense counsel asked Officer 
Pa, on cross-examination: 
Q Okay. As part of your training, are you
informed of, I guess, a percentage of error that's likely
for each test? 
A In the training that I receive? 
Q 
Yes. 
A Yes. 
. . . . 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL] Let's start with the HGN. THE WITNESS: 
The HGN. If there's more than four 
clues in the HGN test, there's a high likelihood that the
person is point one -– well, point one percent or higher,the blood alcohol. 
Q . . . Four clues, it's a likelihood of what? 
A Point one percent blood alcohol. 
Q Point one percent. Okay. But I'm actually
talking about -– you stated on direct that using these
tests, you could determine whether someone is intoxicated ornot. 
A Yes. The likelihood. 
Q In all the time you can determine using these
tests or some of the time? 
A There's a high likelihood that when the tests
are conducted properly that there will be clues of
impairment and –-
Q 
Okay. 
A Most of the time. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q So if you're conducting the test properly,
someone is likely to be intoxicated. Is that what you're
saying? 
A Yes. 
Thus, Voorhees opened the door for the District Court to consider 
his performance on the HGN test as evidence of his impairment. 
Even without evidence of Voorhees' performance on the 
HGN test, and the absence of any evidence of slurred speech, there was substantial evidence that Voorhees' "mental faculties or ability to care for [himself] and guard against casualty" were impaired by alcohol. The police officer who first observed Voorhees' car approaching the checkpoint Officer Eric Reyes (Officer Reyes) testified: 
Upon approaching the roadblock, there was [sic] no
cars in front of it. The Honda stopped, fronting the
roadblock, beginning of the roadblock, and kind of pausedthere for a few seconds and slowly crept up into theroadblock. 
. . . . 
Q And did you make any observations about the
defendant as you were speaking with him? 
A When he was sitting in the driver's seat, he had
red, watery, glassy eyes. And I smelled alcohol emanating
from the vehicle. 
. . . . 
Q 
Okay. And when you had him pull over, did you
ask for any kind of documentation? 
A 
Yes. Identification, license, insurance, and
registration. 
Q And was he able to provide any of those
documents? 
A Not with me. 
Officer Reyes also described what he observed as Officer Pa was 
performing the HGN test: 
While participating in the HGN test, Voorhees walked
away, back towards his vehicle. 
. . . . 
Q . . . And what happened next after the defendant
walked away? 
A He walked away. He went back to his 
vehicle on the passenger side, and he asked for a
lighter from the female seated in the passenger seat. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
Q . . . So you said Officer Pa put him under 
arrest? 
A Yes. We informed him that he was under arrest. 
Q And how did he respond to that? How did the 
defendant respond? 
A Initially he was –- he didn't do anything. We 
grabbed his arms to place him in handcuffs. And he then 
twisted his body, making it unable to secure the handcuffs.And then after that he continued walking towards –- awayfrom his vehicle, towards a rock wall about one or two feetfrom his vehicle. 
Q With the handcuffs on? 
A No. Handcuffs were not on yet. 
. . . . 
Q . . . What happened next after he went to the
rock wall without the cuffs on? 
A Again, like I said, he continued resisting,
making it unable to put the handcuffs on. He was flailing
left to right, kind of going, spinning around one-eighty andso that we were able to finally take him to the ground. And that's when the handcuffs were placed on him. 
Q And then what happened next, once he was finally
handcuffed? 
A We had to transport him, so he needed to go into
the vehicle. Brought the van up to transport, took him intothe van, and he –- I guess handcuffs were still on. We puthim into the van, and he started kicking his legs. 
. . . . 
Q . . . How long did it take you to secure the
handcuffs on the defendant? 
A Probably wasn't more than a minute.
 
Q And how many officers did it take to do that? A Four officers. 
. . . . 
[DEPUTY PROSECUTING ATTORNEY]: 
Was the defendant 
saying anything while he was being –- while the four of you
were attempting to put the handcuffs on him? 
[Objection overruled] 
A He kept on calling us mahus and that he was
going to come and get us. 
Q What was his demeanor while he was making those
comments? 
[Objection overruled] 
13  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE WITNESS: Angry, shouting. 
. . . . 
Q When he first was arriving at the DUI
checkpoint, did he have that same kind of demeanor as you
mentioned when he was getting arrested? 
[Objection overruled] 
A On the first contact, initially, no. And then 
when I asked him to pull over to the side of the road,
that's when his demeanor changed. 
Q And what –- did he say anything, or he just kind 
of . . . ? 
A Yeah. He said, Are you serious? 
Q What was his tone of voice as he said that? A Wasn't loud. It was just kind of irritated and 
angry. 
Q Okay. And then, when you did pull him over, you
asked him to get out of the vehicle? 
A 
No. I asked for license, registration and
insurance. 
Q And he just remained in the vehicle while he was
looking for that? 
A Yes. Q When did the defendant leave the car? A When Officer Pa came to assist me. Q And what was his demeanor then, still was
irritated and angry? 
A Yes. When I originally asked for his license,
registration, and insurance, he did pause for a second. He 
shouted, Kapa. 
Officer Pa described similar circumstances: 
Q And what if anything did you see this Honda
Accord do as it approached the DUI checkpoint? 
A As it approached, it was the only car coming
towards us on the roadway. There's no cars in front or behind him. As he was approaching, he was coming at aslower speed, and he stopped in the roadway for a fewseconds. 
Q Did he have any reason to stop before –-
[Objection overruled.] 
A There was nothing impeding his lane of travel.
There was no cars or anything blocking his way. 
. . . . 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q . . . Did you make any observations about the
defendant as you saw him? 
A As he was sitting in the vehicle, I'd seen that
he had really red, watery, glassy eyes. 
. . . . 
Q Okay. And once you began speaking with the
defendant, did you ask him for any kind of documentation? 
A Yeah. His license and insurance card. 
Q And was he able to provide any of that? 
A No. 
After describing the HGN test, Officer Pa testified: 
Q . . . And then what is the next thing that you
administer after all of the HGN tests are over? 
A In most cases I requested participation in
conducting the walk-and-turn test after –-
Q Okay. And did the defendant participate in
those? 
A No. Q No. What happened next? What caused him not to 
do that? 
A He basically turned around and walked away and
began asking the passenger in the car to pass him a lighter,
because he wanted to smoke a cigarette. 
Q And did you tell him to stop? 
A I did. 
. . . . 
Q 
What did he say when you told him to stop? 
A He disregarded me. He just kept asking for his
lighter. 
Q 
Did he say anything at all? 
A He asked –- he said an expletive and asked for
his lighter. 
[Objection overruled] 
THE WITNESS: He said, Fuck. 
. . . . 
THE WITNESS: I don't recall exactly what his words
were. But he asked for the lighter, and I remember himswearing and asking for his lighter. 
Q 
In an agitated way? 
A He was very agitated and upset. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
Q . . . And so again, you said he was -– you put
him under arrest. 
What happened? You just –- it was kind
of standard, put him under arrest? 
A No. 
He –- I advised him he was going to be
placed under arrest at which time I took ahold of his left
arm. And then Officer Reyes was also there. And he beganpulling away, resisting, not giving –- not cooperating. He was just pulling –- trying to hide his arms. And he was on the vehicle. And he just kept yelling and swearing andsaying –- resisting our orders. I was giving clear, loud,verbal commands to stop resisting. 
Q He was yelling? 
A 
And he disregarded those. 
Q Expletives again? A Yes Q And resisting? A Yeah. Q So what happened? Were you eventually able to
get him arrested on your own? 
A No. 
There was my sergeant, who was also at the
DUI checkpoint, him and Officer Hookano were quite a few
yards away from us. And they ran up towards our locationand then helped eventually get him under arrest. He was –-
Q So basically it took all four of you guys –-
A Yes, yes. Q –- to get him in handcuffs? 
. . . . 
Q So what happened next after you guys finally got
him handcuffed? 
A After he was handcuffed, we were escorting him
back to the transport vehicle, which is a blue-and-white
van. And he was –- we were trying to place him into theback portion of the van, which is at the rear of thevehicle. And as we were trying to put him into the van, hekept resisting. He ended up being placed in there on hisback, and he was kicking towards us, trying to kick us. 
Officer Reyes' and Officer Pa's sergeant Sgt. Aaron Carvalho 
(Sgt. Carvalho) testified: 
Q . . . And then what did you observe next? 
A Momentarily, while continuously glancing over, I
observed the defendant to be walking away from both Officers
Pa and Reyes. I then heard statements from Officers Pa and Reyes saying, Stop resisting. And it appeared that theywere trying to take control of Mr. Voorhees. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q What did you do next? 
A I immediately ran to the area. Q Is there a reason why you would have ran there
instead of just kind of walking over? 
A 
It appeared to me that a person was resisting
arrest at this time physically, and so I ran there to safely
effect the arrest. 
Q Okay. Were you the only one that ran over? 
A No, sir. Q Who else ran over? 
A Officer Hookano. 
. . . . 
Q . . . What happened once the defendant was
ultimately put in handcuffs? 
A 
Once he was put in handcuffs, he continued to
struggle physically while he was on the ground. We were 
able to roll him up onto his bottom and then stand and thenwalk him to the back of the police subsidized van where hecontinued to struggle, or resist, I should say, as we placedhim within the van. 
Q Could you describe how he was resisting and
struggling. 
A He was not complying with verbal commands. He 
was pulling away. He was kicking with his feet. In the back of the van there's a gate and a step to go up –- so asto prevent the closing of the gate once he was in. 
Q And was he making any statements while he was
resisting? 
[Objection overruled] 
A While he was initially resisting the arrest
while we were still on the sidewalk, he did make several
statements, swearing and using obscenities. 
. . . . 
Q What statements did he make while he was 
resisting? 
A He stated, Fuck you guys. I take you all on.
You all a bunch of mahus. . . . . 
Q Okay. When you said it took four of you to
ultimately get handcuffs on the defendant, is there a reason
for that? 
A The reason it took four of us? 
Q Right. 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A The defendant was not compliant with any verbal
commands to place his hands behind his back, to stop
resisting, to remain calm. The initial incident from the standing position took two officers. And then the two of us came running. Four of us attempted to gain control, placinghis hands behind his back. It moved from the defendant being pressed against his vehicle to the stone wall, whichis located right next to his vehicle, and then finally beingtaken to the ground. 
Once there, due to his size, his strength, basically I
was securing both legs, an officer was on one arm, anofficer was on another arm, and the fourth officer wastrying to keep his body down, up by his back and shoulderblades area. 
So due to his size and his strength at that
night or during that night, it took all four of us to subduehim –-
Q Because he was –-
A –- or place him into handcuffs.  
Similarly, the fourth police officer on duty at the checkpoint 
that night Officer Kalena Hookano (Officer Hookano) testified: 
Q Can you describe how Mr. Voorhees was, did you
say, struggling with the officers? 
A Well, on a normal test where officers run 'em
through the Standardized Field Sobriety Tests, they don't
touch the person. So when I looked over, it looked likethey were trying to place him under arrest. And he was trying to get loose. I'm not exactly sure. It was about fifty yards away. But it looks like they were strugglingwith each other, so . . . 
Q And then you ran over when you saw who started
to struggle? 
A Yeah. 
. . . . 
Q . . . While you were attempting to arrest him,
did Mr. Voorhees make any statements? 
A 
Yeah. He stated that like he was going to knock
us out and break your [sic] jaw, knock you out one by one.Said that we was all fags. Stuff like that. 
. . . . 
Q What happened after he was in handcuffs? A We walked him over to the van where we were 
going to transport him in, but he was still resisting,
tensing up. From what I remember, when they put him in thevan, he sat down on the edge of the van and started kickingat us. 
Q Kicking as if to try to strike you? 
A Yeah. 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A witness at the scene corroborated the descriptions of events 
given by Officers Pa, Reyes, and Hookano, and by Sgt. Carvalho: 
Q You were on your break. Okay. And what kind of 
confrontation did you witness? 
A I witnessed them pull over, stop a vehicle. The 
driver of the vehicle got out. I guess they were giving
sobriety tests. I don't know. But I just saw the officerstake the person by the elbows, and the guy startedconflicting –- arguing with the officers and resisting withthe officers. And the officers told them to –- I could hear him tell the guy to calm down. 
. . . . 
Q 
And what was going on with that? He was –-
A He was getting erratic. He started swearing and
. . . . 
[Objection overruled] 
THE WITNESS: I could hear him swearing swear words
and trying to get away from the officer, two of the
officers. 
I don't know which two were up there because it
was dark, but I could see across the street. Had two officers look below and two officers that pulled him over. 
And he started resisting the two officers when they
pulled him to the side of the street. And then I could see the other two officers running up to assist. 
. . . . 
Q What kind of movements did you witness this
driver make as he was –-
A He was trying -– he was -– looked to me like he
was trying to fight the officers off. 
Q 
Like he was trying to fight them? 
A Yeah. He was getting physical with the
officers. That's what it looked to me. 
Officer Pa described Voorhees' demeanor and actions at the police 
station: 
Q And was that –- that was on -– that was when you
were back at the police station –-
A 
At the station. 
Q –- on that same day? 
A 
Mm-hmm. 
Q Yeah. And when you read the [implied consent
for testing] form, did you give him his options regarding
chemical testing? 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A I read him the forms, and I told him what –- he
continued –- basically, I read the forms. And he was 
yelling at me, saying he was going to break my jaw. And he just –-
Q He was yelling at you –-
A That he was going to –-Q –- after you read that or during it? A During the reading of the forms, he was –-Q The whole time you were reading it? A Yeah. He was highly agitated and uncooperative.
And he was swearing at me, saying that he's going to break
my jaw. If he sees me outside, he's going to –-
Q But with expletives mixed in? 
A Yes. 
. . . . 
Q . . . And how did the defendant ultimately
respond? Did he give a response as to the testing? 
A I took his highly uncooperative demeanor as a
refusal, because he just kept yelling, saying that he'd –-
Q He never gave you a yes or no? 
A 
He never gave me a yes or no. I just –-
Q Just continued to yell? A Yeah. He just continued. 
. . . . 
Q . . . And what was the defendant's response to
that [sanctions for use of intoxicants form]? 
A 
It was same as the initial one. I was going
over the forms with him, and he was highly uncooperative,
swearing, yelling at me, saying he was going to basicallybeat me up. 
We have previously held that the following evidence was 
sufficient to support convictions for driving under the influence 
of intoxicating liquor (DUI):6 
(1) Defendant's station wagon was weaving within the
fast lane; (2) Defendant's eyes were "red glassy bloodshot"
and his breath had a strong odor of alcohol; and (3) while 
6 Under former HRS § 291-4 (1999), the elements of DUI are "that
(1) [defendant] (2) operated or assumed actual physical control of theoperation of any vehicle while (3) under the influence of intoxicating liquorin an amount sufficient to impair his [or her] normal mental faculties orability to care for himself [or herself] and guard against casualty."Mitchell, 94 
Hawai #i at 396, 15 P.3d at 322 (citation omitted). 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
performing the field sobriety tests, Defendant lost his
balance and had coordination problems. . . . ,"[Defendant]had a strong odor of alcoholic beverage emitting from hisbreath, very red, watery eyes, and he did speak with athick-tongued slurred speech." 
State v. Nishi, 9 Haw. App. 516, 524-25, 852 P.2d 476, 481 
(1993). In Ferrer, we held there was sufficient evidence to support a DUI conviction – even though the defendant "pulled over his motorcycle 'right away' and produced, at [the police officer]'s request, a driver's license, vehicle registration, and no-fault insurance card[,]" 95 Hawai# i at 411, 23 P.3d at 746 – 
where the officer detected a "moderate odor" of alcohol on the defendant's breath and saw that the defendant's "eyes were red, '[h]is demeanor was kinda sluggish' and '[h]is verbal toneage [sic] was kinda slurred[.]" Id.
But in Ferrer the trial court 
also properly considered the result of defendant's intoxilyzer test in finding that the defendant's blood alcohol content exceeded the legal limit. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court held that the following 
evidence was sufficient to support a DUI conviction: 
Vliet [the defendant] approached the intersection at Kona
and Mahukona Streets and, without stopping at the stop sign,made a right turn. Officer Uehara observed that the smell of alcohol emanated from Vliet's breath and that Vliet's eyes were red and glassy. Vliet had difficulty producinghis ID, initially showing Officer Uehara a picture ofChrist. Indeed, Vliet was unable to locate his ID untilOfficer Uehara pointed it out to him. Upon exiting hisvehicle, Vliet left the door open, blocking traffic. Vliet also “took slow deliberate steps like [ ] ... he was reallyconcentrating in [sic] walking.” Finally, Vliet had balanceand coordination problems during every phase of the FST,even failing, at times, to follow Officer Uehara'sinstructions. 
State v. Vliet, 91 Hawai# i 288, 293, 983 P.2d 189, 194 (1999) 
(brackets in original). 
In this case, viewing the evidence before the District 
Court "in the strongest light for the prosecution," Mitchell, 94 
Hawai# i at 393, 15 P.3d at 319 (citation omitted), there was 
ample evidence that Voorhees' "normal mental faculties or ability 
to care for [himself] and guard against casualty" were impaired, HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). Voorhees stopped his vehicle in the middle of the road as he approached the DUI checkpoint when there was no other vehicle or obstruction in the roadway. Once he entered the 
21 D. Refusal to Submit to Breath, Blood, or Urine Testing NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
checkpoint, the police officers detected the odor of alcohol 
coming from him and saw that his eyes were red, watery, and glassy. He was unable to produce a driver's license, vehicle registration or insurance card. He refused to complete the field sobriety tests, walked away from the police officer and disobeyed Officer Pa's verbal command to stop. He was angry and agitated. He threatened the officers with physical harm. It took four police officers to take him into custody because he physically resisted arrest. He continued to resist after being handcuffed and led to the police van. He tried to kick the officers as he was being put into the van. He could easily have caused injury to himself or others at any point in time. At the police station he continued to yell, swear at, and threaten Officer Pa with physical harm. 
There is substantial evidence in the record that 
Voorhees' mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against casualty were impaired by alcohol, even without considering the evidence of his performance on the HGN test. Voorhees displayed a significant lack of judgment and impulse control. When combined with evidence of his consumption of alcohol, we hold that the District Court's erroneous mention of slurred speech when announcing its findings was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
State v. McDonnell, 141 Hawai# i 280, 297, 409 
P.3d 684, 701 (2017) ("Error should not be viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract, but must be examined in light of the entire proceedings and given the effect to which the whole record shows it is entitled.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
HRS § 291E-15 (Supp. 2010) provides: 
If a person under arrest refuses to submit to a
breath, blood, or urine test, none shall be given, except as
provided in section 291E-21 [mandatory testing in the eventof a collision resulting in injury or death]. Upon the lawenforcement officer's determination that the person underarrest has refused to submit to a breath, blood, or urinetest, if applicable, then a law enforcement officer shall: 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Inform the person under arrest of the sanctions
under section 291E-41 [administrativerevocation], 291E-65 [license suspension], or291E-68 [penalty is petty misdemeanor]; and 
(2) Ask the person if the person still refuses tosubmit to a breath, blood, or urine test,thereby subjecting the person to the proceduresand sanctions under part III or section 291E-65,as applicable; 
provided that if the law enforcement officer fails to complywith paragraphs (1) and (2), the person shall not be subjectto the refusal sanctions under part III or IV. 
In this case, the State concedes that after Voorhees 
was arrested, Officer Pa did not inform him of the sanctions 
under HRS §§ 291E-41 or 291E-65. Since Voorhees was never informed of the refusal sanctions, he is not subject to the sanctions under parts III or IV of HRS Chapter 291E-15. The Judgment is reversed as to Count 5. 
III. 
Based upon the foregoing, the Judgment and Notice of 
Entry of Judgment entered by the District Court of the Third Circuit on April 22, 2014, is reversed as to the conviction on Count 5 only. In all other respects, the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 12, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Elika O. Stimpson,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Jason R. Kwiat,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of 
Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
23 