  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000242
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DORA J. GRIFFIN, Petitioner-Appellee,
on behalf of MICHAEL E. GRIFFIN, a Minor, Subject,
v.
 
JEAN DAVENPORT, Respondent-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DOMESTIC ABUSE NO. 10-1-7071)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Jean Davenport (Davenport) appeals
 
from an Order for Protection issued on November 12, 2010 by the
 
1
Family Court of the First Circuit (family court),  pursuant to
which, among other things, Davenport is precluded from contacting
 
the subject minor (Minor). The Order for Protection is to remain
 in effect for five years, until November 12, 2015.
 
On appeal, Davenport asserts the following points of
 
error: (1) the family court erred in granting the restraining
 order in FC-DA No. 10-1-7071 because of the 
res judicata effect
 
of the dissolution of the temporary restraining order in a prior
 case, FC-DA No. 10-1-6987; and (2) the family court erred in
 ruling that res judicata was inapplicable to FC-DA No. 10-1-7071
 because Petitioner-Appellee Dora J. Griffin (Griffin) was not
 misled that Minor's dislocated elbow was caused by a fall, when
 
1
 The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Griffin already independently concluded how the injury occurred
 
before proceeding with the prior case, FC-DA No. 10-1-6987.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we remand for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion to determine if res
 judicata applies.
I. Background
 
On behalf of her son, Minor, then four-years old,
 
Griffin filed two successive Petitions for an Order of Protection
 
against Davenport in the family court. Davenport, who used to be
 Minor's pre-school teacher, began a relationship with Minor's
 father, Darren Iwamoto, in March of 2010.
 
Griffin's first petition, in FC-DA No. 10-1-6987, was
 
filed on October 8, 2010 alleging two incidents of abuse. The
 first incident Griffin alleged was on September 27, 2010, as to
 which she asserted "my son's preschool administrator informed me
 that Jean Davenport had threatened to choke & stab him with a
 knife because of an argument between his father." The second
 incident was alleged to have been in October of 2010 and Griffin
 asserted "my son said 'she choke me on my neck' after I asked him
 if Jean had ever touched him." On October 8, 2010, a temporary
 restraining order (TRO) was issued and a hearing was set for
 October 18, 2010.
 
At the hearing on the first petition, Griffin,
 
Davenport and Iwamoto testified. Griffin represented to the
 family court that she had a witness who did not show up. Griffin
 sought to present a letter from Kelly Shodahl (Shodahl),
 Davenport's "boss" at the preschool, but because Shodahl was not
 in court to testify, Griffin was not allowed to admit the letter
 into evidence. The family court concluded at the end of the
 hearing that Griffin had not carried her burden of proof and
 issued an order that day, October 18, 2010, dissolving the TRO
 against Davenport due to insufficient evidence.
 
Griffin's second petition, in FC-DA No 10-1-7071, was
 
filed eleven days later, on October 29, 2010, alleging three
 incidents of abuse. The first alleged incident (which had not
 been alleged in the first petition) was in April of 2010 and
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Griffin asserted that "Ms. Jean Davenport grab my son and
 
dislocated his elbow when I asked his father what happen he told
 me he fell." The second alleged incident (previously alleged in
 the first petition) was in October of 2010 and Griffin asserted
 "my son said 'she choke me on my neck' after I asked him if Jean
 Davenport had ever touched him." The third alleged incident
 (similar to an incident alleged in the first petition) was in
 September of 2010 and Griffin asserted "Ms. Jean Davenport had
 threatened to take my son in a bathroom and beat him up also
 wanted to 'punch' um in the throat and stab him in the neck." A
 TRO was issued on October 29, 2010 and a hearing set for
 November 12, 2010.
 
At the hearing on the second petition, Griffin,
 
Shodahl, Davenport and Iwamoto testified. During the hearing,
 Davenport argued that the prior TRO had been dissolved and that
 res judicata should apply. At the end of the hearing, the family
 court issued its ruling, as follows:
 
THE COURT: The Court is going to find that –- that
there was new evidence in this case that was not brought up
in the original TRO or presented to Judge Aburano and was
not available to Ms. Griffin prior to the filing of the
first TRO, which was denied.
 
The Court in this case is going to also find that the
petitioner has proven the allegations and is going to grant
this restraining order.
 
The Order for Protection was issued the same day, November 12,
 
2010, to be effective for five years.
 
In its Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
(Amended FOF/COL), the family court concluded that the acts by
 Davenport that constituted domestic abuse was "[t]he Arpil [sic]
 25, 2010 incident that dislocated [Minor's] arm."
II. Res Judicata In Domestic Abuse Cases
 
In her first point of error, Davenport argues that 
Tortorello v. Tortorello, 113 Hawai' i 432, 153 P.3d 1117 (2007) 
is on point as to application of res judicata in this case and 
that the family court thus committed reversible error in issuing the Order for Protection. Tortorello established that principles 
of res judicata apply in domestic abuse cases. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Res judicata, or claim preclusion, is a doctrine "that
limit[s] a litigant to one opportunity to litigate aspectsof the case to prevent inconsistent results and multiplicityof suits and to promote finality and judicial economy."
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 53, 85 P.3d 150, 160 (2004)
(citation and footnote omitted). Res judicata "prohibits a
party from relitigating a previously adjudicated cause of
action." Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). In addition, 
the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction is a
bar to a new action in any court between the same
parties or their privies concerning the same subject
 matter, and precludes the relitigation, not only of
the issues which were actually litigated in the first
action, but also of all grounds of claim and defense
 which might have been properly litigated in the first
 
action but were not litigated or decided.
 
Id. at 53–54, 85 P.3d at 160–61 (citation, brackets, and
some emphases omitted) (some emphases added). Finally,
 
[t]he party asserting claim preclusion has the burden
of establishing that (1) there was a final judgment on
the merits, (2) both parties are the same or in
privity with the parties in the original suit, and
(3) the claim decided in the original suit is
 
identical with the one presented in the action in
 
question.
 
Id. at 54, 85 P.3d at 161 (emphasis added).
 
Id. at 439, 153 P.3d at 1124.
 
In Tortorello, the petitioner wife did not dispute that
 
the first two prongs required for res judicata were met, but
 
argued that the third prong was not met because the claim in the
 first suit was not identical with the claim in the second suit. 
The supreme court disagreed, stating that "[i]nasmuch as both
 Petitions sought an order of protection against Husband, the
 claim decided in Petition I is identical with the one presented
 in Petition II." Id.
 
Under the facts in Tortorello, the supreme court upheld
 
application of res judicata, noting in part:
 
To conclude as Wife desires in this case, that is, to allow
the filing of successive petitions based on alleged pastacts of abuse that could have been indicated in the earlier petition, would result in clogging the family courts withexcessive hearings and straining the resources of not onlythe parties, but of the family and appellate courts of thisstate. Such potential problems are recognized in the
policies behind res judicata, which, as previously
mentioned, is a doctrine "that limit[s] a litigant to one
opportunity to litigate aspects of the case to prevent inconsistent results and multiplicity of suits and to 
promote finality and judicial economy." Bremer, 104 Hawai' i 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
at 53, 85 P.3d at 160 (citation and footnote omitted)
(emphasis added).
 
Id. at 441, 153 P.3d at 1126. Ultimately, therefore, the supreme
 
court upheld the holding by this court that "the doctrine of res
 judicata 'applies to successive HRS [c]hapter 586 . . .
 protective order cases filed by the same petitioner against the
 same respondent where the second case is based on events that
 occurred, and that the petitioner knew about, prior to the filing
 
of the first petition[.]'" Id. at 437, 153 P.3d at 1122
 
(emphasis added).
 
Although Tortorello recognized the application of res
 
judicata in domestic abuse cases, in this case, the family
 
court's Amended FOF/COL concluded that res judicata did not apply
 because Griffin was misled about the April 2010 incident,
 stating:
 
Res Judicata does not apply because the Petitioner was
deceived by Respondent into believing that [Minor's] arm was
dislocated by a fall. Res judicata does not apply to bar a
claim where the petitioner is ignorant of the existence of
the claim due to the fault or fraud of the respondent. [See
Bolte v. Aits, Inc. 60 Haw. 58, 587 P.2d 810 (1978)]. The
 court also notes that HRS § 586-5.5 specifically
contemplates providing further relief from that provided by
a temporary restraining order. The Respondent actively hid
the information from the Petitioner. Therefore the
 Petitioner should not be precluded from moving for an Order
of Protection on these grounds.
 
In Bolte v. Aits, Inc., 60 Haw. 58, 587 P.2d 810
 
(1978), the Hawai' i Supreme Court recognized that res judicata 
will not bar claims of which the plaintiff or petitioner was
 
ignorant due to the fault or fraud of an adverse party. Id. at
 
62, 587 P.2d at 813-14. We therefore conclude that, although
 Davenport is correct that res judicata applies under Tortorello
 to domestic abuse cases, the key issue in this case is whether an
 exception to res judicata applies under Bolte.
 
III. Exception to Res Judicata Under Bolte
 
In Bolte, the plaintiff brought two successive lawsuits
 
alleging breach of the same contract. Under the contract, the
 
plaintiff was entitled to commissions based on insurance premiums
 for a hotel. The first lawsuit sought commissions for a certain
 amount, and the second lawsuit sought additional commissions on
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subsequent insurance placed on the hotel. 60 Haw. at 59, 587
 
P.2d at 812. There was conflicting evidence as to when the
 plaintiff knew about the second breach. Id.
 
In reviewing whether the circuit court erred in
 
invoking res judicata to bar the second lawsuit, the supreme
 court held, in relevant part:
 
We adhere to the rule adopted by the majority of
jurisdictions that have dealt with the problem that a former
recovery will not bar claims of which the plaintiff was
ignorant, even if those claims existed at the time suit was
commenced in the former recovery and could have been joined,
unless plaintiff's ignorance was due to his own negligence.
The rule is also applicable if plaintiff's ignorance was due
to the fault or fraud of an adverse party.
 
As noted above, the rule against splitting a cause of action
is based on the salutary policy of preventing a multiplicity of
vexatious lawsuits and harassment of the defendant. The rule
 presupposes the fact that the plaintiff is consciously acting
inequitably in suing for only part of his claim, knowing that he
was unnecessarily bringing vexatious lawsuits against the
defendant or careless as to whether he was causing such vexation.
The rule against splitting should not be so rigidly applied,
however, to produce an injustice and thwart the policy upon which
it was founded. Thus, where the plaintiff is ignorant of a
possible cause of action which existed at the time of commencement
of a prior, related action, and he is not negligent in his
ignorance or his ignorance was caused by the fraud or fault of the
defendant, plaintiff's purpose in bringing the subsequent action
will not be to consciously and unreasonably vex or harass the
defendant.  Rather, plaintiff's purpose will merely be to enforce
the alleged liability upon the defendant. Consequently, the
rationale and rule against splitting a cause of action will be
inapplicable.
 
Id. at 62-63, 587 P.2d at 813-14 (citations omitted) (emphasis
 
added).
 
In Bolte, the trial court had granted summary judgment
 
to the defendant based on res judicata, but there had been no
 determination, and apparently no undisputed evidence, as to when
 the second breach had occurred. Therefore, the supreme court
 remanded for further proceedings, stating:
 
The issue as to when the second breach occurred is
 
crucial to the Res judicata inquiry. If it occurred after
 
the July 2, 1971 filing of the first suit in the district
court, Res judicata and the rule against splitting a cause
of action will not operate to bar the bringing of the second
action. But, if the second breach occurred prior to the
filing of the first suit in the district court, then,
dependent on whether plaintiff had knowledge of the second
breach before the first suit was filed and whether his
 possible lack of knowledge was due to the negligence of
plaintiff or the fault or fraud of defendant, the second
suit may be barred.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 64, 587 P.2d at 815 (emphasis added).
 
In her second point of error, Davenport argues that
 
Griffin came to an independent conclusion that Davenport was
 
involved in the April 2010 incident and thus should have been
 barred from raising it in the second petition. Davenport
 acknowledges that the family court made FOF's 4 and 5, which
 state:
 
4. In April of 2010 Respondent caused an injury to
[Minor's] arm.
 
5. [Minor] was taken to Kaiser and treated for the
injury. Petitioner was notified by Darren Iwamoto that
[Minor] fell and was intentionally misled as to the actual
cause of the injury by Respondent and Darren Iwamoto.
 
(Emphasis added). Davenport argues, however, that the family
 
court also made the finding that, after being given a letter by
 
2
Shodahl in September of 2010  that detailed Shodahl's concerns
about Davenport becoming more aggressive towards Minor, Griffin
 came to an independent conclusion that day saying "[t]hat's how
 [Minor's] arm was dislocated." 
Davenport argues that, even if
 
Griffin had been deceived, she was "no longer under that cloud of
 deception by September of 2010."
 
We cannot conclude that Griffin's statement to Shodahl
 
required her to raise the April 2010 incident in the first
 petition. There is nothing in the record indicating that
 Shodahl's letter included any information about the April 2010
 incident. 
Instead, Shodahl testified that her letter addressed
 
her observations of Davenport's conduct at the preschool. The
 Petition For An Order For Protection On Behalf Of A Family Or
 Household Member (petition form) that Griffin was required to use
 in asserting her claims requires the petitioner to allege "under
 penalty of perjury" that the respondent "has abused the Subject
 and/or the listed family/household member(s) as follows[.]"
 Therefore, although the family court's FOF 9 and 10
 
indicate that Griffin suspected as of September 22, 2010 that
 
2
 The family court's FOF 9 and 10 indicate that Shodahl gave Griffin a
letter on September 22, 2010, which was over two weeks before Griffin filed
the first petition on October 8, 2010.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Davenport was involved in the April 2010 incident, Griffin
 
reasonably could not make a claim against Davenport under penalty
 of perjury based on Shodahl's letter.
 
The issue thus turns on when Griffin learned from
 
Shodahl that Davenport had confirmed being involved in the April
 2010 incident when Minor's arm was dislocated. Similar to Bolte,
 we conclude that the record is unclear and the family court did
 not make essential factual findings that would support whether or
 not res judicata applies. The family court's relevant findings
 were:
 
8. Kelle [sic] Shodahl observed Respondent becoming
more aggressive towards [Minor] and not towards any other
children.
 
9. In September 2010, Kelle [sic] Shodahl told
Darren Iwamoto that Respondent was becoming more aggressive
towards [Minor].
 
9. [sic] On September 21, 2010, Kelle [sic] Shodahl
gave Darren Iwamoto a letter detailing her concerns. Darren
 Iwamoto's response was that it was just words and Respondent
didn't mean anything by it.
 
10. The following day Ms. Shodahl gave the same
letter to Petitioner and Petitioner's [sic] responded by
saying, "That's how [Minor's] arm was dislocated."
 
1 1 . Ms. Shodahl then asked Respondent about the
incident where [Minor's] arm was injured. Respondent
confirmed that she had grabbed [Minor's] arm and it
dislocated.
 
(Emphasis added). At the hearing on the second petition, Griffin
 
asserted that she had not raised the April 2010 incident in the
 first petition because she did not know about it at the time. 
Griffin stated at the hearing that she had just found out about
 it from Shodahl, who had asked Davenport if Davenport was the one
 that dislocated Minor's arm; Davenport allegedly responded to
 Shodahl in the affirmative and also told Shodahl that Griffin
 knew. Griffin asserted at the hearing that she did not know that
 Davenport was the one who dislocated Minor's arm and that when
 she learned that Davenport had confirmed it to Shodahl, she was
 very mad and told Shodahl she was going to get another
 restraining order. Griffin did not state when she learned that
 Davenport had confirmed being involved in the events resulting in
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Minor's dislocated arm. Moreover, the family court did not make
 
any findings as to when Griffin learned this information.
 
Thus, in order to determine whether res judicata barred
 
Griffin from asserting the April 2010 incident in the second
 petition, we remand this case to the family court to determine
 when Griffin learned that Davenport had been involved in the
 events of April 2010 leading to Minor's dislocated arm. If
 Griffin learned this information prior to filing the first
 petition, her claims in the second petition regarding the April
 2010 incident are barred by res judicata.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
We therefore remand this case to the family court for
 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion. If the family
 
court finds that, prior to filing the first petition on
 October 8, 2010, Griffin had already learned that Davenport had
 been involved in the events of April 2010 leading to Minor's
 dislocated arm, the family court shall rescind the Order for
 Protection.
 
If, on the other hand, the family court finds that it
 
was not until after the first petition was filed that Griffin
 learned about Davenport's involvement in the events of April 2010
 leading to Minor's dislocated arm, then the family court may
 maintain the Order for Protection.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 5, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Harlan Y. Kimura 
for Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
9
 