NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000537
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEITH MCKINNEY, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0315)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Keith McKinney (McKinney) appeals
pro se from the June 17, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
Court).   After a jury trial, the Circuit Court convicted
McKinney of three counts of Sexual Assault in the Second Degree,
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-731
(Supp. 2018), and sentenced him to concurrent ten-year terms of
incarceration in each count with a mandatory minimum of six (6)
years and eight (8) months as a repeat offender.21
On appeal, McKinney asserts:  (1) the Circuit Court
erred because there was insufficient evidence to support his
conviction; (2)  the Deputy Public Defender (DPD) assigned as his
1The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
2HRS § 707-731 provides, in relevant part:  "(1) A person commits
the offense of sexual assault in the second degree if:  (a) The person
knowingly subjects another person to an act of sexual penetration by
compulsion [.]"NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trial attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel; and
(3) the State committed prosecutorial misconduct.3
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve
McKinney's points as follows and affirm.
1.The State presented substantial evidence
supporting McKinney's conviction.  McKinney apparently challenges
the sufficiency of the evidence in three ways, stating: 
(1) there was "not one iota of evidence that a sexual
relationship had taken place[;]" (2) "[DPA] state [sic] to the
jury that I raped the c/w, without a rape kit to confirm that
prejudicial statement[;]" and (3) "I have not had sex with [CW]."
HRS § 707-731 provides, in relevant part, "(1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the second degree if: 
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person to an act of
sexual penetration by compulsion[.]"  McKinney's challenge to the
sufficiency of evidence appears limited to the acts of sexual
penetration rather that compulsion or his own mental state.  HRS
§ 707-700 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
"Sexual penetration" means:
(1)Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio,
deviate sexual intercourse,  or any intrusion of any
part  of a person's body or of any object into the
genital or anal opening of another person's body; it
occurs upon any penetration, however slight, but
emission is not required. As used in this definition,
"genital opening" includes the anterior surface of the
vulva or labia majora; or
(2)Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not actual
penetration has occurred.
Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
3McKinney's Opening Brief and Reply Brief do not conform with the
requirements of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) and, thus, 
his points may be deemed waived.  HRAP Rule 1(d) (pro se appellant "deemed to 
be aware of, and are expected to comply with, all of the provisions of these
rules.") ; HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) (point of error not presented on appeal in
accordance with Rule 28 "will be disregarded, except that the appellate court,
at its option, may notice a plain error not presented").  However, it is the
policy of this court to address a litigant's arguments on the merits where
possible.  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai #i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558
(1995)).  McKinney's points of error are restyled and presented to the degree
discernable.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  State v. Timoteo, 87
Hawai#i 108, 112-13, 952 P.2d 865, 869-70 (1997)  "'[T]he
testimony of a single witness, if found by the trier of fact to
have been credible, will suffice' to provide substantial
evidence."  State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai# i 43, 50-51, 237 P.3d
1109, 1116-17 (2010) (quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 196, 20
P.3d 616, 629 (2001) (citation omitted)).
Here, the CW testified that McKinney placed his mouth
on her vagina, penetrated her vagina with his finger, and placed
his penis inside her vagina.  CW's testimony provided substantial
evidence for acts of sexual penetration sufficient to support a
conviction for Sexual Assault in the Second Degree.  Therefore,
McKinney's claim is without merit.
2.McKinney makes numerous arguments that the DPD
assigned to his case provided ineffective assistance of counsel.4
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel,
[the appellate court] looks at whether defense counsel's
assistance was within the range of competence demanded of
attorneys in criminal cases.  The defendant has the burden
of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and must
meet the following two-part test:  1) that there were
specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense.  To satisfy
this second prong, the defendant needs to show a possible
impairment, rather than a probable impairment, of a
potentially meritorious defense.  A defendant need not prove
actual prejudice.
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27
(2003) (internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote
omitted).
In his first assertion as we have identified it above,
McKinney fails to identify which "prejudicial photos" his trial
4Specifically, McKinney asserts:  (1) DPD failed to object to
prejudicial photos; (2) DPD failed to remove himself from this case; (3) DPD
refused to provide Notice of Discovery to McKinney; (4) DPD made racial
undertones during voir dire by referring to the CW as a Japanese woman and
McKinney as a black man; (5) DPD argued consent when McKinney wanted to
contest whether there had been a sexual relationship between himself and the
CW; (6) DPD failed to investigate whether McKinney lived at the 2410 Koa
Avenue address; (7) DPD failed to point out to the jury that the exhibit was
redacted; 
(8) DPD failed to call McKinney's friend Marie Kashem as a witness;
(9)
 DPD failed to investigate McKinney had filed complaints with the F.B.I.
against the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney, HPD in 2012 or complaints
against officers in this case and other officers in Waik îkî; (10) DPD did not
tell McKinney how much time he would get; (11) DPD failed to call an expert
witness or send the security video footage to NASA.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counsel should have objected to nor does he explain how they were
unfairly prejudicial.  See Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
Rule 403 (providing for exclusion of evidence whose relevance is
"substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice[.]") 
In any event, our review of the eight photographs admitted into
evidence at trial and the foundation therefor laid by the CW and
the police officer taking photographs leads us to the conclusion
that none were unfairly prejudicial and would not have been
excluded had McKinney's trial counsel objected to their
admission.
In his second allegation, McKinney argues that his
trial counsel, upon their first meeting, "refused to remove
himself from this case" without providing the grounds for such a
withdrawal.  Consequently, he has failed to show this "refusal"
constituted ineffective assistance.
Third, McKinney argues that his counsel refused to let
him see "the Notice of discovery" which we construe to mean he
was not given the opportunity to review all discovery obtained by
his counsel.  However, McKinney does not explain how this alleged
error or omission impaired his defense.
In his fourth claim, McKinney argues that his counsel
"kept making reference" to him being a black man and that the CW
was Japanese.  This allegation is not supported by our review of
the trial proceedings where counsel spent some time in voir dire
exploring the potential jurors' possible racial prejudices and
once in opening and closing arguments mentioning that McKinney
was a black man.  Rather than failing to deal with a potential
issue, it was a matter of trial strategy for McKinney's counsel
to examine the subject in voir dire and attempt to discover and
minimize the issue before trial began.  "[M]atters presumably
within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy , will rarely
be second-guessed by judicial hindsight."  State v. Richie, 88
Hawai#i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted).
Fifth, McKinney argues that his counsel relied on a
consent defense when he wanted to contest having sex with the CW
at all.  McKinney alleges that he told his counsel of his wishes
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
but that counsel proceeded with the consent defense at trial
without consulting him.  On this basis, McKinney makes a
colorable claim as McKinney is entitled within the bounds of the
law, to decide which defenses to raise. 
Sixth, McKinney faults his counsel for not
investigating his true address; that the jury was mislead when it
was told that he lived at 2410 Koa Avenue and had two addresses. 
McKinney does not allege that he informed his counsel that he did
not live at this address.  Moreover, our review of the record
does not support the notion that this information was incorrect. 
In waiving his rights and agreeing to be interviewed, McKinney
signed a form providing 2410 Koa Avenue as his address.  In his
initial interview with police, McKinney was asked for his address
and replied, "I actually have two but where I'm living at 2412
Koa Avenue."  Even if his address was not 2410 Koa Avenue, it was
close by.  Thus, McKinney fails to show how the failure to
investigate his address was an error or omission by counsel.
In McKinney's seventh claim, he argues his counsel
should have pointed out that certain information was redacted
from an exhibit.  However, as this exhibit was not admitted into
evidence, McKinney fails to show how this omission impaired a
defense.
McKinney points out that his counsel failed to call a
witness in his eighth claim.  However, as he does not allege that
he informed his counsel of this witness and does not explain how
this witness's testimony would have helped his case, this claim
also fails to establish his counsel was ineffective.
In his ninth claim, McKinney again fails to allege that
he made his counsel aware of his various complaints against the
prosecutors' office and police officers involved and not involved
in this case, or how investigating these complaints would have
helped his defense.
In similar fashion, McKinney does not explain, in his
tenth allegation, how his counsel "lied" about the potential
sentence he faced for these charges, nor how this impacted his
defense.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Finally, McKinney alleges that his counsel did not call
an expert witness or send the "video to NASA."  Again, McKinney
does not provide any reasons for doing so, or how he believed
this would help his defense.
We conclude that, except for his claim that counsel did
not consult and gain his agreement to assert the consent defense,
McKinney has failed to establish an error or omission that
possibly impaired a potentially meritorious defense.
3.McKinney's allegations of prosecutorial misconduct
are unfounded.  McKinney alleges numerous instances of
prosecutorial misconduct.  McKinney does not identify in the
record where the alleged incidents of prosecutorial misconduct
took place, but his challenges can be grouped into four areas: 
(a) sufficiency of evidence for the State to make in-court
statements; (b) evidence tampering; (c) racially motivated misuse
of a peremptory challenge; and (d) that the State permitted CW to
turn her back to McKinney.
a.The statements by the DPA have a foundation
in the evidence.  McKinney challenges the evidentiary basis for
statements made by the DPA during trial, specifically that the
DPA claimed McKinney:  lived at 2410 Koa Avenue, forcibly kissed
the CW, and raped CW absent a rape kit.  The alleged statements
took place during both opening statement, and closing and
rebuttal arguments.  The opening statement provides an
opportunity for counsel to advise and outline for the jury the
facts and questions in the matter before them, and the State
should only refer in the opening statement to evidence that it
has "a genuine good-faith belief" will be produced at trial. 
State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai# i 465, 480, 24 P.3d 661, 676 (2001)
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted).  During closing
argument a prosecutor "is permitted to draw reasonable inferences
from the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the
evidence[,]" and presenting his or her reasonable impressions
from the evidence.  State v. Clark, 83 Hawai#i 289, 304-05, 926
P.2d 194, 209-10 (1996).
The first issue is whether there was a basis in the
evidence that McKinney lived at the 2410 Koa Ave address.  During
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
closing, the DPA argued, "And what's important, remember
Detective Phromsiri testified, the defendant lived a 14-minute
walk away.  He lived in the neighborhood.  You don't go to a
dumpster room to have consensual sex on the floor next to a
dumpster when you live just a short walk away."  During trial,
Detective Pinyo Phromsiri testified that McKinney lived at 2410
Koa Avenue and that he had walked the distance from CW's
apartment building to that address and it took fourteen minutes.  
On cross, McKinney asked whether Detective Phromsiri determined
if McKinney had two addresses, the detective replied, "I just
went off of the one that was on his booking, sir."  Thus, the
challenged statement was well within the DPA's wide latitude in
discussing the evidence.  Clark, 83 Hawai#i at 304-05, 926 P.2d
at 209-10.  Therefore, McKinney's claim is without merit.
The second issue is whether there was a basis in the
evidence for the DPA to state that McKinney forcibly kissed the
CW.  During opening, the DPA stated, "This defendant led her over
to a bench outside of the apartment, was kissing her, had his
hands on her.  And again she said, I want to go upstairs."  And
in closing, the DPA argued, "[McKinney] instructed her to face
him when he kissed her."  In testimony, the State elicited from
the CW that McKinney kissed her although she did not want him to. 
In both statements, the DPA accurately reflected what was
presented at trial.  Therefore, McKinney's argument is without
merit.
The third issue is whether there was a basis in the
evidence for the DPA to state that McKinney raped the CW absent a
rape kit.  During opening, the DPA stated, "This defendant took
[CW], a 19-year-old Japanese girl, to this, dumpster room at 4:30
in the morning.  He put her down on that floor and he raped her."
In closing, the DPA argued:  "And he knew once he got her alone
in that disgusting dumpster room, he knew what he was doing when
he raped Maria on the floor."  And in rebuttal, the DPA asserted,
"You know he took her into that room, took off his sweatshirt,
pushed her down onto the floor, and raped her three different 
ways." 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The word "rape" is not defined in the HRS, but it is
commonly defined as "unlawful sexual activity and [usually]
sexual intercourse carried out forcibly or under threat of injury
against the will of [usually] a female[.]"  Merriam-Webster's 
Collegiate Dictionary 1030 (11th ed. 2003).  The CW testified
that McKinney placed his mouth on her vagina, penetrated her
vagina with his finger, and placed his penis inside her vagina
without permission, thus meeting the common definition of rape.  
A rape kit is not required to prove a sexual assault.  The
question is whether there is substantial evidence, and a single
witness if believed may provide substantial evidence.  Kalaola,
124 Hawai#i at 50-51, 237 P.3d at 1116-17.
Here, the DPA accurately outlined the evidence that
would be presented at trial.  Valdivia, 95 Hawai# i at 480, 24
P.3d at 676.  Furthermore, the DPA's arguments were within the
wide latitude permitted in discussing the evidence.  Clark, 83
Hawai#i at 304-05, 926 P.2d at 209-10.  Thus, McKinney's claims
are without merit.
b.McKinney provides no evidence to support his
claims of evidence or transcript tampering.  McKinney asserts the
State tampered with both evidence and court transcripts.
i. Evidence Tampering
McKinney claims the State altered "States [sic] Exhibit
F" the screenshot of the Facebook messages to remove or alter the
dates and times of the messages.  McKinney argues that if the
jury had been shown the dates of the messages they would have
known that CW only reported the assault after McKinney messaged,
"You are super ugly have a nice life[.]"  As an initial matter,
the Facebook message screenshot was McKinney's Exhibit F and
McKinney offers no proof that the exhibit was modified by the
State.  Moreover, the exhibit was not entered into evidence and
instead was merely offered for identification to Detective
Phromsiri, who claimed to have created the screenshot.  The
content of the messages was presented to the jury in the form of
leading questions during McKinney's cross-examination of the CW
without any dates or times.  Thus, because the exhibit was not
introduced, it could not have affected the jury.  Therefore,
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
there could not have been prosecutorial misconduct from
modification to the Facebook messages.  Thus, McKinney's point is
without merit.
ii. Trial Transcript Tampering
McKinney merely makes the bald assertion that "The
court transcripts have been tampered with mutilation of evidence,
I will only talk to the F.B.I. or U.S. Attorneys Office."  Trial
transcripts are generally considered "sources whose accuracy
cannot reasonably be questioned[.]"  See State v. Metcalfe, 129
Hawai#i 206, 223, 297 P.3d 1062, 1079 (2013) (citing HRE Rule
201(b); Ditto v. McCurdy, 98 Hawai# i 123, 130, 44 P.3d 274, 281
(2002)).  McKinney provides no evidence to support this claim and
does not cite to what he believes has been altered in the
transcripts.  Where an appellant makes no discernible argument in
support of a position we may disregard the contention.  HRAP
Rule 28(b)(7); State v. Cantiberos, 118 Hawai#i 424, 192 P.3d
613, No. 28800, 2008 WL 4358763 at *1 (App. Sept. 25, 2008). 
Thus, we disregard McKinney's contention the trial transcripts
have been tampered with because he makes no discernible argument
in support of the position.
c.The State did not commit prosecutorial
misconduct by misusing a peremptory challenge with a
discriminatory purpose.  McKinney asserts the DPA committed
prosecutorial misconduct for using a peremptory challenge with a
discriminatory purpose against the only African-American juror.  
In State v. Batson, the Hawai#i supreme court adopted the rule
that whenever the prosecution so exercises its peremptory
challenges as to exclude entirely from the jury all persons
who are of the same ethnical minority as the defendant, and
that exclusion is challenged by the defense, there will be
an inference that the exclusion was racially motivated, and
the prosecutor must, to the satisfaction of the court,
explain his or her challenges on a non-ethnical basis.
71 Haw. 300, 302, 788 P.2d 841, 842 (1990) (citing Batson v.
Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986)).  
In applying this rule, trial courts follow a three-
step procedure:  (1) defendant must make out a prima facie case
of relevant facts that gives rise to an inference of
discriminatory purpose; (2) the "burden shifts to the State to
explain the exclusion by offering permissible category-neutral
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
justifications for the strikes; and (3) "if a category-neutral
explanation is tendered, the trial court must then decide whether
the opponent of the strike has proved purposeful discrimination." 
State v. Daniels, 109 Hawai# i 1, 5-6, 122 P.3d 796, 800-01
(2005).  The opponent of the peremptory challenge has the burden
of persuasion regarding the racial motivation for the challenge. 
Purkett v. Elem, 514 U.S. 765, 768 (1995); Daniels, 109 Hawai#i
at 6, 122 P.3d at 801.
The first issue is whether McKinney made out a prima
facie case of relevant facts that give rise to an inference of
discriminatory purpose.  Id.  In a bench conference, the DPD
stated, "At this time I'm going to make a Batson challenge, your
honor, and ask the State to give a reason why [juror] is being
excused."  Thus, McKinney raised, although arguably did not make
out a prima facie case of relevant facts giving rise to an
inference of a discriminatory purpose.  Second, the State's
explanation of the exclusion, i.e., by offering permissible
category-neutral justifications for the strikes was as follows:
Yes, your honor. State's basis for excusing him is not
based on race.  It's based on his response, well, based on
two things.  One, his response to my question about his
experience with the police when his car was stolen indicated
to me that he has a bias against law enforcement and against
government.  Also, at the beginning of the day he was having
a hard time keeping his eyes open while you were reading
some of the instructions.  And based on his response to my
question about his work shifts, I'm concerned with his
ability to remain attentive throughout the course of the
trial.  So for those two reasons State's seeking to excuse
him.
During voir dire, the DPA engaged the prospective juror in the
following exchange:
[DPA]: Let's see. [juror]?
[juror]: Um-hum.
[DPA]: You said that you had your car stolen a couple
weeks ago?
[juror]: Um-hum.
[DPA]: Oh, I'm sorry that happened.  That's very
recent. 
[juror]: Yes.
[DPA]: Did you have any experiences with the police
during that?
[juror]: Yes, I did.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[DPA]: You did.  And how was that experience?
[juror]: Not too good really.  They came to my house,
took me to the car which was located in Salt Lake.  It was
sitting on bricks. It was basically totalled.  And so far I
haven't heard nothing from the police I'd say.
[DPA]: Okay. I'm sorry about that.  So you haven't had
a great -- not the kind of response that you were hoping
for?
[juror]: Right.
[DPA]: And can I ask you one more unrelated question,
but I also saw that you're a security guard, that was on
your juror card.  Is that right?
[juror]: Yes.
[DPA]: Can you tell me what kind of shifts you work or
what kind of hours you work?
[juror]: I work right now from 4:00 to 12:00 but we
change every three months.
[DPA]: Oh, okay.  So right now you're on like a 4:00
p.m. to 12:00 a.m., to midnight shift?
[juror]: Right, right.
[DPA]: All right.  Thank you, sir.
Thus, the DPA offered permissible category-neutral justifications
for the strikes.  Third, if a category-neutral explanation is
tendered, the trial court must then decide whether the opponent
of the strike has proved purposeful discrimination.  Daniels, 109
Hawai#i at 6, 122 P.3d at 801.  McKinney responded in the
following exchange:
[DPD]: And just with regard to the crime that he was
convicted of, it sounded to me, excuse me, it sounded more
like he was -- he was upset about the condition of his
vehicle.  He did not complain about the police.  What he
referred to specifically was that his vehicle was basically
totalled and that's what he was upset about.  With regard to
his being able to pay attention, I think we can all see for
ourselves he is awake and alert, your honor.
THE COURT: Okay.  Are you challenging [DPA]'s
credibility and belief that he's excusing the juror because
of his race?
[DPD]: At this time, yes.
THE COURT: The challenge is overruled.
Here, the trial court decided the State's category-neutral
explanation was sufficient to defeat McKinney's challenge.  The
record supports the Circuit Court's rejection of McKinney's
argument.  Thus, McKinney's point is without merit.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
d.McKinney also asserts prosecutorial
misconduct because, he argues, the DPA allowed the CW and her
interpreter to turn their backs on McKinney during bench
conferences.  McKinney asserts "The state knew what they were
doing that was very prejudicial."  McKinney provides no evidence
to support this claim and does not state how he was prejudiced. 
Where an appellant makes no discernible argument in support of a
position we may disregard the contention.  HRAP Rule 28(b)(7);
Cantiberos, 2008 WL 4358763 at *l.  Thus, McKinney's point is
disregarded.
Thus, having reviewed all of McKinney's allegations of
prosecutorial misconduct and finding none of them to represent
improper conduct, we need not conduct the harmless error
analysis.  State v. Mara, 98 Hawai#i 1, 16, 41 P.3d 157, 172
(2002).  Further, because none of the challenged conduct was
misconduct it cannot be so egregious as to bar reprosecution. 
See State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai#i 405, 423, 984 P.2d 1231, 1249
(1999).  We therefore conclude that McKinney has failed to
establish the prosecution engaged in misconduct.
Based on the foregoing, the June 17, 2015 Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit is affirmed without prejudice to McKinney bringing a
petition under Rule 40 of the Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure
regarding his choice of defenses.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 30, 2019.
On the briefs:
Keith McKinney,
Defendant-Appellant, pro se.
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
12