   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000585 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MN, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
AN, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DA NO. 15-1-2511)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant A. N. (Husband) appeals from an
 
order issued on July 25, 2016 (Order Denying Motion to Vacate),
 
1
by the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court),  which
denied his motion to vacate an Order for Protection.
 
On appeal, Husband contends that (1) the family court

 
erred when it implied that it did not have jurisdiction to vacate
 
the Order for Protection because custody and visitation matters
 are not part of the restraining order proceeding; and (2) the
 family court erred in denying Husband's Motion to Vacate the
 Order for Protection because the Order for Protection was a
 settlement agreement which Wife expressly breached.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided, unless otherwise indicated. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 
relevant legal authorities, we resolve Husband's points of error
 as follows, and we affirm.
 
On November 17, 2015, Petitioner-Appellee M. N. (Wife),
 
filed a Petition for an Order for Protection (Petition) against
 
Husband, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 586
 
and HRS § 134-7 (2011). Wife filed the Petition on behalf of
 herself and the couple's two minor children (Minor Children)
 
alleging, inter alia, physical harm and extreme psychological
 
abuse from a number of alleged incidents. On November 17, 2015,
 the family court issued a Temporary Restraining Order (TRO)
 
prohibiting Husband from contacting Wife and the Minor Children.
2
 
At the hearing on the Petition, held on November 30,
 
2015, a representative from Adult Client Services Branch advised
 
the family court that the "parties agree to an order for
 protection for three years for [Wife]. The children are taken
 off the TRO. The parties have agreed that father will be able to
 visit the children twice a week for two hours each day." The
 family court confirmed with both Husband and Wife as to their
 understanding of the agreement. The court's order was then read
 to the parties, including that the Minor Children are removed
 from the order and are no longer covered (and with no other
 provision expressly related to the Minor Children being included
 in the order). After the order was read in court, Husband stated
 that he understood the order and made no objection to it. 
Husband was represented by counsel at the hearing. Thereafter,
 on the same day, the family court issued the written Order for
 Protection which covers three-years and under which Husband is
 prohibited from contacting Wife. As noted during the hearing,
 the Order for Protection expressly states that Minor Children
 "are removed from this order and are no longer covered." Of
 further note, the Order for Protection contains a section III.D. 
2
 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza issued the TRO.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entitled "Temporary Custody and Visitation" relating generally to
 
minor children, but this section of the order is left blank.
 
On June 17, 2016, Husband filed a "Motion to Vacate the
 
Order of Protection" (Motion to Vacate). In his declaration
 
attached to the motion, Husband declared that he agreed to the
 
Order of Protection in exchange for Wife removing the two Minor
 Children from the Order of Protection. Husband also attested
 that the parties agreed Wife would permit Husband to visit with
 the children twice a week for two hours each week. Husband
 declared, however, that on January 8, 2016, Wife informed
 Husband's attorney that she would not be bringing the Minor
 Children to a shopping mall for visits with Husband the next day
 or thereafter. We note that in his declaration, Husband also
 attests to an existing divorce action, FC-D No. 16-1-0023, in
 which the presiding judge had issued an order for him to have
 overnight visitation with the Minor Children starting on May 27,
 2016. 
After a hearing on July 25, 2016, the family court
 
issued the Order Denying Motion to Vacate.
(1) Husband contends that the family court erred in
 
implying it did not have jurisdiction to vacate the Order for
 Protection in light of the custody and visitation matters
 involved. However, from our review of the record, the family
 court did not hold that it lacked jurisdiction. Rather, given
 that there was a pending divorce proceeding, the family court
 stated multiple times that the custody and visitation issues
 should be addressed in the divorce proceeding. We agree with the
 family court.
 
As we noted above, the Order for Protection in this
 
case did not contain any terms related to the custody and
 visitation for the Minor Children. Moreover, even if the parties
 intended that there be certain visitation rights as part of an
 agreement related to the Order for Protection, HRS § 586-5.5
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2006) only authorizes the court to establish temporary
 
visitation and custody of minor children.3 This is consistent
 
with the fact that other statutes provide criteria and procedures
 for awarding custody and visitation for minor children. See HRS
 
§ 571-46 (Supp. 2016); HRS Chapter 583.
 
We thus conclude that Husband's first point of error is
 
without merit.
 
(2) Husband also contends that the family court erred
 
in denying the Motion to Vacate because the Order for Protection
 was an agreement which Wife breached under principles of contract
 law. Husband argued at the hearing on the Motion to Vacate that
 because Wife will not permit Husband to see children twice a
 week, the Order for Protection should be "null and void." 
We do not agree with Husband that contract law applies
 
in resolving this appeal. Rather, because the Order for
 Protection does not contain any terms related to the custody or
 visitation of Minor Children, any assertion of a settlement
 agreement that included visitation rights was not set forth in
 the order. Moreover, an important aspect of the Order for
 Protection in favor of Husband was that the Minor Children were
 removed from the order and Husband was not precluded from seeing
 them, unlike under the TRO. Finally, even if the parties
 
3
 HRS § 586-5.5(a) provides in relevant part:
 
The protective order may include all orders stated in
the temporary restraining order and may provide for
further relief as the court deems necessary to prevent
domestic abuse or a recurrence of abuse, including
orders establishing temporary visitation and custody
with regard to minor children of the parties and
orders to either or both parties to participate in
domestic violence intervention services. If the court
 finds that the party meets the requirements under
section 334-59(a)(2), the court further may order that
the party be taken to the nearest facility for
emergency examination and treatment.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contemplated visitation rights as being part of the Order for
 
Protection, HRS § 586-5.5 clearly establishes that such rights
 would be temporary. It is undisputed in this case that there was
 a pending divorce proceeding by the time Husband filed his Motion
 to Vacate and that the presiding judge in the divorce case had
 issued an order pertaining to Father's visitation with the Minor
 Children. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the family
 court did not abuse its discretion in denying the Motion to
 Vacate.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
 
Motion to Dissolve Existing Order" entered on July 25, 2016, by
 the Family Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 20, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Andrew Daisuke Stewart,
for Respondent-Appellant. 
Gary G. Singh,
for Petitioner-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
5
 