NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000565 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LOGOVII TALO, Defendant-Appellee, and
J
ASON M. KRAMBERG, Real Party in Interest-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1PC161000667) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding J., Hiraoka, J.; and
Circuit Court Judge Ashford, in place of Ginoza, C.J.,
and Wadsworth, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ., all recused) 
Real Party In Interest-Appellant Deputy Public Defender 
Jason M. Kramberg (
Kramberg) appeals from the August 14, 2020 
Findings of Fact [(FOFs)], Conclusions of Law [(COLs)], and Order 
of Sanction Against Jason Kramberg, Esq. (Sanction Order) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
  1
Kramberg raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in 
imposing sanctions against Kramberg; Kramberg challenges FOFs 2-10 as clearly erroneous and COLs 2-4 as wrong. 
1 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Kramberg's point of error as follows: 
Kramberg argues that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in invoking its inherent powers under Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 603-21.9 (2016) to impose sanctions against 
Kramberg where he did not act in "bad faith." 
Pursuant to HRS § 603-21.9, the circuit court has the 
power to, inter alia: 
(6) To make and award such judgments, decrees, orders, and
mandates, issue such executions and other processes,and do such other acts and take such other steps asmay be necessary to carry into full effect the powerswhich are or shall be given to them by law or for thepromotion of justice in matters pending before them. 
HRS § 603-21.9 "is a legislative restatement of the 
inherent powers doctrine." Kaina v. Gellman, 119 Hawai# i 324, 
331, 197 P.3d 776, 783 (App. 2008) (citations omitted). 
Courts 
have "inherent power to curb abuses and promote a fair process." 
Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., 79 Hawai# i 452, 458, 903 
P.2d 1273, 1279 (1995) (citation omitted). 
However, "a court's 
inherent power, [] should be exercised with restraint and discretion." Id. (citation omitted). 
A circuit court invoking its powers to sanction an 
attorney must: 
(1) identify the appropriate sanctioning 
authority; and (2) set forth specific findings of perceived 
misconduct, i.e., bad faith, with reasonable specificity. Id. 79 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai#i at 459, 903 P.2d at 1280 ("[A]n order imposing sanctions 
should set forth findings that describe, with reasonable 
specificity, the perceived misconduct (such as harassment or bad faith conduct), as well as the appropriate sanctioning authority[.]"); see also Bank of Haw. v. Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i 
397, 389, 984 P.2d 1198, 1215 (1999) ("It is well settled that a court may not invoke its inherent powers to sanction an attorney without a specific finding of bad faith."). 
The record must 
support a finding of bad faith by clear and convincing evidence. Erum v. Llego, 147 Hawai# i 368, 393, 465 P.3d 815, 840 (2020); 
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i at 390, 984 P.2d at 1216 (determining 
circuit court's bad faith findings were supported by clear and convincing evidence in the record). 
The sanctioning order does not need to expressly use 
the words "bad faith," but "the court must make findings 
tantamount to a specific finding of bad faith, i.e.
, findings 
that are sufficient to enable the appellate court to infer a 
specific finding of bad faith by the circuit court." Sandomire 
v. Brown, 144 Hawai# i 314, 331, 439 P.3d 266, 283 (App. 2019) 
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
In analyzing the imposition of sanctions, the supreme 
court reasoned that: 
[s]anctions are not to be assessed without full and fair
consideration by the court. They often entail a fine whichmay have more than a token effect upon an attorney'sresources. More importantly, they act as a symbolicstatement about the quality and integrity of an attorney'swork - a statement which may have tangible effect upon theattorney's career. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Enos, 79 Hawai# i at 458, 903 P.2d at 1279 (citation omitted). It 
has been noted, however: 
These concerns are balanced with our observation that 
lawyers who know how to think but have not learned how
to behave are a menace and a liability to theadministration of justice. The necessity for civilityis relevant to lawyers because they are livingexemplars - and thus teachers - every day in everycase and in every court; and their worst conduct willbe emulated more readily than their best. 
Id. (citation, brackets and ellipses omitted). 
Kramberg first argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
relying on the Guidelines of Professional Courtesy and Civility 
for Hawai# i Lawyers (Guidelines) as a basis for imposing 
sanctions although they are not mandatory rules of professional 
conduct and are only offered as guidance. However, Kramberg cites no legal authority prohibiting a court from citing the 
Guidelines to support a particular proposition. We note that the supreme court has previously cited to the Guidelines to support 
propositions regarding sanctions. Erum, 147 Hawai# i at 393 n.46, 
465 P.3d at 840 n.46. 
Although the Guidelines provide that they 
should not be used as an independent basis for disciplinary charges or claims of professional negligence, the Guidelines also expressly provide that a court may reference them. See 
Guidelines Preamble (2018). 
Here, in COL 3, after citing the Hawai# i Rules of 
Professional Conduct (HRPC
), the Circuit Court referenced the 
Guidelines using a "see also" reference, in support of its 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusion that Kramberg's unprofessional conduct failed to 
comport with ethical standards for arguments to a tribunal, and behavior toward the court. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in referencing the Guidelines in this manner. 
Kramberg further argues that the Circuit Court abused 
its discretion because he did not act in bad faith. More specifically, Kramberg submits that he did not engage in "opportunistic and unprofessional argument" by bringing up Talo's health condition only after the Circuit Court began to sentence Talo to prison. 
However, conduct that violates the HRPC may constitute 
bad faith and warrant the imposition of sanctions. See Kunimoto, 
91 Hawai# i at 392, 984 P.2d at 1218 (determining conduct that 
failed to comply with HRPC warranted sanctions). 
The Preamble of 
the HRPC, which was cited by the Circuit Court, includes, inter 
alia: 
[5] . . . A lawyer should demonstrate respect for
the legal system and for those who serve it, including
judges. . . 
. . . . 
[9] In the nature of law practice, however,
conflicting responsibilities are encountered. 
Virtually all
difficult ethical problems arise from conflict between alawyer's responsibilities to clients, to the legal systemand to the lawyer's own interest[.] . . . These principlesinclude the lawyer's obligation zealously to protect andpursue a client's legitimate interests, within the bounds ofthe law, while maintaining a professional, courteous, andcivil attitude toward all persons involved in the legalsystem. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRPC Rule 3.1, which was also cited by the Circuit 
Court, provides: 
A lawyer shall not bring or defend a proceeding, or
assert or controvert an issue therein, unless there is a
basis for doing so that is not frivolous, which includes agood faith argument for an extension, modification, orreversal of existing law. A lawyer for the defendant in acriminal proceeding, or the respondent in a proceeding thatcould result in incarceration, may nevertheless so defendthe proceeding as to require that every element of the casebe established. 
At a June 18, 2020 resentencing hearing, Kramberg 
interrupted the court in the middle of its ruling. Kramberg 
interrupted the court after the court explained that probation would not be "an adequate deterrent" and that the nature of the probation violation in combination with the underlying conviction favored a prison term. Kramberg then proceeded to argue that sentencing Talo to prison was tantamount to sentencing him to die; and when the court rejected his argument, Kramberg said that the court's actions were outrageous, reiterated that the court was sentencing the defendant to die, and persisted in arguing with the judge. As reflected in the transcript of the June 18, 2020 hearing, and as set forth in FOF 2: 
THE COURT: . . . So when I look at the underlying
offense of a violent assault in the second degree, combined
with the nature of this particular probation violation, thecourt's finding is that this particular weighing doesmilitate in favor of a prison term. 
. . . . 
So for all of these reasons, it is the judgment and
sentence of this court that [Talo] be committed to thecustody -
-
MR. KRAMBERG: Excuse me, Your Honor . 
THE COURT: -- and care --
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MR. KRAMBERG: Before you finish that sentence, I'm 
not sure if I placed on the record about Mr. Talo's medical
condition in terms of he does suffer from gout, he isoverweight, and he does have a pre -- and diabetes . 
So, essentially, by sentencing him to imprisonment
with the corona virus, Mr. Talo is at very high risk of
death if it is to enter our prison system. So I would ask 
the court to also consider that as a factor in whether or 
not Mr. Talo deserves to die for the alleged violation ,
which is not supported by any direct testimony. 
THE COURT: You gotta stand when you talk, Mr.
Kramberg. [
2] And, Mr. Kramberg, the court's sentence is
based on the court's considered -- you know, I take 
exception to you saying that I am sentencing him to die,which I am not . 
MR. KRAMBERG: I respectfully disagree . The high
possibility that people die in prison based on his health
condition. So I would before -- I would ask that mittimus be delayed. We do intend to appeal. 
He is already out on a
hundred thousand dollars bond. He's shown that he's compliant. I would ask that the bond be allowed to continue while we pursue an appeal in this case. Especially,considering the fact at this time we're trying to reducepopulations of our prisons, especially the vulnerableinmates with pre-existing health conditions. 
THE COURT: Okay. You cut me off before I was gonna
finish the sentence. 
MR. KRAMBERG: I apologize. 
THE COURT: The judgment and sentence of this court
that [Talo] be committed to the custody and care of the
Director of the Department of Public Safety for a term ofimprisonment of five years and [Talo] to receive any credittime served. 
Defense has made additional argument regarding COVID-
19 and [Talo's] alleged medical condition. 
And you are
requesting delay of the mittimus? 
MR. KRAMBERG: Yes, Your Honor. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: 
I don't know that I can do that, because I
think that if he's convicted of a fel -– if it's a felonyand the sentence is imprisonment, I don't know that the lawallows a stay pending appeal. 
MR. KRAMBERG: I believe it does, Your Honor. 
2 While the Circuit Court did not sanction Kramberg for failing to
rise to his feet before making this argument, this lack of decorum by anexperienced courtroom attorney, combined with his interruption of the courtmidsentence, is palpably discourteous and disrespectful. 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
THE COURT: 
And the court took a recess to look at the 
bail statute, and I have done that. 804-4 talks about when 
a defendant is entitled to bail as a matter of right. 
Subsection (a)(2) says no bail shall be allowed
pending appeal of a felony conviction where a sentence ofimprisonment has been imposed. 
MR. KRAMBERG: And it goes on. To read -– please
continue reading, Your Honor. There are certain exceptionsto that. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: 
I don't agree with you. I think -- I'm 
looking at subsection (2), no bail shall be -- I mean, hefalls into subsection (2). 
MR. KRAMBERG: And. 
THE COURT: And it goes on to list additional
situations where no bail is allowed. 
. . . . 
MR. KRAMBERG: 
Essentially, what I'm saying is I would
like the mitt to be postponed so I can file a notice of
appeal and then be asking that bail be continued. . . . 
THE COURT: The court's -– okay. My decision on your
request is based on my reading of 804-4 subsection (2), thecourt interprets this statute to not allow bail in thissituation because the court has imposed a sentence ofimprisonment. So your request, Mr. Kramberg, is denied.And --
MR. KRAMBERG: Would it -- would it then be in effect 
if I file an appeal? Would -- would the court then find that that exception applies? 
THE COURT: I don't know that the defendant would meet 
the criteria. Subsection (b), I don't think it applies. So that's why I disagree with you, and I'm gonna impose -- Imean, I'm gonna order the mittimus to issue forthwith andI'm finding it does not apply. 
MR. KRAMBERG: That's outrageous, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: It is not outrageous. It's outrageous
that you tell me that I'm sentencing this defendant to --
MR. KRAMBERG: To prison. 
THE COURT: -- to death. MR. KRAMBERG: You are. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: No, you said that I am sentencing him to
die. I am not. I am imposing a prison term in accordance 
with the law. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: The court has ruled on the sentence and 
I've explained the reasons where I came out on thatsentence. Okay? So you are free to take a -- take up anappeal, whatever remedy your lawyer and you decide you wantto take. But I have ruled and I've made the sentence, andI'm ordering mittimus to issue forthwith and [Talo] to getcredit for any time served. 
MR. KRAMBERG: What -- what reason do we have to issue 
the mittimus right away? Why can't it be delayed for me to
simply file a notice of appeal? 
What is the urgency? When 
the court has already had Mr. Talo out since February? 
THE COURT: Mr. Kramberg. 
MR. KRAMBERG: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: I've ruled. 
You file whatever you need to
file. I have ruled. 
MR. KRAMBERG: I would just -- my point of arguing is
to --
THE COURT: I've heard your argument. 
You cannot keep
arguing with the Judge after the Judge has ruled. 
(Some emphasis added). 
Prior to sanctioning Kramberg, the Circuit Court issued 
an order to show cause (OSC) why Kramberg should not be 
sanctioned for his unprofessional conduct, giving him an 
opportunity to file a written response, and directing him to appear at a hearing to show why he should not be sanctioned. In addition to noting his conduct at the June 18, 2020 resentencing hearing, in the OSC, the Circuit Court took judicial notice of prior instances in which the court issued OSCs to Kramberg for unprofessional conduct, but took "no further action" on possible sanctions after hearing Kramberg's apology and explanation, and instead cautioned Kramberg. 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the August 5, 2020 hearing on the OSC, Kramberg did 
apologize to the Circuit Court, but his primary arguments against 
a sanction was that he expected the court to re-sentence Talo to probation, not to prison, and he was frustrated. Kramberg argued that he never "specifically said" the court was sentencing Talo to die, minimizing the clear implication of his words and the accusatory and unprofessional manner in which he used them. Kramberg contended that his argument at the resentencing hearing was not made in bad faith. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Circuit Court orally imposed a $50 sanction against Kramberg. The Sanction Order was issued thereafter. Kramberg challenges the following FOFs and COLs: 
2. At the probation revocation and resentencing in
the above-entitled case on 6/18/20, after the Court had
already found [Talo] committed a probation violation forpossessing a shotgun and ammunition in his bedroom,[Kramberg] engaged in unprofessional conduct by makingdisrespectful arguments, refusing to acknowledge the court'sruling, and displaying disrespectful conduct toward thecourt, as shown in the following record:
[Excerpts from the transcript of the June 18, 2020
resentencing hearing, quoted in part above.] 
. . . . 
3. Counsel's argument that the Court should
consider whether [Talo] " deserves to die for the alleged
violation" and that the court was sentencing [Talo] todeath, was offensive and disrespectful. 
(6/18/20 TR: 30-31,
37). 
4. Counsel's argument that the Court was sentencing
[Talo] "to die", was disruptive and disrespectful, becauseit had not been supported by any timely argument or evidenceregarding the COVID-19 pandemic, [Talo]'s health conditionsand/or risk of death, prior to the Court's imposition of thesentence, but was rather sprung on the Court last-minute.Counsel also interrupted the Court mid-sentence as the Courtattempted to impose a prison term. 
5. This argument regarding whether [Talo] "deserves
to die for the alleged violation" was also disrespectful,
because it refused to acknowledge the Court's finding of 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probation violation, which [Kramberg] was still
characterizing as an " alleged violation, which was not
supported by any direct testimony ." (Id.: 30). The Court 
had already found a probation violation supported by a
comprehensive evidentiary record, testimony by numerouswitnesses, and had made detailed findings regarding theprobation violation. (See id.: 10-14). 
6. [Kramberg] further engaged in unprofessional and
disrespectful conduct towards a tribunal, by persisting inarguing with the Court after the Court had already imposedsentence and denied the request to stay the mittimus, and bydeclaring that the Court's ruling was "outrageous."(6/18/20 TR: 31-39). 
7. [Kramberg]'s prior 2019 OSC in the Liftee case
referenced supra, is an aggravating factor militating infavor of sanctions. In the Liftee case, [Kramberg] engagedin gamesmanship by making a last-ditch motion for fitnessexamination without a good-faith basis. [Kramberg] said hismotion for a fitness examination was contingent upon whetherthis Court would impose a prison term, yet he simultaneouslyargued that he would be withdrawing the motion for fitnessexamination if this Court imposed a probation term insteadof prison. (See 8/15/19 TR at 4-7, attached as Exhibit "A"in the 2019 OSC). [Kramberg] lacked a good-faith basis torequest a fitness examination unde HRS § 704-404. Avoidance of a prison term was not a good-faith basis to move for afitness examination. 
8. At the 12/12/19 hearing on the 2019 OSC, this
Court issued a caution to [Kramberg] in open court, insteadof a sanction, and took "No Further Action", afterconsideration of [Kramberg]'s written response andpresentation at the hearing. 
9. The record in this establishes a similar pattern
to that in the 2019 OSC, of [Kramberg]'s unscrupulous resortto unprofessional argument and/or questionable tactics, toavoid a prison sentence for a client. 
10. In light of this Court's leniency shown to
[Kramberg] at the 2019 OSC, and a similar pattern of conductoccurring again in the current OSC proceeding, sanctions arenow warranted for this repeated conduct. 
. . . . 
[COL] 2. The unprofessional conduct in the findings
described above, undermines this Court's judicial power andauthority to administer and promote justice. See HRS § 603
-
21.9. 
3. The unprofessional conduct supra, also fails to
comport with ethical standards for arguments to a tribunal,and behavior toward the court. See Hawai #i Rules of 
Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 3.1 . . . ; HRPC Preambleparagraph 5 . . .; HRPC Preamble paragraph 9 . . .; see alsoGuidelines of Professional Courtesy and Civility for Hawai #i 
Lawyers, SCRU-17-651, Section 12(b) . . . . 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. This Court concludes that a monetary sanction is
appropriate, and imposes a $50.00 sanction on [Kramberg]. A 
low sanction amount was imposed, solely out of considerationof the nature of [Kramberg]'s public service employment, andis not reflective of the seriousness of [Kramberg]'sconduct, for which a more substantial sanction wouldotherwise be appropriate. 
(footnotes omitted). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's FOFs are supported 
by the record of these proceedings and are not clearly erroneous. 
We reject Kramberg's argument that the prior instances in which the Circuit Court issued OSCs to Kramberg should not have been considered because they involved "dilatory conduct," rather than the type of conduct at issue here. See generally Off. of 
Disciplinary Couns. v. Breiner, 89 Hawai# i 167, 174-76, 969 P.2d 
1285, 1292-94 (1999) (suspending attorney's license for making argumentative and disrespectful comments to the court). 
In 
addition, we conclude that the Circuit Court's FOFs are tantamount to a finding of bad faith, and are sufficient to support the imposition of a sanction. See Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i 
at 392, 984 P.2d at 1218; Sandomire, 144 Hawai# i at 331, 439 P.3d 
at 283. 
Finally, we conclude that the Circuit Court's COLs are 
supported by the court's FOFs and reflect an application of the correct rule of law. 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 14, 2020 
Sanction Order is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 24, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ James H. Ashford
Circuit Court JudgeJon N. Ikenaga,Deputy Public Defender, for Real Party In Interest-
Appellant. 
Patricia Ohara, Robyn B. Chun,Lori N. Tanigawa,Deputy Attorneys General,for The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone. 
13 