NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
NO. CAAP-22-0000121 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I 
 
 
THOMAS PEREZ NARVAEZ, Plaintiff-Appellant,  
v. 
SIMON B. ROJAS AND KATHY ROJAS, Defendants-Appellees 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
KO‘OLAUPOKO DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DRC-20-0004686) 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Thomas Perez Narvaez (
Narvaez) 
appeals from the March 7, 2022 Final Judgment (Judgment), and 
March 29, 2022 Order Awarding Attorney's Fees (Attorney's Fees 
Order), entered by the District Court of the First Circuit.1  As 
explained below, we affirm the district court's Judgment, and 
vacate the Attorney's Fees Order. 
                                                           
1  The Honorable Karin L. Holma presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
2 
 Alii Kawa Corp. presently leases a parcel of Kahuku 
Agricultural Park land from the State of Hawai‘ i (State), 
pursuant to General Lease No. S-6010 (Lot 10).2  Narvaez is the 
president of Alii Kawa Corp.   
In December 2016, Narvaez and Defendant-Appellee 
Simeon B. Rojas (Rojas)3 entered into a sublease agreement 
(Sublease), whereby Narvaez would sublease to Rojas a portion of 
Lot 10.4   
In August 2020, Narvaez filed a complaint against 
Rojas and his wife, Defendant-Appellee Kathy Rojas,5 for summary 
possession of the subleased land.  Narvaez contended that the Sublease was unenforceable because the Rojas defendants failed 
to qualify and be eligible for a lease under the terms of the 
Kahuku Agricultural Park program.   
In May 2021, the Rojas defendants moved to dismiss 
and/or for summary judgment.  The district court granted summary 
                                                           
2  General Lease No. S- 6010 was entered into, on March 15, 1999, by 
and between the State, Board of Agriculture, and Pau‘ la Manupule.  On July 18, 
2001, original lessee Pau‘ la Manupule assigned, with the lessor' s consent, his 
interest in Lot 10 to Alii Kawa Corp.   
 
3  The Sublease identifies the sublessee as " Simeon B. Rojas."   
Rojas is identified as "Simon B. Rojas" in the caption of this appeal.  
 
4  Although the Sublease references Narvaez as the " Original Land 
Lease holder" , and Narvaez signed the Sublease, it is Alii Kawa Corp. that is 
the lessee of General Lease No. S- 6010.  Alii Kawa Corp. is not named or 
referenced in the Sublease. 
 
5  Kathy Rojas, although named as a defendant, did not enter into 
the Sublease between Narvaez and Rojas.  Rojas and Kathy Rojas will be 
collectively referred to as "the Rojas defendants." 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
3 
 judgment in the Rojas defendants' favor, by an order dated 
September 27, 2021, ruling as a matter of law that the Sublease was not void, unenforceable, or rescindable.  The district court 
entered the Judgment on March 7, 2022, and subsequently granted 
attorney's fees to the Rojas defendants. 
On appeal, Narvaez contends that the district court 
erred in granting summary judgment to the Rojas defendants 
because: (1) the Sublease is unenforceable; and (2) Narvaez is 
entitled to summary possession of the subleased parcel because 
the Rojas defendants failed to obtain the State's approval for 
the Sublease, thereby violating the terms of the Sublease and the statutes and regulations governing the Kahuku Agricultural 
Park program.  Narvaez further contends that the district court 
lacked jurisdiction to award attorney's fees to the Rojas 
defendants because the filing of Narvaez's notice of appeal 
divested the district court of jurisdiction over the Rojas 
defendants' motion for fees. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties,
6 and having given due consideration to 
                                                           
6  The Rojas defendants' answering brief does not include any record 
citations or citations to legal authority, and also appends two 
unauthenticated documents (appendices 1 and 3) that are outside the record on 
appeal, in contravention of Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
28(b)(7) and (10).  We note also that the points of error section of 
Narvaez's opening brief fails to comply with HRAP 28(b)(4).  Counsel for both 
parties are cautioned to comply with HRAP Rule 28, and are reminded that 
failure to comply with the HRAP could result in sanctions. 
 
(continued . . .)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
4 
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve Narvaez's points of error as follows: 
(1) Narvaez first contends that the Sublease is 
unenforceable,7 and that the district court thus erred in 
granting the Rojas defendants' motion for summary judgment.   
This is an action brought by Narvaez for summary 
possession.  "Summary possession is a statutory proceeding that 
enables a landlord to regain possession of his property and 
remove any tenant who is wrongfully in possession of the land in 
question."  Queen Emma Found. v. Tingco, 74 Haw. 294, 299-300, 
845 P.2d 1186, 1189 (1992) (citing Kimball v. Lincoln, 72 Haw. 117, 124, 809 P.2d 1130, 1134 (1991), and HRS § 666-1 (1985)).  
In order to state a claim for summary possession, a landlord 
must allege: (1) that a relation of landlord and tenant exists 
or has existed; (2) how such tenancy was created, whether by 
lease or parol; (3) when and how the tenancy was terminated; and 
(4) that required notice to quit was given.  Coney v. Manele, 
4 Haw. 154, 157 (Haw. Kingdom 1879); Haw. Land Co. v. Scott, 13 Haw. 385, 386 (Haw. Terr. 1901); Ahulii v. Yip Lan, 22 Haw. 
739, 740-41 (Haw. Terr. 1915).  
                                                           
7  Narvaez's contentions that the Sublease is "contrary to" Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 166 and Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR)  
Chapter 4- 153 are raised for the first time on appeal and therefore waived.  
Cnty. of Haw. v. C&J Coupe Fam. Ltd. P'ship, 119 Hawaiʻ i 352, 373, 198 P.3d 
615, 636 (2008) (quoting State v. Moses, 102 Hawaiʻ i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 
947 (2003)); HRAP 28(b).  HRS Chapter 166, and HAR Chapter 4- 153, set forth, 
among other things, limitations on the transfer, assignment, and sublease of 
Kahuku Agricultural Park program lands.   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
5 
 "The purpose of a summary possession proceeding is to 
provide a prompt remedy for landlords against tenants who have 
violated a material condition of their lease or have wrongfully 
withheld possession after expiration of the lease."  Queen Emma 
Found., 74 Haw. at 300, 845 P.2d at 1189.   
We conclude that the district court properly granted 
the Rojas defendants' motion for summary judgment.  The district 
court was not wrong in its conclusion that, 
In this case, despite numerous opportunities to 
present evidence in support of the allegation in his 
Complaint, Landlord has failed to do so.  Landlord alleges 
that Tenant breached the Sublease, but has not submitted 
any evidence in support of this allegation. 
 
 The only argument Landlord makes in support of his 
claims is that the Sublease is void because he, Landlord, 
did not have the right to sublease the Property to Tenant in the first place, and therefore, Tenant has "no 
enforceable right to occupy or have any interest" in the Property.  See Plaintiff's Response to Defendants' Motion 
at p. 2.  
 This is a specious argument.  Landlord does not 
provide any authority for his argument that the Sublease is 
void because Landlord breached his own lease with the State 
of Hawaiʻ i by not obtaining prior approval of the Sublease.  
If this was the case, the Sublease would be voidable at the 
election of the Tenant, not at the election of the Landlord.  In addition, Tenant has been in possession of 
the Property for more than four years and there is no 
evidence that the State of Hawaiʻ i has any objection to the 
Sublease.  Landlord has presented no evidence that the 
State has raised an issue about the Sublease.
 
  Because there is no genuine issue of material fact, 
and Defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law, 
the Court concludes that summary judgment against Landlord on the Complaint is appropriate.
 
 
"On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is 
reviewed de novo."  Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻ i 46, 55, 292 P.3d  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
6 
 1276, 1285 (2013) (citations omitted).  The court applies the 
following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non- moving party.  In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion
. 
 
Id. at 55-56, 292 P.3d at 1285-86 (citation omitted). 
The record reflects that the Rojas defendants 
satisfied their initial burden of production through Kathy 
Rojas' declaration and the attached Sublease.  Ralston, 129 
Hawaiʻi at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290 ("[A] summary judgment movant may 
satisfy his or her initial burden of production by either (1) 
presenting evidence negating an element of the non-movant's 
claim, or (2) demonstrating that the nonmovant will be unable to 
carry his or her burden of proof at trial" (citations omitted)).  
The burden then shifted to Narvaez, and Narvaez did not meet his 
burden of establishing that there is a genuine question of material fact for trial.  Narvaez does not allege when and how 
the Sublease was terminated, and given that the legal lessor – 
Alii Kawa Corp. – is not a party to this matter (see supra n. 
4), the undisputed facts establish that Narvaez is not entitled 
to summary possession of the subleased land. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
7 
 According to Narvaez, the Sublease is "unenforceable" 
because any sublessee of Kahuku Agricultural Park land is 
required by law to meet certain tenancy requirements.  The 
Sublease contains no reference, however, to the State's Kahuku 
Agricultural Park tenancy requirements.  Indeed, aside from a 
description of the subleased land as consisting of "3 acres of 
Kahuku Agricultural Park lot #10," and a provision that "[t]he 
landlord agrees that this agreement includes the access to water 
at the rate Kahuku Agricultural Park/Board of Water Supply is 
charging the landlord," the Sublease contains no reference to 
the Kahuku Agricultural Park program.  The Sublease is thus devoid of any language that would require sublessee Rojas to 
comply with the Kahuku Agricultural Park tenancy requirements, 
as set forth in General Lease No. S-6010.   
Narvaez has not alleged how the Rojas defendants' 
"failure" to comply with terms and conditions that are not part of the Sublease caused the termination of the Sublease.  The 
record reflects that he did not submit any legal authority below to support that the Sublease was unenforceable.  The district 
court did not err in granting summary judgment.  Narvaez did not 
raise a genuine issue of material fact, and the Rojas defendants 
are entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. 
(2) Narvaez contends, in the alternative, that "even 
if the Sublease is somehow enforceable, Defendants failed to 
obtain the approval of the Department [of Agriculture] since NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
8 
 they entered in the Sublease in 2015, thereby violating the 
terms of the Sublease and the [Kahuku Agricultural Park] Program's statutes and regulations."  As explained supra, 
Narvaez does not allege that the Sublease itself contains 
language requiring the sublessee to take any action to obtain 
the State's approval of the Rojas defendants' compliance with 
Kahuku Agricultural Park program requirements.
8   
Narvaez's contention that the Sublease was violated 
due to the Rojas defendants' "failure" to obtain the State's 
consent to the Sublease does not raise a genuine question of 
material fact as to whether the Sublease was terminated, and the district court did not err on this basis in granting the Rojas 
defendants' summary judgment motion. 
(3) Narvaez argues, for the first time on appeal, that 
the District Court lacked jurisdiction to award attorney's fees 
to the Rojas defendants after Narvaez had filed a notice of 
appeal.  Narvaez does not challenge the district court's order 
granting attorney's fees on the merits.  Narvaez challenges only the district court's jurisdiction to dispose of the Rojas 
                                                           
8  The  separate issue of whether the Sublease violated the terms of 
General Lease No. S- 6010, and/or the State law provisions governing the lease 
of Kahuku Agricultural Park land, is not before this Court.  The Lessor of 
General Lease No. S- 6010, the State, is not a party to the present summary 
possession litigation, and has not challenged the legality or enforceability 
of the Sublease within the scope of this litigation. 
 
(continued . . .)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
9 
 defendant's attorney's fees motion after Narvaez filed his 
notice of appeal.9   
With regard to jurisdiction,  
The general rule is that courts are divested of 
jurisdiction upon the filing of a notice of appeal. . . . 
However, in Busher v. Boning, 114 Hawaii ‘202, 221, 159 P.3d 
814, 833 (2007), this court held that the 1999 version of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) " supersedes the line of cases standing 
for the proposition that the circuit court lacks 
jurisdiction to award costs after a notice of appeal is 
filed" and "provides that the court has 90 days to dispose 
of a post- judgment motion to reconsider, vacate, or alter 
the judgement, or seeks attorney
's fees or costs, 
regardless of when the notice of appeal was filed."   
Although HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) has since been amended, the 
language providing that a court has 90 days to dispose of a 
timely post- judgment motion has not changed substantively. 
 
DL v. CL, 146 Hawaiʻi 415, 421-22, 463 P.3d 1072, 1078-79 (2020) 
(cleaned up).   
The dispositive question is whether the Rojas 
defendants' fees motion was timely filed pursuant to a court 
rule that specifies the time for filing the post-judgment fees 
motion.  "Under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), only the filing of a timely motion for [fees or] costs, where court rules specify the time 
by which the motion must be filed: (1) tolls the time for filing 
a notice of appeal, and (2) extends the time the trial court 
retains jurisdiction to resolve the motion."  Nakaoka v. 
Shizuru, 151  510, 514, 517 P.3d 793, 797 (App. 2022) 
Hawaiʻi
                                                           
9  Although raised for the first time during appellate briefing, 
this court will consider the question of the district court's jurisdiction to 
award fees while this matter was pending on appeal.  Lingle v. Hawaii 
Government Employees Association, AFSCME, Local 152, 107 Hawai‘ i 178, 182, 
111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005)("Questions regarding subject matter jurisdiction may 
be raised at any stage of a cause of action."). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
10 
 (cleaned up), aff'd, SCWC-20-0000320, 2023 WL 4399999 (Haw. 
July 7, 2023) (SDO) (emphasis added). 
Here, the record reflects that the Rojas defendants 
filed their attorney's fees motion on March 9, 2022, two days after the district court entered its Judgment on March 7, 2022, 
but prior to Narvaez's filing of the notice of appeal on 
March 13, 2022.
10  The district court entered its Attorney's Fees 
Order on March 29, 2022, sixteen days after Narvaez filed his notice of appeal.   
There is, however, no district court rule that 
specifies the time in which a post-judgment motion for attorney's fees may be filed.  The district court rules of civil 
procedure, unlike the circuit court rules of civil procedure, 
are silent as to the time requirements for filing post-judgment 
motions for attorney's fees.  In the absence of such a rule, we 
conclude that the district court lacked jurisdiction to dispose 
of the Rojas defendants' attorney's fees motion once Narvaez 
filed the notice of appeal.  The attorney's fees motion remains pending in the district court and may be addressed on remand. 
For the foregoing reasons, the district court's 
Judgment, entered on March 7, 2022, is affirmed.  The district 
court's Attorney's Fees Order, dated March 29, 2022, is vacated, 
                                                           
10  The Rojas defendants originally filed their motion for attorney's 
fees on March 9.  That motion was stricken with instructions by the district 
court to "[p]lease file non
-hearing motion form #1DC39 for judicial 
approval."  The Rojas defendants refiled their request for attorney's fees, using form #1DC39, on March 11. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
11 
 and this case is remanded to the district court for further 
proceedings consistent with this summary disposition order.   
 DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘i, September 22, 2023.
On the briefs: 
 
Mateo Caballero, for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
 
Bosko Petricevic, for Defendants-Appellees.  
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge  
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Associate Judge  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
 
  