NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0005454
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
WAYNE LEE, SR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0161)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Wayne Lee, Sr. (Lee) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, filed on
 
November 6, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 (circuit court).
1 Lee was convicted for Habitually Operating a
 
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (Habitual OVUII), in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61.5 (2007 &
 Supp. 2014) and Driving While License Suspended or Revoked, in
 violation of HRS § 286-132 (2007).
2
  
1 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61.5 provides in pertinent part:
 
§291E-61.5 Habitually operating a vehicle under the
influence of an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
habitually operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant if:
 
(1)	 The person is a habitual operator of a vehicle
while under the influence of an intoxicant; and
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In the circuit court, Lee filed a motion to suppress
 
the results of his breath alcohol test, which the circuit court
 
denied. Lee then entered a conditional guilty plea and was
 convicted. He was convicted for Habitual OVUII because, within
 ten years of the instant June 23, 2011 offense, Lee had three
 prior convictions for operating a vehicle under the influence of
 an intoxicant.
3 For his Habitual OVUII conviction, Lee was
 
2 (...continued)
(2)	 The person operates or assumes actual physical
control of a vehicle:
 
(A)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 
amount sufficient to impair the person's
normal mental faculties or ability to care
for the person and guard against casualty;
 
(B)	 While under the influence of any drug that
impairs the person's ability to operate
the vehicle in a careful and prudent
manner;
 
(C)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath; or
 
(D)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per one
hundred milliliters or cubic centimeters
 of blood.
 
(b) For the purposes of this section:

 
. . . .
 
A person has the status of a "habitual operator of a
vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant" if the
 
person has been convicted three or more times within ten
years of the instant offense, for offenses of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant.
 
(c) Habitually operating a vehicle while under the
influence of an intoxicant is a class C felony[.]
 
HRS § 286-132 provides:
 
§286-132 Driving while license suspended or revoked.
Except as provided in section 291E-62, no resident or
nonresident whose driver's license, right, or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle in this State has been canceled,
suspended, or revoked may drive any motor vehicle upon the
highways of this State while the license, right, or
privilege remains canceled, suspended, or revoked.
3
 Lee was previously convicted for Operating a Vehicle Under the
Influence of an Intoxicant on May 5, 2010, November 5, 2008, and March 5,
2003.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sentenced to five years probation and special terms including
 
incarceration for one year, with all but ninety days stayed on
 condition of compliance with the terms of probation and with
 credit for time served. For his conviction for Driving While
 License Suspended or Revoked, Lee was sentenced to thirty days
 jail with credit for time served, to run concurrently with the
 sentence for Habitual OVUII.
 
4
On appeal,  Lee contends that the circuit court erred
by denying his motion to suppress the results of his breath

 
alcohol test because (a) he should have been advised of his right
 to consult with counsel prior to being asked whether he would
 submit to testing, (b) he was misled and/or inadequately advised
 as to his right to consult an attorney and thus he did not
 
5
knowingly and voluntarily consent to the breath test,  and
(c)
 based on Missouri v. McNeely, 133 S.Ct. 1552 (2013), the
 
police violated his rights under the Fourth Amendment in
 obtaining the results of his breath test.
6
 
Upon a careful review of the issues raised, the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 legal authorities, we resolve Lee's points of error as follows
 and affirm.
 
Based on the evidence adduced at the hearing on Lee's
 
motion to suppress, Lee was stopped for a traffic violation on
 June 23, 2011, when he disregarded a red stop light in making an
 
4 Lee does not raise any issues on appeal related to his conviction for
Driving While License Suspended or Revoked.
5 Lee also argues on appeal that a specific provision of the Implied
Consent Form misled him as to the penalties for refusal to submit to testing,
but he did not raise this argument in the circuit court. 
6
 The decision in McNeely was issued on April 17, 2013, after the
 
circuit court in this case had issued its April 9, 2013 oral ruling on Lee's
motion to suppress, but before the circuit court entered its July 15, 2013
written order denying the motion to suppress. Lee entered his guilty plea on
July 25, 2013. Counsel for Lee did not raise any issues related to McNeely in
the circuit court and did not request reconsideration in light of McNeely. 
Nevertheless, given that McNeely was issued so close in time to when the
circuit court was ruling on Lee's motion to suppress, we will consider Lee's
arguments on appeal based on McNeely.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
illegal left turn. The arresting police officer, Officer Gabriel
 
Wilson (Officer Wilson), testified that upon stopping Lee he
 detected some kind of odor of alcoholic beverage coming from Lee.
 Based on this observation, Officer Wilson conducted a field
 sobriety test and Lee showed signs of impairment. Lee was
 arrested and transported to the Hilo police station, where he was
 read verbatim the "Use of Intoxicants While Operating a Vehicle
 Implied Consent for Testing Form."
7 Lee signed the Implied
 
Consent Form and consented to the breath test. The result of
 Lee's breath test was .091 grams of alcohol per 210 liters of
 breath, which is over the legal limit. During the suppression
 hearing, Lee testified that he would have contacted an attorney
 if advised that he could, but he also testified that he
 understood the Implied Consent Form which had been read to him by
 Officer Wilson. 
The issues raised by Lee in this appeal were considered 
and rejected by this court in State v. Won, 134 Hawai
'i 59, 332 
P.3d 661 (App. 2014), cert. granted No. SCWC–12–0000858, 2014 WL 2881259 (June 24, 2014). Based on the decision in Won, 
7 The Implied Consent Form states in relevant part:
 
1.	 Any person who operates a vehicle upon a public way,
street, road, or highway or on or in the waters of the
State shall be deemed to have given consent to a test or
tests for the purpose of determining alcohol
concentration or drug content of the persons breath,
blood, or urine as applicable.
 
2.	 You are not entitled to an attorney before you submit to
any tests or tests to determine your alcohol and/or drug
content.
 
3.	 You may refuse to submit to a breath or blood test, or
both for the purpose of determining alcohol
concentration and/or blood or urine test, or both for
the purpose of determining drug content, none shall be
given, except as provided in section 291E-21; however,
if you refuse to submit to a breath, blood or urine
test, you shall be subject to up to thirty days
imprisonment and/or a fine of up to $1,000 pursuant to
section 291E-68 and/or the sanctions of section291E-65
[sic], if applicable. In addition, you shall also be
subject to the procedures and sanctions under Chapter
291E, part III.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore, the circuit court did not err in denying Lee's motion
 
to suppress the results of his breath test. 
Given that Lee's breath alcohol content exceeded the
 
legal limit and he had three prior convictions for driving under
 the influence within ten years of the instant offense, Lee was
 properly convicted under HRS § 291E-61.5.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Probation Sentence, filed on November 6, 2013, in the Circuit
 Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 5, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Kevin S. Hashizaki Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5

 