BACKGROUND NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000661 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
KR, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
TR, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(Case No. FC-D No. 17-1-6978) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant KR (
Father) appeals from the 
"Decision and Order re Extended Hearing" (Post-Decree Order) 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit  on August 27, 
2019. 
For the reasons explained below, we affirm the Post-Decree 
Order. 1
Father and Defendant-Appellee TR (Mother) were married 
and had one child (Child).  Father filed for divorce on June 13, 2017. The family court appointed Barbara Higa Rogers, PsyD., 
LCSW, as custody evaluator. Dr. Rogers submitted her custody 
evaluation on November 16, 2017. The Divorce Decree was entered 
1 The Honorable Na #unanikina #u A. Kamali #i  presided. on February 27, 2018.2 Father and Mother were awarded joint 
legal and physical custody of Child. 
On April 22, 2019, Mother filed a motion for post-
decree relief. Mother stated that she intended to temporarily 
relocate to North Carolina, and requested that Father be the 
"educational parent"3 subject to a proposed long-distance co-
parenting plan. On May 29, 2019, Father filed a motion for post-decree relief. Father requested sole legal and physical custody 
of Child, "subject to Mother's visitation on the island of 
[O#ahu]." 
Evidentiary hearings on both motions were conducted on 
June 6, June 21, and July 5, 2019. The family court entered the 
Post-Decree Order on August 27, 2019. 
By that time, Mother had 
relocated. The Post-Decree Order provided, in relevant part: 
D. The Court finds credible Mother's testimony that she moved
to North Carolina on a temporary basis to give birth to anewly conceived child,[
4] attend school and secure
employment while she furthers her education and increasescareer options; 
. . . . 
The disputed issues raised in Mother's Motion andFather's Motion are as follows:
 
1. Legal custody; [and]
 2. Physical custody (The parties agree that Father will
have physical custody while Mother resides outside ofHawaii)[.] 
. . . . 
NOW THEREFORE, in the best interest of the child, the Court
hereby orders that Mother's Motion and Father's Motion are grantedin part and denied in part as follows: 
I. LEGAL CUSTODY and PHYSICAL CUSTODY WHILE MOTHER RESIDES IN 
THE STATE OF HAWAII 
2 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza signed the Divorce Decree. 
3 Mother clarified that Father being the "educational parent" meant
that Father will make decisions regarding Child's education in Hawai #i while 
Mother is temporarily in North Carolina. 
4 Father is not the biological father of the child expected by
Mother. 
2   
  
    When Mother moves back to and resides in the State of Hawaii,
legal and physical custody shall be consistent with the provisions
regarding legal custody, physical custody and visitation as provided inthe Divorce Decree filed February 27, 2018. 
II. LEGAL CUSTODY and PHYSICAL CUSTODY WHILE MOTHER RESIDES IN 
NORTH CAROLINA 
A. Legal Custody . Mother and Father shall share joint
legal custody of [Child] while Mother is in North Carolina. The 
Parties shall resolve Joint [sic] legal custody issues that arisewhile Defendant/Mother resides in North Carolina in the followingmanner: 1) the Parties shall first consult each other on legalcustody issues in a civil and amicable manner through Our FamilyWizard (OFW), as set forth in section A. 6. Below; 2) obtain bothparties input on the major decisions regarding the child and 3)provide a record of their communication in OFW for counselors orother professionals to review if they seek their assistance. 
1. Decision Making . . . . 
. . . . 
2. Joint Communication/Co-Parenting . . . . 
. . . . 
3. Contact Information . . . . 
4. [Child]'s Family/sitter's Contact . . . . 
. . . . 
5. Respectful [L]anguage . . . . 
6. Our Family Wizard . . . . 
. . . . 
B. Physical Custody [.] 
The Court orders that, by
agreement of the parties, so long as Mother temporarily resides inNorth Carolina, Father is awarded sole physical custody of[Child], subject to Mother's rights of reasonable visitation.Mother shall have unlimited telephone, SKYPE, FaceTime contactdirectly with the child at reasonable hours taking intoconsideration the child's scheduled activities or planned events.If [Child] so desires, the parties shall facilitate his exerciseof unlimited telephone, SKYPE or FaceTime contact with the otherparent at reasonable hours. 
(Footnote added.) 
Father filed a notice of appeal from the Post-Decree 
Order on September 25, 2019. The family court entered findings
of fact and conclusions of law on November 25, 2019.  
3  DISCUSSION 
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unlessthere is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will notdisturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless thefamily court disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of a party litigantand its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted). Father's opening brief contains five points 
of error,5 but argues only two. 
1. Father contends that the family court erred by not 
awarding him sole legal custody of Child, or at least giving him "tie-breaking authority" (the functional equivalent). We 
disagree. 
Father argues that because he has sole physical custody 
of Child while Mother is in North Carolina, he should also have 
sole legal custody because he and Mother "don't agree on anything 
and we would be bringing every matter to the court." The only 
legal authority cited by Father for his being given sole legal 
custody or tie-breaking authority is language from our opinion in 
PO v. JS, 138 Hawai# i 109, 377 P.3d 50 (App. 2016), vacated in 
part on other grounds, 139 Hawai# i 434, 393 P.3d 986 (2017).
6 
There, we acknowledged having "held that an extraordinarily high 
level of conflict between parents . . . qualifies as a material 
change in circumstances" warranting modification of child custody 
and visitation provisions. Id. at 119, 377 P.3d at 60 (cleaned 
up). To that end, Father challenges the following findings of fact made by the family court: 
19. The parties have a history of disfunction [sic] and
disagreement yet were able to communicate concerningjoint legal major decisions concerning the child. 
5 Father's statement of the points of error does not comply with
Rule 28(b)(4) of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
6 Father's opening brief fails to completely cite PO v. JS, and
provides an incorrect pin cite for the language quoted in the brief. 
4 . . . . 
27. Since Mother's decision to relocate to North Carolina,
the parties' direct communication and communicationthrough third parties was frustrated 
by Father. 
(Underscoring added.) The family court also found, and Father 
does not challenge, that 
58. Father intentionally "blocked" Mother's number from
calling Father's phone so that she was not able tohave any contact with [Child] directly through Father. 
. . . . 
60. Father
 refuses to communicate directly with Mother. 
61. Based on the credible testimony of both parties,Father has been disparaging and demeaning in hiscommunication towards Mother. 
. . . . 
67. It is in the child's best interest that the partiesengage in respectful co-parenting. 
(Underscoring added.) 
The findings of fact challenged by Father are not 
clearly erroneous; they are supported by substantial evidence in 
the record, and we are not left with a definite or firm 
conviction that a mistake was made. See Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 
46, 137 P.3d at 360. 
And, as the Hawai# i Supreme Court has noted, 
"there are legitimate interests in preventing continued 
relitigation of issues and reducing repetitive motions. However, 
the family courts have various tools at their disposal to address 
such situations[.]" Waldecker v. O'Scanlon, 137 Hawai# i 460, 470, 
375 P.3d 239, 249 (2016). 
Father has not shown that the family 
court abused its discretion by not modifying the joint legal 
custody provisions in the Divorce Decree. 
Father also challenges the following conclusion of law 
made by the family court: 
22. Based on the Court's Findings of Fact set forth above,
the Court concludes that the sixteen factors set forth in HRS § 57l-46(b), [sic] in determining custody andvisitation in the best interest of the child are satisfied by this Court's Order. 
5 Conclusion of law no. 22 is actually a mixed determination of 
fact and law. When a conclusion of law presents mixed questions 
of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" 
standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the 
facts and circumstances of each individual case. Estate of Klink 
ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 
(2007). 
A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial 
court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id. The family 
court's findings of fact were supported by substantial evidence in the record. See Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360. 
We hold that the family court correctly applied Hawaii Revised 
Statutes ( 
HRS) § 571-46 (2018) to those facts. 
2. Father also contends that the family court erred 
by "ordering father's sole physical custody be automatically 
converted to joint physical custody upon a potential, years-in-
the-future relocation by mother." 
We disagree. 
Father's brief quotes a pre-evidentiary-hearing 
exchange between the family court, Mother's counsel, and Mother 
to argue that a stipulated award of sole physical custody to 
Father would "NOT [be] a temporary order[.]" But the Post-Decree 
Order never awarded permanent physical custody to Father; it 
referred to the parties' agreement that Father have sole physical 
custody "so long as Mother temporarily resides in North 
Carolina[.]" (Underscoring added.) The record indicates that 
the family court's pre-evidentiary-hearing inclination changed 
after hearing the testimony and weighing the credibility of the 
witnesses. The Post-Decree Order recites the Divorce Decree 
provisions awarding the parties joint physical custody of Child, 
and states that Mother's temporary relocation to North Carolina 
warranted modification of that provision. The Post-Decree Order 
also recites that the family court found Mother's testimony that 
she moved to North Carolina on a temporary basis to give birth to 
a newly conceived child, attend school and secure employment 
6 while she furthered her education to increase her career options, 
and that she intends to return to Hawai# i within approximately 
three years, to be credible. 
"It is well-settled that an 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the 
province of the trier of fact." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360 (citation omitted). 
Father challenges the following conclusions of law: 
5. The Court notes that the child will continue to reside 
in Hawai #i when Mother relocates and confirms in the 
best interest of the child, the award of joint legalcustody and joint physical custody under the [Divorce]
Decree , when Mother resides in Hawai #i. 
6. The Court determines that in view of Mother's 
temporary relocation to North Carolina, it is in thebest interest of the child to require or justify themodification or change in physical custody as agreedby the parties, from a joint physical custody scheduleto sole physical with Father, subject to Mother'srights of reasonable visitation during the temporarythree-year period of Mother's relocation. 
(Italics in original, underscoring added.) We hold that the 
family court correctly applied the facts that it found – which 
were not clearly erroneous – to the applicable law by awarding 
sole physical custody to Father while Mother temporarily resides 
in North Carolina, and returning the parties to the custody 
status quo under the Divorce Decree upon Mother's return to 
Hawai# i. 
Father argues that "any future change of custody based 
on any relocation of Mother [to Hawai# i] must be rightfully and 
understandably based upon Mother improving herself significantly from her current situation and proving herself to Father . . . . 
The future change of custody would require a future change in 
Mother[.]" 
Any "future change in Mother" – for better or worse – 
could form the basis for a modification of custody provisions under HRS § 571-46.l(c) (2018) if a change would be "in the best 
interests of the child." The statute provides, in relevant part: 
(c) Any order for joint custody may be modified or
terminated upon the petition of one or both parents or on 
7 the court's own motion if it is shown that the best 
interests of the child require modification or terminationof the order. 
Equally, any future change in Father could also form the basis 
for a modification of custody provisions under HRS § 571-46.l(c). 
Based on the record, we hold that the family court did not abuse 
its discretion by temporarily awarding sole physical custody of 
Child to Father during Mother's temporary relocation to North 
Carolina, and returning physical custody to the status quo under 
the Divorce Decree upon Mother's return to Hawai# i. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Decision and Order re 
Extended Hearing" entered by the Family Court of the First 
Circuit on August 27, 2019, is affirmed. 
Dated: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 27, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Michael A. Glenn, for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
David B. Leas, for Defendant-Appellee. 
8 