 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001344
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF
 
JL
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 12-00235)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on November 24, 2014, in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1
 
On appeal, Mother contends Petitioner-Appellee the 
State of Hawai 'i, Department of Human Services (DHS) failed to 
provide her with a reasonable opportunity for reunification with her child, J.L., prior to terminating her parental rights. Specifically, Mother argues that DHS's service plan for Comprehensive Counseling and Support Services (CCSS) to provide parenting and home based services was not sufficient for Mother to parent J.L.; assuming the CCSS services were sufficient, DHS improperly terminated those services for Mother; DHS failed to provide J.L. with appropriate therapy for autism; and DHS failed to provide Mother and J.L. with the opportunity to participate in the ABC program for autistic children. 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother challenges findings of fact (FOF) 47, 57, 58,
 
59, 69, 70, and 71 in the family court's "Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law" filed on January 6, 2015.2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's points of error as follows and affirm. 
2
 The FOFs that Mother challenges state:
 
47.	 Mother participated in CCSS from August 30, 2013 until May
5, 2014, when CCSS services were terminated due to the
assessment that Mother remained unable to implement
parenting skills to care for the Child. 
. . . .
 
57.	 Under the circumstances presented in this case, Mother was
given every reasonable opportunity to effect positive
changes to provide a safe family home and to reunify with
the Child. 
58.	 Mother is not presently willing and able to provide the
Child with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan. 
59.	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that Mother will become
willing and able to provide the Child with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed two years from the
Child's date of entry into foster care.
 
. . . . 
69.	 Under the circumstances presented by the instant case, the
Department has exerted reasonable and active efforts to
avoid foster placement of the Child. 
70.	 Under the circumstances presented by the instant case, the
Department has exerted reasonable and active efforts to
reunify the Child with Mother and Father by identifying
necessary, appropriate, and reasonable services to address
Mother's and Father's identified safety issues, and making
appropriate and timely referrals for these services. Under 
the circumstances presented by the instant case, the
Department gave Mother and Father every reasonable
opportunity to succeed in remedying the problems which put
the Child at substantial risk of being harmed in the family
home and to reunify with the Child. The Department actively
encouraged Mother and Father to participate in necessary and
reasonable services to allow them to reunify with the Child. 
71.	 Each of the service plans offered by the Department and
ordered by the Court were fair, appropriate, and
comprehensive. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We apply the following standards with regard to
 
Mother's points of error in this appeal:
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001) (block format altered)).
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal
under the “clearly erroneous” standard. A FOF is
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)
despite substantial evidence in support of the
finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been
 made. “Substantial evidence” is credible evidence
 which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion.
 
Id. (citations and block format omitted).
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-33 (Supp. 2014)
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 587A-33 Termination of parental rights hearing.   (a) At a
termination of parental rights hearing, the court shall determine
whether there exists clear and convincing evidence that:
 
(1) 
	A child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination is not presently willing and able to
provide the parent's child with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service
plan;
 
(2)	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that the
child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination will become willing and able
to provide the child with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not exceed two years
from the child's date of entry into foster
care;
 
(3)	 The proposed permanent plan is in the best
interests of the child. In reaching this
determination, the court shall:
 
(A)	 Presume that it is in the best interests
 
of the child to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and
competent substitute parents and family in
a safe and secure home; and
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(B)	 Give greater weight to the
presumption that the permanent plan
is in the child's best interest, the
younger the child is upon the
child's date of entry into foster
care[.
]
 
The determinations under HRS § 587A-33 present mixed questions of 
fact and law and therefore are reviewed on appeal under the clearly erroneous standard. Cf. In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 
P.3d at 623 (addressing similar standards under a predecessor statute). 
With regard to Mother's points of error in this case,
 
we conclude that the family court did not clearly err in its
 findings that DHS provided Mother with a reasonable opportunity
 to reunify with J.L. by specifying an appropriate service plan
 and providing services for Mother. Although Mother contends that
 the services provided to her were insufficient and/or improperly
 terminated, Richard Wong (Wong), the DHS case manager for this
 matter, testified at trial that Mother never informed him that
 the services provided to her were inadequate and she did not ask
 for any referral for services that he did not make. Mother does
 not point to any part of the record where she complained about
 the services provided to her or where she sought different or
 additional services.
 
Manifestly, a claim for additional services and
accommodations must be timely made. While it could be argued
that Mother was hampered in asking for assistance because of
her mental condition, we note that Mother was represented by
counsel, who could have notified DHS on Mother's behalf. No
request, however, was ever made until trial. Under such
circumstances, we cannot hold that Mother has any cognizable
procedural complaint.
 
In re Doe, 100 Hawai 'i 335, 344, 60 P.3d 285, 294 (2002). In 
this case, Mother has been represented by counsel. 
Even considering the specifics of the issues Mother
 
raises on appeal, the family court did not clearly err. J.L. is
 
an autistic child with special needs. In DHS's Petition for
 Foster Custody, it alleged that J.L. was first taken into DHS
 custody when he was found with unexplained injuries to different
 parts of his body and injuries in different stages of healing. 
At that time, J.L. resided with his maternal grandmother
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Grandmother) and his maternal uncle (Uncle). According to the
 
Petition for Foster Custody, Uncle admitted to hitting J.L. with
 a hanger, causing a laceration, and to pinching J.L.'s inner
 thighs, causing bruising, as Uncle was frustrated with J.L.'s
 behavior. DHS asserted that J.L. requires constant supervision,
 is at risk for wandering, has minimal verbal communication
 skills, and that Uncle lacks the skill and patience to care for
 him. 
The Petition for Foster Custody also asserted that:
 
e. Mother lacks the knowledge, skill or motivation to
parent due to her inability to address the safety issues as
[J.L.] has multiple special needs. Due to [J.L.'s] special
needs, the child requires 24-hour supervision. . . .
 
f. Mother had unresolved mental health issues and
 
current protective factors were not in place to ensure
[J.L.'s] safety. Mother has agreed to participate in DHS
recommended services.
 
We also note the following findings by the family court
 
which have not been challenged and are therefore binding on this
 
court:
 
38.	 [J.L.] did not exhibit the violent or disruptive behavior at
school or in the resource home that he exhibited during the
visits with Mother due to the structure provided by the
school and resource home environments.
 
39.	 [J.L.] has needs that require significantly more skills than
those of an average child's needs. . . .
 
. . . .
 
43.	 Mother has a chronic history of mental health
problems. . . .
 
. . . .
 
49.	 Mother lacks insight into her own mental health needs and
the special needs of [J.L.], which is a threat of harm to
[J.L.].
 
DHS referred Mother, inter alia, for services with
 
CCSS, to include outreach parenting education during visitations
 
with J.L. and counseling/outreach after the visitations. The
 visitation sessions, approximately once a week, occurred during
 supervised visits between August 2013 and May 2014. During these
 visits, Mother was provided hands on parenting instruction and
 counseling on how to handle J.L.'s behavior. However, the
 closing report by CCSS reflects concern about Mother's ability to
 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
handle both J.L.'s needs and the needs of Mother's younger
 
daughter, who resides with her. The closing report states that
 Mother's CCSS case was closed in May 2014 because "she was not
 making marked progress towards reunification or able to utilize
 the feedback to demonstrate changes in her parenting skills." 
This report also summarized that "the CWS Social Worker consented
 that CCSS close this case in May due to having no imminent
 reunification date and no evidence of forward progress or change
 in the client's parenting skills or attitude."
 
A Family Counselor from CCSS who worked on Mother's
 
case, Ursula Steffany (Steffany), testified at trial that she did
 not feel that there was anything within her services that she
 could have done differently that would have been more helpful. 
Steffany indicated that an underlying challenge in this case was
 the need for acknowledgment that "my son is special needs" and
 "he's going to need more of me[.]" As Mother points out,
 Steffany testified that Mother's services were terminated because
 by April 2014 imminent reunification was no longer the goal of
 the service plan. However, Mother's termination from CCSS was
 not improper because, as reflected in the CCSS closing report,
 Mother had shown minimal progress with the services provided to
 her by CCSS and on March 25, 2014, DHS filed a Motion to
 Establish a Permanent Plan which proposed that J.L. be placed in
 legal guardianship until he attained the age of majority. 
DHS did not fail to ensure that J.L. had appropriate
 
services and it did not fail to provide J.L. with therapy. 
Mother cites a comment by Cheryl Andaya, a psychologist who
 performed a psychological evaluation of Mother shortly before the
 hearing on the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights, as evidence
 that J.L. should have been provided therapy. Dr. Andaya stated
 that a caregiver would have to work closely with a child's
 therapist to appropriately address some behaviors exhibited by
 autistic children. Aside from failing to specify what behavior
 a therapist would address with J.L., Dr. Andaya also stated that
 not every child requires a therapist and that school specialists
 and skills trainers can assist a parent depending on the level of
 autism of the child. Dr. Andaya did not perform an evaluation
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of J.L. and did not recommend that J.L. be provided a therapist. 
A Court Appointed Special Advocates Program volunteer testified
 that J.L.'s current disability was his speech for which a speech
 therapist is provided at school. 
Mother also relies upon Steffany's testimony to argue
 
that DHS failed to provide Mother and J.L. access to the ABC
 Program, a program in a classroom setting that taught theory. 
According to Steffany, it is a program that is self-referred to
 take. Mother supposedly contacted the ABC Program but did
 nothing more. In addition, Wong testified that the ABC Program
 was duplicative of services that J.L. was already receiving in
 school, i.e., a one-on-one skills trainer in a classroom setting. 
Steffany also testified that the ABC Program would teach Mother
 theoretical knowledge but that Mother would benefit more from
 hands-on parenting education, which is the type of service that
 Steffany had provided. Similarly, Dr. Andaya also recommended
 that Mother receive hands-on parenting. Thus, the record
 indicates that the DHS service plan was appropriate in this case,
 even without participation in the ABC Program.
 
For the above reasons, Mother's points of error on
 
appeal do not have merit and the family court did not clearly err
 in its FOFs 47, 57, 58, 59, 69, 70, and 71 in the "Findings of
 Fact and Conclusions of Law" filed on January 6, 2015. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on November 24, 2014, in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 18, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Yamada,
for Appellant-Mother. Chief Judge 
Mary Anne Magnier,Kurt Jamie Shimamoto,Deputy Attorney General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7
 