NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000332
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
DYLAN R. TRUMPY, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Respondent-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(S.P.P. NO. 16-1-0004K (CR. NO. 12-1-028K))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Dylan R. Trumpy (Trumpy) appeals
from the "Order Denying Rule 40 Petition Filed July 11, 2016,"
filed on March 17, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit (Circuit Court).1
On August 15, 2012, Trumpy entered a guilty plea for
Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree and Assault in the
Third Degree and requested a deferred acceptance of guilty plea,
contemporaneously with a withdrawal of all of his pretrial
motions, including any motions relating to delay of discovery
process.  On October 17, 2012, the Circuit Court granted Trumpy's
request for a deferred acceptance of guilty plea and sentenced
Trumpy to one year incarceration, three days credit for time
served, with all but sixty days suspended, and a five year
deferral period.
On June 20, 2014, Trumpy filed a Petition to Vacate,
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner for [sic]
1  The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Custody (First Rule 40 Petition), pursuant to Rule 40 of the
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP).  The Circuit Court
denied Trumpy's First Rule 40 Petition without a hearing.  On
October 9, 2015, Trumpy filed a non-conforming Petition to
Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
from Custody (Second Rule 40 Petition), pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. 
The Circuit Court denied Trumpy's Second Rule 40 Petition without
a hearing.
On July 11, 2016, Trumpy filed a Petition to Vacate,
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
Custody (Third Rule 40 Petition), pursuant to HRPP Rule 40.
Trumpy claimed "(1) his confession was coerced, (2) the
prosecution failed to disclose to the defendant evidence
favorable to the defendant, (3) his plea of guilty was unlawfully
induced or not made knowingly, intelligently, or voluntarily or
with an understanding of the nature of the charges and the
consequences of the plea, and (4) he was the subject of
prosecutorial misconduct," because police report no. C11033877
(Police Report) was hidden from him until July 21, 2015.
After a hearing on the Third Rule 40 Petition, on
March 17, 2017, the Circuit Court entered its "Order Denying Rule
40 Petition Filed July 11, 2016," concluding that Trumpy "failed
to raise a colorable claim as the allegations and arguments
raised have no merit in that Defendant is arguing he was
prejudiced by failing to have a document disclosed which he
drafted himself."
On appeal, Trumpy contends that the Circuit Court erred
when it denied Trumpy's Third Rule 40 Petition and held that
there was no colorable claim for post-conviction relief based on
a claim of newly acquired evidence relating to discoverable
documents authored by the defendant.  Trumpy argues that he had
obtained a copy of the Police Report, which he had previously
requested during discovery prior to trial but which was not
produced, and that it provides factual support for a colorable
claim that he did not knowingly and voluntarily enter into his
guilty plea.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Trumpy's point of error as follows, and affirm.
The Circuit Court did not err by denying Trumpy's Third
Rule 40 Petition because relief pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(a) is
not available due to Trumpy's deferred acceptance of guilty plea.
HRPP Rule 40(a) expressly states that proceedings under the rule
"shall be applicable to judgments of conviction and to custody
based on judgments of conviction[.]"  If a motion to defer
acceptance of guilty plea is granted, acceptance of the plea is
then deferred.  State v. Kealaiki, 95 Hawai# i 309, 315, 22 P.3d
588, 594 (2001).  "There is no conviction when the acceptance of
a guilty plea is deferred."  State v. Putnam, 93 Hawai# i 362,
367, 3 P.3d 1239, 1244 (2000) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
See also State v. Oshiro, 69 Haw. 438, 442, 746 P.2d 568, 570
(1987) (deferred acceptance of no contest plea is not a
conviction nor a sentence).  Here, the Circuit Court granted
Trumpy's request for a deferred acceptance of guilty plea and
deferred the proceedings for a period of five years subject to
various terms and conditions.  Upon completion of the deferral
period and submission of a motion, if the court finds that Trumpy
had complied with all the terms and conditions, the case would be
dismissed without a conviction.
During the five year deferral period, Trumpy filed
three HRPP Rule 40 Petitions, all of which were denied, the last
of which is the subject of this appeal.  Pursuant to HRPP Rule
40, a petitioner may institute an HRPP Rule 40 post-conviction
proceeding to seek relief from a judgment of conviction  or
custody based on a judgment of conviction under certain
circumstances.  Because Trumpy was granted a deferred acceptance
of guilty plea, there is currently no judgment of conviction in
Trumpy's underlying case.  Without a judgment of conviction,
Trumpy may not initiate a post-conviction proceeding, pursuant to
Rule 40.
Furthermore, even assuming arguendo  that Trumpy is
entitled to initiate a post-conviction relief proceeding,
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, relief "shall not be granted where the
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled upon or
were waived."  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).  Here, the issues that Trumpy
raises on appeal from the denial of the Third Rule 40 Petition
were previously raised and ruled upon in his prior HRPP Rule 40
petitions, both of which he did not appeal.  Trumpy did not rebut
the presumption that his failure to appeal the denials of his
prior HRPP Rule 40 petitions were a "knowing and understanding
failure" and Trumpy failed to prove the existence of
extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise the
issues.  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).2  Therefore, the Circuit Court did
not err when it denied Trumpy's Third Rule 40 Petition.
THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying
Rule 40 Petition Filed July 11, 2016," filed on March 17, 2017,
in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.   
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 31, 2018.
On the briefs:
John Knoebber,
for Petitioner-Appellant.
Mitchell D. Roth,
Prosecuting Attorney, and
David Blancett-Maddock,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai #i
for Respondent-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
2  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) states:
(3) Inapplicability . Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled
upon or were waived.  Except for a claim of illegal
sentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have been
raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated under
this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the
petitioner's failure to raise the issue.  There is a
rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or
to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure.
4