NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000206
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRADLEY LIU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-13-00288)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Bradley Liu
 
(Liu) was found guilty of (1) operating a vehicle under the
 
influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 
1
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2015);  and (2)
inattention to driving, in violation of HRS § 291-12 (Supp.
 2015).
2 Liu appeals from the Judgment entered by the District
 
1HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental faculties or
ability to care for the person and guard against casualty[.]
 
2HRS § 291-12 provides:
 
Whoever operates any vehicle without due care or in a manner
as to cause a collision with, or injury or damage to, as the case
may be, any person, vehicle or other property shall be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned not more than thirty days, or both,
and may be subject to a surcharge of up to $100 which shall be
deposited into the trauma system special fund.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
Court of the Second Circuit (District Court)  on February 10,
2015. 
On appeal, Liu contends that there was insufficient

 
evidence to support his convictions for OVUII and inattention to
 
driving. We affirm.
 
I.
 
The evidence presented at trial showed that in the
 
early morning, Liu was involved in a single-vehicle accident in
 an area where the road he was driving on was straight and
 consisted of two lanes traveling in opposite directions. When
 Officer John Serena (Officer Serena) arrived at the scene at
 about 2:30 a.m., he saw a Toyota truck flipped over on its roof
 and blocking one lane of travel on the highway. Liu admitted to
 Officer Serena that he was the driver of the vehicle. Liu
 related that "he was driving while intoxicated." Liu further
 related that while on his way home and driving "under the
 influence," he veered to the left, overcorrected to the right,
 and then hit a dirt embankment on the west shoulder of the
 highway which caused his truck to flip over. Liu told Officer
 Serena that there were no other vehicles or any external factors
 that caused the accident, and no other people were in his truck
 when the accident occurred.
 
Officer Serena observed that about 100 feet from where
 
Liu's truck had come to rest, there was a large chunk of dirt
 missing from the embankment on the west shoulder of the highway. 
The embankment was about ten to fifteen feet off of the roadway. 
There was also a trail of debris from where the truck apparently
 had struck the embankment to where the truck had come to rest. 
From a distance of about one and a half to two feet,
 
Officer Serena smelled an odor of liquor emanating from Liu's
 breath and his person. Officer Serena also observed that Liu had
 red watery eyes and flushed facial features. Liu had scrapes and
 cuts to his arms, legs, and head, and Liu was placed on a
 
3The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
backboard by medics and apparently taken from the scene. There
 
was extensive damage to the roof of Liu's truck. 
II.
 
We resolve Liu's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
1. Liu contends that there was insufficient evidence 
to show that he was "under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair [his] normal mental faculties or ability to care for [himself] and guard against casualty." See HRS § 291E­
61(a)(1). We disagree. When viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, see State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 
P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998), we conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the District Court's determination that Liu drove his truck while under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard against casualty. 
2. Liu contends that the prosecution failed to adduce
 
sufficient evidence to prove the mens rea for inattention to
 driving. We conclude that this contention is without merit. 
In State v. Bayly, 118 Hawai
'i 1, 185 P.3d 186 (2008), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court described the elements the prosecution 
must prove to establish inattention to driving under HRS § 291–12. The supreme court stated that in order to convict under HRS § 291-12, the prosecution must prove that the defendant: "(1) operated a vehicle 'without due care or in a manner,' (conduct) (2) 'as to cause a collision with, or injury or damage to, as the case may be, any person, vehicle or other property' (result of conduct), and that [the defendant] did so (3) intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly[.]" Bayly, 118 
Hawai
'i at 10, 185 P.3d at 195 (citations omitted). 
We reject Liu's claim that there was insufficient
 
evidence to show that he acted with a reckless mens rea with
 respect to the conduct and result of conduct elements. The
 prosecution showed that Liu intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly drove his truck while under the influence of alcohol
 in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ability to care for himself and guard against casualty; that
 
while driving in this impaired condition, he veered left on a
 straight road, overcorrected to the right, hit an embankment ten
 to fifteen feet off of the roadway, which caused his truck to
 flip over and resulted in personal injury to himself and
 extensive damage to his truck; and that Liu was solely
 responsible for the accident -- there was no other vehicle or
 person and no external factor that caused the accident. We
 conclude that there was sufficient evidence to show that Liu
 recklessly "operat[ed his truck] without due care or in a manner
 as to cause a collision with, or injury or damage to, as the case
 may be, any person, vehicle or other property." See HRS § 291­
12.
 
III. 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 31, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
David A. Sereno 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4

 