NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000523
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF MA, H
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 09-12410)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, entered on May 14, 2012 by the
 
1
Family Court of the First Circuit,  (Family Court) that 
terminated her parental and custodial rights over her children, 
MA and H, and awarded Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai 'i 
Department of Human Services (DHS) with permanent custody over MA 
and H. 
On appeal, Mother contests the following findings of
 
fact and conclusion of law and argues that: 
1. Finding of Fact (FOF) 96 was erroneous in finding
 
that DHS failed to provide every reasonable opportunity to
 
succeed because the service plan failed to include a referral to
 a dual diagnosis treatment; 
2. FOF 98 was erroneous in determining that Mother is
 
not presently willing or able to provide a safe family home even
 with the assistance of a service plan, because Mother’s current
 participation in the dual diagnosis treatment along with her
 
1
 The Honorable Matthew Viola presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trial testimony reflect her willingness to provide a safe family
 
home and comply with services; 
3. FOF 118 was erroneous in finding that DHS exerted
 
reasonable and active efforts to reunify, where DHS failed to
 make a referral to a dual diagnosis treatment plan, which Mother
 entered on her own; 
4. FOF 121 was erroneous in determining that each of
 
the service plans were fair, appropriate, and comprehensive,
 because the service plans failed to include the dual diagnosis
 treatment plan; and 
5. Conclusion of Law (COL) 3 was wrong in concluding
 
that Mother is not presently able to provide the children with a
 safe home even with the assistance of a service plan, based on
 the foregoing erroneous findings.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Mother's
 points of error as follows:
 
Mother's points of error all stem from her assertion
 
just prior to trial that dual diagnosis treatment, which she
 contends was not offered or provided by DHS in-service plans, was
 pivotal.
 
A.	 Reasonable and Sufficient Efforts to Succeed and to
 
Reunify through Appropriate and Comprehensive Service
Plans (FOFs 96, 118, & 121)
 
In In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i 335, 338, 343-44, 60 P.3d 
285, 288, 293-94 (2002), the mother contended that she was denied 
a reasonable opportunity to reunify through the service plan where DHS was aware that mother had a severe mental problem and only provided mother with phone numbers of counselors, with no follow up. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded, however, that no 
substantial prejudice arose to mother, as required under Rule 61 
2
of the Hawai 'i Family Court Rules (HFCR),  for disturbing the
2
 HFCR Rule 61, entitled Harmless Error, states:
 
No error in either the admission or the exclusion of
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family court’s order, where mother demonstrated that she was
 
unwilling to participate in DHS services, and where mother never
 contested the service plan and never requested additional
 services until the start of trial, which was not timely because,
 despite her mental condition, Mother was represented by counsel
 who could have contacted DHS. Id. 
1. Service Plans. Mother had three family service
 
plans involving MA and H that ordered substantially the same
 services.
 
The October 14, 2009 family service plan required
 
substance abuse assessment at Hina Mauka, random drug screening,
 continuation of regular therapy sessions with Dr. Jaime Horton
 until clinically discharged, parenting education, a psychological
 evaluation, that Mother establish stable housing, and cooperation
 with the DHS social worker. Mother stipulated to the October 14,
 2009 service plan.
 
The November 3, 2010 family service plan included Hina
 
Mauka substance abuse assessment and random drug screening,
 attendance at regular therapy sessions until clinically
 discharged, Comprehensive Counseling and Support Services parent
 education, psychological evaluation after Mother demonstrates 90
 days sobriety, establishing stable housing, and cooperation with
 the DHS social worker. 
The September 20, 2011 service plan included Mother’s
 
services of substance abuse assessment and treatment, individual
 therapy, family therapy, psychiatric services, random UAs,
 parenting education, psychological evaluation, good stable
 housing, and cooperating with the social worker. Upon inquiry
 from the Family Court regarding whether Mother was willing to do
 
2(...continued)
evidence and no error or defect in any ruling or order or in
anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the
parties is ground for granting a new trial or for setting
aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying, or otherwise
disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such
action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial
justice.  The court at every stage of the proceeding must
disregard any error or defect in the proceeding that does
not affect the substantial rights of the parties.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the services in the September 2011 service plan, Mother’s counsel
 
answered yes; the court asked mother if she had any questions, to
 which Mother responded no. Mother acknowledged that the
 October 14, 2009 family service plan had substantially the same
 services as the September 20, 2011 family service plan. 
2. Non-compliance with services. As of January 22,
 
2010, Mother failed to get into a clean and sober house and to
 stabilize her medication, despite being told repeatedly. This
 resulted in her being terminated from drug court, which Mother
 acknowledged at trial. Mother also failed to do a requested drug
 screening. 
As of February 23, 2010, Mother was minimally compliant
 
with court-ordered services, was against recommendations of the
 program, refused to move into clean-and-sober living, and chose
 to reside with a male friend she had just met in Waikiki. 
As of August 5, 2010, Mother was found guilty of
 
criminal contempt of court regarding a temporary restraining
 order, and she was sentenced to one-year probation with the HOPE
 program, for which a violation could result in being sentenced to
 one year in prison. 
As of August 25, 2010, Mother acknowledged her previous
 
failure to comply, presumably with mental health services. As of
 November 3, 2010, Mother had not been submitting evidence of
 attendance in narcotics anonymous and alcoholics anonymous
 meetings, and the HOPE program drug monitoring revealed that
 Mother tested positive for alcohol on September 10, 2010 and
 tested positive for marijuana on October 7, 2010. 
As of February 24, 2011, Mother was reportedly
 
homeless. At trial, Mother agreed that she had not followed
 through on the October 14, 2009 family service plan. 
As of September 20, 2011, "due to two no-shows, Mother
 
was discharged on December 15, 2010 from UA testing at Hina Mauka
 Waipahu, and Mother's "drug issues remain unresolved."
 Additionally, information reflected that Mother had not engaged
 in parenting classes, that no psychological evaluation was
 scheduled because DHS was unable to verify Mother's sobriety for
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a minimum of 90 days, that DHS had no information as to Mother's
 
living arrangements, and that Mother had made minimal efforts to
 maintain contact with DHS.
 
Mother acknowledged she was supposed to do substance
 
abuse assessment and treatment according to the September 20,
 2011 family service plan, but stopped doing the Hina Mauka
 program because "half of the time [she] was incarcerated."
 
DHS referred Mother to substance abuse assessment,
 
random drug screening, and parent education. The substance abuse
 assessments recommended random urinalysis monitoring and
 reestablishment of mental health services until clinically
 discharged, compliance with medical treatment for her seizure
 condition, participation in an intensive outpatient substance
 abuse treatment program three times a week until clinically
 discharged, attendance at three sober support groups per week
 with verification to her case manager, and participation with DHS
 random drug monitoring. Mother did not complete any of those
 recommendations. Although Mother complied at some points with
 random urinalysis, she also had no-shows and had positive
 results. 
As of January 30, 2012, Mother failed to show up for UA
 
testing on January 20, 2012 and January 23, 2012; DHS was unable
 to confirm compliance with therapy; and Mother made minimal
 efforts to stay in contact with DHS. Additionally, it appears
 that Mother was incarcerated on January 23, 2012, according to
 Mother’s probation officer, for testing positive for alcohol. 
Mother acknowledged that she tested positive for alcohol in
 September of 2011. Also, as of January 30, 2012, Mother "was not
 accepted at Queen's Day Program (Dual Diagnosis) as she was
 assessed by an intake worker, Suzanne, as not motivated."
 
Mother believes she tested positive for alcohol and
 
marijuana in February, 2012.
 
Mother apparently failed to attend the court-ordered
 
mediation on April 19, 2012, because Mother was incarcerated for
 a month for testing positive for alcohol, a probation violation.
 
Mother used alcohol on May 6, 2012. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At trial, according to the DHS social worker, Mother 
was referred to therapy because of her history of post-traumatic 
stress disorder, but prior to Po 'ailani, the social worker could 
not verify with any therapist Mother's progress because they did not receive consents or have any follow through by Mother. DHS referred Mother to parenting classes; Mother did not participate. Mother did not participate in a psychological evaluation. The DHS social worker’s testimony reflected that Mother provided very limited cooperation with DHS and did not have regular contact with DHS. To the DHS social worker’s knowledge, Mother was not employed and does not have any source of income. Since 1995, according to the DHS social worker, Mother has been involved in at least four or five substance abuse programs involved with the State, and Mother did not complete any of them. At the time of trial, according to the DHS social worker, Mother had completed the assessments, but to his knowledge, had not completed the random UAs, parent education, and he did not receive verification of her getting regular therapy. 
Mother did not do the psychological evaluation. Mother
 
acknowledged at trial on May 14, 2012 that she had not cooperated
 with the social worker in the past. 
3.	 Mother was aware of dual diagnosis treatment prior
to Po
'ailani 
Mother received a dual diagnosis of both substance
 
abuse and mental health problems from Dr. Jamie Horton, whom
 
Mother last saw in 2007 or 2009. A subsequent therapist, Dawn
 Tomita also treated Mother based on a dual diagnosis, but Mother
 was later not accepted into the Queen’s Dual Diagnosis Program
 after being assessed as "not motivated." Mother was aware that
 she had had a dual diagnosis since 2009.
 
4.	 Mother had counsel and failed to explicitly object
prior to trial regarding service plans or the
Family Court's finding as to DHS efforts to
reunify 
The record reflects that Mother had the same counsel
 
from October 16, 2009 through trial. Mother does not assert, and
 
the record does not demonstrate, that Mother objected to the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foregoing service plans prior to trial. The Family Court
 
repeatedly found that DHS has made reasonable efforts at
 reunification. Mother does not assert, and the record does not
 demonstrate, that prior to trial Mother explicitly objected to
 the Family Court's findings as to the efforts of DHS toward
 reunification.
 
In light of the foregoing, and consistent with In re 
Doe, 100 Hawai
'i at 338, 343-44, 60 P.3d at 288, 293-94, where 
Mother demonstrated that she was unwilling to participate in DHS services, the Family Court did not clearly err in its FOF 96 and FOF 118 that DHS made reasonable and sufficient efforts to have mother succeed and to reunify, or in its FOF 121 that the service plans were appropriate and comprehensive, considering Mother’s repeated inability to comply with services and where Mother failed to timely object prior to trial and could have done so where she was represented by counsel. In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i at 
344, 60 P.3d at 294; In re AI, No. CAAP-12-0000390, 2013 WL 511790, 1 (App. Feb. 11, 2013), citing In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i at 
344, 60 P.3d at 294; In re M Children, No. CAAP-11-0000153, 2012 WL 171618 (App. Jan. 20, 2012) citing In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i at 
343-44, 60 P.3d at 293-94. 
B.	 Clear and Convincing Evidence Existed That Mother Was
Not Presently Willing and Able to Provide MA and H with
a Safe Family Home, Even with the Assistance of a
Service Plan (FOF 98)
 
Mother asserts that her current participation in the
 
dual diagnosis treatment and her testimony establishes her
 
willingness to provide the children with a safe family home and
 to comply with services. Despite that argument, the evidence
 before the Family Court included all of the foregoing, and the
 Family Court found Mother's testimony as to her willingness and
 ability to provide a safe family home to be not credible, and
 found the testimony of the DHS social worker to be credible. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother has not challenged those findings, and they are binding
 
upon this court.3
 
Moreover, it appears that another year or longer would
 
be necessary for Mother to complete services. Regarding the
 evidence that must exist for termination of parental rights,
 HRS § 587A-33(a)(2) (Supp. 2012) includes clear and convincing
 evidence that:
 
It is not reasonably foreseeable that the child's parent
whose rights are subject to termination will become willing
and able to provide the child with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable
period of time, which shall not exceed two years from the
child's date of entry into foster care; ...
 
MA and H had been in temporary foster care from
 
October, 2009; which, at the time of the termination of Mother’s
 
parental rights in May, 2012, exceeded two-and-a-half years. 
In light of the clear and convincing evidence aforesaid
 
and the unchallenged credibility finding, the Family Court did
 not err in its FOF 98.
 
Consequently, clear and convincing evidence existed
 
that Mother was not presently able to provide the children with a
 safe family home even with the assistance of a service plan. 
C. The Family Court was Not Wrong in COL 3
 
Finally, where the Family Court did not err in the
 
findings that Mother contests, its conclusion that Mother "is not
 
presently willing and able to provide [MA] and [H] with a safe
 family home, even with the assistance of a service plan" was not
 wrong.
 
3
 "If a finding is not properly attacked, it is binding; and any
conclusion which follows from it and is a correct statement of law is valid." 
Kawamata Farms v. United Agri Products, 86 Hawai' i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055,
1093 (1997) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's May 14, 2012
 
Order Terminating Parental Rights is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 17, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Wilfred S. Tangonan
for Mother-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Mary Anne MagnierTiffany K.M. IgeDeputy Attorneys General Department of the Attorney GeneralState of Hawai
'i 
for Petitioner-AppelleeDepartment of Human Services Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
9
 