NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000699 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR CSMC 
MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST 2006-7, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
WATOSHINA LYNN COMPTON, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
G
ABI A. BENGIS; RON SERLE; DEPARTMENT
OF TAXATION - STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-20; JANE DOES 1-20; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-20;
DOE ENTITIES 1-20; AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-20
Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 17-1-0025(3) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
I. Introduction 
This appeal arises out of a civil action initiated by 
Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank National Association as Trustee for 
CSMC Mortgage Loan Trust 2006-7 (U.S. Bank) to foreclose on real 
property owned by Defendant-Appellant Watoshina Lynn Compton 
(Compton) and located in Kihei, on the island of Maui (Property).
Compton appeals from the Judgment entered on August 10, 2018, 
pursuant to the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment against All  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure," also 
entered on August 10, 2018, by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
On appeal, Compton asserts that the Circuit Court erred 
in granting U.S. Bank's motion for summary judgment and for interlocutory decree of foreclosure (Motion for Summary Judgment) 
because (1) U.S. Bank failed to meet its burden of establishing 
it was the holder of the subject promissory note (Note) at the 
time it filed the complaint and thus lacked standing, and (2) 
U.S. Bank failed to establish that Compton had been provided adequate notice of the alleged default. 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate and remand. 
II. Discussion 
U.S. Bank filed the Complaint For Mortgage Foreclosure 
(Complaint) in this action on January 24, 2017. The Complaint 
asserts that in return for a loan received, Compton signed a Note 
on May 18, 2006, made and delivered to lender Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. (Countrywide).  The Complaint further asserted that 
the Note was endorsed in blank, and that U.S. Bank had possession 
of the Note through its counsel. 
Compton contends that U.S. Bank failed to establish 
that it was entitled to enforce the Note at the time that U.S. Bank filed the Complaint. In particular, Compton asserts that the evidence which U.S. Bank sought to admit through (1) the "Declaration of Indebtedness and on Prior Business Records" by Carol Davis (Davis), a "Document Execution Specialist" employed 
by Nationstar Mortgage LLC d/b/a Mr. Cooper (Nationstar), as 
servicing agent for U.S. Bank, attached to the Motion for Summary 
Judgment, and (2) the "Declaration of Custodian of Note" by Gina Santellan (Santellan), a "custodian of original loan records" 
employed by The Mortgage Law Firm, PLC (TMLF CA), attached to 
U.S. Bank's "Supplemental Memorandum in Support of Its [Motion 
1 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
2      NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Summary Judgment]," was hearsay and not admissible evidence 
under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) 803(b)(6).  2
In Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 
390 P.3d 1248 (2017), the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court held that in 
order for a foreclosing plaintiff to establish standing to foreclose, the plaintiff must show entitlement to enforce the promissory note at the time the foreclosure action was commenced.Id. at 368, 390 P.3d at 1255.  
Whether a party is entitled to enforce a promissory note is
determined by application of HRS ยง 490:3-301 (2008), whichprovides the following: 
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i)
the holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder inpossession of the instrument who has the rights of aholder, or (iii) a person not in possession of theinstrument who is entitled to enforce the instrument pursuant to section 490:3-309 or 490:3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce theinstrument even though the person is not the owner ofthe instrument or is in wrongful possession of theinstrument. 
Id. at 369, 390 P.3d at 1256. 
2 HRE Rule 803(b)(6) provides: 
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarantimmaterial . 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule,even though the declarant is available as awitness: 
. . . . 
(b) Other exceptions. 
. . . . 
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity.  A 
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, inany form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, ordiagnoses, made in the course of a regularly conductedactivity, at or near the time of the acts, events,conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, 
as shown by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness,or by certification that complies with rule 902(11) ora statute permitting certification, unless the sourcesof information or other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness. 
(Emphasis added). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  Here, U.S. Bank contends that it had standing to 
foreclose because its servicing agent, Nationstar, or its 
counsel, TMLF, had possession of the subject Note prior to the commencement of this action. In this regard, business records such as a promissory note may be admitted into evidence through "the testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness" of such records pursuant to HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
For purposes of admitting a promissory note in a 
mortgage foreclosure action, and given Hawai# i case law on the 
issue, it appears that someone purporting to be a "custodian or other qualified witness" must establish sufficient foundation upon which to admit the note. 
In Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. 
Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i 37, 414 P.3d 89 (2018), the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court stated: 
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be qualified to
provide the testimony required by HRE Rule 803(b)(6) even ifthe witness is not employed by the business that created thedocument or lacks direct, personal knowledge of how thedocument was created. Id. "There is no requirement that
the records have been prepared by the entity that hascustody of them, as long as they were created in the regularcourse of some entity's business." Id. (quoting State v. 
Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i 354, 366, 227 P.3d 520, 532 (2010)).
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with therecord-keeping system of the business that created therecord to explain how the record was generated in theordinary course of business. Id. 
Records received from another business and incorporated into
the receiving business' records may in some circumstances beregarded as "created" by the receiving business. Id. 
Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)when a custodian or qualified witness  testifies that the 
documents were incorporated and kept in the normal course ofbusiness, that the incorporating business typically reliesupon the accuracy of the contents of the documents, and thecircumstances otherwise indicate the trustworthiness of the document. See id.; Fitzwater, 122 Hawai #i at 367-68, 227
P.3d at 533-34. 
Id. at 45-46, 414 P.3d at 97-98. As further explained with 
regard to custodians: 
Obviously, mere possession or "custody" of records
under [circumstances where a second organizationincorporates the records into their own] does notqualify employees of the possessing party to lay therequisite foundation, and reliance by the organizationon records created by others, although an importantpart of establishing trustworthiness, without more is 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not sufficient. However, when the business offering
the records of another has made an independent check
of the records, has integrated them into their ownbusiness operation in a way that establishestrustworthiness or contains other assurances of trustworthiness, or can establish accuracy by othermeans, the necessary foundation may be established. 
2 McCormick On Evid. ยง 292 (8th ed. 2020) (emphasis added, 
footnotes omitted). Consequently, even a custodian of records must lay a proper foundation for the admission of records of regularly conducted activity pursuant to HRE Rule 803(b)(6). 
Here, Davis does not attest to being a custodian of 
records, but an authorized signer for Nationstar. In her declaration signed on September 8, 2017, and submitted with U.S. Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment, Davis attests in relevant part: 
1. I am authorized to sign this Declaration on
behalf of Plaintiff, [U.S. Bank], as an authorized
signer of [Nationstar], which is Plaintiff's servicingagent for the subject loan ("the loan"). 
2. Nationstar maintains records for the loan in 
its capacity as Plaintiff's servicer. As part of myjob responsibilities for Nationstar, I am familiarwith the type of records maintained by Nationstar inconnection with the Loan. As such, I am authorized to make this Declaration. 
3. Nationstar is the current loan servicer for 
Plaintiff and acts as the exclusive representative andagent of Plaintiff in the servicing and administeringof mortgage loans referred to Nationstar, includingthe Loan being foreclosed in this action. 
4. The information in this Declaration is taken 
from Nationstar's business records. I have personal
knowledge of Nationstar's procedures for creatingthese records. They are: (a) made at or near the time
of the occurrence of the matters recorded by personswith personal knowledge of the information in thebusiness record, or from information transmitted bypersons with personal knowledge; (b) kept in thecourse of Nationstar's regularly conduced businessactivities; and (c) created by Nationstar as a regularpractice. 
. . . . 
6. Plaintiff has possession of the Note
 with
standing to prosecute the instant action and the rightto foreclose the subject Mortgage. The Note has been indorsed to Blank. In anticipation that the originalNote would be required for these foreclosureproceedings, Plaintiff has since caused the original 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Note to be delivered to Nationstar, agent for the
Plaintiff. Nationstar received from the Plaintiff,the original Note, reviewed the original Note and asthe agent for Plaintiff, is entitled to collect on theoriginal Note. Prior to the filing of the Complaint
on 01/24/17, Nationstar caused the original Note to bedelivered to the Plaintiff's attorney, TMLF HawaiiLLLC, as agent for the Plaintiff. A true and correct copy of the original Note is attached hereto asExhibit "1" and incorporated herein by reference. 
7. Nationstar's records indicate that 
Plaintiff, by and through Nationstar had possession ofthe original Note prior to 01/24/17, the date of thefiling of the complaint in this foreclosure. 
. . . . 
13. Under the terms of Nationstar's servicing
arrangement, Plaintiff does not participate in, keepand maintain any of the day to day loan documents,inputting of accounting data, saving of businessrecords and all communications with borrowers. 
14. The Plaintiff, as the Investor, has a
passive role with the primary emphasis on tracking itsreturn on investment. 
In terms of routine business 
records on the Loan, Nationstar acts as the solecustodian of Plaintiff's records. 
15. Nationstar became Plaintiff's loan servicer 
for the Loan being foreclosed in this action on01-December-2013. 
. . . . 
23. The prior loan servicer for this mortgage
loan was Bank of America ("Prior Servicer"). 
24. Upon becoming Plaintiff's loan servicer,
Nationstar took custody and control of loan documentsand business records of the Prior Servicer and incorporated all such records into the businessrecords of Nationstar. 
25. Before the Prior Servicer's records were 
incorporated into Nationstar' [sic] own businessrecords, it conducted an independent check into thePrior Servicer's records and found them in keepingwith industry wide loan servicing standards and onlyintegrated them into Nationstar' [sic] own businessrecords after finding the Prior Servicer's recordswere made as part of a regularly conducted activity,met industry standards and determined to betrustworthy. 
26. In performing its services to the
Plaintiff, Nationstar relies upon the accuracy of thePrior Servicer's records and those records are now a part of and used for all purposes in the conduct ofNationstar's regularly conducted activity of keepingand maintaining its own business records. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
27. The Prior Servicer's records are regularly
used and relied upon by Nationstar in all dealings
with all the borrowers, in reporting all profit andloss on the mortgage loans to the Plaintiff, in thepreparation, filing and payment of income taxesdependent upon such information, and in evaluatingNationstar's own job performance. 
. . . . 
29. Nationstar did review and determine the 
Prior Servicer's business records were trustworthyotherwise it would not have incorporated it into itsown records. 
(Emphases added). Attached to Davis's declaration is a copy of 
the Note, which states that Countrywide is the lender and which has an undated blank indorsement by Countrywide on the second page. 
The Davis declaration does not state that U.S. Bank 
possessed the Note at the time the Complaint was filed, merely stating that "[U.S. Bank] has possession of the Note," and that based on Nationstar's records, U.S. Bank "by and through Nationstar had possession of the original Note prior to 01/24/17, the date of the filing of the complaint in this foreclosure." (Emphases added). 
Moreover, although Davis attests to Nationstar 
incorporating the records of Bank of America, the "Prior Servicer," and relying upon the accuracy of those records, Davis does not aver that she is familiar with the record-keeping system of Bank of America or the lender Countrywide, which purportedly created the Note and signed the blank endorsement. Thus, Davis's declaration failed to establish the foundation for the Note to be admitted into evidence. Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45, 414 P.3d at 
97; U.S. Bank N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai# i 26, 32-33, 398 P.3d 
615, 621-22 (2017). 
U.S. Bank also submitted a "Declaration of Custodian 
Note" executed on May 18, 2018, by Gina Santellan, an employee of TMLF CA and a "custodian of records," which states: 
1. I am employed by [TMLF CA] as the custodian
of original loan records of foreclosing mortgagees,
their respective loan servicers and foreclosurecounsel. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. My custodial duties include taking
possession of original loan documents of foreclosing
mortgagees represented by both TMLF CA for theforeclosure of the clients' California properties andTMLF Hawaii LLLC. [sic] ("Plaintiff's Counsel") forthe foreclosure of the clients' Hawaii properties.Foreclosure mortgagees represented by both law firmsare referred to as "Common Law Clients". 
3. In this Hawaii foreclosure, [U.S. Bank]
("Plaintiff") and its loan servicer, [Nationstar], areboth clients of TMLF CA and Plaintiff's Counsel. 
4. As custodian for this Common Law Client, I
am duly authorized by the Plaintiff to make thisSupplemental Declaration in support of Plaintiff's[Motion for Summary Judgment] filed on February 20,2018. 
5. I am over the age of 18 years, and I have
personal knowledge of the facts and matters statedherein based on my review of the business recordsdescribed below. The statements set forth in this 
Supplemental Declaration are true and correct. 
6. As custodian for Plaintiff's records, I
supervise and control TMLF CA's employees in theregular maintenance of our receipt records, documentinventory, secure storage, retrieval, and transmittalof the original loan collateral file, including theoriginal Note, of all Common Clients. 
7. Until we are in receipt and possession of
the original documents, we do not advise Plaintiff'sCounsel it is clear to proceed with the foreclosureprocess. 
8. For Hawaii foreclosures, it is my duty to
transmit to Plaintiff's Counsel immediately upon itsrequest, the original loan documents as may be neededfor inspection by borrowers, production as part ofdiscovery by opposing counsel, hearings or other courtproceedings. 
9. The process of documenting our receipt and
retention of loan documents for Common Law Clients is part of a regularly conducted activity under myimmediate supervision and control. All such records,including but not limited to the receipt of baileeletters and its enclosures such as original notes aremade at or near the time of is [sic] occurrence andrecorded by a person with knowledge of those matters.This record custodial process is done in the course ofour regularly conducted activity as custodian forPlaintiff's Counsel and this regularly conductedactivity is part of our regular custodial practice. 
10. Receipt of the Plaintiff's original Note
was handled under standard operating procedures aspart of our regularly conducted activity describe[sic] above. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11. The document used to confirm the date of 
our receipt of the foreclosing mortgagee's original
Note is a bailee letter. 
12. On or about 01/02/2015, TMLF CA, as
custodian for Plaintiff and Plaintiff's Counsel,received the Bailee Letter and original Note indorsedin blank, among other documents, for the propertybeing foreclosed in this action. The Bailee Letter 
and original Note indorsed in blank, among otherdocuments, have since remained in our possession  as 
custodian for Plaintiff and Plaintiff's Counsel. 
13. The Bailee Letter was accepted by me on
01/07/2015, a TMLF CA employee with knowledge workingunder by direct supervision and control as thecustodian for Plaintiff and Plaintiff's Counsel. 
14. A true and correct copy of the Bailee
Letter is attached as Exhibit "12". TLMF CA took 
possession of the original Note indorsed in blank ascustodian for Plaintiff and Plaintiff's Counsel on or before 01/07/2015. Under the direction of and with authority from Nationstar as Plaintiff's loanservicer, it delivered the original Note indorsed inblank to us with the Bailee Letter. Attached hereto as Exhibit "13" is a true and correct copy of theoriginal Note indorsed in blank, received by TMLF CAon or about 01/02/2015, and acknowledged on01/07/2015. 
15. The Bailee Letter Agreement attached
Exhibit "12" is part of the Plaintiff's businessrecords on this action and I have personal knowledgeas to how these records are created, used andretained: [sic] The attached business records weremade at or near the time of the occurrence of the matters recorded by persons with personal knowledge ofthe information in the business record, or frominformation transmitted by persons with personalknowledge; (b) kept in the course of the law firm'sregularly conducted law business activities; and (c)created by the Law Firm as part of its regularpractice when acting as custodian. 
(Emphases added). The Bailee Letter attached to the Santellan 
Declaration is dated January 2, 2015, addressed to Ryan Remingtonat TMLF CA, and signed by "Nationstar Mortgage LLC Document Control Department" as the creator of the Bailee Letter as indicated by the "Nationstar Mortgage" logo on the top right corner of the Bailee Letter. The Bailee Letter further indicatesthat the recipients "acknowledge and agree that all of the enclosed documents are being provided to you and are to be held by you, as agent for and Bailee of, and subject to the direction of, Nationstar Mortgage LLC." The "enclosed documents" consist  
 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the "Note," "Security Instrument," and "Title Policy." 
Acknowledgment of receipt is signed by Santellan on January 7, 2015. 
Even if we assume, without deciding, that the Bailee 
Letter is admissible evidence, Santellans' declaration does not establish the foundation for admission of the Note to establish possession. That is, like the Davis declaration, Santellan does not attest that she has "familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business that created the record to explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of business." Behrendt, 142 Hawai# i at 45, 414 P.3d at 97 (quoting Mattos, 140 
Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621); Fitzwater, 122 Hawai# i at 365-66, 
227 P.3d at 531-32) (determining that while there is no requirement that the records have been prepared by the entity that has custody of them, as long as they were created in the regular course of some entity's business, the witness must have enough familiarity with the record-keeping system of the business that created the record to explain how the record was generated in the ordinary course of business) (quotation marks omitted). 
Accordingly, the Davis and Santellan declarations do 
not lay adequate foundation to establish that U.S. Bank had possession of the Note when the Complaint was filed. Behrendt, 
142 Hawai# i at 45-46, 414, P.3d at 97-98; Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 
33, 398 P.3d at 622; Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i at 370-71, 390 
P.3d at 1257-58. 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to 
Compton, as we must for purposes of a summary judgment ruling, we conclude that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether U.S. Bank had standing to initiate this foreclosure action when it was commenced. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting U.S. Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment. Because plaintiff's standing to enforce the Note is dispositive, we do not reach Compton's other point of error. 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment and the "Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion 
for Summary Judgment against All Defendants and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure," both entered on August 10, 2018, by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, are vacated. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
3 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 18, 2020. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate JudgeGary Victor Dubin,Katherine S. Belford,for Defendant-Appellant. 
J. Blaine Rogers,
Madisson L. Heinze,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
3 On remand, the parties may need to address the Hawai #i Supreme
Court's "Order Regarding Foreclosure or Non-Judicial Foreclosure RelatedActions: Certification of Compliance With the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, andEconomic Security Act in Foreclosures," issued on June 26, 2020, and extendedon August 28, 2020. 
11 