NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000433 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
K
ORY CRISP and KAHEALANI FONG, Defendants-Appellees, and
UNITED BAIL BONDS, LLC, Real Party in Interest/Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 1CPC-17-0000331) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
In a criminal case involving a civil bail forfeiture 
proceeding within a criminal case, Real Party in Interest/ 
Appellant United Bail Bonds, LLC (UBB) appeals from the April 26, 
2018 post-judgment Order Denying United Bail Bonds, LLC's Motion 
to Set aside Bail Forfeiture Judgment, Reinstate and Discharge 
Bond and/or Motion to Continue Search Period Under HRS 804-51 for 
Defendant for Thirty Days From Date of Hearing (Order) entered by 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
1 The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, UBB challenges2 the denial of its March 6, 
2018 "Motion to Set Aside Bail Forfeiture Judgment, Reinstate and 
Discharge Bond and/or Motion to Continue Search Period Under HRS 
[§] 804-51 for Defendant For Thirty Days From Date of Hearing" 
(Motion to Set Aside). 
After a careful review of the issue raised and 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable 
legal authority, we resolve UBB's appeal as follows and affirm. 
It is undisputed that UBB provided a bail bond to 
Defendant Kahealani Fong (Fong) in the underlying criminal case, 
1CPC-17-0000331, Fong did not appear for a January 18, 2018 trial 
call, and the Circuit Court issued a bench warrant. On the same 
day as the non-appearance, the Circuit Court entered the Judgment 
and Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond (Forfeiture Judgment), which 
was received by UBB on January 23, 2018.3 The Motion to Set 
Aside was filed on March 6, 2018. UBB acknowledged in its Motion to Set Aside that it was due February 26, 2018. On 
March 7, 2018, UBB filed a "Supplemental Declaration of Counsel 
in Support of [Motion to Set Aside]," in which counsel stated 
that he had uploaded the Motion to Set Aside on March 6, 2018 
"because he thought that he had uploaded the Motion earlier after 
having it calendered [sic] with the Court by email correspondence 
on February 22, 2018, four days before the Motion was due[.]" 
2 UBB's point of error fails to comply with Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) in that it fails to provide record
references to where the alleged error was objected to or the manner in whichthe alleged error was brought to the attention of the court. 
Further, in violation of HRAP Rule 28(b)(3), no record citation
have been provided for any factual statement and no copy of the challengedorder has been appended to the opening brief. 
Counsel is warned that future noncompliance with the rules may
result in sanctions, including disregard of the points on appeal, dismissal ofthe appeal, or monetary sanctions. 
3 The record reflects that service of the Forfeiture Judgment was
made by certified mail to Universal Fire and Casualty Insurance at a Michiganaddress on January 23, 2018. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the hearing on the Motion to Set Aside, counsel 
represented that he "tendered this motion by email to chambers on 
February 21st, roughly four to five days before this motion was 
actually due. So in terms of getting the hearing date set, I got that done. But it's my – it's inadvertent. I had thought that I 
had uploaded this motion; it did not go through." Counsel also 
represented that Fong was in custody in New Mexico, but that the 
State was not willing to extradite her. The Circuit Court denied 
the Motion to Set Aside, ruling that it lacked jurisdiction over 
the matter and that Fong was not in custody within the State. 
The procedure for forfeiture of bail bonds is set out 
in HRS § 804-51 (2014) which provides in relevant part: 
Whenever the court, in any criminal cause, forfeits
any bond or recognizance given in a criminal cause, the
court shall immediately enter up judgment in favor of theState and against the principal or principals and surety orsureties on the bond, jointly and severally, for the fullamount of the penalty thereof, and shall cause execution toissue thereon immediately after the expiration of thirty
days from the date that notice is given via personal service
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the suretyor sureties on the bond, of the entry of the judgment infavor of the State, unless before the expiration of thirtydays from the date that notice is given to the surety orsureties on the bond of the entry of the judgment in favorof the State, a motion or application of the principal orprincipals, surety or sureties, or any of them, showing goodcause why execution should not issue upon the judgment, isfiled with the court. If the motion or application, after ahearing held thereon, is sustained, the court shall vacatethe judgment of forfeiture and, if the principal surrendersor is surrendered pursuant to section 804-14 or section804-41, return the bond or recognizance to the principal orsurety, whoever shall have given it, less the amount of any
cost, as established at the hearing, incurred by the State
as a result of the nonappearance of the principal or otherevent on the basis of which the court forfeited the bond or recognizance. If the motion or application, after a hearingheld thereon, is overruled, execution shall forthwith issueand shall not be stayed unless the order overruling themotion or application is appealed from as in the case of afinal judgment. 
(Emphasis added.) As the Supreme Court of Hawai# i has 
"reiterate[d], once a bond is forfeited pursuant to HRS § 805-51, 
a surety has thirty days from the time it receives notice of 
forfeiture to set aside the forfeiture judgment[.]" State v. 
Vaimili, 131 Hawai# i 9, 15, 313 P.3d 698, 704 (2013). "HRS 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 804-51 permits the filing of neither of a second motion . . . 
nor any motion after the closing of the thirty-day window." 
State v. Ranger Ins. Co., 83 Hawai# i 118, 124 n.5, 925 P.2d 288, 
294 n.5 (1996) ("Without addressing its merits, the motion to vacate [forfeiture judgment] did 'not provide a legal basis for 
the relief requested,' as the circuit court ruled, because it was 
not filed within the time limit imposed by HRS § 804-51, and the 
circuit court was therefore without power to consider it.") 
Here, UBB did not file its Motion to Set Aside within 
thirty days of receiving the Forfeiture Judgment. Although it 
claims it "tendered" the motion by sending a copy by email to the 
court within the thirty-day period, the record does not contain a 
copy of the email or its attachment. More importantly, such a 
tendering does not satisfy the mandate of HRS § 804-51 that the 
motion be filed within the thirty-day window. 
Under the Hawai# i Electronic Filing and Service Rules 
(HEFSR), every attorney representing a party must (1) register as 
a Judiciary Electronic Filing System (JEFS) user, HEFSR Rule 
4.1(a), and (2) electronically file each document as an Adobe 
Portable Document Format (PDF) document through JEFS, HEFSR Rules 
1.13, and 2.2. "Electronic filing "means (1) the submission of 
documents by authorized JEFS Users for docketing and storage in 
[Judiciary Information Management System (JIMS)] and (2) the 
conversion and/or transmission of documents by JIMS Users 
directly into JIMS." HEFSR Rules 1.4 and 1.9. "The electronic 
filing of a document is deemed complete for all purposes under 
any of the Hawai# i Rules of Court when a Notice of Electronic 
Filing is generated," HEFSR Rule 3.1, and, except when filing paper documents, "a document filed through JEFS or JIMS for 
docketing and storage in JIMS is deemed filed at the date and 
time stated on the Notice of Electronic Filing. The time stamp 
on the Notice of Electronic Filing is the time the document was 
electronically received by the court, not the time the document 
was transmitted by the JEFS User." HEFSR Rule 3.3. By contrast, 
the HEFSR provide that, if one is a conventional filer, i.e., 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
files paper documents, HEFSR Rule 1.1, the receipt date and time 
reflected on the conventionally filed document shall be deemed 
the filing date. HEFSR Rule 2.5. Thus, even if UBB sent a copy 
of its unfiled motion to the court by email, as counsel was 
required to electronically file documents on behalf of UBB and 
could not conventionally file the Motion to Set Aside, the 
March 6, 2018 electronic filing date and not the email date 
governs. 
Consequently, the Circuit Court was correct when it 
ruled it had no jurisdiction to consider UBB's Motion to Set 
Aside. 
Ranger Ins. Co., 83 Hawai# i at 124 n.5, 925 P.2d at 294 
n.5. 
For the foregoing reasons, the April 26, 2018 Order 
Denying United Bail Bonds, LLC's Motion to Set aside Bail Forfeiture Judgment, Reinstate and Discharge Bond and/or Motion 
to Continue Search Period Under HRS 804-51 for Defendant for 
Thirty Days From Date of Hearing, entered by the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 17, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Christopher Chui,
for Real Party inInterest/Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5 