NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  The Honorable Na# unanikina# u A. Kamali# i presided.
2     HRS § 709-906(1) states in part:  "It shall be unlawful for any
person, singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or household member
or to refuse compliance with the lawful order of a police officer under
subsection (4)."NO. CAAP-14-0000921
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
EDWIN K. CUMMINGS, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-2321)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Edwin K. Cummings ( Cummings)
appeals from the May 21, 2014 Judgment of Conviction, Order, and
Sentence ( Judgment), and the June 13, 2014 Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law, and Guilty Verdict ( FOF/COL), entered in the
Family Court of the First Circuit ( Family Court).1  After a bench
trial, Cummings was convicted of Abuse of Family or Household
Members in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 709-
906(1) (Supp. 2016).2  Cummings was sentenced to two days jail,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2two years probation and ordered to attend a domestic violence
intervention program. 
Cummings raises two points of error on appeal,
contending that:
(1) The Family Court erred in concluding that the
Protection of Property Defense is unavailable where Cummings and
the complaining witness ( CW), his wife, were co-owners of the
property; and
(2) There is no substantial evidence to support the
conviction as the State failed to disprove the Protection of
Property Defense beyond a reasonable doubt.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Cummings's points of error as follows:
HRS § 703-306 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
§ 703-306  Use of Force for the protection of
property.  (1) The use of force upon or toward the person of
another is justifiable when the actor believes that such
force is immediately necessary: 
. . . .
(c) To prevent theft, criminal mischief, or any
trespassory taking of tangible, movable property
in the actor's possession or in the possession
of another person for whose protection the actor
acts.
(2) The actor may in the circumstances specified in
subsection (1) use such force as the actor believes is
necessary to protect the threatened property, provided that
the actor first requests the person against whom force is
used to desist from the person's interference with the
property, unless the actor believes that:
(a) Such a request would be useless;
(b)  It would be dangerous to the actor or another
person to make the request; or
(c)  Substantial harm would be done to the physical
condition of the property which is sought to be
protected before the request could effectively be
made.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3We note that the State neither repeated nor conceded this argument
on appeal, although it successfully argued this point in the Family Court.
3As Cummings contends, the Circuit Court erred when it
concluded that the Protection of Property defense set forth in
HRS § 703-306 is not available to a defendant where the property
is co-owned by the defendant and the person against whom force
has been used.3  As plainly stated in HRS § 703-306, this
justification defense does not require that the actor using force
be the sole owner, or even an owner, of the subject property;
rather, it requires that the "property [be] in the actor's
possession."  Simply put, ownership is not the issue.  Cummings
and CW's co-ownership of the truck did not preclude Cummings from
asserting this defense.
The Circuit Court nevertheless ruled, in Conclusion of
Law 7: 
7. The court also concludes that, to the extent that the
evidence presented gave rise to the possible justification
defenses of self-defense and/or defense of property, the
State met its burden of negating these potential defenses
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Cummings contends that there was insufficient evidence
for the State to meet its burden to disprove the justification
defense beyond a reasonable doubt.  See HRS § 701-115 (2014).  
This argument, however, is grounded in Cummings's assertion that
this court should overturn the Family Court's determinations as
to the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the
evidence.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard appliesNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4whether the case was before a judge or a jury.  The test on
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact.  Indeed,
even if it could be said in a bench trial that the
conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long as
there is substantial evidence to support the requisite
findings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed.
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable [a person]
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  And as trier
of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including
circumstantial evidence.
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31
(2007) (quoting State v. Batson , 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d
924, 931 (1992)).
Here, the Family Court's findings included, "[g]iven
the court's careful observation of [CW], and based on the
totality of the evidence and circumstances brought out at trial,
the court finds [CW's] recantations, both written and
testimonial, unconvincing and lacking credibility."  The Family
Court found Cummings's testimony regarding the subject incident,
including the assertions that CW dumped juice in his truck, and
keyed the exterior, to be "unconvincing and lacking credibility"
as well.  Instead, the Family Court found CW's initial recounting
of the incident in her (first) written statement to be most
credible.  This written statement followed shortly after the
incident, and was prepared after CW drove immediately to a police
station.  It was consistent with the duty officer's testimony
concerning his observations of slight redness on CW's neck, where
she claimed to have been choked, and the minor scratches,
abrasions, and redness observed on CW's arms.  In this initial
statement, CW said she was searching Cummings's truck for hisNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5house key and Cummings "suddenly started choking [her] and [she]
couldn't breath" and that he then "grabbed [her] and threw [her]
on the ground."  
Viewing the evidence and inferences in a light most
favorable to the State, and in light of the Family Court's
assessment of the lack of credibility of CW's recantation and
Cummings's testimony, we conclude that there was substantial
evidence negating the justification defense.  The CW's original
report described an unprovoked attack, rather than an action to
protect threatened property.  See HRS § 703-306.
Accordingly, the Family Court's May 21, 2014 Judgment
is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 27, 2017.
On the briefs:
Todd Eddins,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge