NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
NO. CAAP-18-0000075 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
LIGAYA C. MARTIN, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
RENATO S. MARTIN, Defendant-Appellee.  
  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-D NO. 09-1-3502)  
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.)
 
 
  Plaintiff-Appellant Ligaya C. Martin (Ligaya
) appeals 
from the Family Court of the First Circuit's  (1) January 31, 
2018 "Order Granting Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree 
Relief" (Order) filed by Defendant-Appellee Renato S. Martin 
(Renato), and (2) March 16, 2018 "Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law."  21
                                                           
1   The Honorable Jessi L.K. Hall presided. 
 
2   Ligaya challenges findings of fact (FOF) 12- 13 and conclusions of law 
(COL) 2-3, 6, and 8.  She does not individually address why these findings 
(continued . . . ) 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
2 
   On appeal, Ligaya's sole point of error is that "the 
Family Court erred in ordering [her] to refinance the home 
and/or remove [Renato's] name from the mortgage."  Ligaya 
asserts that, "[s]ince the parties' Divorce Decree [(Decree)] 
                                                           
(continued . . . ) 
 
are clearly erroneous and why these conclusions are wrong, but appears to 
challenge them in the context of her argument.  We address the challenged 
findings and conclusions in a likewise manner.  FOF 12
-13 and COL 2- 3, 6, and 
8 are as follows: 
     
FOF 12. The Court finds that Defendant has been harmed by 
not having his name removed from the mortgage debt on the 
real property at 1121 Kamehameha IV Road, Honolulu, Hawaii 
96819 for the past seven (7) years.  
FOF 13. Defendant's Motion and Declaration for Post Decree 
Relief filed December 18, 2017 is hereby granted.  
Plaintiff has 90 days from J anuary 31, 2018 to refinance 
the mortgage and/or remove Defendant's name from the 
mortgage. 
 
 
 . . . . 
COL 2. The Family Court may further divide assets after a 
decree has been entered if it is necessary to effectuate 
the enforcement of the terms of the decree.  Carroll v. 
Nagatori- Carroll, 90 [Hawai‘ i] 376 (1999).  
 
COL 3. The time limit to divide property only " pertains to 
the Family Court's jurisdiction to resolve the property 
division issue" pursuant to [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§] 580-56(d), not to enforcing an already ordered division 
of assets.  Richter v. Richter, 108 [Hawai‘ i] 504 (2005). 
 . . . . 
 
COL 6. Defendant was solely seeking to enforce the terms as 
they are set out in the Divorce Decree.  As such [Hawai‘ i 
Family Court Rules Rule] 60(b) does not apply in this 
matter.
 
 . . . . 
 
COL 8. To the extent that any Finding of Fact herein is a 
Conclusi
on of Law, it shall be so construed.  To the extent 
any Conclusion of Law herein is a Finding of Fact, it shall be so construed. 
 
(Formatting altered.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
3 
 did not require [her] to remove [Renato's] name from the joint 
debt, enforcement of the parties' Divorce Decree cannot include 
removal of [his] name from the joint debt." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve this appeal as discussed below and affirm. 
"When interpreting a decree/judgment, the 
determinative factor is the intention of the court as gathered 
from all parts of the decree/judgment itself."  Rosales v. 
Rosales, 108 Hawai‘ i 370, 374, 120 P.3d 269, 273 (App. 2005) 
(citation omitted).  "Generally, the family court possesses wide 
discretion in making its decisions and those decision[s] will 
not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of 
discretion."  Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai‘ i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 
360 (2006) (citation omitted). 
Here, Ligaya and Renato were divorced in March 2011.  
Both Ligaya and Renato agreed that the "Total Debt Owed" on the 
marital residence was $584,000.  The Decree divided the marital 
residence as follows: 
Wife is awarded as her sole and separate property the 
parties' one-half interest in the marital residence located 
at 1121 Kam IV Road, Honolulu, Hawaii 96819, subject to the 
encumbrances thereon and shall indemnify and hold husband 
harmless therefrom. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
4 
 (Formatting altered.)  The Decree then ordered that: 
 
Wife shall pay: The parties' joint debt on the marital 
residence and hold husband harmless therefrom. 
 
(Formatting altered.)  The Decree did not require Ligaya to pay 
Renato for his interest in the marital residence.  About a year 
later, on Ligaya's motion, a quitclaim deed was filed removing Renato's name from the deed to the marital residence. 
  In December 2017, over six years after the Decree, 
Renato moved for post-decree relief seeking to have his name 
removed from the mortgage, and indicating that the total debt 
owed increased to $599,435.00.   The record does not indicate 3
that Ligaya challenged this amount.  During the hearing on the 
motion, Renato's attorney explained that Renato wanted his name 
removed from the mortgage because he cannot "qualify for any 
loan on a car or a house because his name wasn't removed in the -- in the mortgage . . . [h]is name was removed from the deed."  
Renato's attorney further explained that Renato "tried to work 
it out with the creditor . . . tried to work it out with Miss -- 
Miss Ligaya . . . tried to work it out with all the children 
present . . . [and] tried to work it out with all the co-owners 
present.  But they won't budge and all for the reason that they 
can't qualify for a -- the loan . . . ." 
                                                           
3   Renato also requested damages, but later clarified that he was only 
seeking to have his name removed from the mortgage. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
5 
     Ligaya's attorney explained that "unfortunately in 
this case, or fortunately or however it is, the decree -- on 
page 4 of the decree, it just -- it awarded my client the 
property and -- subject to the encumbrances thereon, and her 
obligation is only to indemnify and hold harmless [Renato] from 
liability on the mortgage."  Ligaya's attorney continued, "And I 
will -- for offer of proof, my client -- the mortgage is 
current.  There's no showing there's any liability on the 
mortgage or at least [Renato] has had to pay anything on the 
mortgage."  Ligaya, herself, explained to the family court that 
her "sister having a problem on their business and so we seek 
for refinance" but "Ocwen took over the mortgage -- the first 
mortgage that we had.  And so again, instead of refinance, they gave us a loan modification which is I can't do anything because 
. . . my monthly payment was so high, and they gave us 25 
hundred . . . which is I can't resist." 
  Again, the Decree ordered that Ligaya "shall pay:  The 
parties' joint debt on the marital residence . . . ."  At the 
time, both parties indicated that the total debt owed on the 
marital property was $584,000.00.  Although Ligaya represented 
that she had been making the monthly mortgage payments, those 
payments go towards paying down (lowering) the debt on the 
marital residence.  See Black's Law Dictionary, 1211 (11th ed. 
2019) (defining "mortgage" as a "conveyance of title to property 
that is given as security for the payment of a debt").  Ligaya, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
6 
 however, has not paid the debt on the marital residence as 
ordered by the Decree.  Had she done so, Renato's name would not 
be on this debt. 
  The Decree could have ordered that Ligaya shall pay 
the monthly mortgage payments towards the joint debt, but it did 
not.  And interpreting the Decree in that manner, as Ligaya 
urges we do, would bind Renato to the debt for the next 19 years 
($584,000 debt ÷ $2,500 monthly payment ÷ 12 months), while 
being completely divested of title to the property.  As gathered 
from all parts of the Decree, that does not appear to be the 
family court's intention, or just and equitable.  See 
Rosales, 108 Hawai‘ i at 374, 120 P.3d at 273; Gordon v. Gordon, 
135 Hawai‘ i 340, 348-49, 350 P.3d 1008, 1016-17 (2015) ("Under 
HRS § 580-47 [(Supp. 2017)], the family court has wide 
discretion to divide marital partnership property according to 
what is 'just and equitable' based on the facts and 
circumstances of each case.") (citation omitted).  
Ligaya had over six years to comply with the Decree.  
During that time, Ligaya removed Renato's name from the deed, 
and was entitled to enjoy all the benefits of property ownership 
such as residing on the property and earning income from the 
property.  Renato, on the other hand, says Ligaya's failure to 
comply with the Decree harmed him because he cannot qualify for 
a house or car loan. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
7 /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge   
 Based on the foregoing, we hold that the family 
court's conclusion that Renato "was solely seeking to enforce 
the terms" of the Decree was correct, and its finding that 
Renato had "been harmed by not having his name removed from the 
mortgage debt on the real property . . ." was not clearly 
erroneous.  We further hold that the family court did not 
manifestly abuse its discretion in granting Renato's request for 
post-decree relief. 
  Therefore, we affirm the family court's 
(1) January 31, 2018 "Order Granting Motion and Declaration for 
Post-Decree Relief filed by Defendant on December 15, 2017"; and 
(2) March 16, 2018 "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law."  
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, August 24, 2022. 
 
On the briefs:  Ronald P. Tongg, 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
 Rhoda Yabes Alvarez, 
for Defendant-Appellee. 