Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000580 26-JAN-2024 08:21 AM Dkt. 56 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000580 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
BECKY LYNN SWAN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROY WILLIAM GILLETTE, JR., Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-1864) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.)  
Defendant-Appellant Roy William Gillette, Jr. 
(
Gillette) appeals from the July 17, 2019 Order Partially 
Granting and Partially Denying Plaintiff's Motion and Declaration 
for Post-Decree Relief (2019 Order re Post-Decree Relief) entered 
by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court)1 in favor 
of Plaintiff-Appellee Becky Lynn Swan (Swan). 
Gillette raises four points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Family Court erred in: (1) assuming 
jurisdiction over Swan's post-decree motion; (2) concluding that the Stipulated Agreement to Modify Decree Granting Absolute Divorce, Filed Herein on 11/2/2007; Order (2011 Stipulation and 
1 The Honorable John C. Bryant, Jr. presided. Order) was the original judgment; (3) its application of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-5 (2016); and (4) certain Findings of Fact (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law (COL) supporting its decision in the 2019 Order re Post-Decree Relief. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Gillette's arguments as follows: 
A Decree Granting Absolute Divorce was entered on 
November 2, 2007 (2007 Divorce Decree). It is undisputed that 
the 2007 Divorce Decree awarded the Main House to Gillette, 
subject to an equalization payment to Swan (Main House 
Equalization Payment). In Plaintiff's September 19, 2019 FOFs and COLs, the Family Court found, inter alia, that the 2011 
Stipulation and Order "does not contain any provision addressing, modifying, forgiving, or cancelling the equalization payment;" the Family Court concluded, inter alia, that the 2011 Stipulation and Order "did not address or amend the [2007 Divorce] Decree's provisions regarding the Main House." This finding and conclusion are undisputed, and upon review, we conclude that neither one is wrong. 
The dispositive issue in this appeal is whether the 
ten-year statute of limitation to enforce the Main House Equalization Payment runs from the 2007 Divorce Decree or the 2011 Stipulation and Order. 
HRS § 657-5 provides: 
§ 657-5 Domestic judgments and decrees . Unless an 
extension is granted, every judgment and decree of any court 
2 of the State shall be presumed to be paid and discharged at
the expiration of ten years after the judgment or decree wasrendered. No action shall be commenced after the expirationof ten years from the date a judgment or decree was renderedor extended. No extension of a judgment or decree shall begranted unless the extension is sought within ten years ofthe date the original judgment or decree was rendered. A court shall not extend any judgment or decree beyond twentyyears from the date of the original judgment or decree. No extension shall be granted without notice and the filing ofa non-hearing motion or a hearing motion to extend the lifeof the judgment or decree. 
In Estate of Roxas v. Marcos, 121 Hawai< i 59, 214 P.3d 
598 (2009), the 
Hawai#i Supreme Court held: 
In construing "original judgment" of HRS § 657–5, in 
pari materia  within the framework of the entire statutory
scheme governing limitations of actions, the statute oflimitations for extending a judgment begins to run when thecause of action—the judgment that creates the enforceableclaim or right—"come[s] into existence as an enforceableclaim or right." All judgments, even those that are
modified or amended, become "enforceable claim[s] or
right[s]" only when the judgments creating those rights areentered. It is only at the time that the judgment isrendered when the parties are (1) aware of their rights andresponsibilities created by the judgment and (2) able toenforce these rights. Accordingly, the statute oflimitations for extending a judgment begins to run at thecreation of the judgment that creates the rights andresponsibilities that the party is seeking to extend. 
121 Hawai#i at 69, 214 P.3d at 608 (emphasis added). 
The supreme court explained: 
We hold . . . that "original judgment" of HRS § 657–5pertains to the judgment that creates the rights andresponsibilities that the moving party is seeking to enforceand extend. 
Id. at 71, 214 P.3d at 610. 
With respect to an amended judgment, the supreme court 
held: 
Where an unextended judgment is "amended in a material andsubstantial respect," so that it creates the rights that arebeing extended, the time within which a motion to extend thejudgment may be brought "begins to run from the date of theamendment," because that judgment created those rights. 
Id. at 72, 214 P.3d at 611 (citation omitted and emphasis 
altered). 
3  In applying that rule to the case before it, the 
supreme court, inter alia, held: 
Under the foregoing construction of HRS § 657–5,
Petitioners timely sought to extend the Second and Fourth
Amended Judgments. Petitioners moved to extend these judgments within ten years of the date that  the judgments
that created the rights to be extended were rendered. 
The Second Amended Judgment, filed on October 18,
1999, granted judgment "in favor of [Dacanay,] as personalrepresentative of the estate of Roger Roxas in the amount of$6 million in general damages for false imprisonment andbattery against Imelda Marcos in her personal capacity, tothe extent of her interest in the Marcos Estate." This 
right was created by the Second Amended Judgment. The 
first-in-time judgment (rendered on August 28, 1996) and theAmended Judgment (rendered on October 21, 1996) do notqualify as an "original judgment" for purposes of extendingthe Second Amended Judgment, because they did not presentenforceable rights on Petitioners' claims of battery andfalse imprisonment against Imelda Marcos in her personalcapacity. The first-in-time judgment and Amended Judgmentwere materially and substantially changed by the SecondAmended Judgment. Accordingly, the Second Amended Judgmentis the "original judgment" on the false imprisonment andbattery claims against "Imelda Marcos in her personalcapacity, to the extent of her interest in the MarcosEstate." 
121 Hawai# i at 73, 214 P.3d at 612 (citation and footnote 
omitted; emphasis altered). 
Here, the 2007 Divorce Decree was the judgment that 
created the Main House Equalization Payment due to Swan. The 
2011 Stipulation and Order did not create, modify, or address the Main House Equalization Payment. Therefore, the Family Court erred in concluding that in 2019, the statute of limitations applicable to the Main House Equalization Payment had not expired.
 2
2 We express no opinion as to whether the statute of limitations has
since run on the 2011 Stipulation and Order. 
4 Accordingly, the Family Court's 2019 Order re Post-
Decree Relief is reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 26, 2024. 
On the briefs: 
Sheila Vierra,
Jo-Ann K. Takara,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Richard J. Diehl,
Christine D. Weger,(Diehl & Weger, Attorneys at
Law, a Law Corporation),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardActing Chief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
5 