NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000387
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KEVIN P. MCELROY, Appellant-Appellant, v.
PACIFIC LIGHTNET, INC., AND DEPARTMENT OF
LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0410-02)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Kevin P. McElroy (McElroy) appeals
 
from the Order Affirming Employment Security Appeals Referee's
 
Decision, filed on March 13, 2012 (Order) and the Final Judgment
 
filed on March 13, 2012 (Judgment) in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (Circuit Court).  The Circuit Court's Judgment and
 
Order affirmed the decision of the Department of Labor and
 
Industrial Relations (DLIR), Employment Security Appeals
 
Referees' Office (ESARO), filed January 27, 2011, which in turn
 
affirmed the December 20, 2010 decision of the Unemployment
 
Insurance Division finding that McElroy was not entitled to
 unemployment benefits because he left his job with Employer-
Appellant Pacific Lightnet, Inc. (Lightnet) "without good cause."
 
On appeal, McElroy contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in affirming the agency decision because the DLIR ESARO
 
1
 Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
appeals officer erred in concluding that McElroy voluntarily left
 
employment without good cause. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve McElroy's point of error as follows:
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 383-30 (1993) outlines
 
the circumstances that disqualify an individual from receiving
 unemployment benefits. HRS § 383-30(1) provides:
 
An individual shall be disqualified for benefits: 
(1) Voluntary separation. . . . For any week beginning on
and after October 1, 1989, in which the individual has left
 the individual's work voluntarily without good cause, and
continuing until the individual has, subsequent to the week
in which the voluntary separation occurred, been paid wages
in covered employment equal to not less than five times the
individual's weekly benefit amount as determined under
section 383-22(b).
 
(Emphasis added). Implementing the provisions of HRS § 383-30(1)
 
is Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-5-47: Voluntary
 
Separation, which states in relevant part:
 
(a) An individual shall be disqualified for benefits for
voluntarily leaving work without good cause.
 
(b) A separation is a voluntary leaving or quitting when the
facts and circumstances demonstrate that a claimant is the
 "moving party" in the termination of an employment
relationship.
 
(c) Generally, a leaving of work is considered to be for
good cause where it is for a real, substantial, or
compelling reason, or a reason which would cause a
reasonable and prudent worker, genuinely and sincerely
desirous of maintaining employment, to take similar action.
Such a worker is expected to try reasonable alternatives
before terminating the employment relationship.
 
Good cause for leaving employment may be found where there
is:
 
(1) Change in working conditions and the change is
prejudicial or detrimental to the health, safety, or
morals of the individual;
 
(2) Change in terms and conditions of employment,
including, but not limited to: change in rate of pay,
position or grade, duties, days of work, or hours of
work;
 
(3) Discrimination which violates federal or state
laws regarding equal employment opportunity practices;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) Change in the individual's marital or domestic
status;
 
(5)
 Acceptance of a definite, firm offer made of other
employment where the offer is subsequently withdrawn
and the former employer refuses to rehire the
individual;
 
(6) Retirement under a mandatory requirement imposed
by a collective bargaining agreement;
 
(7) Evidence that the individual was a victim of
domestic or sexual violence . . . ; or
 
(8) Any other factor relevant to a determination of
good cause.
 
The voluntariness of the employee's leaving and whether 
the employee left for good cause are two different prongs that 
are analyzed separately. Ipsen v. Akiba, 80 Hawai 'i 481, 486, 
911 P.2d 116, 121 (App. 1996). 
On appeal, McElroy argues that because his unemployment 
was due to Lightnet's refusal to reinstate him, he is not the "moving party" within the meaning of HAR § 12-5-47(b). Thus, he argues, he did not leave his job with Lightnet voluntarily. McElroy failed to raise this argument in the proceedings below, and his previous position was apparently that his departure from Lightnet was voluntary. During the January 25, 2011 hearing before the appeals officer, McElroy's counsel gave an opening statement wherein he took the position that: "This was a voluntary separation from employment for good cause as defined under [HAR § 12-5-47(c)(5)]." McElroy's opening brief to the Circuit Court on appeal from the appeals officer's decision read: "The issue is whether McElroy's voluntary leaving work for the Employer was for good cause." Accordingly, this argument is waived. See, e.g., Onaka v. Onaka, 112 Hawai
'i 374, 386, 146 
P.3d 89, 101 (2006) ("[T]he rule in this jurisdiction . . . prohibits an appellant from complaining for the first time on appeal of error to which he has acquiesced or to which he failed to object.") (citations omitted). 
Turning to the issue of good cause, HAR § 12-5-47(c)(5)
 
provides that "[g]ood cause for leaving employment may be found
 where there is: . . . . Acceptance of a definite, firm offer made
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of other employment where the offer is subsequently withdrawn and
 
the former employer refuses to rehire the individual[.]" Here,
 the appeals officer did not specifically determine whether
 McElroy's offer from Hawaiian Telcom was firm or definite, but
 she did find that "although claimant was given a verbal offer of
 employment, which he considered an official offer, claimant was
 also told, that day, that the offer was pending a background
 check." 
This finding is supported by McElroy's testimony that
 
when he spoke to Hawaiian Telcom's hiring manager, Julian Raposa
 (Raposa) on September 16, 2010, before receiving the verbal
 
offer, Raposa "said at that time that the offer - it would be
 
pending of their background center[.]" This echoes his statement
 during the claims examiner's fact finding interview that before
 getting the "official verbal offer", "[Raposa] told me that I
 still needed to get this offer officially processed and he did
 tell me that there is a drug test and background test pending." 
The letter sent to McElroy after the verbal offer makes clear
 that "this offer may be withdrawn or your employment may be
 terminated if information that you provided in connection with
 your application is determined by the Company to be false,
 inaccurate, or misleading." This offer "was the same as the
 verbal offer" according to McElroy. Additionally, the letter
 stated that it would supersede any prior "promises,
 representations and agreements." Finally, Hawaiian Telcom's
 representative told the claims examiner that McElroy's offer was
 contingent on a background check and the offer was rescinded when
 the background check revealed that he had falsified information.
 
McElroy argues that "a contingency in an offer does not
 
render it indefinite or infirm" under HAR § 12-5-47(c)(5). We
 disagree. "Firm" is defined as "not subject to change, revision,
 or withdrawal." Webster's Third New Int'l Dictionary 856 (1981)
 
"Definite" is defined as "marked by absence of the ambiguous,
 obscure, doubtful, or tentative . . . . " Id. at 592. As the
 
offer in this case was contingent on the passing of a background
 check and subject to withdrawal pending the results of the check,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it was thus not "firm" or "definite" based on the ordinary
 
meaning of these words. See also, e.g., Sanchez v. Unemp't.
 
Comp. Bd. of Review, No. 821 C.D. 2013, 2013 WL 6122376 at *3
 (Pa. Commw. Ct. Nov. 20, 2013) ("[Employer's] failure to hire
 Claimant because of his driving record indicates that the offer
 of employment was conditional rather than firm."), Davis v.
 Unemp't. Comp. Bd. of Review, No. 1411 C.D. 2007, 2008 WL 9398689
 at *2 (Pa. Commw. Ct. Apr. 24, 2008) ("[Employer's] offer, by its
 terms, was conditioned on the premise that Claimant had not
 provided false information in his application and depended on
 Claimant passing a background check; therefore, it was a
 conditional offer, not a firm offer."), Breslow v. Commonwealth
 Unemp't. Comp. Bd. of Review, 517 A.2d 590, 593 (Pa. Commw. Ct.
 1986) (Where the claimant's job offer was rescinded after she
 failed an insurance aptitude test, "Claimant did not have a firm
 job offer, but simply a conditional offer which Claimant knew had
 been rescinded before her termination date.")
 
Finally, the appeals officer did not clearly err when 
she found that McElroy "failed to try reasonable alternatives to maintain employment, as required under Section 12-5-47(c), HAR, [thus] claimant fails to meet the standard of good cause for leaving employment, under Section 12-5-47, HAR." While HAR § 12-5-47(c)(1)-(8) lists circumstances under which good cause for leaving employment may be found, part of the "good cause" test under HAR § 12-5-47(c) is whether the claimant "tr[ied] reasonable alternatives before terminating the employment relationship." Ipsen, 80 Hawai
'i at 489-90, 911 P.2d at 124-25; 
see also Noor v. Agsalud, 2 Haw. App. 560, 563, 634 P.2d 1058, 1060 (1981). Thus, following Ipsen, when an employee fails to try reasonable alternatives before leaving employment, the "good cause" test is not met even though the employee may have otherwise had a valid reason for leaving. 
Here, the appeals officer found that it was not
 
credible that McElroy inadvertently erred in claiming that he had
 a college degree, and thus he "should have been aware that the
 background check [might] uncover that the information in his
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
application was false and [might] affect any job offer he was
 
given." As the appeals officer further noted:
 
Instead of submitting a notice of resignation, before the
background check was completed, claimant could have easily
asked the hiring company if he could wait on submitting a
notice of resignation to the subject employer, and possibly
delay his start date, until he cleared his background check.
There is insufficient evidence to find that the hiring
company would have refused claimant's request to delay his
work start date until the background check was completed.
 
Notwithstanding McElroy's contention that "[h]ad he
 
waited for the completion of the background check on September 24
 
to give his notice[,] Employer would have only had eleven days
 notice of his termination[,]" he could have asked to delay his
 start date in order to ensure that he passed the background check
 and give timely notice to Lightnet.
2 Further, in response to the
 
claims examiner's question – "was [McElroy] required to accept
 the start date of 10/4/10, or could he have waited until the
 background check was completed and would [the] job have been
 available later?" – the Hawaiian Telcom representative stated: 
"He didn't have to accept the position at that time. The job
 would have still been available until the point in time that his
 background check came back." Finally, McElroy was not entitled
 to rely on Raposa's assurance to "go ahead" and tender a letter
 of resignation where McElroy knew he had falsified information on
 his application and knew or should have known that a background
 check could uncover it. Thus, despite McElroy's contention that
 he acted reasonably with respect to leaving his employment with
 Lightnet, based on the reliable, probative, and substantial
 evidence on the record, the appeals officer's conclusion that
 McElroy "failed to try reasonable alternatives to maintain
 employment" and thus left without good cause was not clearly
 erroneous.
 
2
 Also, according to Lightnet's head of business operations, McElroy
was not required to give a two week notice. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's March 13, 2012 Order
 
and Judgment are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Charles H. Brower 
for Appellant-Appellant Chief Judge 
John S. Mackey(Torkildson, Katz, Moore,
Hetherington & Harris)
for Appellee-AppelleePACIFIC LIGHTNET, INC. Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
7
 