NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000667
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
STATE OF HAWAI fI, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN WALTON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-0498)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John Walton (Walton) appeals from
 
an August 10, 2011 Judgment entered in the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit  (circuit court), convicting Walton of Attempted
Murder in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500 and 707-701.5 (1993).
 
On appeal, Walton contends the circuit court
 
erroneously (1) denied Walton's motion for severance; (2) denied
 
Walton's motion to suppress evidence and identification
 
testimony; (3) admitted a recorded conversation into evidence;
 
(4) admitted prejudicial photographs; (5) gave erroneous jury
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided until October 1, 2010, when
the case was re-assigned to the Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi who presided
thereafter.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instructions. Walton also contends the evidence was insufficient
 
to support his conviction.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On April 8, 2009, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai fi 
(State) indicted Walton for Attempted Murder in the Second Degree 
and Robbery in the First Degree.2 On June 7, 2010, the State 
moved to consolidate Walton's trial with the trial of Courage Lee Elkshoulder (Elkshoulder), stating the cases were "based on the 
same conduct or series of acts connected together or constituting 
parts of a single scheme or plan." The circuit court granted the 
State's motion over the defendants' objections. The circuit 
court also denied Walton's pretrial motions to sever the 
defendants, and his motion for severance during trial. 
At trial, the victim testified that on November 15,
 
2008, he was driving his taxi cab when two males approached and
 
stated they needed a cab. The victim agreed to take the two
 
males, who then entered the cab and directed the victim to a home
 
in Manoa.
 
The victim stated that when he stopped his cab and
 
waited for payment, he saw one of the passenger's arms grabbing
 
him from behind and cutting him on the neck. Both passengers
 
then pinned the victim down, and the victim stated he saw another
 
hand stab him a few more times, although he did not know which
 
passenger held the knife. The victim lost all of the money in
 
his pocket during the altercation. The State also entered into
 
evidence photos from a video surveillance camera near the cab,
 
depicting two males. The victim identified the two males in the
 
photos as the males who had attacked him.
 
The co-defendant, Elkshoulder, testified at trial. He
 
admitted to riding in the cab with Walton but claimed that Walton
 
2
 Pursuant to a special interrogatory, the jury determined the two
offenses had merged, and in the August 10, 2011 Judgment, the circuit court
dismissed the robbery offense without prejudice under HRS § 701-109 (1993).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alone attacked the victim, while Elkshoulder immediately fled. 
Elkshoulder also testified that on November 17, 2009, he received
 
a call from Walton. He asked Walton to call back and then called
 
his attorney. After speaking with his attorney, Elkshoulder
 
obtained a cassette recorder. When Walton called back later that
 
evening, Elkshoulder stated he placed his phone on speaker mode
 
and used the recorder to record their conversation. During the
 
conversation, Walton allegedly made self-incriminating remarks,
 
indicating he stabbed the victim two to three times. Elkshoulder
 
then submitted the cassette tape to his attorney. Over
 
objections from Walton and the State, the circuit court received
 
into evidence an edited copy of the cassette tape placed onto a
 
CD. Elkshoulder played the CD in open court, and the circuit
 
court allowed the jury access to the CD during its deliberations.
 
Elkshoulder's defense rested after he testified, and
 
Walton's defense rested without presenting any further evidence
 
or testimony. The jury found both Walton and Elkshoulder guilty
 
as charged on all counts. The circuit court entered its judgment
 
on August 10, 2011, and Walton filed a timely notice of appeal on
 
September 9, 2011.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion For Severance
 Appellate courts review the issue of whether the trial 
court erred in not severing a trial under the abuse of discretion standard. State v. Timas, 82 Hawai
fi 499, 512, 923 P.2d 916, 929 
(App. 1996). Furthermore, upon review of a motion to sever, the appellate court "may not conclude that the defendant suffered 
prejudice from a joint trial unless it first concludes that a 
defendant was denied a fair trial. What might have happened had 
the motion for severance been granted is irrelevant speculation." 
Id. (ellipsis and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Gaspar, 8 
Haw. App. 317, 327, 801 P.2d 30, 35 (1990)). 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 Motion To Suppress Evidence
 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to suppress
evidence is reviewed de novo to determine whether the 
ruling was "right" or "wrong." State v. Edwards, 96
Hawaifi 224, 231, 30 P.3d 238, 245 (2001) (citing
State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawaif i 87, 100, 997 P.2d 13, 26
(2000)). The proponent of the motion to suppress has
the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of theevidence, that the statements or items sought to beexcluded were unlawfully secured and that his or herright to be free from unreasonable searches orseizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 
7 of the Hawaif i Constitution. See State v. Wilson,
92 Hawaif i 45, 48, 987 P.2d 268, 271 (1999) (citations
omitted). 
[State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawaif i 370, 375, 56 P.3d 138, 143
(2002)]. 
State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai fi 351, 357, 173 P.3d 498, 504 
(2007).
 
C.	 Authentication
 
Authentication is "a condition precedent to
 
admissibility" of an object and is "satisfied by evidence
 sufficient to support a finding that the matter in question is
 
what its proponent claims." Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule
 
901(a). In Kam Fui Trust v. Brandhorst, 77 Hawai
fi 320, 884 P.2d 
383 (App. 1994), this court held that
 
[t]he crux of the authenticity requirement is whether there
is evidence which supports the conclusion that an object is
the very thing it purports to be. 
The standard on appeal for review of evidentiary
rulings depends on the particular rule of evidence in issue.
Evidentiary rulings are reviewed for abuse of discretion,
unless application of the rule admits of only one correct
result, in which case, review is under a right/wrong
standard. HRE Rule 901(b) enumerates authentication
methods, by way of illustration only, and not by way of
limitation. Rulings on authentication questions, then, do
not partake of only one correct result. There being no
single right or wrong disposition of authentication issues,
. . . on appeal, the trial court's ruling on authentication
of objects under HRE Rule 901 is subject to review for abuse
of discretion.
 
Id. at 326, 884 P.2d at 389 (internal quotation marks, citations,
 
and brackets omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D. Admissibility of Evidence - Hearsay
 
"[W]here the admissibility of evidence is determined by 
application of the hearsay rule, there can be only one correct result, and the appropriate standard for appellate review is the 
right/wrong standard." State v. Moore, 82 Hawai
fi 202, 217, 921 
P.2d 122, 137 (1996) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
However, "inasmuch as the trial court is required to 
make a 'judgment call' in determining whether to admit evidence under [Hawai
fi Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule 804(b)(3), its 
ruling [as to whether 'corroborating circumstances' rise to the level of clearly indicating the trustworthiness of the statement] 
should not be reversed unless there has been an abuse of 
discretion." State v. Christian, 88 Hawai
fi 407, 418, 967 P.2d 
239, 250 (1998). E. Sufficiency Of The Evidence
 
The standard of review for sufficiency of the evidence
is well established; namely, whether, upon the evidence
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in
full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full play
to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility,
weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact. 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai fi 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(block quote format changed) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai fi 
409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Motion For Severance
 
Whether separate trials should be granted to joint
 
defendants rests in the sound discretion of the trial judge. 
State v. Faalafua, 67 Haw. 335, 340, 686 P.2d 826, 830 (1984). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a defendant has been adjudicated guilty, the appellate
 
court may not conclude the trial court abused its discretion in
 
denying a defendant's motion for severance unless it first
 
concludes that the defendant was denied a fair trial. State v.
 
White, 5 Haw. App. 670, 672, 706 P.2d 1331, 1333 (1985). A
 joinder denies a defendant a fair trial in three possible
 
situations:
 
(1) the core of each defense was in irreconcilable conflict
with the other and there was a significant danger, as both
defenses were portrayed in the trial, that the conflict
alone led the jury to infer the defendant's guilt, (2) the
joint trial prevented the defendant in question from
introducing evidence that would have been admissible in his
separate trial not involving the other defendant, or (3) the
joint trial allowed the admission of evidence damaging to
the defendant in question that would not have been
admissible in his separate trial not involving the other
defendant.
 
State v. Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. 317, 327-28, 801 P.2d 30, 35 (1990)
 
(citations omitted).
 
Walton fails to demonstrate he was denied a fair trial. 
Walton first argues he and Elkshoulder presented irreconcilable
 
defenses. Although the co-defendants' defenses conflicted to an
 
extent, the consolidated trial is not unfair unless "the conflict
 
alone led the jury to infer the defendant's guilt[.]" Id. at
 
327, 801 P.2d at 35 (emphasis added). 
In this case, the State's theory was that both
 
defendants actively participated in the crime, and it presented
 substantial evidence supporting this theory. The jury could have
 
inferred the two defendants' guilt based on the State's evidence,
 
and not based solely on the fact that the defendants' respective
 
positions conflicted in that each defendant blamed the other for
 
the crime. The jury's verdict finding each defendant guilty as
 
charged established that the jury had not accepted either
 
defense. 
Walton has also failed to demonstrate that he was
 
prevented from presenting his evidence, or that any evidence
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
damaging to his case was introduced in the joint trial that would
 
not have been admissible in a trial of Walton only. See Id. at
 
327-28, 801 P.2d at 35. "[S]peculation about what might have
 happened had a motion for severance been granted is irrelevant." 
Id. at 328, 801 P.2d at 36. Here, Walton asks us to speculate
 
that had a severance been granted, Elkshoulder would have refused
 
to testify against him or to provide a foundation for admitting
 
the recorded conversation.
 
Walton's claim that the joint trial violated his
 
confrontational right is also unpersuasive. In Bruton v. U.S.,
 
389 U.S. 818 (1967), the United States Supreme Court held that in
 
a joint trial, the confession of a nontestifying co-defendant
 
that directly incriminates another defendant was not admissible
 
because of confrontation issues. In this case, however,
 
Elkshoulder testified at trial, and Walton had the opportunity to
 
cross-examine Elkshoulder.
 
B. Motion To Suppress Evidence
 
Walton challenges the admissibility of identification
 
evidence from two of Walton's co-workers. At trial, the State
 called two of Walton's co-workers, who stated they had seen
 
"blurry" surveillance photos and video footage on the local news
 
and identified Walton. The police later conducted a photographic
 
line-up, at which time the witnesses identified Walton.
 
We agree with the circuit court's conclusion that the
 
photographic line-up was not impermissibly suggestive. See State
 
v. DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. 127, 131, 681 P.2d 573, 577-78 (1984). 
The two witnesses testified they had already recognized Walton
 
before the police conducted the photographic line-up, the line-up
 
merely confirmed their identification of Walton. The court
 
concluded the witnesses' familiarity with Walton further
 
supported the reliability of their identification testimony, and
 
the record supports its conclusion.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Walton also contends the police conducted an illegal
 
search when it obtained Walton's name and address from a GNC card
 
found in a backpack recovered from the cab. The GNC card did not
 
provide a name, but it had a membership number. A detective from
 
the Honolulu Police Department testified he contacted the GNC
 
franchise and learned that the card's membership number was
 
registered to Walton's name and address. Walton does not
 
challenge the validity of the search and the warrant through
 
3
which the police obtained the GNC card itself;  however, hecontends the detective's additional investigation into the card's 
owner exceeded the warrant's scope and violated his rights under 
the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and 
article 1, section 7 of the Hawai
fi Constitution. 
It is well-established that the Fourth Amendment does
 
not apply to basic information revealed to a third party, "even
 
if the information is revealed on the assumption that it will be
 
used only for a limited purpose and the confidence placed in the
 
third party will not be betrayed." United States v. Miller, 425
 
U.S. 435, 443 (1976) (holding that a bank depositor does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in bank records, including 
financial statements and deposit slips). The Hawai
fi Supreme 
Court adopted Miller's holding in State v. Klattenhoff, 71 Haw. 
3
 The warrant authorized search of the backpack for:
 
Any and all evidence pertaining to a Robbery in the First
Degree case . . . including, but not limited to: 
. . . .
 
3. 	Articles of personal property, tending to
establish the identity of person in control of
said backpack and property, including, but not
limited to: personal identification, bills, bank
account statements, checks, photographs,
receipts, agreements, letters, lists, notes,
personal telephone lists, photographs, books,
and other information and documents tending to
establish the ownership of said backpack, and/or
property[.]
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
598, 606, 801 P.2d 548, 552 (1990), concluding the Hawai fi 
Constitution does not provide a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in bank records. The Miller and Klattenhoff rationale is even 
more compelling in the context of this case, because the disputed 
information the police obtained was merely Walton's name and 
address, which Walton voluntarily disclosed to GNC as part of a 
business transaction. Moreover, the majority rule is that a 
person's name and address, by themselves, do not constitute 
information about which a person can have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy.4 Therefore, we conclude the circuit 
court did not err when it admitted the above evidence. C. Admission Of Recorded Statement Under HRE Rule 
804(b)(3) (1993)
 
Walton challenges the admission of the recorded
 
telephone conversation between Elkshoulder and Walton, during
 
which Walton allegedly made self-incriminating statements. 
Walton claims the recording was not properly authenticated and
 
was improper hearsay. 
Walton provides no argument supporting his claim that
 
the recording was not authenticated, and the record demonstrates
 
the State satisfied HRE Rule 901 (1993). At trial, Elkshoulder
 
identified a State's exhibit as the cassette tape he used to
 
record his telephone conversation. Elkshoulder testified that
 
when he received a call from Walton, he placed his phone on
 
speaker mode and recorded their conversation. He verified his
 
and Walton's voices and stated he listened to the cassette
 
afterward and verified that the recording was a fair and accurate
 
4
 See 1 Wayne R. Lafave, Search and Seizure § 2.7(c) (5th ed. 2012)
 
("[I]f law enforcement agents were allowed to consult business records which
merely reveal a person's name or address or telephone number, this does not
offend any interests protected by the Fourth Amendment."); Commonwealth v.
Duncan, 817 A.2d 455 (Pa. 2003) (police's warrantless telephone call to
appellant's bank, seeking name and address corresponding to an ATM card used
by a suspect, did not violate appellant's privacy right under state
constitution); State v. Chryst, 793 P.2d 538, 541 (Alaska Ct. App. 1990). 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
depiction of the portions he recorded. Elkshoulder also
 
testified that the CD copies the State entered into evidence were
 
fair and accurate copies of the original conversation recorded on
 
the cassette. Therefore, the recording was sufficiently
 
authenticated. 
Walton also contends the circuit court erred in
 
admitting the recording as a statement against interest. HRE
 
Rule 804(b)(3) sets forth an exception to the hearsay rule for a
 
statement against interest: 
(b) Hearsay exceptions. The following are not excluded by
the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable as a
witness:
 
. . . .
 
(3) Statement against interest. A statement which was
at the time of its making so far contrary to the
declarant's pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so
far tended to subject the declarant to civil or
criminal liability, or to render invalid a claim by
the declarant against another, that a reasonable
person in the declarant's position would not have made
the statement unless the declarant believed it to be
 true. A statement tending to expose the declarant to
criminal liability and offered to exculpate the
accused is not admissible unless corroborating
circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of
the statement[.]
 
Walton does not contest that his status as a defendant rendered
 
him unavailable within the meaning of HRE Rule 804 (1993) and
 
that the statements were against his interest. The only argument
 
Walton raises on appeal is that the recording lacked sufficient
 
corroborating circumstances indicating the trustworthiness.
 
The assessment of whether sufficient corroborating 
circumstances exist requires the circuit court to make a judgment 
call through the exercise of its discretion, and its ruling 
should not be reversed unless there has been an abuse of 
discretion. State v. Christian, 88 Hawai fi 407, 418, 967 P.2d 
239, 250 (1998). Courts have looked to both the reliability of the declarant when the statement was made, as well as 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
corroboration of the truth of the declarant's statement. State
 
v. Bates, 70 Haw. 343, 349, 771 P.2d 509, 513 (1989).
 
Walton argues the statements were not corroborated
 
because no eyewitness, including the victim, definitively linked
 
Walton to the stabbing. However, the State produced other,
 
substantial evidence independently corroborating Walton's
 
presence and active participation in the crime. Although
 
Elkshoulder had a strong motive to obtain Walton's admission, he
 
testified under oath and was subject to cross-examination, and
 
the jury could assess his credibility as to the recorded
 
conversation. Moreover, Walton stood to benefit nothing by
 
disclosing his role, and Walton has not pointed to anything
 
indicating he spoke under coercion. Walton's statements were
 
solely self-incriminating with respect to the stabbing and made
 
no attempt to minimize his culpability. Therefore, we cannot
 
conclude the circuit court abused its discretion in ruling that
 
the statement was sufficiently corroborated. 
Walton also contends the circuit court violated his
 
confrontation right when it ruled the attorney-client privilege
 
barred Walton from questioning Elkshoulder and Elkshoulder's
 
attorney regarding their conversations about the recording.
 
However, the circuit court's ruling only barred Walton from
 
cross-examining Elkshoulder as to "specific communications
 
between attorney and client[,]" and the court stated "Elkshoulder
 
is and remains subject to cross-examination concerning his
 
purpose and motive for recording the conversation" and "may also
 
be cross-examined as to the various copies of the conversation." 
Moreover, to the extent that there was a concern whether CD
 
versions of the recording accurately duplicated the original
 
cassette recording, the parties had the original cassette
 
recording to compare against the CD duplicates. Therefore, we
 
agree with the circuit court's conclusion that Walton failed to
 
demonstrate an entitlement to privileged communications between
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Elkshoulder and his attorney. See State v. Peseti, 101 Hawai fi 
172, 182, 65 P.3d 119, 129 (2003). 
Lastly, the circuit court did not err when it allowed 
the jury to review a recording of the conversation during its 
deliberations. The recording was properly admitted into evidence 
as an exhibit. Once properly admitted, the trial court had the 
discretion to permit a jury to take the exhibit into the jury 
room and review it. State v. Robinson, 79 Hawai fi 468, 473, 903 
P.2d 1289, 1294 (1995). D. Admission Of Photographs
 
Walton argues the photographs of the victim's injuries 
and of the cab's interior were cumulative and prejudicial. The admission of photographs is a matter within the trial court's 
discretion and "is eminently suited to the trial court's exercise 
of its discretion because it requires a cost-benefit calculus and 
a delicate balance between probative value and prejudicial 
effect." State v. Edwards, 81 Hawai
fi 293, 297, 916 P.2d 703, 
707 (1996) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
Here, the circuit court admitted four photographs of
 
the victim's injuries, each depicting the location and extent of
 different injuries. The photographs of the cab's interior were
 
each taken from different angles, depicted the location of
 
certain evidence, and corroborated witnesses' testimony about the
 
crime scene. The photographs were not needlessly cumulative or
 
unfairly prejudicial and were properly admitted.
 
E. Jury Instructions
 
We disagree with Walton's claim that the circuit
 
court's jury instructions failed to distinguish between liability
 as a principal and liability as an accomplice. The circuit
 
court's instructions on the material elements of the substantive
 
offenses properly specified the requisite state of mind to
 
establish liability as a principal. The court also gave separate
 
jury instructions on accomplice liability which properly
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identified the requisite state of mind to establish accomplice
 
liability. The circuit court's jury instructions were not
 
erroneous, misleading, or prejudicially insufficient.
 
F. Sufficiency Of Evidence
 
We reject Walton's contention that the evidence was
 
insufficient to support his conviction. Viewed in the light most
 favorable to the State, the record contains "substantial
 
evidence" in the form of Walton's admissions in the recorded
 
conversation, testimony from two witnesses placing Walton at the
 
scene, the victim's testimony, and testimony from the physician
 
who treated the victim's injuries. Walton's challenge to the
 
sufficiency of the evidence used to convict him is without merit.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The August 10, 2011 Judgment entered in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, May 21, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard S. Kawana
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
13
 