NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000287
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
EDDIESON AGPAOA REYES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-2119)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Eddieson Agpaoa Reyes (Reyes)
 
appeals from the March 13, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court),
1
 based on jury findings of guilt in Count 1,
Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) or (b) (Supp. 2013), Count 2,
 Reckless Endangering in the First Degree, in violation of
 HRS § 707-713 (1993), and Count 4, Carrying or Use of a Firearm
 in the Commission of a Separate Felony, in violation of
 HRS § 134-21 (2011).
 
On appeal, Reyes argues that (1) there was insufficient
 
evidence to support Reyes's conviction for Assault in the Second
 Degree; (2) the Circuit Court failed to instruct the jury on the
 lesser-included offense of Assault in the Third Degree; (3) there
 was insufficient evidence to support the jury's verdicts on
 special interrogatories; and (4) the Circuit Court erred in
 failing to provide the jury with a specific eyewitness
 identification instruction.
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 
authority, we resolve Reyes's points on appeal as follows:
 
1. There was substantial evidence supporting Reyes's
 
conviction for Assault in the Second Degree. Reyes argues on
 appeal that the evidence adduced at trial was insufficient
 because the prosecution failed to prove that Darcy Betonio's
 (Betonio) bullet wound constituted a substantial injury because
 it was not a "major penetration" of the skin as required by HRS
 § 707-711(1)(a) or (1)(b).
2
 
Substantial bodily injury is defined, in relevant part, 
as a bodily injury which causes "[a] major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the skin[.]" HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2013). In State v. Tanielu, 82 Hawai
'i 373, 922 P.2d 986 (App. 1996), this 
court held that the word "major" modifies the words "avulsion," "laceration," and "penetration." Id. at 379, 922 P.2d at 992. 
This court defines the word "major" as "'greater as in size, amount, extent, or rank[,]' . . . The Random House College 
Dictionary 807 (rev. ed. 1979)." Id. at 379, 922 P.3d at 992. 
Penetration is defined as "to pass into or through[;] to extend into the interior of[;] . . . to enter or go through by overcoming resistance [;] . . . to pass, extend, pierce, or diffuse into or through something [.]" Id. at 378 n.4, 922 P.2d 
at 991 n.4 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Reyes argues that Betonio's injury did not constitute
 
substantial bodily injury for the purposes of HRS § 707-700
 because Betonio was "able to continue running all the way to his
 friend Dane's house[,]" and that he didn't "realize the nature of
 his injury until he reached there[;]" and that Betonio only
 discovered some blood around a hole in his pants, and that his
 injury neither required surgery nor took longer than a month to
 heal. We disagree.
 
Dr. Sharon Moran (Dr. Moran) testified that when she
 
treated Betonio, it appeared that he had a "single gunshot wound
 
2
 HRS § 707-711(1)(a) and (1)(b), provides that a person commits the
offense of Assault in the Second Degree, if: "(a) The person intentionally or
knowingly causes substantial bodily injury to another; [or] (b) The person
recklessly causes serious or substantial bodily injury to another[.]"
(Formatting altered).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
through the right buttock that then traveled through the internal
 
area of the pelvis and lodged near the left femur." Dr. Moran's
 conclusions were supported by an x-ray and CAT scan, which showed
 fragments of metal similar to those a bullet casing would leave,
 if the bullet split upon entry. Dr. Moran then concluded that
 Betonio's injury constituted a penetrating injury.
 
The "test on appeal in reviewing the legal sufficiency 
of the evidence is whether, when viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, substantial evidence exists to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. 
Agard, 113 Hawai
'i 321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007) (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). The testimony given and the evidence presented to the Circuit Court was sufficient to support the jury's conclusion that Betonio suffered a substantial bodily injury from a bullet entering into and traveling several inches across his body. 
2. Reyes argues that the Circuit Court "erred in
 
failing to instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense of
 Assault in the Third Degree where there was a rational basis for
 the jury to conclude that Ikaika's [Betonio's] injury constituted
 only 'bodily injury' and not 'substantial bodily injury.'"
 
The Supreme Court of Hawai
'i held in State v. Flores, 
131 Hawai 'i 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128 (2013) that "jury 
instructions on lesser-included offenses must be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense." Id. 
Reyes argues that there was evidence that the injury
 
sustained by Betonio was not "substantial bodily injury" as
 defined, in light of the effect the gunshot wound had on Betonio. 
Specifically, he argues that because Betonio was able to run
 immediately after being shot, was not permanently disabled, and
 did not require surgery, that there was a rational basis for the
 jury to find that Betonio's injury did not constitute a major
 penetration, i.e., was not a substantial bodily injury. Reyes
 presents no authority that a penetration of several inches is not
 a "major" penetration, nor that the victim's reaction to the
 injury diminishes the physical characteristics of the injury.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Dr. Moran testified at trial that Betonio had appeared
 
to have suffered "a single gunshot wound through the right
 
buttock that then traveled through the internal area of the
 pelvis and lodged near the left femur." She also testified that,
 subsequent to an x-ray and CAT scan, she located metallic
 fragments lodged in Betonio's left femur, consistent with
 fragments of a bullet casing. A photograph of the entry point of
 the wound was also admitted into evidence. There was no evidence
 contradicting the extent of the wound presented. Therefore,
 there was no rational basis for a trier of fact to find that
 Betonio's injury did not constitute a "major penetration"
 pursuant to HRS § 707-700 and the Circuit Court did not err in
 failing to instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense of
 Assault in the Third Degree.
 
3. Reyes requests that Counts 1 and 2 be vacated
 
because there was insufficient evidence to support the jury's
 
3
responses to the special interrogatories  and requests that thecase be remanded for the State to elect one of the offenses. Given its agreement to dismiss Count 2 in the event that Reyes was found guilty of both Counts 1 and 2, the State asks that this court vacate the May 13, 2013 judgment and remand for a dismissal of Count 2 and a reinstatement of conviction on Count 1 in an amended judgment. Based on the State's concession of error, we agree that the remedy is to enter judgment on one count, in this case Count 1 as the State has elected. See State v. Padilla, 114 
Hawai
'i 507, 517, 164 P.3d 765, 775 (App. 2007). 
3 Count I charged, in relevant part, 
On or about the 16th day of March, 2009, in . . . Honolulu,
. . . EDDIESON AGPAOA REYES did intentionally or knowingly
cause substantial bodily injury to Darcy Betonio, and/or did
recklessly cause substantial bodily injury to Darcy Betonio,
thereby committing the offense of Assault in the Second
Degree, in violation of Section 707-711(1)(a) and/or Section
707-711(1)(b) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
Count II charged in relevant part: 
On or about the 16th day of March, 2009, in . . . Honolulu,
. . . EDDIESON AGPAOA REYES did intentionally fire a
firearm, to wit, an instrument that falls within the scope
of Section 706-660.1 of the Hawai`i [sic] Revised Statutes,
in a manner which recklessly placed other persons in danger
of death or serious bodily injury, thereby committing the
offense of Reckless Endangering in the First Degree, in
violation of Section 707-713 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Relying on State v. Cabagbag, 127 Hawai 'i 302, 277 
P.3d 1027 (2012), Reyes claims that the Circuit Court "abused its 
discretion in failing to, sua sponte, provide the jury with a specific eyewitness identification instruction where identification of the shooter was a central issue in the case." In Cabagbag, the Supreme Court of Hawai
'i held "when eyewitness 
identification is central to the case, circuit courts must give a specific jury instruction upon the request of the defendant to focus the jury's attention on the trustworthiness of the identification." 127 Hawai
'i at 313-14, 277 P.3d at 1038-39 
(emphasis added). Reyes did not request such an instruction here. 
Moreover, eyewitness identification was not a "central"
 
issue in this case. This was a circumstantial evidence case; no
 witness testified that he or she saw a person fire the gun
 causing Betonio's injury. The persons testifying to Reyes's
 behavior before and after the shooting knew who Reyes was and had
 arrived at the scene in the same car. Although Reyes cross-
examined these witnesses regarding the veracity of their
 testimony and prior statements, neither of them was challenged on
 the issue of whether Reyes was the person they were referring to. 
We see no error here.
 
Therefore, the March 13, 2013 Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 is vacated as to Count 2 and affirmed in all other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 26, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Jeffrey A. Hawk,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
5
 