NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP 15-0000400
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
DARREN TODD SCHMIDT, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
COURTNEY MARIE CARROLL, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-M NO. 12-1-0003)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Darren Todd Schmidt (Father)
 
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision
 
and Order filed on April 15, 2015 (Custody Order), in the Family
 
1
Court of the Third Circuit (Family Court).  The Custody Order
 
awarded Respondent-Appellee Courtney Marie Carroll (Mother) sole
 
legal and physical custody of their child (Child) with limited
 visitation to Father. 
On appeal, Father raises three points of error,

 
contending that the Family Court erred when it: (1) disregarded
 
Mother's alleged violation of Hawaii's custodial interference
 statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-726 (2014), and
 
1
 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided, except as otherwise
noted. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thereby rewarded unlawful behavior intended to be prevented by
 
the law, violated due process, and wrongly shifted the burden
 onto Father, who is a fit parent; (2) made "clearly erroneous
 findings of fact in support of its applying an incorrect legal
 standard pursuant to HRS § 571-46 [(Supp. 2015)], in awarding
 sole legal and physical custody to Mother, to the detriment of
 Father's substantive rights and child's best interest;" and (3)
 cited clearly erroneous procedural background to obscure judicial
 delay to the detriment of Father's substantial rights. Father
 asks the court to reverse the Order.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's points of error as follows:
 
(1) 	HRS § 707-726, which is part of Hawai
'i's Penal 
Code, provides in relevant part:

 
§ 707-726 Custodial interference in the first degree. 
(1) A person commits the offense of custodial interference
in the first degree if:
 
. . . . 

(c) 	The person, in the absence of a court order
determining custody or visitation rights,
intentionally or knowingly takes, detains,
conceals, or entices away a minor with the
intent to deprive another person or a public
agency of their right to custody, and removes
the minor from the State.
 
This is not an appeal of a criminal proceeding. In his 
January 24, 2012 Petition for Custody, Father requested that 
Mother be compelled to appear before a Hawai 'i court, Father be 
adjudged to be the legal and natural father of child, legal and physical custody be awarded to Father subject to Mother's rights 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of reasonable visitation, and Mother should be ordered to pay for
 
the support, maintenance and education of the child. A criminal
 prosecution of Mother was not before the Family Court. In
 addition, the record indicates that Father contacted the police
 and the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney, which responded in
 pertinent part: 
After a careful consideration of the facts and the law
 
as it may pertain to this case, and in using my
prosecutorial discretion to charge a crime or not, I have
come to the conclusion that it is not in the best interests
 of your child for the State of Hawaii to interfere with the
pending Family Court proceeding. Indeed, it is common
knowledge that that forum is the most convenient and
appropriate to decide child custody matters, especially
where allegations and counter-allegations against both
parents are being made. That forum was specifically
designed and intended to handle such matters, and has the
resources at hand to more readily decide what the best
interests of your child call for. 
Father fails to provide any Hawai 'i precedent or other 
persuasive authority supporting his contention that the Family 
Court had an obligation to treat Mother's relocation to Indiana as a violation of HRS § 707-726 in these Family Court custody proceedings. 
It is clear from the record that Father raised this
 
allegation in the Family Court proceedings, in his Motion to
 Return Minor Child to Hawaii and for Temporary Legal and Physical
 Custody and Child Support (Motion to Return). Mother responded
 
to this motion, as well as to Father's Petition for Custody. 
After a June 4, 2012 hearing, the Family Court denied, without
 prejudice, Father's Motion to Return, instead ordering that the
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
parties agree on a custody evaluator, who was to visit with Child
 
at each parent's home.2
 
Despite Father's arguments to the contrary, we cannot 
conclude that Findings of Fact (FOFs) 14, 15, 19, 20, 23, 30, and 
33 "provide erroneous support to Mother's custodial interference 
offense." Rather, FOFs 14, 15, 19, 20, 23, 30, and 33 are supported by the record in this case – including the report of the custody evaluator (which was admitted into evidence by stipulation), and the trial testimony of Father, Mother, and maternal grandfather – and thus are not "clearly erroneous." In 
re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001). We decline 
to disturb the Family Court's evaluation of credibility and weighing of the evidence. Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 
97 Hawai
'i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 (2001) (citing State v. 
Jenkins, 93 Hawai 'i 87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000)). 
Accordingly, we conclude that this point of error is without merit. 
(2) In the second point of error, Father principally
 
challenges the Family Court's determination that pursuant to HRS
 § 571-46, it is in the best interest of Child that Mother be
 awarded sole legal and physical custody of the minor child. 
Father argues that the Family Court erred in "making clearly
 
erroneous [FOFs] in support of its applying an incorrect legal
 standard pursuant to HRS § 571-46[.]" Father contends that the
 Family Court made erroneous FOFs, which falsely support Mother's
 
2
 The Honorable Anthony K. Bartholomew presided over the Motion to
Return.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
false allegations that poor conditions existed in Child's Hawai 'i 
home before Mother relocated Child to live in Indiana. Father 
contends that the Family Court did this in order to support its incorrect Conclusions of Law (COLs) B, C, D. Father also argues 
that the Family Court made erroneous FOFs to "obfuscate [his] 
caregiving." In particular, Father challenges FOFs 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 25, and 28-30. 
HRS § 571-46 sets forth the criteria for awarding child
 
custody. HRS § 571-46(a) states in relevant part: 
(a) In actions for divorce, separation, annulment,
separate maintenance, or any other proceeding where there is
at issue a dispute as to the custody of a minor child . . .
the court shall be guided by the following standards,
considerations, and procedures:
 
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or to
both parents according to the best interests of the
child, and the court also may consider frequent,
continuing, and meaningful contact of each parent with
the child unless the court finds that a parent is
unable to act in the best interest of the child;
 
. . . . 
(4) Whenever good cause appears therefor, the court
may require an investigation and report concerning the
care, welfare, and custody of any minor child of the
parties
.
 
HRS § 571-46(b) provides a list of factors for the 
Family Court to examine when determining the best interest of the 
child. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has recognized that the Family 
Court is "granted broad discretion to weigh the various factors involved, with no single factor being given presumptive paramount weight, in determining whether the standard has been met." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 41, 50, 137 P.3d 355, 364 (2006). 
HRS § 571-46(b) states in relevant part: 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best interest
of the child under this section, the court shall consider,
but not be limited to, the following:
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . 
(3) The overall quality of the parent-child
relationship;
 
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting by each
parent prior and subsequent to a marital or other type
of separation;
 
(5) Each parent's cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs,
interests, and schedule; provided that this factor
shall not be considered in any case where the court
has determined that family violence has been committed
by a parent;
 
(6) The physical health needs of the child;
 (7) The emotional needs of the child;
 (8) The safety needs of the child;
 (9) The educational needs of the child;
 . . . .
 (11) Each parent's actions demonstrating that they
allow the child to maintain family connections through
family events and activities; provided that this
factor shall not be considered in any case where the
court has determined that family violence has been
committed by a parent;
 
(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating that they
separate the child's needs from the parent's needs;
 
(13) Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol
abuse by a parent;
 
(14) The mental health of each parent;
 (15) The areas and levels of conflict present within
the family[.]
 
Here, the Family Court concluded that it was in the
 
best interest of the Child to award sole legal and physical
 
custody to Mother, subject to Father's visitation. 
Upon review of the record, it appears that FOFs 8, 10,
 
and 12 are not based on evidence presented at trial.3 Rather,
 
3
 The Family Court's FOFs include:
 
[FOF 8]: Father and Mother met in February of 2007. In
January 2009, Mother became pregnant. [Child] was born on
October 17, 2009, in Hawaii. After [Child] was born, Mother
received approximately $570 a month in food stamps for she
(continued...)
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FOFs 8, 10, and 12 appear to be based on Mother's Memorandum in
 
4
Opposition to Motion to Return Child,  and Mother's Proposed
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. Thus, as they are not
 
supported by substantial evidence, we conclude FOFs 8, 10, and 12
 are clearly erroneous, although it is unclear to what extent the
 facts stated therein are in dispute. In any case, pursuant to
 Rule 61 of the Hawai
'i Family Court Rules, the "court at every 
stage of the proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the
 proceeding that does not affect the substantial rights of the
 parties." Father has not explained how FOFs 8, 10, and 12
 affected his substantial rights. Furthermore, even "[e]rroneous
 findings of fact that are unnecessary to support the decision and
 judgment of the trial court are not grounds for reversal." 
Wright v. Wright , 1 Haw. App. 581, 585, 623 P.2d 97, 100 (1981). 
3(...continued)
and [Child]. Mother began to work part time at a local

farmer's market on weekends in the morning, earning
approximately $70, per week to help make ends meet. While
she was working, Father was able to take care of [Child],
but only up to about 5 hours at a time. 
[FOF 10]: The front cabin on the property is approximately
20 ft. x 20 ft. in dimensions with single wall plywood and a
corrugated aluminum roof. It has one bedroom and one
bathroom. Electricity is off-grid, and limited to two (2)
solar panels and a generator. The back cabin is smaller with
just one room. 
[FOF 12]: On August 27, 2011, Mother and [Child] returned to
South Bend. She was due to return to Hawaii in mid-
September, but the trip was eventually extended until
approximately October 11, 2011. Mother's parents paid her
transportation costs. Mother left on the 11th for Hawaii,
stopping for two days in California to visit Paternal
Grandmother. She returned with [Child] to Hawaii on October
15, 2011[.] 
4
 Mother's Memorandum in Opposition to Motion to Return Child was
supported only by a declaration of counsel, which included statements Mother
reportedly made to her attorney. Counsel represented that he did not have
sufficient time to receive a signed declaration from Mother, but would submit
one thereafter. Upon review of Mother's Answering Brief and the record on
appeal, we are unable to confirm that such declaration was ever filed.
 
7

   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As in Wright, FOFs 8, 10, and 12 are of "marginal relevance only
 
and [are] clearly not necessary to support the family court's
 decision." Id. Accordingly, we decline to reverse the Family
 
Court's Custody Order on the grounds that these FOFs are clearly
 erroneous. 
However, FOFs 13, 15, 25, and 28-30 are supported by 
substantial evidence in the record, and are not clearly erroneous. FOFs 13, 15, and 30 are based on Mother's testimony. With regard to FOF 13, Mother testified that she discussed leaving Hawai
'i with Father. Mother stated "[w]e were having 
problems in the home, we were arguing a lot. So got a ticket and [Child] and I left." With regard to FOF 15, Mother testified that she relocated to Indiana because she "thought there would be more opportunities for [Child] and I there. Things weren't going very well with [Father] in Hawaii, we were living in poverty. He was pretty controlling as well." Mother related that she felt psychologically abused by Father. With regard to FOF 30, Mother related that she has "always been [Child's] primary caretaker." 
FOF 25 is the Family Court's assessment of Dr. Carol
 
Luzzi's (Dr. Luzzi) testimony. Dr. Luzzi testified that Mother
 
provided superior care in treating Child's medical condition. 
Dr. Luzzi stated that if Child's stable environment is disrupted,
 it could cause "serious backsliding." Dr. Luzzi opined that
 Child should not have "long term visitation away from her current
 living situation over the next calendar year[.]" In FOF 27, the
 "court [found] Dr. Luzzi to be a credible witness." We decline
 to disturb the Family Court's evaluation of credibility and
 
8
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
weighing of this evidence. Tamashiro, 97 Hawai 'i at 92, 34 P.3d 
at 22 (citation omitted). 
FOF 28 is the Family Court's assessment of the custody
 
evaluator's report. In her report, the custody evaluator noted
 
that Father "believes that [Child's] emotional injury is not due
 to ADHD but caused by being separated from him." The custody
 evaluator believed that Father would not accept Child's
 diagnosis, follow the recommendations of Drs. Andrea Karweck (Dr.
 
Karweck) and Luzzi, or administer Stratera or other ADHD
 medication. 
FOF 29 is based on Father's testimony. Father
 
testified that he does not "discount potential ADHD things and
 
the need to bring in medication if necessary." However, Father
 
believes that "recognizing the developmental implications of not
 
having attachment -- healthy secure attachment to both parents,
 that's primary to a child's best interest[.]" FOF 30 accurately
 depicts Mother's relationship with Child, based on the evidence
 presented.
 
Thus, the Family Court did not clearly err in
 
considering FOFs 13, 15, 25, and 28-30, as part of the
 substantial evidence in the record to support the Family Court's
 conclusion that "it is in the best interest of the minor child
 that [Mother] be awarded sole legal and physical custody of the
 minor child[.]" The Family Court's FOFs and COLs reflect its
 consideration of the factors outlined in HRS § 571-46(b),
 including the "overall quality of the parent-child relationship,"
 the "history of caregiving or parenting by each parent prior and
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subsequent to a marital or other type of separation," "[e]ach
 
parent's cooperation in developing and implementing a plan to
 meet the child's ongoing needs, interests, and schedule," the
 "physical health needs of the child," the "emotional needs of the
 child," the "educational needs of the child," "[e]ach parent's
 actions demonstrating that they allow the child to maintain
 family connections through family events and activities," "[e]ach
 parent's actions demonstrating that they separate the child's
 needs from the parent's needs," and the "areas and levels of
 conflict present within the family." See HRS § 571-46(b). We
 
conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion when
 it determined that Mother should be awarded sole legal and
 physical custody of the minor child, with limited visitation
 available to Father.
 
(3) Father contends that the Family Court erroneously
 
concluded: "The Custody Evaluator filed a Motion for
 Instructions on December 31, 2012, which was heard on January 11,
 2013. At the hearing the Custody Evaluator advised the Court that
 [Father] failed to provide the necessary deposit to begin the
 evaluation." Father avers that there was no January 11, 2013
 hearing, and that the custody evaluator received full payment. 
We are unable to find any record of such a hearing, but the
 custody evaluator's December 31, 2012 Motion and Declaration do
 report and request action from the court due to Father's delays
 in payment, which the custody evaluator reported was delaying the
 completion of her evaluations. Although Father provides no
 particular record citation to aid us, from our review of the
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
record as a whole, it does appear that Father made the payment(s)
 
at some point, perhaps even shortly after the custody evaluator's
 motion, as Father suggests. 
The substance of Father's complaint, however, is that
 
the evaluation process took too long and that the delays worked
 in Mother's favor, as the longer Child lived more-or-less
 exclusively with Mother, the more it worked to Father's
 detriment. Father's complaint is not completely without merit
 and the lengthy period of time that it took to complete the
 evaluation process in this case is of concern to this court. In
 addition, there is no evidence that Father is an unfit parent
 and, absent a decision to relocate to Indiana, it appears that
 Father will have a limited role in Child's life. However, there
 were many factors, based on substantial evidence in the record,
 supporting the Family Court's decision, and there is no evidence
 that a speedier process would have led to a different result. 
Therefore, we cannot conclude that the Family Court abused its
 discretion in awarding custody of Child to Mother.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's April 15, 2015
 
Custody Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 29, 2016. 
On the briefs: Harry Eliason,
for Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brian J. De Lima,Francis R. Alcain,Justin P. Haspe,(Crudele & De Lima)for Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
12
 