NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000042
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANDREW K. KAOIHANA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1331)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Andrew Keone Kaoihana (Kaoihana)
 
appeals from the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
 
on October 14, 2010.1 On April 20, 2010, Kaoihana was convicted
 
by jury verdict to one count of Burglary in the Second Degree in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-811 (1993)
 
2
(Burglary).  After the September 3, 2010 entry of a Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence, the Circuit Court filed an Amended
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence on October 14, 2010,
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 708-811 (1993), Burglary in the second degree, provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the second
degree if the person intentionally enters or remains
unlawfully in a building with intent to commit therein a
crime against a person or against property rights.
(2) Burglary in the second degree is a class C felony.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentencing Kaoihana to five years imprisonment on the Burglary
 
count, with a mandatory minimum sentence of one year and eight
 
months stemming from Kaoihana's repeat offender status. 
Kaiohana raises two related points of error, contending
 
that the Circuit Court erred by: (1) denying the motion to
 
suppress/exclude all video surveillance images; and (2) allowing
 
surveillance video footage and still photographs into evidence. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Kaoihana's points of error as follows:
 
Kaoihana argues that his motion to suppress all video
 
surveillance images was improperly denied because the State had
 
failed to properly maintain and preserve the evidence of the
 
video recording and because he was deprived of his due process
 
right to have the evidence produced.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
[W]here [an] exhibit was an object which was positively
identified and where its unchanged condition was establishedby direct testimony or was not significant, the requirementof proof of a chain of custody has not been applied. 
State v. Olivera, 57 Haw. 339, 344, 555 P.2d 1199, 1202 (1976). 
The court explained:
 
It is not necessary to negate all possibilities of tampering
with an exhibit, it being sufficient to establish only that
it is reasonably certain that no tampering took place, with
any doubt going to the weight of the evidence.
 
Id. at 344-45, 555 P.2d at 1203; see also, e.g., State v. Wilson,
 
No. 28478 at p. 23 (Haw. Apr. 14, 2009) (mem. op.)
 
Here, the Circuit Court held a hearing to determine the
 
admissibility of the surveillance footage and still photographs.
 
At that hearing, Toys N' Joys store manager Art Molina (Molina)
 
gave testimony about the store's surveillance system and
 
positively identified the copy of the surveillance footage as a
 
true and accurate depiction of what was originally observed on
 
the surveillance system on the date of the burglary. The
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence adduced included, inter alia, that Molina and his
 
brother Ricardo had set up the system and loaded the related
 
software onto the store's computer. The system had multiple
 
cameras connected to the computer, which was located in an area
 
of the store where only authorized personnel were allowed. 
Molina was responsible for maintaining the system and checked it
 
every other day, including checks to confirm the parts of the
 
store recorded and the accuracy of the date and time stamps. 
Only Molina, Ricardo, and the store owner had access to the
 
computer; they also were the only ones who had the computer's
 
password. 
Molina further testified concerning his review of the
 
videos taken during the time of the burglary, the steps taken to
 
ensure that the images would not be deleted or recorded over, and
 
how he copied the material onto a CD, which was provided to the
 
police, along with still shots copied and pasted by selecting
 
particular times from the video. Kaoihana failed to show in
 
cross-examination or by any other evidence that the videos on the
 
CD were not true and accurate depictions of images from the date
 
and time of the break-in or that the images had in any way been
 
tampered with. The Circuit Court concluded that the State had
 
laid a proper foundation for the video surveillance footage and
 
therefore it would be admitted into evidence and any remaining
 
issue regarding the surveillance "goes to weight." We reject
 
Kaoihana's argument that the Circuit Court erred when it denied
 
his motion to suppress due to possible tampering.
 
We also reject Kaoihana's argument that he was deprived
 
of his due process right to have evidence produced. It appears
 
that the police, and the defense, were initially unable to get a
 
full viewable copy of the video surveillance footage, and instead
 
received still pictures from the video, because a proprietary
 
security software was used to make the record. The State made
 
efforts to obtain a viewable copy of the video surveillance
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
footage for the defense, but because a proprietary security
 
software was used to record the footage, there was difficulty in
 
securing a copy that would be viewable on systems that lacked the
 
specific software.  In the first instance, the State received a
 
data file containing the video and made a copy of it available to
 
the defense. However, neither the State nor the defense was able
 
to view the material without the proper software. Both the
 
prosecutor and defense counsel were able to go to Toys N' Joys
 
store on November 13, 2009 to view the footage on the Toys N'
 
Joys computer system. A viewable copy of the video surveillance
 
footage was eventually provided to the defense in January of
 
2010. Because the defense knew of the existence of the
 
surveillance footage and was able to view the surveillance
 
footage in November of 2009 at the Toys N' Joys store, nearly
 
five months before trial, the defense did not suffer any
 
prejudice resulting from the later production of a viewable copy
 
of the footage. There is no indication or argument that the
 
State intentionally withheld the footage. The State did not
 
accrue any benefit from the delay and Kaoihana has not argued or
 
demonstrated any prejudice resulting from the delay. Kaoihana's
 
due process rights were not violated by the delay in the
 
production of the viewable video. 
Kaiohana also cites Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rules 901, 1002, 1003, and 1004, apparently contending that a duplicate of the original video on the Toys N' Joys store 
computer should not have been admitted. However, we conclude 
that the Circuit Court did not err in accepting Molina's 
authenticating and identifying testimony. Sufficient foundation 
was established for the surveillance video images at the HRE 104 
hearing, and no genuine question was raised as to the 
authenticity of the original images. See HRE 1003 (allowing 
duplicates to be admissible "to the same extent as an original unless (1) a genuine question is raised as to the authenticity of 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the original, or (2) in the circumstances it would be unfair to
 
admit the duplicate in lieu of the original").
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 14, 2010
 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 20, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Richard D. Gronna 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyAttorney for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 