FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
DANIEL M. SANDOMIRE; KATY YEN-JU CHEN; TRUDI MELOHN,
i
ndividually and as Co-Trustee under the William Charles
Melohn III Revocable Trust dated June 4, 2010 and
Co-Trustee under the Trudi Melohn Revocable Trust dated 
June 4, 2010; and WILLIAM CHARLES MELOHN III,
individually and as Co-Trustee under the William Charles
Melohn III Revocable Trust dated June 4, 2010 and
Co-Trustee under the Trudi Melohn Revocable Trust dated 
June 4, 2010, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
DAVID EDWARD BROWN and LANHUA KAO BROWN,
Defendants-Appellants 
NO. CAAP-17-0000199 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-2267) 
MARCH 29, 2019 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This case arises out of a dispute between neighbors 
over whether a proposed home addition would violate certain 
restrictive covenants that are applicable to their neighborhood. As discussed herein, we hold that the trial court erred in failing to first make a legal determination whether the express language of the height restriction is ambiguous. If, as a matter of law, the express language of the restrictive covenant is unambiguous, then there is no basis for a factual inquiry into the "reasonableness" of the restriction, as the trial court did in this case. In addition, we hold that the trial court erred in adopting an interpretation of the height restriction that would effectively add a requirement not expressly stated in the restrictive covenants. However, we conclude that the trial court did not err in applying the lot coverage area restriction. Finally, we conclude that the trial court's permanent injunctions are flawed and the attorneys' fees awards must be vacated. The case is remanded. 
Defendants-Appellants David Edward Brown and Lanhua Kao 
Brown (Browns or Defendants) appeal from the February 21, 2017 
Final Judgment  in Favor of Plaintiffs (Judgment), which was 
entered in favor of Plaintiffs-Appellees Daniel M. Sandomire, 
Katy Yen-Ju Chen, Trudi Melohn, and William Charles Melohn III (collectively, Plaintiffs), by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (Circuit Court).  The Browns also challenge the Circuit 
Court's: (1) December 20, 2016 Order Granting Plaintiffs' 1
1 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
2 I. BACKGROUND 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs Based on the Declaration of Michael W. 
Gibson Regarding Attorneys' Fees and Costs Incurred by Plaintiffs (Attorneys' Fees Order); (2) May 25, 2016 Order Granting 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Preliminary Injunction (Order Granting Preliminary Injunction); (3) August 12, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Relief on Counts II and 
III (Order on Counts II and III); and (4) March 21, 2017 Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiffs' Motion for 
Supplemental Attorneys' Fees and Costs (Supplemental Fees Order). 
On November 23, 2015, Plaintiffs, neighboring 
homeowners to the Browns, filed the Complaint in this action, alleging, inter alia, that the Browns own real property, specifically, Lot 71 (the Subject Lot) on Alaweo Street, which is 
in the Waialae-Iki View Lots, Unit IV subdivision (Waialae-Iki View Lots), in Honolulu. The Complaint further alleged that the Browns intended to construct an addition to their home, which 
included, inter alia, adding a second floor onto their existing structure that, if constructed, would violate the restrictive covenants running with the Browns' land.
2 Plaintiffs alleged 
that the proposed addition would exceed the lot coverage maximum 
2 The parties agree that the following documents comprise the
restrictive covenants that run with the land situated in the Waialae-Iki View 
Lots and are therefore binding on the Subject Lot: (1) Building Requirementsfor Waialae-Iki View Lots, Unit IV; (2) First Amendment of BuildingRequirements for Waialae-Iki View Lots, Unit IV; (3) Supplemental BuildingRequirements; and (4) Declaration of Protective Provisions. They are referredto collectively herein as the Subdivision Documents . 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and violate the height restriction, which are set forth as
follows in the Subdivision Documents:  
1. View Channels, Setback Lines, Building Area and Lot
Coverage Area. 
. . . . (d) The Lot Coverage Area, being the maximum total area
under roof and trellis work within the wall lines and/or the outer vertical support members (includingbalcony railings) of all buildings on the lot, shallamount to not more than one-third (1/3) of the area ofthe lot. 
. . . . 
12. Height of Buildings, Antennas or Chimneys. 
(a) No portion of any building or other structure, exceptantennas and chimneys, shall be more than 18 feetabove the highest existing ground elevation at thebuilding or structure. For houses with setbacks greater than that required, the height shall notproject above an imaginary plane constructed over thebuilding area as follows: 
(1) Commencing at a corner of the building area with
the highest ground elevation, measure verticallyto a point 18 feet above the corner. This pointshall be a corner of the "height plane". 
(2) Slope this plane downward at a ratio of 1vertical to 10 horizontal towards the corner of the building area with the lowest groundelevation. 
Plaintiffs sought declaratory and injunctive relief to 
enjoin the Browns from proceeding with their proposed 
construction.  Plaintiffs also requested attorneys' fees and 
costs. 
On March 31, 2016, Plaintiffs filed a Motion for 
Preliminary Injunction, based on the allegations in the Complaint, but further arguing that the Browns' proposed construction would violate additional restrictive covenants.  At 
3
3 Specifically, Plaintiffs argued that: (1) the proposed
construction would violate a purported prohibition against flat roofs within
(continued...) 
4  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the hearing on the motion, the Circuit Court stated that "with 
regard to the height restriction only, the Court's ruling is that the likelihood of success factor has been met" and granted Plaintiffs' motion. 
At an evidentiary hearing on the merits of Counts II 
(Permanent Injunction) and III (Declaratory Relief), which was held on July 5, 7, 8, and 12, 2016, Plaintiffs presented testimony from Plaintiff Daniel Sandomire (Sandomire), as well as 
architects James Reinhardt (Reinhardt) and Fritz Johnson (Johnson). 
Sandomire testified that he purchased his home in the 
Waialae-Iki View Lots and has lived there with his family since 
2013. He and his family decided to move there because of the "beautiful neighborhood" that is close to his children's schools and has a "very attractive . . . varying architecture and landscape design." 
Sandomire testified that in the summer of 2014, he 
learned that the Browns were exploring the possibility of constructing an addition on their home. Out of concern about the 
3(...continued)
Waialae-Iki View Lots; (2) the flat roof would serve as a platform for
photovoltaic solar panels, "further exacerbating the height restrictionviolation"; (3) the second story might be used as a second dwelling unit inviolation of both the restrictive covenants and the Land Use Ordinance of the City and County of Honolulu ( LUO); and (4) the Browns violated a purported
requirement in the Subdivision Documents to have a licensed architect preparethe drawings for the proposed construction. 
The Circuit Court ruled in favor 
of the Browns on the first three of these issues in response to the Browns'motion for judgment as a matter of law during the evidentiary hearing, whichis not at issue in this appeal. The Circuit Court also ruled againstPlaintiffs on the assertion that the Browns were required to have involved alicensed architect in their construction plans in its Order on Counts II andIII following the evidentiary hearing. Neither side has raised these issues on appeal. 
5  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possible construction, Sandomire and the other surrounding 
neighbors drafted a letter to the Browns, introducing themselves, reminding the Browns of the applicable height restriction within the Subdivision Documents, and requesting to view the preliminary drawings of any proposed construction. Through an exchange of 
emails, Sandomire learned that the Browns intended to build the 
addition to their home, but that the Browns were interpreting the applicable height restriction to allow a much higher structure than Sandomire believed was permitted. 
Sandomire testified that he was very concerned that the 
proposed construction would negatively impact himself and his immediate neighbors as well as the community, which was designed to allow for ocean and Diamond Head views, because the Browns' proposed plans would "destroy the views of the adjacent houses to him." Sandomire was also concerned that a violation of the Subdivision Documents would leave only the LUO to govern the Waialae-Iki View Lots, which would "impact[] the character of the neighborhood tremendously." 
The Circuit Court allowed Sandomire to give expert 
testimony in the area of architecture and for the interpretation of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs). First, 
Sandomire cited the lot coverage provision under the Subdivision 
Documents and opined that the Browns' proposed construction exceeds the maximum, because the proposed construction would cover thirty-nine percent of the lot. Sandomire testified that even if the Browns did not build a deck that was included in 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their original plans it would still exceed the maximum because 
the Browns' current home is already in excess of the thirty-three percent lot coverage allowance. During cross-examination, Sandomire acknowledged that his calculation incorrectly included a side lanai that is not included in the construction plans, but asserted that there is a portion of additional coverage that will still need to be included in the calculation. He also testified he was aware that some of the trellis work would be removed by the construction, but he did not have a calculation for how that would impact the lot coverage. 
As to the height limitation, Sandomire testified that 
he interprets the applicable language in the Subdivision Documents to provide "two methods to determine the height" and that "it's optional which one you would use." 
Sandomire opined 
that under "Method 1 . . . we go from a point 18 feet above the building and follow the grade," creating a limitation that "would descend according to the slope of the lot." Under "Method 2," for "houses with setbacks greater than required," the point would begin "18 feet above the highest building area at the property line, . . . draw descending at an even grade towards the lowest point . . . [by] one unit vertical over ten units." According to Sandomire, the Browns' proposed construction violated either method.
   During cross-examination, Sandomire acknowledged that 4
4 Sandomire briefly addressed the assertion by Defendants' expert
(Tusher ) that Sandomire's own house violated the sloping plane interpretation
of "Method 1," by stating that Tusher used the incorrect survey and starting
grade elevation. He also responded to Tusher's assertion that numerous
(continued...) 
7  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Subdivision Documents do not guarantee an "unobstructed view 
from [his] property" and that there is "no view channel easement on his lot" or the Brown lot. However, during redirect, Sandomire explained that the "fact that there's not one there doesn't mean that you don't have any restrictions of building. You're still restricted to build only 18 feet."
5 
Reinhardt testified for Plaintiffs as an expert in the 
area of architecture and the interpretation of CC&Rs. Reinhardt testified that he is generally familiar with the Subdivision Documents of Waialae-Iki View Lots, and that he had reviewed the Browns' proposed addition, which, in his opinion, fails to comply with the Subdivision Documents by exceeding the one-third lot coverage maximum and by exceeding the height limits. 
As for lot coverage, Reinhardt testified that when the 
Brown residence was originally constructed, the Tax Department documents indicated that the square footage equated to the allowable thirty-three and a third percent. Subsequently, 
however, two trellises were built that were not shown on the 
original permits, which added approximately 200 square feet, thus 
4(...continued)
Building Department drawings support Tusher's interpretation of the height
limit, submitting that those drawings are excerpts of building permitdrawings, which do not establish compliance with the CC&Rs. 
5 During cross-examination, the Browns' counsel primarily questioned
Sandomire on the feasibility of applying a sloping height restriction to"every bump and curve of the lot" and how to use the mass grading plans toestablish the eighteen-foot height limitation. Counsel also questionedSandomire about the differences in elevation points between the mass gradingplans and other surveys of the Brown lot. There was also a brief inquiryregarding the setback lines, but this appeared to be directed mostly atreaching a common definition of "setback." 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
putting the lot coverage "over the allowable maximum . . . before 
[the] Brown[s] had got involved." Finally, the proposed addition covers three areas of the lots that were not previously covered, which takes them "well over" the one-third lot coverage maximum. 
During cross-examination, Reinhardt explained that even if the 
first-floor deck proposed in the drawings was not under roof, it would still count as lot coverage per the allowance in the Subdivision Documents. 
Reinhardt also testified that he interpreted the height 
restriction as Sandomire had, as providing for two "methods" and that the proposed construction would exceed either height restriction method.
6 Reinhardt recognized that the height 
restriction provision does not include "either/or" language but that he believes it is clear from "how it is then described that you have to use one or the other." Reinhardt acknowledged during cross-examination that the "highest existing ground elevation" referred to a "single point" and that "you cannot exceed 18 feet above [the] point" but reiterated that his interpretation of that language is that it is "a sloping plane parallel to the grade." Reinhardt also testified that the Browns' house has setbacks greater than required on all sides and that "Method 2 must have been used when this house was originally built," but reiterated that, because the methods are options, "Method 1, the parallel-
6 Reinhardt also indicated certain errors and inconsistencies 
between the Browns' proposed drawings and the various surveys conducted on the
Brown lot. During cross-examination, there was extensive questioning aboutthe purported inconsistencies in certain elevation drawings on which Reinhardtrelied. 
9  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to-the-grade, works better in this lot, so that's what they 
used." 
Johnson also testified as an expert in the area of 
architecture and with respect to interpreting CC&Rs, but only to 
offer his opinion regarding the height restriction as applied to 
the Browns' proposed construction. Johnson testified that he had made a site inspection in Waialae-Iki View Lots in November 2015, during which he met with the Sandomires, viewed the drawings for the Sandomire home, a mass grading plan, permit drawings for the Browns' house, the existing house, and the topographic survey for the house. Johnson viewed the Browns' property from both the 
Sandomire and Melohn residences and from the street side. 
Johnson also reviewed the Subdivision Documents and the Browns' proposed construction drawings. Additionally, Johnson testified that he had previously designed three homes in the Waialae-Iki View Lots and thus was familiar with the height restrictions. Johnson initially testified that he had designed three homes, but on cross-examination admitted that he had designed a fourth but said he could not remember the address and "didn't want to estimate or guess." During cross-examination, counsel for the Browns asked whether Johnson's drawings for those other homes would indicate, as is the standard practice, the "call-outs" for the Waialae-Iki View Lots CC&R height restrictions. Johnson acknowledged that it would be standard practice but declined to verify that the drawings he was shown during his testimony showed "the 18-foot horizontal call-out." 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Johnson testified that he was "familiar with Method 1 
and Method 2" of the height restriction and that he did not 
believe that the Browns' proposed construction complied with either. Regarding the other houses he designed in Waialae-Iki View Lots, Johnson testified that he used Method 2 for all of the homes because "when [he] went through the design review process, Method 1 did not apply as a horizontal plane. It followed the grade of the land." He also explained the review process he went through with the design review committee when it was in existence. 
During cross-examination, Johnson admitted that the 
height restriction provision does not include the language "following the existing grade" or language that Method 2 is "intended to be a bonus." He acknowledged the section in his report in which he described "different ways height restrictions can be set forth in [covenants]" and that "18 feet high at the highest buildable point and follow the grade over the entire lot" is different than "18 feet above the highest existing ground elevation at the building or structure." Finally, he acknowledged that he still had unanswered questions regarding when a house has setbacks greater than required in order to "qualify" for Method 2. 
Following Johnson's testimony, Plaintiffs rested their 
case and the Browns moved for a judgment as a matter of law on all issues. The Circuit Court granted the motion in part as described in note 3, supra. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant David Brown (Brown) testified first for the 
defense and then called architects Terry Tusher (Tusher) and 
Kenneth Butterbaugh (Butterbaugh). 
Brown testified that he, along with his wife, are the 
owners of the Subject Lot, which is their intended retirement 
home. Brown testified that he and his wife do not plan to construct everything that is shown in the proposed construction drawings, as they do not intend to build a deck. However, Brown testified during cross-examination that they had not obtained nor attempted to obtain a construction modification permit. During re-direct, Brown testified that they did not request a construction modification permit because the modifications were minimal and he was told that the Building Department would not object to such a relatively minor modification. 
Tusher testified next for the Browns. Over Plaintiffs' 
objection, the Circuit Court permitted Tusher's testimony as an expert witness in the field of architecture and to interpret CC&Rs. Tusher initially testified that his interpretation of the height restriction is "that it was and is a horizontal line that is established by the highest buildable point of the corner of the property." Tusher later clarified, during cross-examination that this was a misstatement, because his opinion was that, for Method 1, the starting point is at the corner of the building with the highest existing ground elevation, which is not necessarily the highest buildable point on the lot. For "houses with setbacks greater than required," Tusher agreed that the 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
height was restricted to an imaginary plane sloping at one foot 
vertical to ten horizontal, commencing at the corner of the building area with the highest ground elevation measured vertically to a point 18 feet above the corner. Tusher further agreed that there were two methods described in the Subdivision Documents and that they "defin[e] the height envelope that could be built." According to Tusher, the proposed construction for the Brown property "meets the height envelope" for the first method and that the second method "should not be imposed on the Brown lot." 
Tusher testified that he reviewed a number of drawings 
from Waialae-Iki View Lots that were submitted to the Building Department and that had received approvals by the Waialae-Iki View Lots design review committee. He initially did not review all of the available blueprints, but the ones he did review confirmed his interpretation of the height restriction as a horizontal plane either because "of a dimension that was tied to the corner of the building" or because "it was actually physically noted on the drawings." He did not find any notation indicating that the restriction followed the grade of the topography. Tusher subsequently conducted a modeling analysis of all available building permits that were issued for properties in Waialae-Iki View Lots, including one of the homes designed by Johnson, and found that of the drawings that referenced the Waialae-Iki View Lots height restriction, there were no properties that stayed within eighteen feet of the grade. During 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cross-examination, Tusher acknowledged that there were some 
drawings that did not include a "call-out" to the horizontal Waialae-Iki View Lots standards. Tusher also admitted that he did not have information for almost half of the homes in Waialae-Iki View Lots and that his report includes a mistake as to one of the diagrams, which he discovered after receiving drawings from Plaintiffs' counsel, apparently after the report was written. 
Tusher also testified that he had performed an analysis 
of the lot coverage for the proposed renovation of the Brown property. Upon reviewing the renovation drawings prepared for the Browns, Tusher opined that "there is a net reduction in the amount of lot coverage with this renovation." Tusher did not perform his own calculation of the Brown's current lot coverage, because it "wasn't important to us . . . in an existing condition" and the records for the original permit for the Brown residence do not exist. During cross-examination, Tusher agreed that the proposed addition would add lot coverage that was not covered today, but explained that the Browns' proposal included decreased lot coverage in other areas. 
Although Butterbaugh was a licensed architect, he was 
presented as a fact witness, rather than as an expert witness. Butterbaugh testified that he was contacted by a draftsman for the Browns to answer certain questions about their proposed construction project, but that he was never formally retained to work on the project. He was also contacted by Sandomire, and 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
while they exchanged emails about the height restriction, in 
which Butterbaugh noted that Sandomire "had made a compelling case for his opinion," Butterbaugh "never came to a conclusion either way" as to whether the proposed construction complied with the Subdivision Documents. Butterbaugh's testimony was apparently offered to counter an assertion by the Plaintiffs that Butterbaugh had opined that he agreed with Johnson's opinion that the Browns' plans were not in compliance with the Subdivision Documents. 
The Circuit Court entered the Order on Counts II and 
III on August 12, 2016. In granting the relief to Plaintiffs, the Circuit Court included, inter alia, the following findings of fact (FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs): 
16. The Subdivision Documents expressly state the
intent underlying the covenants and restrictions[:] . . . . 
"to develop and maintain the general attractiveness of
the subdivision, as seen from all public areas, toprovide each lessee as much undisturbed view andunobstructed breeze as practicable, to promoteesthetic standards for buildings and theirrelationship to each other, to public spaces and tothe site[.]" 
. . . . 
36. All experts agreed that [the height restriction]
provision describes two methods for determining the heightlimit of a house in the Waialae-Iki View Lots. . . . All experts agreed on the interpretation of Method 2, butPlaintiffs' and Defendants' experts differed on theinterpretation of Method 1. 
37. All experts agreed that Method 2 applies "[f]or
houses with setbacks greater than that required." In other words, Method Two applies to a house built narrower thanrequired by the Subdivision Documents and the applicableordinances, and is not as wide as it could be. All expertsagreed that Method 2 describes a sloping plane that runs ata slope of 1 foot to 10 feet. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
38. [Defendants] interpreted Method 1 as describing a
horizontal plane that begins at 18 feet above the highest
existing ground elevation at the building and extendshorizontally. 
39. Plaintiffs and their experts interpreted Method 1
as a sloping plane that runs parallel to the ground at aheight of 18 feet at each existing ground elevation point atthe building. 
40. The court agrees with Plaintiffs' experts that
[Defendants'] interpretation of Method 1 is unreasonable,contrary to the Subdivision Documents' expressed intent, andwould render Method 2 meaningless. 
41. Under Tusher's interpretation, Method 1 would
always allow for a wider and taller house in comparison toMethod 2. Under Tusher's Method 1, a house built to be aswide as it could be (i.e., using the minimum setbacks) wouldalso be able to build up to 18 feet extending out in ahorizontal plane from the highest point. On the other hand,a house built to be narrower than required (i.e., usinggreater tan minimum setbacks) would only be able to buildalong the 1:10 sloping plane, under Method 2. This is not a reasonable interpretation of the Height Restriction. 
42. Plaintiffs' experts testified that Method 2 exists
to grant a "height bonus" to narrower houses with setbacksgreater than that required. Under Plaintiffs' interpretation, depending on the slope of the lot, Method2's 1:10 sloping plane may allow for a taller home thanMethod 1's sloping plane. Thus, a homeowner may chooseMethod 2 and build a house narrower than required, inexchange for the "height bonus" or additional height allowedunder Method 2's sloping plane. This is a reasonable interpretation of the Height Restriction that preserves andeffectuates both Method 1 and Method 2. 
43. Defendants' interpretation vitiates Method 2.
Under Tusher's interpretation, Method 1's 18' horizontalplane extending out and minimum setbacks would always allowfor a taller and wider home than Method 2's sloping planeand greater-than-minimum setbacks. A homeowner would have no reason to choose Method 2. 
44. Defendants' interpretation relies solely on the
first sentence of the height restriction provision, whilefailing to relate to or give meaning to the remainingsentences of the height restriction. 
45. The Court disagrees with Defendants' argument
that Plaintiffs' interpretation of Method 1 renders the word"highest" superfluous. The word "highest" signifies the"highest existing ground elevation of the building," fromwhere the 18 feet height can be measured from; Method 1 setsthe maximum height to 18 feet above this "highest" point. 
46. The Court adopts Plaintiffs' interpretation of
Method 1. Plaintiffs' interpretation gives meaningfuleffect to the entire language of the height restriction;reasonably relates the two methods to one another; isconsistent with the sloping terrain of the Waialae-Iki View 
16  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lots; and complies with the Subdivision Documents' expressed
intent "to develop and maintain the general attractivenessof the subdivision, as seen from all public areas, toprovide each lessee as much undisturbed view andunobstructed breeze as practicable, to promote estheticstandards for the buildings and their relationship to eachother, to public spaces and to the site," and of"protecting, preserving and maintaining the value,desirability and attractiveness of the Residential Area[.] 
. . . . 
48. Defendants' proposed construction does not comply
with either Method 1 or Method 2, as construed and applied
7herein.  Therefore, the court finds that Defendants'
proposed construction violates the Height Restriction underthe Subdivision Documents. 
. . . . 
64. Based on the [FOFs] above, the Court concludes
that the Subdivision Documents' provisions regarding the
Height Restriction are not ambiguous. While a facial ambiguity exists when reading Method 1 in isolation, theambiguity is resolved when both Method 1 and Method 2 areread together as a whole. 
65. To the extent any ambiguity exists with regards
to the Height Restriction, the Court concludes thatPlaintiffs' interpretation is consistent with theSubdivision Documents' expressed intention, and gives "areasonable, lawful, and effective meaning to all the terms,"while Defendants' interpretation renders significantprovisions of the Subdivision Documents unreasonable or ofno effect. 
Regarding the lot coverage restriction, the Circuit 
Court found: 
50. Defendants' plans, for which the Building
Permit was issued, show that the lot coverage ofDefendants' proposed construction is 39%. The proposed construction exceeds the allowed lotcoverage. 
51. Therefore, the Court finds that Defendants'
proposed construction violates the lot coveragerestriction under the Subdivision Documents. 
(Emphasis added; footnote omitted). 
7 Although the Circuit Court found that the Browns' proposed
construction would violate Method 2, it did not make a specific finding thatthe Brown property qualifies as a house with "setbacks greater than thatrequired." 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 29, 2016, the Circuit Court entered the 
Summary Judgment Order, which concluded that the Browns' Motion 
for Partial Summary Judgment, which was filed on June 7, 2016, was moot in light of the court's rulings on the Browns' motion for judgment as a matter of law during the trial on the merits. 
Regarding Plaintiffs' request for attorneys' fees, the 
Circuit Court determined that the Subdivision Documents "provide for the payment of attorneys' fees and costs to a party who successfully brings an enforcement action under the Subdivision Documents." The Circuit Court concluded that because it had "found Defendants to be in violation of the Subdivision Documents . . . Plaintiffs may be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees and costs." After Plaintiffs' counsel filed a declaration regarding attorneys' fees and costs, the Circuit Court entered a separate order, awarding Plaintiffs $141,738.45, inclusive of attorneys' fees in the amount of $124,201.41 and costs in the amount of $17,537.04. 
On September 20, 2016, the Browns filed a motion for 
reconsideration of the Order on Counts II and III, which the Circuit Court denied on December 15, 2016. On January 24, 2017, Plaintiffs filed a Motion for Supplemental Attorneys' Fees and Costs, requesting fees and costs incurred responding to the Browns' motion for reconsideration and for expert witness fees. Plaintiffs sought expert witness fees "on the grounds that Plaintiffs' expert witnesses were part of and necessary to the enforcement action and [are] therefore awardable under the 
18  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subject Subdivision Documents." Alternatively, Plaintiffs 
requested expert witness fees "as a sanction against Defendants' 
bad faith post-trial conduct toward Plaintiffs' expert witness." Specifically, Plaintiffs cited Mr. Brown's email to Johnson threatening to file an ethics complaint, pursue criminal charges, and seek revocation of his architectural license if he did not inform the Circuit Court in writing "that the only correct Method 1 height rule for [Waialae-Iki View Lots] has always been 18-feet horizontal." 
Following a hearing on the motion, the Circuit Court 
granted the request for additional attorneys' fees and costs related to opposing the Browns' motion for reconsideration and denied the request for additional expert fees as untimely sought and because the Subdivision Documents "do not expressly and specifically provide for a non-standard, extraordinary cost such as expert witness fees, to be awarded." The Circuit Court declined to award additional expert witness fees alternatively as a sanction for "bad faith" but stated that "[u]nder this Court's inherent court powers under HRS § 603-21.9, for Mr. Brown's harassing and improper conduct, Defendants shall pay the attorneys' fees and costs Plaintiffs incurred in bringing this motion." 
Judgment was entered on February 21, 2017. The Browns 
timely appealed. 
19 II. POINTS OF ERROR FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Browns raise nine points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred: (1) in finding that the 
height restriction at issue in this case is not ambiguous and finding that, even if an ambiguity exists, it is not a substantial ambiguity; (2) by applying the general rule of contract interpretation, i.e., the intent of the parties, rather than the rule applicable to restrictive covenants, which requires all doubts be resolved in favor of the free use of the land; (3) in finding that the height restriction at issue should be interpreted to impose an 18 foot height limit that follows the preexisting grade of the lots (or, alternatively, that any such restriction was abandoned); (4) by applying an interpretation of the height restriction that can only be reached after a trained architect reviews the relevant documents, as opposed to applying the plain language of the covenant; (5) when it determined that "Method 2" for the height restriction applies only to a house that is is not as wide as it could be under the Subdivision Documents and the applicable ordinances; (6) when it looked only to the lot coverage shown in the plans submitted in support of the Browns' building permit application to determine that "the proposed construction exceeds the allowed area coverage;" (7) by determining that the proposed construction violated the height restriction and lot coverage restriction; (8) in granting a preliminary injunction; and (9) in awarding Defendants' attorneys' fees and costs. 
20 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"In construing restrictive covenants governing the use 
of land, we are guided by the same rules that are applicable to 
the construction of contracts. The fundamental rule is that the intent of the parties, as gleaned from the entire context of the covenant, governs." Pelosi v. Wailea Ranch Estates, 10 Haw. App. 424, 435-36, 876 P.2d 1320, 1326-27 (1994) (internal citation omitted) (citing DeMund v. Lum, 5 Haw. App. 336, 343 n.7, 690 P.2d 1316, 1322 n.7 (1984)). "As long as the terms of a covenant are not ambiguous, i.e., not 'capable of being reasonably understood in more ways than one,' we are required to interpret the terms 'according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech.'" Id. at 1327, 876 P.2d at 1327 (quoting Cho Mark Oriental Food, Ltd. v. K & K Int'l, 73 Haw. 509, 520, 836 P.2d 1057, 1064 (1992)). Whether a covenant's language is ambiguous is a pure question of law, which this court reviews de novo. Hiner v. Hoffman, 90 
Hawai# i 188, 190, 977 P.2d 878, 880 
(1999); see also Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai# i 226, 
239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996). Moreover, if the language of the covenant is clear and unambiguous, and the meaning of the covenant can be readily discerned from the instrument itself, the legal effect and construction of the covenant is also a question of law. Pelosi, 10 Haw. App. at 436, 876 P.2d at 1327. 
"[A] trial court's FOFs are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review. 
An FOF is clearly erroneous when, 
despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has 
been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai# i
, 106 Hawai# i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005) (citations, internal quotation marks and ellipses omitted). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 
Hawai# i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 
(1999) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citation omitted). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and
is freely reviewable for its correctness. [The
appellate court] ordinarily reviews COLs under theright/wrong standard. Thus, a COL that is supportedby the trial court's FOFs and that reflects anapplication of the correct rule of law will not beoverturned. 
Chun, 106 Hawai# i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and original brackets omitted). 
Generally, the granting or denying of injunctive
relief rests with the sound discretion of the trial court and the trial court's decision will be sustained absent a showing of a manifest abuse of discretion.Abuse of discretion may be found where the trial courtlacked jurisdiction to grant the relief, or where thetrial court based its decision on an unsound proposition of law. 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of State of Hawaii, 120 Hawai# i 
181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (citation omitted). 
[The appellate] court reviews the denial and
granting of attorney's fees under the abuse ofdiscretion standard. The same standard applies to[the appellate] court's review of the amount of atrial court's award of attorney's fees. An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearlyexceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rulesor principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant. 
22 IV. DISCUSSION FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chun, 106 Hawai# i at 431, 106 P.3d at 354 (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and ellipses omitted). 
The parties agree that the Waialae-Iki View Lots, 
including the Subject Lot, are subject to certain restrictive 
covenants, including the lot area coverage and height restrictions at issue in this case. As stated in the first of the Subdivision Documents, the original developers sought, inter alia, to "develop and maintain the general attractiveness of the subdivision, as seen from all public areas, to provide each lessee as much undisturbed view and unobstructed breeze as practicable, [and] to promote esthetic standards for the buildings and their relationships to each other." The developers emphasized, however, in describing view planes, view channels, and view easements, that they were not guaranteeing any unobstructed views. 
With respect to the height restriction stated in the 
Subdivision Documents, the parties do not agree as to how the drafters intended the restriction to be applied, based on the language of the height restriction provision. With respect to the lot area coverage, the dispute appears to center on whether the Circuit Court erred in basing its decision on the building plans submitted to the Department of Planning and Permitting of the City and County of Honolulu (DPP), which issued a building 
permit based on those plans, as opposed to the proposed 
construction described at trial by the Browns' witnesses, which 
23 A. The Height Restriction FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included removing three existing trellises, which would "reduce 
nonconformities without bringing the structure fully into compliance." We will address each in turn, as well as the other issues raised in the Browns' points of error. 
The Browns contend that the Circuit Court erred in 
interpreting the height restriction set forth in the Subdivision Documents by concluding that the height restriction was not ambiguous, or not "substantially ambiguous," based on an interpretation that was not grounded in the express language of the height restriction, and then, by failing to resolve any doubts against the party seeking enforcement of the restriction and in favor of the grantee of the burdened property. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has long held: 
[R]estrictive covenants are to be liberally construed
in favor of the grantee and against the grantor, and
substantial doubt or ambiguity is to be resolved in favor ofthe free and unrestricted use of property. Although in someinstances restrictive covenants may increase the value ofproperty, they do nonetheless raise title problems andimpair alienability. Therefore, restrictive covenants areto be strictly construed against the grantor because the
limitations and prohibitions they impose may be felt over a
very long period of time, and it is not too much to insistthat they be carefully drafted to state exactly what isintended no more and no less. In thus attempting toconstrue ambiguous covenants, a court must look to theexpressed intention of the parties as may be ascertainedfrom the entire language of the covenant agreement. 
Collins v. Goetsch, 59 Haw. 481, 485, 583 P.2d 353, 356-57 (1978) 
(citations, quotation marks, parentheses, and footnote omitted). 
The supreme court has similarly stated: 
Restrictive covenants restrain the free use of 
property and are strictly construed in favor of the grantee
of the property and against the grantor. The general ruledoes not favor restrictions imposed upon the use of land,but rather the unrestricted use of property. The party 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
seeking to enforce a restrictive covenant in a deed has the
burden to prove the parties' clear intention to create acovenant that would run with the land. 
. . . . When construing a restrictive covenant, the parties'
intentions are normally determined from language of thedeed. . . . Substantial doubt or ambiguity is resolvedagainst the person seeking its enforcement. If the languageof the deed is ambiguous, surrounding circumstances may beconsidered but not parol evidence. Because the covenant is unclear as to its intended beneficiary, we look to thecircumstances surrounding the creation of the covenant. The use of surrounding circumstances, also known as extrinsicevidence, usually concerns the geographical location of thelands and the physical condition of the structures thereon. 
Waikiki Malia Hotel, Inc. v. Kinkai Props. Ltd. P'ship, 75 Haw. 
370, 382, 384-85, 862 P.2d 1048, 1056-58 (1993) (citations and quotation marks omitted); see also Hiner, 90 Hawai# i at 190-91, 
977 P.2d at 880-81 ("when construing a restrictive covenant, the parties' intentions are normally determined from the language of the deed" and that "substantial doubt or ambiguity is resolved against the person seeking its enforcement" (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and emphasis omitted)).
8 
The parties agree that the height restriction in the 
Subdivision Documents consists of two methods of achieving compliance with the restriction, and it states: 
[Method 1:] No portion of any building or other
structure, except antennas and chimneys, shall be more than
18 feet above the highest existing ground elevation at the
building or structure . 
[Method 2:] For houses with setbacks greater than
that required, the height shall not project above animaginary plane constructed over the building area asfollows: 
8 Although the dissent in Hiner disagreed with the majority's
conclusion that the restrictive covenant in that case was ambiguous, it agreedthat "[t]he fundamental rule in construing restrictive covenants is theintention of the parties as shown by the covenant governs." Hiner, 90 
Hawai #i 
at 196, 977 P.2d at 886 (Nakayama, J., dissenting) (citations and emphasisomitted). 
25  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Commencing a t a corner of the building area with
the highest ground elevation , measure vertically
to a point 18 feet above the corner-This point
shall be a corner of the "height plane". 
(2) Slope this plane downward at a ratio of 1vertical to 10 horizontal towards the corner of the building area with the lowest groundelevation. 
(Format altered; emphasis added). 
Under Method 1, a property's compliance is plainly 
determined by reference to the "building or other structure['s]" 
height at – not commencing at – "the highest existing ground elevation at the building or structure." 
Under Method 2, a property's compliance is determined 
by reference to the lot's "building area," more specifically, by applying certain measurements and calculations "commencing at" the corner of the "building area" with the highest ground elevation. "Building Area" is defined in the Subdivision Documents as "that portion of the lot lying outside of the setback and view channel areas of the lot." "Setback Lines" are defined primarily with respect to municipal zoning requirements.
9 
"View Channels" are as indicated on a particular subdivision map, which is identified as Bishop Estate Map No. 8043-F. 
The Browns contend that the Circuit Court's analysis 
regarding the "ambiguity" of this covenant is flawed. This argument has merit. The Circuit Court erred when it based its conclusion that height restriction is not ambiguous on the testimony of the Plaintiffs' expert witnesses and the 
9 In certain circumstances, a 19-foot setback was applicable to a
garage or carport, but this additional setback was subject to variances from
the original developer. 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"reasonableness" of various interpretations, rather than the 
language of the covenant. In COL 64, the court concluded: 
64. Based on the [FOFs] above, the Court concludes
that the Subdivision Documents' provisions regarding the
Height Restriction are not ambiguous. While a facial ambiguity exists when reading Method 1 in isolation, theambiguity is resolved when both Method 1 and Method 2 areread together as a whole. 
(Emphasis added). 
The threshold question of whether a restrictive 
covenant's language is ambiguous or not ambiguous is "a pure 
question of law." 
See, e.g., Hiner, 90 Hawai# i at 190, 977 P.2d 
at 880. 
Apparently based on expert opinions, rather than a legal 
determination based exclusively on the express language of the covenant, the Circuit Court concluded that "a facial ambiguity exists when reading Method 1 in isolation." The Circuit Court erred in failing to first make a legal determination that the express language of the height restriction was or was not ambiguous. If, as a matter of law, the express language of the covenant is unambiguous, then there is no basis for a factual inquiry into the "reasonableness" of the restriction as drafted.  As discussed below, if the court determined, as a 
matter of law, that the height restriction is ambiguous, then extrinsic evidence of "circumstances surrounding the creation of the covenant" may be considered, but not parol evidence or expert 
10
10 This should not be read to suggest that a finding as to the
"reasonableness" of an interpretation of an ambiguous covenant leads to a
conclusion that the interpretation is enforceable in the absence of theexpressed intention of the original parties or grantor, as ascertained fromthe entire covenant agreement. "In the determination of the meaning oflanguage used in restrictive covenants, the controlling factor is expressedintent, and unexpressed intent is generally 'unavailing.'" Collins, 59 Haw. at487, 583 P.2d at 358 (citation omitted). 
27 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opinions that embellish or otherwise vary the actual terms of the 
restriction. See, e.g., Waikiki Malia Hotel, Inc., 75 Haw. at 384-85, 862 P.2d at 1057-58. 
Moreover, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in 
its conclusion. 
On its face, Method 1 is plain and unambiguous: 
"[n]o portion of any building or other structure, except antennas and chimneys, shall be more than 18 feet above the highest existing ground elevation at the building or structure." The maximum allowed height of a building is measured at the highest existing ground elevation at the building. Nothing, except an antenna or chimney, can exceed 18 feet above that reference point, i.e., that particular elevation.
11 
Although a bit more complicated, we also conclude that 
Method 2 is, on its face, unambiguous.  As stated above, unlike 
Method 1, Method 2 is drafted in reference to the "building area" of the lot itself, rather than in reference to a building or 12
11 Although not addressed by the Circuit Court, and therefore not at
issue in this appeal, we note that, in describing the initially-required site
plan drawings, the Subdivision Documents distinguish between "existing" and"proposed" topography. In reference to grading, the Subdivision Documentsstate that the lots were to be accepted "as is, as of the date of completionof all contracts for the grading and roadway and utility improvements for thesubdivision" or the date of acceptance of a lot lease application, whicheveris later. Reading these provisions together with the reference to "highestexisting ground elevation," the developers plainly intended that the heightrestriction is determined based on the topography and elevation conditions"existing" as of the "as is" date, and not determined, for example, based onthe topography and elevation conditions resulting from cutting and/or fillingdone by a lot owner after that date. 
12 Both parties' expert witnesses agreed on the interpretation of
Method 2. See FOFs 36 and 37 (set forth above). The Circuit Court does not state whether it concluded, as a matter of law, that Method 2 was ambiguous orunambiguous. As discussed above, if the Circuit Court had concluded thatMethod 2 was unambiguous, then the various expert opinions on this particularpoint were irrelevant. We recognize, of course, that expert testimony may be
of assistance to the court in determining factual  issues concerning whether
the Browns' proposed construction would violate the height restriction. 
28  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
structure on the lot.13 It is undisputed that Method 2 plainly 
applies only if the house is built (or to be built) with setbacks 
greater than required – in other words, only if the house does not extend to the limits of the building area. In that case, the method for determining whether the house complies with the height restriction commences at a corner of the building area (not the house) with the highest ground elevation. Eighteen vertical feet up from that point, that particular corner of the building area, is designated as a "corner" of a "height plane." From that corner of the height plane, Method 2 imposes an imaginary plane over the entire building area, sloping downward at a 1:10 vertical to horizontal ratio towards the corner of the building area with the lowest ground elevation. The height of the house cannot project above that imaginary plane. Notably, unlike Method 2, Method 1 is stated in terms of a single, not-to-exceed, point of elevation and is not drafted with reference to any downward sloping imaginary plane. 
We further conclude, contrary to the Circuit Court's 
findings, it is unnecessary to delve into whether a plain-language reading of the entire height restriction impairs an unexpressed rationale for Method 2. Method 1 plainly applies no matter where on the lot a house is built, whether the house is built utilizing the maximum building area by abutting the setbacks or whether it occupies a narrower or smaller footprint; 
13 It appears from the Circuit Court's FOFs that the court did not
recognize this distinction. See, e.g., FOFs 41-43 (set forth above). 
29 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no portion of the house (except antennas and chimneys) can exceed 
18 feet above a particular point of elevation. Period. Method 2 appears to be equally mandatory – the height shall not project 
above an imaginary plane – but Method 2 only applies to houses 
with setbacks greater than required. 
As Plaintiffs have argued, the Subdivision Documents 
express a clear intent to promote undisturbed views, unobstructed breezes, aesthetic standards, and an attractive residential district. The Subdivision Documents contain no hint of any intent to create a "height bonus" for smaller or narrower houses, as argued by Plaintiffs and found to be a "reasonable" interpretation by the Circuit Court. On the contrary, the Subdivision Documents expressly mandate a "minimum enclosed floor area of 2,000 square feet" and specify no maximum (beyond the lot area coverage restriction). Even if the height restriction was ambiguous, it is irrelevant to the determination of the grantor's intent that, as the Circuit Court found, "[a] homeowner would have no reason to choose Method 2."
14 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
erred in adopting "Plaintiffs' interpretation" of Method 1, which would in effect add a "sloping plane" requirement to the express requirement stated in Method 1. 
14 Arguably, a height penalty for a smaller home is more consistent
with the stated intent of the original developers than a height bonus for a
smaller house. The Subdivision Documents express an intent for houses of atleast a certain size, costs of not less than a certain amount, garages of notless than a certain size, materials of a superior custom-designed-homequality, and an absence of any structure, tree, hedge or other impedimentabove a view plane. 
30 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, the Circuit Court made no specific 
findings as to whether the Browns' proposed construction would 
have setbacks greater than required, and accordingly, whether both Method 1 and Method 2 applied to the Browns' proposed construction. Instead, the Circuit Court concluded that the Browns' proposed construction "does not comply with either Method 1 or Method 2, as construed and applied herein." However, it appears to be undisputed on appeal – based in part on the Plaintiffs' statement in their Answering Brief that "the parties disagree as to whether the [Browns'] proposed construction is in compliance with Method 1" – that Plaintiffs did not establish that the Browns' proposed construction had setbacks greater than required. As noted above, there are no Circuit Court findings that the Browns' proposed construction has setbacks greater than required. Accordingly, Method 2 is inapplicable and the Plaintiffs' burden was to establish that the Browns' proposed construction violated the height restriction as determined by Method 1. As the Circuit Court erred in adopting and applying Plaintiffs' interpretation of Method 1 to the Browns' proposed construction, we further conclude that the Circuit Court erred in its findings and conclusions that the Browns' proposed construction does not comply with Method 1. Further proceedings are necessary to determine whether the Browns' proposed construction complies with Method 1. As there are no factual findings supporting the applicability of Method 2 here, we simply 
31 B. Lot Coverage Area Restriction 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vacate the Circuit Court's findings and conclusions that the 
Browns' proposed construction does not comply with Method 2. 
The Browns contend that the Circuit Court erred in 
finding that the proposed construction would violate the lot coverage area restriction described in the Subdivision Documents. The Browns argue that the Circuit Court should not have relied solely on the percentage cited in the drawings the Browns submitted to DPP in their building permit application. The Browns further argue that the Circuit Court failed to address "the fact" that, at a minimum, their proposed construction would reduce a pre-existing nonconformity. 
The lot coverage area restriction provides that the 
area of the building "under roof and trellis work within the wall lines and/or the outer vertical support members (including balcony railings) of all buildings on the lot," shall not exceed one-third of the area of the lot. The Circuit Court found that 
the plans "for which the Building Permit was issued, show that 
the lot coverage of [the Browns'] proposed construction is 39 [percent]." While the Browns argue that this percentage was not 
calculated using the definition of "lot coverage area" in the 
Subdivision Documents, they cite no evidence to support a conclusion that, after their proposed construction, the lot coverage area would be in compliance with the unambiguous requirement that it "shall not amount to more than one-third (1/3) of the area of the lot." 
32 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Browns rely heavily on the argument that, based on 
the testimony offered at trial, the proposed construction would 
eliminate three existing trellises and would not add new areas "under roof or trellis" that would increase the currently existing lot area coverage. However, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred in relying on the square footage calculations that were actually submitted to, and approved by, the DPP. Although not included in the Circuit Court's factual findings, it appears to be undisputed that the total lot area is 9075 square feet. The Plaintiffs submitted evidence that after the Browns' proposed construction, the lot coverage area would exceed one-third of the area of the lot, i.e., 3025 square feet. The Browns point to no evidence in the record that, after their proposed construction, the lot coverage area would not be more than 3025 square feet. On the record in this case, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred in finding that the Browns' proposed construction would violate the lot coverage area restriction in the Subdivision Documents. 
The Browns' further argument that the Circuit Court 
failed to address their contention that, at a minimum, their proposed construction would reduce a pre-existing nonconformity appears to be based on municipal zoning ordinance provisions that address renovations of nonconforming residences. However, the Browns provide no authority supporting the proposition that these zoning provisions limit the enforceability of the restrictive covenants in the Subdivision Documents, which are indisputably 
33 C. Preliminary and Permanent Injunction FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
more restrictive than applicable zoning requirements in numerous 
ways.   15
On the record in this case, we cannot conclude that the 
Circuit Court erred in ruling that the lot coverage area reflected in building plans submitted by the Browns to DPP would violate the lot coverage area restriction in the Subdivision Documents. 
The Browns argue that the Circuit Court erred in 
entering the May 26, 2016 Order Granting Preliminary Injunction. The preliminary injunction, however, was mooted  by the 
permanent injunction that was included in the Circuit Court's August 12, 2016 Order on Counts II and III, which states: 
16
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants are permanently
enjoined from proceeding with construction as shown in
Defendants' proposed construction plans; [and] 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Defendants are permanently
enjoined from violating the Subdivision Documents in anymatter [sic], including but not limited to proceeding with 
15 However, we note that, to the extent a homeowner would seek to
enforce historical violations of the Subdivision Documents against propertiesin the Waialae-Iki View Lots, it would be the homeowner's burden to establishthat the existing building or structure was not approved by the Trustees'design review committee as either compliant with the Subdivision Documents orby way of a permitted variance pursuant to Article II of the original BuildingRequirements. In addition, defenses not applicable to proposed or newlyconstructed homes might apply to pre-existing homes with alleged violations. 
16 In addition, the Preliminary Injunction states "the Court finds
that with respect to the height restriction only, the Plaintiffs have met therequirements for issuance of a preliminary injunction." In light of ourdisposition of the height restriction issue, we conclude that the CircuitCourt based its decision on an unsound legal analysis. See Sierra Club, 120Hawai #i at 197, 202 P.3d at 1242. The Preliminary Injunction further states
that its prohibition is in effect "until such time as the [Circuit Court] hasruled on the merits of this case or further order of this [Circuit Court]."Thus, we conclude that the Preliminary Injunction expired, by its own terms,upon the entry of the Order on Counts II and III. 
34 D. Attorneys' Fees FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other construction plans that violate the Subdivision
Documents[.] 
In conjunction with our disposition of the issues 
raised by the Browns, and pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule (HRCP) 65(d),17 we conclude the first paragraph of 
the permanent injunction is not specific enough in its terms and 
does not describe in reasonable and sufficient detail the act or acts to be restrained. We further conclude that the second paragraph of the permanent injunction must be stricken as it states an overly broad prohibition that is not specific in its terms, does not describe in reasonable and sufficient detail the act or acts to be restrained, purports to rule on, inter alia, other construction plans that were not before the Circuit Court, and does not appear to be grounded in the evidence and arguments presented to the Circuit Court in this case. 
The Browns contend that the Circuit Court erred in 
awarding attorneys' fees to Plaintiffs under the relevant provision of the Subdivision Documents, which states: 
[The Waialae-Iki View Lots] owners . . . shall each have the
right, but not the responsibility, to enforce any or all ofthe limitations, restrictions, covenants and conditions 
17 HRCP Rule 65(d) provides: 
(d) Form and scope of injunction or restraining order.
Every order granting an injunction and every restrainingorder shall set forth the reasons for its issuance; shall bespecific in terms; shall describe in reasonable detail, andnot by reference to the complaint or other document, the actor acts sought to be restrained; and is binding only uponthe parties to the action, their officers, agents, servants,employees, and attorneys, and upon those persons in active
concert or participation with them who receive actual notice
of the order by personal service or otherwise. 
35 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imposed by this Declaration by any proceeding at law or in
equity against any person or persons violating or attemptingto violate any such limitation, restriction, covenant orcondition, and any judgment for any such violation mayrequire all costs and expenses of such enforcement action,including a reasonable attorney's fee, to be paid by theperson who the court finds in violation of any suchlimitation, restriction, covenant or condition. 
(Emphasis added). 
While the provision clearly grants the Plaintiffs the 
right to enforce attempted violations of the Subdivision 
Documents through court proceedings, the plain language of the provision limits the award of costs, expenses, and reasonable attorneys' fees to cases in which there is a "judgment for any such violation . . . to be paid by the person who the court finds in violation." The Circuit Court, in granting the Plaintiffs' request for attorneys' fees and costs, stated that it "found Defendants' to be in violation of the Subdivision Documents." However, the gravamen of these proceedings was to obtain a declaration that the Brown's proposed construction would be in violation of the Subdivision Documents (Count III) and to obtain injunctive relief in order to prevent such a violation (Count II). The record does not support a conclusion that the Browns were in violation of the Subdivision Documents as it is undisputed that they have not completed or even begun construction on their proposed addition. Thus, the Circuit Court clearly erred in finding the Browns to be in violation of the Subdivision Documents. 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in entering the 
Attorneys' Fees Order. 
36 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court also based the Supplemental Fees 
Order, in part, on the inherent power of the court set forth in 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS
) § 603-21.9 (2016).  The supreme 
court has recognized that 18
Hawai# i courts "have the inherent power 
and authority to control the litigation process before them and to curb abuses and promote fair process." Bank of Hawaii v. Kunimoto, 91 
Hawai# i 372, 387, 984 P.2d 1198, 1213 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and footnote omitted). Under this power, a court may order a party to pay an opposing party's attorney's fees and costs as a sanction for abusive litigation practices. Kukui Nuts of Hawaii, Inc. v. R. Baird & Co., Inc., 7 Haw. App. 598, 624, 789 P.2d 501, 517 (1990). 
However, a court may not invoke its inherent power for 
this purpose absent a specific finding of bad faith. 
Id. "Bad 
faith" is defined as "actual or constructive fraud or a neglect or refusal to fulfill some duty . . . not prompted by an honest mistake as to one's rights or duties, but by some interested or sinister motive." Bank of Hawaii, 91 Hawai# i at 390, 984 P.2d at 
1216; see also Kaina v. Gellman, 119 
Hawai# i 324, 330, 197 P.3d 
18 HRS § 603-21.9 provides: 
§ 603-21.9 Powers. The several circuit courts shall 
have power: . . . 
(6) To make and award such judgments, decrees,
orders, and mandates, issue such executions and
other processes, and do such other acts and takesuch other steps as may be necessary to carryinto full effect the powers which are or shallbe given to them by law or for the promotion ofjustice in matters pending before them. 
37 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
776, 782 (App. 2008). Although the words "bad faith" need not be 
explicitly stated in the sanctioning order, the court must make findings "tantamount to a specific finding of bad faith," i.e., "findings that are sufficient to enable [the appellate court] to infer a specific finding of bad faith by the circuit court." Id. at 390, 984 P.2d at 1216. 
Here, the Circuit Court ordered Defendants to pay the 
attorneys' fees and costs Plaintiffs incurred in bringing the Motion for Supplemental Attorneys' fees "for Mr. Brown's harassing and improper conduct." The Circuit Court characterized the conduct as "consist[ing] of using improper and coercive tactics to change or influence a witness's prior testimony after the Court had already rendered a decision, undermin[ing] the litigation process before this Court."  However, the Circuit 
Court expressly denied Plaintiffs' request "as a sanction for 
'bad faith'" because an "alleged violation of a criminal statute [i.e., witness intimidation] cannot be used as a basis for sanctions in a civil lawsuit."  The Circuit Court therefore "made 
no finding of bad faith, or finding tantamount to a finding of 
bad faith." See, e.g., In re Marn Family Litigation, No. 29448, 2013 WL 514255, *3 (Haw. App. Feb. 12, 2013) (SDO). To the contrary, the Circuit Court specifically declined to find bad faith on the part of Mr. Brown.  Accordingly, to the extent the 
19
19 Moreover, the Circuit Court's order is devoid of any reference to
purported conduct by Mrs.  Brown that could constitute a finding of "bad faith"
and thus, even if the Circuit Court had made a sufficient finding of bad faith
on the part of Mr. Brown, the Circuit Court erroneously ordered both 
(continued...) 
38 V. CONCLUSION FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court ordered Defendants to pay attorneys' fees and costs 
pursuant to its inherent powers under HRS § 603-21.9, it plainly erred.  Thus, we vacate the Circuit Court's Supplemental 
Attorneys' Fees Order. 20
For these reasons, we vacate the Circuit Court's 
February 21, 2017 Judgment, December 20, 2016 Attorneys' Fees Order, August 12, 2016 Order on Counts II and III (in part, consistent with this conclusions herein), and March 21, 2017 Supplemental Fees Order. This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. On the briefs: Bruce D. Voss,
Christian D. Chambers,(Bays Lung Rose & Holma),for Defendants-Appellants. 
Michael W. Gibson,
Francis P. Hogan,(Ashford & Wriston),for Plaintiffs-Appellees. 
19(...continued)
"Defendants" to pay the awarded attorneys' fees and costs without having made
specific findings of "bad faith" on the part of both defendants. 
20 Although the Browns challenged the Supplemental Fees Order on
appeal, they failed to specifically identify it in their points of error.
Nevertheless, applying the three-factor test to determine whether to exercisethis court's discretionary power to notice plain error, we conclude that thiscase satisfies each. Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97Hawai #i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). Under the first factor, "based on
the tenet that an appellate court should not review an issue based on anundeveloped record," the record here clearly and sufficiently provides the
Circuit Court's factual basis for awarding the supplemental attorneys' fees
and costs. The error here also affects the integrity of the Circuit Court'sfindings of fact, because of the extent to which the Circuit Court relied onits finding that Mr. Brown's conduct was "harassing and improper" in awardingsupplemental attorneys' fees and costs. Finally, eradicating this improperexercise of the circuit courts' inherent power is an issue of "great publicimport." See, e.g., Montalvo v. Lopez, 77 Hawai #i 282, 290-91, 884 P.2d 345,
353-54 (1994) (applying the three-factor test). 
39 