  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29387
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DEREK KAAUKAI, Petitioner-Appellant/Appellant,
v.
 
COUNTY OF MAUI AND COUNTY OF MAUI POLICE COMMISSION,
Respondents-Appellees/Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0495(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal, Petitioner-Appellant/
 
Appellant Derek Kaaukai (Kaaukai) appeals from the final judgment
 
filed on September 18, 2008 in the Circuit Court for the Second
 
Circuit (circuit court).1 Kaaukai filed an appeal in the circuit
 
court from the County of Maui Police Commission's (Commission)
 
decision and order denying his request for legal representation.
 
On August 21, 2008, the circuit court issued an order determining
 
that the appeal was moot and affirming the decision of the
 
Commission. The circuit court thereafter entered final judgment
 
in favor of Respondents-Appellees/Appellees County of Maui
 
(County) and the Commission.
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August, presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Kaaukai contends that the circuit court
 
erred in holding that his appeal was moot. In particular,
 
Kaaukai argues that: the circuit court should not have considered
 
settlement and court dismissal documents that were not a part of
 
the Commission records; the circuit court erred in determining
 
that the appeal was moot; the circuit court erred in failing to
 
consider the appeal based on the "public interest" exception to
 
mootness; and, although not raised before the circuit court, the
 
"collateral consequences" exception to the mootness doctrine
 
applies in this case.
 
Appellant Kaaukai is a former police officer with the
 
Maui County Police Department. Kaaukai was named as a defendant
 
in a lawsuit filed by Joseph Crisafulli (Crisafulli), who claimed
 
that in December 2004, Kaaukai and another officer battered him
 
in a cane field after he was arrested and while en route to the
 
police station. Crisafulli also named the other officer and the
 
County as defendants in the lawsuit, which was removed to federal
 
court.
 
After Crisafulli's lawsuit was filed, Kaaukai requested
 
legal representation from the County pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 52D-8 (1993 Repl.).2 Under HRS § 52D-9, the
 
Commission determines whether an act was done in the performance
 
2 HRS § 52D-8 provides:
 
[§52D-8] Police officers; counsel for. Whenever a
 
police officer is prosecuted for a crime or sued in a civil
action for acts done in the performance of the officer's
 
duty as a police officer, the police officer shall be
represented and defended:
 
. . . 
(2) In civil cases by the corporation counsel or
county attorney of the county in which the police
officer is serving.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the officer's duty and thus, whether the officer qualifies for
 
representation under HRS § 52D-8. HRS § 52D-9 (1993 Repl.).3
 
The Commission denied Kaaukai's request for representation and
 Kaaukai demanded a contested case hearing.
 
The Commission held a contested case hearing on
 
September 21, 2007 and on October 17, 2007 issued its Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order (Commission
 
Decision), which denied Kaaukai's request for legal
 
representation.
 
Kaaukai appealed to the circuit court pursuant to
 
4
 arguing inter alia that
 HRS § 91-14 (1993 Repl. & Supp. 2010),
the Commission Decision should be reversed because the Commission
 
violated the law and its own procedures in rendering its
 
decision, the Commission improperly placed the burden of proof on
 
Kaaukai, and there was insufficient evidence to support the
 
result.
 
The parties filed briefs with the circuit court, and
 
the County attached to its answering brief a Release and
 
Indemnity Agreement (Release) dated December 19, 2007 and a
 
Stipulation for Dismissal With Prejudice of Plaintiff's Claims
 
Against Defendants (Stipulation for Dismissal) filed in federal
 
3 HRS § 52D–9 provides: 
[§52D-9] Determination of scope of duty. The
 
determination of whether an act, for which the police
officer is being prosecuted or sued, was done in the
performance of the police officer's duty, so as to entitle
the police officer to be represented by counsel provided by
the county, shall be made by the police commission of the
county. Before making a determination, the police commission
shall consult the county attorney or the corporation
counsel, who may make a recommendation to the police
commission with respect thereto if the county attorney or
corporation counsel so desires. The determination of the
 police commission shall be conclusive for the purpose of
this section and section 52D-8.
4
 HRS § 91-14 provides for judicial review of contested cases.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
district court on February 6, 2008. These documents show that,
 
soon after the Commission Decision was issued, Crisafulli had
 
settled and dismissed his claims in the lawsuit, including a full
 
release of Kaaukai and the County from liability. The circuit
 
court held a hearing on August 7, 2008 and confirmed that there
 
was no dispute that the settlement covered any potential
 
liability of Kaaukai. The circuit court thus held that the
 
appeal was moot.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Kaaukai's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) We do not agree with Kaaukai's contention that the
 
circuit court abused its discretion in considering the Release
 
and Stipulation for Dismissal submitted by the County to the
 
circuit court. These documents did not exist at the time of the
 
Commission Decision and the circuit court properly considered
 
them for purposes of determining whether the case had become
 
moot.
 
Although HRS § 91-14(f) provides that judicial review
 
of contested cases "shall be confined to the record," the County
 
did not attempt to introduce to the circuit court additional
 
materials regarding the merits of the appeal. Instead, the
 
documents were pertinent to mootness and the justiciability of
 
the case.
 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the
circumstances that destroy the justiciability of a suit
previously suitable for determination. Put another way, the
suit must remain alive throughout the course of litigation
to the moment of final appellate disposition. Its chief
 purpose is to assure that the adversary system, once set in
operation, remains properly fueled. The doctrine seems
 appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of the
trial court have so affected the relations between the
 parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on appeal—adverse interest and effective remedy—have been
compromised.
 
Lathrop v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai' i 307, 312–13, 141 P.3d 480, 
485–86 (2006) (citations omitted). 
"It is axiomatic that mootness is an issue of subject 
matter jurisdiction." Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 
Hawai'i 1, 4, 193 P.3d 839, 842 (2008). Every court must 
determine "as a threshold matter whether it has jurisdiction to 
decide the issue presented." Pele Def. Fund v. Puna Geothermal 
Venture, 77 Hawai' i 64, 67, 881 P.2d 1210, 1213 (1994) (citation 
omitted). 
The parties had an affirmative duty to disclose the 
Release and the Stipulation for Dismissal to the circuit court 
where the settlement and dismissal of Crisafulli's claims 
affected the justiciability of the case. As in AIG Hawai' i 
Insurance Co. v. Bateman, the execution of the Release and filing of the Stipulation for Dismissal were facts "clearly material to 
the proceeding brought before [the] court, and counsel for the 
parties had an affirmative duty to inform [the] court of the 
settlement." 82 Hawai' i 453, 460, 923 P.2d 395, 402 (1996), 
amended by AIG Haw. Ins. Co. v. Bateman, 83 Hawai' i 203, 925 P.2d 
373 (1996). 
The circuit court thus properly considered the Release
 
and the Stipulation for Dismissal in order to determine whether
 the case was moot.
 
(2) We review de novo whether the circuit court
 
correctly determined that Kaaukai's appeal was moot. Hamilton ex
 
rel. Lethem, 119 Hawai' i at 4-5, 193 P.3d at 842-43. 
[T]he duty of this court, as of every other judicial
tribunal, is to decide actual controversies by a judgment
which can be carried into effect, and not to give opinions
upon moot questions or abstract propositions, or to declare
principles or rules of law which cannot affect the matter in
issue in the case before it.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Courts will not consume time deciding abstract
propositions of law or moot cases, and have no jurisdiction
to do so.
 
Lathrop, 111 Hawai' i at 312, 141 P.3d at 485 (quoting Wong v. Bd. 
of Regents, Univ. of Hawai' i, 62 Haw. 391, 394–95, 616 P.2d 201, 
204 (1980)). "A case is moot if it has lost its character as a 
present, live controversy of the kind that must exist if courts 
are to avoid advisory opinions on abstract propositions of law." 
Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Grp. v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 87, 734 P.2d 
161, 165 (1987) (internal quotation mark and brackets omitted). 
Further, a case is moot "if the reviewing court can no longer 
grant effective relief." Kaho' ohanohano v. State, 114 Hawai' i 
302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007) (quotation and italics omitted). 
Here, the settlement and dismissal of Crisafulli's
 
claims against Kaaukai and the County completely changed the
 
character of this case because there was no longer a live
 
controversy as to whether the County should provide
 
representation for Kaaukai and the circuit court could no longer
 
grant any effective relief. Kaaukai argues that he had legal
 
costs and fees out of pocket, but there is nothing in the record
 
showing such costs and fees or that they are related to defending
 
against Crisafulli's civil action against Kaaukai. Moreover,
 
Kaaukai does not dispute the County's contention that neither he
 
nor anyone on his behalf made an appearance in the Crisafulli
 
lawsuit. Kaaukai also argues that the County filed a cross-claim
 
against him in the Crisafulli lawsuit, apparently suggesting that
 
this supported some kind of ongoing controversy. However,
 
Crisafulli settled and dismissed all claims against Kaaukai and
 
the County, and moreover, the circuit court confirmed with the
 
parties that the settlement covered any potential liability for
 
Kaaukai.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The circuit court did not err in declining to
 
decide the case on the basis of the public interest exception to
 
the mootness doctrine.
 
When determining whether the public interest exception 
applies, the courts consider "(1) the public or private nature of 
the question presented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative 
determination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) the 
likelihood of future recurrence of the question." Hamilton ex 
rel. Lethem, 119 Hawai' i at 6-7, 193 P.3d at 844-45. "[C]ases in 
this jurisdiction that have applied the public interest exception 
have focused largely on political or legislative issues that 
affect a significant number of Hawai' i residents." Id. at 7, 193 
P.3d at 845. 
Notwithstanding the issues raised by Kaaukai 
challenging, in part, the process utilized by the Commission, his appeal to the circuit court involved a private matter and not a 
public matter that would affect a significant number of Hawai' i 
residents. That is, his appeal involved whether he was entitled to legal representation in the civil action brought by Crisafulli 
and whether the Commission's process in his case was proper. 
Further, Kaaukai "has not provided any evidence in the record 
that the issues presented in his appeal involve political or 
legislative matters that will affect a significant number of 
people." Id. Therefore, Kaaukai does not meet the requirements 
of the first prong of the public interest exception. Id. 
The circuit court was correct not to apply the public
 
interest exception to the mootness doctrine. 
(4) Kaaukai's final argument is that the collateral 
consequences exception to the mootness doctrine applies to this case. Kaaukai's opening brief suggests that he failed to raise 
this argument before the circuit court because the collateral 
consequences exception was first explicitly adopted in Hawai' i in 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hamilton ex rel. Lethem, which was issued two months after the 
circuit court's ruling in this case. This exception, however, 
had previously been adopted and applied by this court in In re 
Doe, 81 Hawai' i 91, 912 P.2d 588 (App. 1996). 
Even if we consider this issue, we conclude the 
collateral consequences exception does not apply in this case. 
Kaaukai alleges a variety of consequences which have no relation 
to the Commission Decision.5 Moreover, he fails to establish any 
support in the record or any persuasive authority that it is "reasonably possible" that the unreviewed Commission Decision 
will cause him reputational or other harm. See Hamilton ex rel. 
Lethem, 119 Hawai' i at 10, 193 P.3d at 848. "[T]he litigant must 
establish these consequences by more than mere conjecture, but 
need not demonstrate that these consequences are more probable 
than not." Id. at 8, 193 P.3d at 846 (quoting Putman v. Kennedy, 
900 A.2d 1256, 1261 (Conn. 2006)) (italics omitted). 
Kaaukai asserts, without any basis in the record, that
 
"[h]e was subject to reduced employment opportunities; public
 scorn on the implication that the County determined he was
 
involved in a civil rights incident[.]" Importantly, however,
 
the Commission Decision relied on the results of two other
 
investigations, one of which led to Kaaukai's termination, to
 
support its conclusion that Kaaukai did not act in the
 
performance of his duties as a police officer and thus was not
 
entitled to legal representation. In short, even if we assume
 
the harm he alleges, it was not the Commission Decision which
 
subjected Kaaukai to reduced employment opportunities or to
 
alleged public scorn. Rather, any alleged harm was the result of
 
5
 For instance, Kaaukai argues he lost his job as a police officer
based on the allegations by Crisafulli and that there is continued employment
litigation pursuant to collective bargaining. He makes no connection between
 these matters and the Commission Decision regarding legal representation in
Crisafulli's lawsuit.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the two other investigations and the termination of Kaaukai's 
employment, which occurred before the Commission Decision was 
issued. This case, therefore, is distinguishable from Hamilton 
ex rel. Lethem, 119 Hawai' i at 11, 193 P.3d at 849 (holding that 
"there is a 'reasonable possibility' that the family court's issuance of the TRO against Father, which was based upon its 
findings and conclusions that Father abused his daughter, will 
cause harm to Father's reputation."). 
The collateral consequences exception is not applicable
 
in this case.
 
(5) As a final matter, we note that although the
 
circuit court determined the case was moot, its disposition in
 
its August 21, 2008 order was to affirm the Commission Decision
 
and, on September 18, 2008, final judgment was entered in favor
 
of the County and the Commission. Where a case is determined to
 
be moot, however, a court lacks subject matter jurisdiction and
 
the appropriate disposition would be to dismiss the case. See
 
Application of Thomas, 73 Haw. 223, 228, 832 P.2d 253, 255-56
 (1992). Although this issue was not raised by either party,
 
[i]t is well-established ... that lack of subject matter
jurisdiction can never be waived by any party at any time. .
. . Accordingly, [w]hen reviewing a case where the circuit
court lacked subject matter jurisdiction, the appellate
court retains jurisdiction, not on the merits, but for the
purpose of correcting the error in jurisdiction.
 
Koga Eng'g & Const., Inc. v. State, 122 Hawai' i 60, 84, 222 P.3d 
979, 1003 (2010) (citations and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
Therefore, because the disposition below appears to
 
effect an exercise of jurisdiction by the circuit court, we
 
remand to the circuit court to enter a dismissal of the case. 
See Life of the Land v. Burns, 59 Haw. 244, 580 P.2d 405 (1978)
 
(where issue below was moot, case was remanded with direction to
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismiss the amended complaint); Exit Co. Ltd. P'ship v. Airlines
 
Capital Corp.
, 7 Haw. App. 363, 366, 766 P.2d 129, 131 (1988).
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the final judgment entered on
 
September 18, 2008 by the circuit court is vacated and the case
 is remanded with directions that the circuit court enter a
 
dismissal of the case.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 18, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Matthew S. Kohm
 
for Petitioner-Appellant/Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Richard Rost
 Deputy Corporation Counsel
County of Maui
for Respondent-Appellee/Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
10
 