NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29729
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
GROUP BUILDERS, INC., and
TRADEWIND INSURANCE COMPANY, LTD.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
ADMIRAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
NATIONAL INTERSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY,
SERVCO INSURANCE SERVICES CORP., formerly known as
and/or doing business as American Insurance Agency, Inc.,
and American Insurance Agency;
NATIONAL INTERSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY OF HAWAII, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
and
 
ZURICH AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY,
Defendant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-2204)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 In this insurance coverage dispute arising from a
 
construction-defect lawsuit, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-
Appellees/Cross-Appellees Group Builders, Inc. (Group Builders)
 
and Tradewind Insurance Company, Ltd. (Tradewind) (collectively,
 
Plaintiffs) appeal from the Partial Final Judgment entered on
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
March 20, 2009, by the Circuit Court for the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court).
 
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant/Cross-Appellee
 
Admiral Insurance Company (Admiral) cross-appeals from the
 
Partial Final Judgment entered in the circuit court on April 7,
 
2009.
 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
National Interstate Insurance Company, Servco Insurance Services
 
Corp., and National Interstate Insurance Company of Hawaii, Inc.
 
2
(collectively, National)  cross-appeal from the Partial Final
Judgment entered in the circuit court on April 9, 2009.
 
Plaintiffs had earlier appealed from six circuit court 
orders and Admiral and National had cross appealed. 
That appeal 
was docketed as Case No. 29402. This court partially dismissed Plaintiffs' appeal, except for one order that had been properly 
certified for an interlocutory appeal under Hawaif i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b), and all cross appeals, and issued a published opinion, Group Builders, Inc. v. Admiral Ins. 
Co., 123 Hawaif i 142, 231 P.3d 67 (App. 2010) (hereinafter, Group 
Builders). 
Following the opinion in Group Builders, Plaintiffs and
 
National stipulated to dismiss the appeal and cross—appeal of
 issues remaining between them in Case No. 29729.
 
I. Background
 
A. Underlying Lawsuit
 Hilton Hotels Corp. and its Hawaif i affiliate Hilton 
Hawaiian Village, LLC (collectively, Hilton) brought the 
underlying lawsuit in this case against Group Builders and 
numerous other companies, alleging design and construction 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 National insured Caulking Hawaii, Inc., a subcontractor of Group
Builders. Plaintiffs' complaints against National concerned National's
refusal to defend and indemnify Group Builders as an additional insured under
Caulking's policy.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defects that led to a mold infestation at the new Kalia Tower in
 
the Hilton Hawaiian Village hotel complex. Hilton Hotels Corp.,
 
et al. v. Wimberly Allison, Tong & Goo, et al., Civ. No. 03-1­0813-04 (hereinafter, the Kalia Tower Lawsuit). Group Builders
 
was a subcontractor hired to install the exterior insulation
 
system and sealant, fireproofing, building insulation, and metal
 
wall framing at the Kalia Tower. Hilton's complaint alleged that
 
34. After construction of the Kalia Tower was purportedly
completed, the Kalia Tower hotel guest rooms were opened to
the public in or about May, 2001. A short time thereafter,
in mid-2002, extensive mold growth was discovered in guest
 rooms.
 
35. On July 24, 2002, following a preliminary evaluation of
conditions in the building, [Hilton] closed the guest rooms
on floors 5 through 25 of the Kalia Tower to the public.
Since the discovery of the mold, [Hilton has] undertaken
extensive efforts to ascertain and remediate the causes of
 the excessive mold growth and the resulting damage to the
building and its contents.
 
Hilton maintained that after it closed the building, an
 
investigation found "numerous material defects in the design and
 
construction." As to Group Builders, Hilton alleged,
 
The design, construction, installation, and/or selection of
the Kalia Tower building exterior wall finish, which is a
stucco-appearing exterior insulation finishing system and
sealant ("EIFS"), did not provide an adequate air and/or
moisture barrier. In addition, the EIFS was neither
designed nor installed in accordance with industry standards
and manufacturers' guidelines.
 
Hilton made five claims against Group Builders: breach
 
of contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair
 
dealing, negligence, breach of express and implied warranties,
 
and negligent misrepresentation. Hilton requested, among other
 
relief, "general, special and consequential damages" and damages
 
incurred by Hilton in third-party lawsuits arising from mold at
 
the Kalia Tower.
 
B. Group Builders' Insurance Policies
 
Group Builders was insured under commercial general
 
liability (CGL) policies written by Tradewind Insurance from
 
October 1, 1999, to October 1, 2000; by Admiral from October 1,
 
2000 to October 1, 2001, which was subsequently cancelled
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
December 1, 2000; and by Zurich American Insurance Co. (Zurich)
 
from December 1, 2000, to October 1, 2003. Group Builders
 
maintained umbrella policies through Tradewind between October 1,
 
1999 and October 1, 2000, and Fireman's Fund Insurance Company
 
(Fireman's Fund), who was not a party to this lawsuit, following
 
the expiration of that policy.
 
C. Tender and Denial of Defense
 
On May 27, 2003, Group Builders tendered the defense of
 
the Kalia Tower Lawsuit to Admiral. On June 11, 2003, Admiral
 
denied coverage on the basis that "the Kalia Tower building was
 
completed well after this policy was cancelled. No coverage
 
extends." Admiral reserved the right to raise other terms,
 
conditions, and exclusions.
 
In late February 2004, Tradewind tendered the defense 
to Admiral and attached a copy of Hilton's First Amended
 
Complaint, dated September 4, 2003. Admiral sent Group Builder's
 
attorney a denial letter on April 7,2004. The full contents of
 
the denial letter are not part of the record, but a letter from
 
Tradewind's attorney to Admiral's representative noted that the
 
April 2004 denial "simply enclosed [the] June 11, 2003 letter."
 
On January 18, 2005, Admiral's attorney sent a lengthy
 
letter to Plaintiffs' attorney explaining that "our
 
interpretation of the policy, by its plain meaning, and as
 
applied to known facts and potential, speculative, hypothetical
 
facts, precludes a finding of any potential indemnification
 
obligation, and precludes any duty to participate or contribute
 
to the defense of Group Builders in the pending action." Admiral
 
said Hilton did not allege that the purported "property damage"
 
occurred during Admiral's policy period, but assuming there was
 
damage during the policy period, five provisions of the insurance
 
contract, namely work-in-progress exclusions j.(5) and j.(6),
 
excluded coverage for such damage. Furthermore, Admiral asserted
 
that even assuming that there was property damage sustained
 
during the policy period, such damage was not the result of an
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"occurrence," e.g., an accident, which was a requirement for
 
coverage to apply. Lastly, Admiral said Hilton's claims could
 
not be covered by "the products-completed operations hazard"3
 
because Group Builders cancelled the policy before it had
 completed operations on the building.
 
On May 19, 2006, Hilton, Plaintiffs, and Zurich and
 
Fireman's Fund entered a $6.8 million settlement of the Kalia
 
Tower Lawsuit and related lawsuits. The settlement expressly
 
reserved claims that Group Builders, Tradewind, Zurich, and
 
Fireman's Fund may raise against Admiral, National and Servco. 
In connection with the settlement, Group Builders assigned
 
Tradewind its claims against Admiral and National, and authorized
 
Tradewind "to sue in the name of Group [Builders], and to the
 
extent any of the [c]laims are not assignable, to recover on
 
Group [Builders'] behalf."
 
3
 16. "Products-completed operations hazard":
 
 a.	 Includ[ing] all "bodily injury" and "property damage"
occurring away from premises you own or rent and
arising out of "your product" or "your work" except:
 
(1) Products that are still in your physical possession; or
 (2) Work that has not yet been completed or abandoned.
However, "your work" will be deemed completed at the
earliest of the following times:
 (a) When all of the work called for in your contract has
been completed.
 (b) when all of the work to be done at the job
site has been completed if your contract calls
for work at more than one job site.
 (c) When that part of the work done at a job site
has been put to its intended use by any person or
organization other than another contractor or
subcontractor working on the same project.
 Work that may need service maintenance,
correction, repair or replacement, but which is
otherwise complete, will be treated as completed.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D. The Instant Action 
Plaintiffs filed their complaint in this action on
 
December 13, 2005, and amended the complaint on May 30, 2006. 
The First Amended Complaint alleged seven counts. Count 1
 
alleged that Admiral and National breached their contractual
 
duties to defend and indemnify Group Builders. Counts 2 and 3
 
related to National only. Count 4 alleged that the insurers
 
breached the duty of good faith and fair dealing. Count 5
 
alleged that Admiral and National breached their duty to
 
contribute to Group Builders' defense and as a result Tradewind
 
is entitled to subrogation for a share of the defense and
 
settlement costs it paid. Count 6 alleged that Admiral breached
 
its duty of good faith that it owed to Tradewind as Group
 
Builders' umbrella insurer. Count 7 requested punitive damages.
 
On June 9, 2006, Admiral filed an answer to Plaintiffs'
 
First Amended Complaint, a counter-claim against Plaintiffs and a
 
cross-claim against Zurich, seeking reimbursement from Zurich for
 
any amounts to pay or defend or indemnify Group Builders. In
 
October 2007, Admiral's cross-claim against Zurich was dismissed
 
with prejudice.
 
Plaintiffs, Admiral, and National filed motions for
 
partial summary judgement, asking the circuit court to rule on
 
the issue of whether Admiral had a duty to defend Group Builders
 
in the Kalia Tower Lawsuit, whether Admiral had a duty to
 
indemnify Group Builders, and whether the insurers acted in bad
 
faith in refusing to defend and to indemnify Group Builders. The
 
circuit court held that (1) Admiral had a duty to defend Group
 
Builders; (2) Admiral was entitled to summary dismissal of the
 
claims that Admiral acted in bad faith in refusing to indemnify
 
Group Builders; (3) there was no evidence to support the award of
 
punitive damages; (4) Admiral was entitled to summary dismissal
 
of Plaintiffs' claim that Admiral owed Tradewind, as an umbrella
 
insurer, a duty of good faith and fair dealing; (5) Admiral was 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
entitled to summary dismissal of Plaintiffs' bad-faith claims
 
relating to the duty to defend; and (6) Admiral was entitled to
 
summary judgment on the issue of the duty to indemnify where
 
"there is no genuine issue of material fact that any property
 
damage as a result of an occurrence took place at the Kalia Tower
 
Project during the Admiral Policy period, which is required for
 
coverage under Admiral's Policy[.]"
 
On October 10, 2008, Plaintiffs appealed from six
 
orders, and that appeal was docketed as No. 29402. National and
 Admiral filed separate cross-appeals. This court dismissed all
 
appeals and cross-appeals, except for Group Builders' appeal from
 
the "Order Granting [Admiral's] Motion for Partial Summary
 
Judgment Re: No Duty to Indemnify, Filed on June 25, 2008," which
 
had been certified for interlocutory appeal under HRCP Rule
 
54(b). The circuit court issued partial final judgments
 
certifying other orders for interlocutory appeal. This appeal
 
concerns Partial Final Judgments dated March 20, 2009 and April
 
7, 2009.
 
The March 20, 2009 Partial Final Judgment dismissed
 
with prejudice "[t]he claims in [Count 4, Count 6 and Count 7] of
 
the First Amended Complaint as they relate[d] to [Admiral] only." 
In these counts, Plaintiffs alleged that Admiral breached its
 
duty of good faith and fair dealing which it owed to its insured
 
Group Builders (Count 4), that Admiral breached its duty of good
 
faith and fair dealing which it owed to Tradewind as an umbrella
 
insurer (Count 6), and that Plaintiffs were entitled to punitive
 
damages (Count 7).
 
The April 7, 2009 Partial Final Judgment entered a 
judgment in favor of Plaintiffs and against Admiral, pursuant to
 
and based on the circuit court's December 11, 2006 Amended
 
4
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order,  which concluded
that Admiral had a duty to defend Group Builders.
 
4
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
7
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
E. The Intermediate Court of Appeals ruling in Appeal No. 29402
 
On May 19, 2010, this court issued its opinion in No. 
29402, in which it considered whether "the circuit court erred in 
holding there was no genuine issue of material fact and in 
dismissing the claims for Admiral's breach of its duty to 
indemnify Group [Builders], as a matter of law." Group Builders, 
123 Hawaif i at 143, 231 P.3d at 68. Admiral's duty to indemnify 
Group Builders depended on "whether the alleged faulty 
construction work, giving rise to contractual claims, constitutes 
an 'occurrence' under a CGL policy." Id. at 145-46, 231 P.3d at 
70-71. This court concluded that "construction defect claims do not constitute an 'occurrence' under a CGL policy" and therefore 
breach of contract claims based on allegations of shoddy 
performance, and tort claims derived from those breach of 
contract claims, would not be covered under CGL policies. Id. at 
148-49, 231 P.3d at 73-74. Accordingly, this court affirmed the circuit court's order, concluding that Admiral had no duty to 
indemnify Group Builders under its policy. Id. at 148-49, 231 
P.3d at 73-74. 
II. Points on Appeal
 
A. Plaintiffs' Appeal
 
Plaintiffs contend that the circuit court erred by (1)
 
dismissing their claims that Admiral acted in bad faith in 
refusing to indemnify Group Builders; (2) dismissing the claim
 
for punitive damages against Admiral; (3) holding that Admiral
 
did not owe a duty of good faith and fair dealing to Tradewind as
 
an umbrella insurer; and (4) dismissing Plaintiffs' claims that
 
Admiral acted in bad faith in refusing to defend Group Builders.
 
B. Admiral's Cross-Appeal
 Although Admiral asserts four points on appeal, they
 
all in effect challenge the circuit court's conclusion that
 
Admiral had a duty to defend Group Builders in the Kalia Tower
 
Lawsuit.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. Standard of Review
 
On appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed under
the same standard applied by the trial courts. Summary
judgment is appropriate where the moving party demonstrates
that there are no genuine issues of material fact and it is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
 
Sentinel Ins. Co., Ltd. v. First Ins. Co. of Hawaif i, Ltd., 76 
Hawai
fi 277, 287, 875 P.2d 894, 904 (1994) (citations omitted). 
IV.
 Admiral's Cross Appeal
 
A. Admiral's Duty to Defend
 
1. Duty to Defend
 
This court's opinion in No. 29402 held that Admiral had 
no duty to indemnify Group Builders, because "construction defect 
claims do not constitute an 'occurrence' under a CGL policy." 
Group Builders, 123 Hawaif i at 148-49, 231 P.3d at 73-74. This 
ruling, in itself, does not resolve the issue of whether Admiral had a duty to defend Group Builders in the Kalia Tower Lawsuit 
because "the duty to provide coverage [i.e., the duty to 
indemnify,] and the duty to defend on the part of an insurer are 
separate and distinct." Dairy Road Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 
Ltd., 92 Hawaif i 398, 412, 992 P.2d 93, 107 (2000) (quoting 
Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 291, 875 P.2d at 908) (brackets in 
original). 
"The duty to defend is limited to situations where the 
pleadings have alleged claims for relief which fall within the terms for coverage of the insurance contract. Where pleadings 
fail to allege any basis for recovery within the coverage clause, 
the insurer has no obligation to defend." Hawaiian Holiday 
Macadamia Nut Co., Inc. v. Industrial Indem. Co., 76 Hawaif i 166, 
169, 872 P.3d 230, 233 (1994) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
"[T]he obligation to defend . . . is broader than the duty to pay 
claims and arises wherever there is the mere potential for 
coverage." Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 287, 875 P.2d at 904) 
(quoting Commerce & Indus. Ins. Co. v. Bank of Hawaif i, 73 Haw. 
322, 326, 832 P.2d 733, 735, reconsideration denied, 73 Haw. 625, 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
834 P.2d 1315 (1992)). "This possibility may be remote, but if 
it exists, the insurer owes the insured a defense." Dairy Road, 
92 Hawaif i at 412, 992 P.2d at 107 (brackets and citation 
omitted). 
The burden of proof for Admiral as the insurer refusing
 
the tender of defense is "significantly augmented" when reviewed
 
under the summary judgment standard. Id. Plaintiffs' burden
 
with respect to their motion for summary judgment "was
 comparatively light, because [they] had merely to prove that a
 
possibility of coverage existed." Id. at 413, 992 P.2d at 108. 
On the other hand, Admiral was required to prove that it would be 
"impossible" for Hilton to prevail against Group Builders on the
 
underlying lawsuits on a claim covered by the policies. See Id. 
at 412, 992 P.2d at 107. 
"[W]hether an insurer's refusal to defend was justified 
must be answered in light of the information available to the insurer at the time it made the refusal." Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i 
at 288, 875 P.2d at 905. It is of no consequence that this court later determined that the insurer had no indemnification 
liability. See Tri-S Corp. v. Western World Ins. Co., 110 
Hawaifi 473, 497, 135 P.3d 82, 106 (2006) (later judgment in 
insured's favor in underlying suit "irrelevant" to determination 
of insurer's duty to defend). 
The duty to defend "arises[s] under the terms of the 
insurance policy, and it is through an interpretation of the 
terms of the policy that such duties are deemed to be owed." 
Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Fireman's Fund Ins. 
Co., 117 Hawaif i 357, 369-70, 183 P.3d 734, 746-47 (2007). 
Accordingly, "[o]ur consideration of the issue before us begins as it must with the relevant provisions of the insurance policy." 
Sturla, Inc. v. Fireman's Fund Ins. Co., 67 Haw. 203, 207, 684 
P.2d 960, 962 (1984). 
10
    
     
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the policy's insuring agreement, Admiral agreed:
 
1. Insuring Agreement
 a. We will pay those sums that the insured becomes
legally obligated to pay as damages because of "bodily
injury" or "property damage" to which this insurance
applies. We will have the right and duty to defend the
insured against any "suit" seeking those damages.
However, we will have no duty to defend the insured
against any "suit" seeking damages for "bodily injury"
or "property damage" to which this insurance does not
apply. We may, at our discretion, investigate any
"occurrence" and settle any claim or "suit" that may
result. 
.  .  .  .
 b. This insurance applies to "bodily injury" and
property damage" only if:
 
(1) The "bodily injury" or "property
damage" is caused by an "occurrence"
that takes place in the "coverage
territory"; and
 
(2) The "bodily injury" or "property damage"
occurs during the policy period.
 
The policy excluded coverage for "property damage" to
 
j. Damage To Property
 
(5) That particular part of real property on which
you or any contractors or subcontractors working
directly or indirectly on your behalf are
performing operations, if the "property damage"
arises out of those operations; or 
(6) That particular part of any property that
must be restored, repaired or replaced because
"your work" was incorrectly performed on it.
 
Paragraph (6) of the exclusion did not apply to "property damage
 
included in the products-completed operations hazard."
 
The policy defined "property damage" as "[p]hysical
 
injury to tangible property, including all resulting loss of use
 
of that property" and provides that "[a]ll such loss of use shall
 
be deemed to occur at the time of the physical injury that caused
 
it"; or "[l]oss of use of tangible property that is not
 
physically injured. All such loss of uses shall be deemed to
 
occur at the time of the 'occurrence' that caused it." The
 
policy defined an "occurrence" as "an accident, including
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general
 
harmful conditions."
 
An amendment to the policy provided that "property
 
damage" will be covered under the policy if it "occurs during the 
policy period and was not prior, to the policy period, known to
 
have occurred by any insured listed . . . [and] includes any
 
continuation, change or resumption of that 'bodily injury' or
 
'property damage' after the end of the policy period."
 
a. Cancellation of policy waived defense of claims as a
result of occurrence after December 1, 2000.
 
Admiral's first argument on appeal is that by
 
cancelling the policy, Group Builders "specifically released
 
Admiral from any obligation to indemnify losses that occurred
 
after December 1, 2000." Admiral relies on the policy
 
cancellation, which reads, "No claims of any type will be made
 
against [Admiral], its agents or its representatives under this
 
policy for losses which occur after the date of cancellation
 
shown above [12/01/00]." Neither the cancellation document nor
 
the policy defines what is meant by "loss." However, "loss" is
 
commonly defined as "[t]he amount of financial detriment caused
 
by . . . an insured property's damage, for which the insurer
 
becomes liable." Black's Law Dictionary 1030 (9th ed. 2009). 
Admiral asserts that the cancellation waived Group Builders'
 right to receive a defense by Admiral for claims for property
 
damage as a result of an occurrence after December 1, 2000. 
b. Complaint did not specify when "occurrence" causing
property damage took place. 
Under the policy, Admiral agreed to indemnify Group
 
Builders against losses for property damage "caused by an
 
'occurrence'" which "occurs during the policy period." 
Accordingly, Group Builders had an occurrence policy: "under an
 
occurrence policy, the event that triggers potential coverage is 
the sustaining of actual damage by the complaining party and not
 
the date of the act or omission that caused the damage." 
12
  Admiral maintains that "the uncontroverted proof in 
this case is that it is a scientific impossibility that mold 
could have grown at the Kalia Tower prior to December 1, 2000." 
However, the insurer points as "proof" to an April 17, 2008 
deposition done by Hilton for the Kalia Tower lawsuit, in which 
Hilton's expert testified that the mold growth which caused 
damage throughout the hotel was a result of air, a "food source" 
(in this instance, drywall paper), and water coming in contact 
with one another. Admiral argues that any property damage could 
not have occurred during the policy period "because the water was 
not present until the building was closed up and the air 
conditioning was turned on." 
 Contrary to Admiral's assertion that Hilton alleged in 
the Kalia Tower Lawsuit that Group Builders' work "resulted in property damage from the growth of mold in the Kalia Tower after 
construction of the Kalia Tower was complete," Hilton's complaint 
does not specify when the mold growth began, when any property 
damage occurred, or what caused the mold to grow. The Kalia NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 288, 875 P.2d at 905. We agree with 
Admiral's position that in order for property damage at Kalia 
Tower to trigger coverage under Admiral's policy, "there would 
have to be a possibility that the mold was present during those 
two months." 
Admiral's reliance on a deposition taken in 2008, 
almost five years after it refused to defend, ignores that the 
duty to defend arises, not during pre-trial discovery, but when 
the complaint is tendered. See Dairy Road, 92 Hawaif i at 413, 
992 P.2d at 108. We evaluate "whether an insurer's refusal to defend was justified . . . in light of the information available 
to the insurer at the time it made the refusal." Sentinel, 76 
Haw. at 288, 875 P.2d at 905. While the cause and timing of the mold growth supports Admiral's position that there was no 
property damage during the policy period, the expert's opinion 
was obtained well after Admiral denied the defense. 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tower Lawsuit complaints noted only that the mold was 
"discovered" in mid-2002. Cf. Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 288, 875 
P.3d at 905 (complaint similarly did not specify timing of damages). At the time the tender of defense was made and 
refused, the source of the mold had not been alleged, and, it 
appears from the record, had not been determined by Hilton's 
investigation. Admiral itself admits that "[t]he only 
information presented to Admiral at the time of the tender was a 
copy of the Hilton Complaint[,]" and points out no other facts 
known at the time upon which it based the denial of the defense. 
c. Although subsequently determined that Hilton's
claims were not covered by Admiral's CGL policy, there
was possibility of coverage when Admiral denied
defense.
 
Admiral appears to acknowledge that the uncertainty
 
over when the mold damage occurred is a disputed factual issue
 
that would preclude summary judgment, but maintains that even if
 
property damage were present during the Admiral policy period,
 
those damages were not the result of occurrences or were excluded
 
5
by provisions  of the policy.  For purpose of this appeal, we 
must assume that property damage may have occurred at the Kalia 
Tower during the policy period. See Dairy Road
, 92 Hawaif i at 
418, 992 P.2d at 113 (duty to defend hinges on whether "allegations set forth in the complaint, which if true, establish 
the possibility of coverage"). Two questions remained at the 
time of the denial of the defense: (1) whether damages caused by 
defective workmanship constituted an "occurrence" within the 
meaning of the standard-form CGL policy and, (2) if so, whether 
the damage could be excluded here under the works-in-progress 
exclusions, j.(5) and j.(6). 
5
 Although Admiral's motion for summary judgment on the duty to
indemnify identified exclusions j.(5), j.(6), k, l and m, as being applicable
to Group Builders' claim, Admiral abandons the applicability of exclusions k,
l, and m on appeal.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
i. Circuit court based its decision on duty to
defend on holding from Sentinel Insurance Co. v.
First Insurance Co.
 
Although the circuit court does not provide a citation
 
in its order granting Plaintiffs partial summary judgment
6 on
 
the duty to defend, the court's later-entered Findings of
 
Fact/Conclusions of Law (FOF/COL) regarding the bad-faith claims
 
make clear that the court upheld Admiral's duty to defend under
 
"Sentinel . . . and its progeny." Plaintiffs argue that
 
Sentinel required an insurer to defend "where Hawaii appellate
 
cases have not conclusively answered coverage issues impacting
 
the duty to defend."
 
In Sentinel, Sentinel and First Insurance insured the 
developers of an apartment complex under a series of CGL 
policies, which alternated over the course of seven years. 76 
Hawaifi at 284-85, 875 P.2d at 901-02. After water infiltration 
damaged the apartment building, the homeowner's association sued the developers and contractors, alleging defects in design, 
construction, and/or materials. Id. at 284, 875 P.2d at 901. 
The developers tendered the defense to both insurers. Id. at 
284, 875 P.2d at 901. Sentinel agreed to defend under a 
reservation of rights, while First Insurance refused to defend or 
indemnify, instead maintaining Sentinel was solely responsible 
6
 The circuit court concluded in its order granting partial summary
judgment to Plaintiffs:
 
14. Construing the policy liberally in favor of the insured
and resolving any ambiguities against the insurer, the Court
finds that because of the uncertainty as to when the
property damage occurred, as to whether the property damage
arose out of Group Builders' operations, or as to whether
Group Builders' work was incorrectly performed, a
possibility of coverage, however remote, exists where the
insurer owed the insured a duty to defend. 
Uncertainty over when the property damage occurred and whether the work was
incorrectly performed are factual matters that would have been decided had the
Kalia Tower Lawsuit come to trial. Whether the property damage "arose out of
Group Builder's operations" would affect the court's application of exception
j.(5) and j.(6).
 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the entire losses to the building because it was the
 
"'insurer on risk' at the time of manifestation" of the damages. 
Id. at 290, 875 P.2d at 907. The homeowners's association and
 
building owners settled the case, and Sentinel brought an action
 
for declaratory relief against First Insurance to recover the
 
cost of defending the lawsuit as well as a portion of the
 
settlement paid. Id. at 286, 875 P.2d at 903. 
The supreme court considered, inter alia, what event
 
would trigger coverage in a third-party liability insurance case
 
and, more specifically, "what trigger should apply where the loss
 
continues and progresses over successive policy periods involving
 
different insurers." Id. at 290, 875 P.2d at 907. The supreme
 
court found "a notable dispute nationwide" on those issues. Id. 
After concluding that First Insurance had a duty to defend 
because these questions were open questions of law, the supreme
 
court held that the injury-in-fact, not manifestation of the
 
damages, was the relevant event triggering coverage and a
 
continuous trigger might apply, exposing successive insurers to
 
liability. Id. at 298, 875 P.2d at 915. The court remanded
 
the case with instructions for the trial court because factual
 issues remained that would affect the application of the injury­
in-fact test.
 
In affirming the trial court's conclusion that First
 
Insurance had breached its duty to defend, the supreme court
 
said it did not need to answer "what event(s) triggered
 
coverage in this case for property damage under the First
 
Insurance policies" nor whether the insurers would be jointly
 
and severally liable for damages, although it later answered
 
these questions Id. at 290, 875 P.2d at 907. "The mere fact
 
that the answers to those questions in this jurisdiction were
 not then and are not presently conclusively answered
 
demonstrates that, based on the allegations in the underlying
 
action, it was possible that the [insured] would be entitled to
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indemnification under the First Insurance policies." Id. 
Plaintiffs rely on this sentence in demanding a defense.
 
A dozen years after Sentinel, the supreme court said 
that Sentinel stood for the proposition that "determining 
breach of duty to defend does not require resolution of open 
questions in the underlying case because the fact that, based 
on the allegations in the complaint, the questions are open in 
itself demonstrates the possibility that the insured will be 
entitled to coverage." Tri-S Corp., 110 Hawaif i at 495 n.10, 
135 P.3d at 104 n.10 (citing Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 290, 875 
P.2d at 907)) (emphasis added). 
ii. Sentinel required a defense.
 
In a letter from the Plaintiffs' attorney to Admiral
 
dated September 22, 2004, Plaintiffs asked Admiral to
 
reconsider its coverage decision and pointed out the Sentinel
 
rule. Admiral rejected application of the Sentinel rule. In a
 
letter to a mediator in the Kalia Tower Lawsuit, Admiral's
 
attorney argued, "To employ Tradewinds' wildly broad
 
application of Sentinel would require absurd results, such as
 
preventing an insurer from ever relying on unambiguous policy
 
language that clearly precluded coverage because a Hawaii
 
appellate court had not addressed it, even where the reason the
 
court had not addressed it was that no one had yet chosen to
 
contest the clarity of the policy terms on the issue."
 
Sentinel was clear that "[a]ll doubts as to whether a 
duty to defend exists are resolved against the insurer and in 
favor of the insured." Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 287, 875 P.2d at 
904 (quoting Trizec Properties, Inc. v. Biltmore Constr. Co., 767 F.2d 810, 812 (11th Cir. 1985) (some brackets omitted). 
Admiral has not distinguished the Sentinel holding on appeal. 
Admiral owed a defense because the courts were split
 
as to whether construction defect claims constituted an
 
"occurrence" under a CGL policy at the time Admiral refused to
 
undertake a defense on behalf of Group Builders. See Group
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Builders, 123 Hawaif i at 148, 231 P.3d at 73 (noting "a split of 
authority on the issue"). 
iii. Work-in-progress exclusions.
 
Admiral argues that even if there was "property damage" 
as a result of an occurrence, the business-risk exclusions of the
 
Admiral policy excludes coverage for any of the damages alleged. 
However, Admiral repeatedly acknowledges that "there is no Hawaii
 
case law interpreting the scope of exclusions j.(5) and j.(6)."
 
Admiral points to other jurisdictions that have interpreted the
 
same exclusionary language in the insurer's favor as well as
 
other cases regarding the purpose of CGL policies, but Admiral
 
fails to note citations to the contrary in other jurisdictions,
 
which would lead to the conclusion that the interpretations of
 
exclusions j.(5) and j.(6)--although a standard industry form-­
continue to vary. 
Exclusions j.(5) and j.(6) are a subset of business-
risk exclusions called the "work-in-progress exclusion" or
 
"ongoing operations" exclusions. 9A Couch on Insurance § 120:20
 
(3d ed. 1997). 
Exclusion j.(5) has generally been applied to preclude
coverage for damages to particular real property resulting from or
arising out of the ongoing operations of the insured. The purpose
of exclusion j.(6) is to preclude coverage for the costs to repair
or replace particular work which is discovered to be defective or
otherwise incorrectly performed while the insured is still
performing its work.
 
Both of these exclusions are limited in their
 
application by both time and scope. In order for these
exclusions to apply, the claims must arise at the time the
insured is actually performing the work on the property.
Conversely, the exclusions do not apply to claims which
arise after the insured's operations are complete. These
 exclusions will further only apply to that 'particular part'
of the subject property where the operations were being
performed by the insured."
 
Id.
 
Even if we assume, based on the fact that Group
 
Builders' subcontract called for completion of the project in May 
2001, that Group Builders' was in the middle of construction when
 
Admiral "came off the risk" in December 2000, it is still not
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
certain that these exclusions could be interpreted in Admiral's
 
favor. Admiral's reading of the exclusions--that because Group
 
Builders had ongoing operations, the exceptions applied--ignores
 
the words "that particular part."
 
Admiral states that ongoing operations exclusions have
 
been held to be unambiguous and indeed some courts have so held. 
See, e.g., Transportation Ins. Co. v. Piedmont Const. Group, LLC,
 
686 S.E.2d 824, 827 (Ga. App. 2009) (citing Sapp v. State Farm
 
Fire & Cas. Co., 486 S.E.2d 71 (Ga. App. 1997)). But other
 
jurisdictions have interpreted section j.(5) and j.(6) of the
 
standard form as being ambiguous, and have accordingly construed
 
them against the insurer. See Beaverdam Contracting v. Erie Ins.
 
Co., 2008 WL 4378153, at *8-9 (Ohio App. 2008) (citing Thommes
 v. Milwaukee Ins. Co., 641 N.W.2d 877 (Minn.2002) and Pekin Ins.
 
Co. v. Miller, 854 N.E.2d 693 (Ill. App. 2006)).
 
Admiral cites to a number of cases that read "that
 
particular part" broadly: Shelby Ins. Co. v. Ne. Structures,
 
Inc., 767 A.2d 75,77 (R.I. 2001) (holding that exclusions j.(5)
 
and j.(6) barred coverage because temporary bracing "cannot be
 
separated from the construction of the remainder of the structure
 
for purposes of recovery under the insurance policy"); Bituminous
 
Cas. Corp. v. No. Ins. Co. of New York, 548 S.E.2d 495, 496 (Ga.
 
App. 2001) (rejecting narrow interpretation of j.(5) and j.(6)
 
exclusions, where contractor was reinstalling defective roofing
 
and protective tarp blew away causing flooding inside home);
 
Grinnell Mut. Reinsurance Co. v. Lynne, 686 N.W.2d 118, 125-26
 
(N.D. 2004) (rejecting narrow interpretation of j.(5) exclusion 
to find no coverage where house collapsed due to faulty supports
 
lifting house while new foundation was laid); Auto Owners Ins.
 
Co. v. Chorak & Sons, Inc., 2008 WL 3286986, at *3 (ND. Ill.
 
2008) (house slid off foundation resulting in "catastrophic
 
damage" where contractor worked on a two-inch by six-inch wooden
 
plate at the top of the foundation); Journeyman Prof'ls, Inc. v.
 
American Family Ins. Co., 2006 WL 3041107, at *3 (Ohio App. 2006)
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(excluding damages to wall of building caused by faulty
 
construction of roofing trusses).
 
Admiral does not acknowledge that the clause has been
 
narrowly interpreted in other jurisdictions to meaning damages
 
necessitating repair or replacement of the defective workmanship
 
only. See, e.g., Mid-Continent Cas. Co., v JHP Dev., Inc., 557
 
F.3d 207, 210, 215 (5th Cir. 2009) ("the exclusion does not bar
 coverage for damage to parts of a property that were the subject
 
of only nondefective work by the insured and were damaged as a
 
result of defective work by the insured on other parts of the
 
property") (coverage applied where contractor's failure to water-
seal exterior damaged interior finishes, drywall, electrical
 
wiring); Hathaway Dev. Co., Inc. v. Am. Empire Surplus Lines Ins.
 
Co., 686 S.E. 2d 855, 863 (Ga. App. 2009), aff'd, 707 S.E.2d 369
 
(2011) (exclusion did not apply where contractor's undersized
 
pipes ruined site preparation work done to date); Piedmont, 686
 
S.E.2d at 827 ("'that particular part' in the exclusions referred
 
not to [the building] as a whole, but 'only to the room and the
 
plumbing on which [the subcontractor] was working prior to the
 
fire starting'"). 
The Sixth Circuit, addressing j.(6), explained:
 
The opening words of the exclusion--namely, "[t]hat
particular part"--are trebly restrictive, straining to the
point of awkwardness to make clear that the exclusion
applies only to building parts on which defective work was
performed, and not to the building generally. And we also
 agree that "part," as used in this exclusion, means the
"distinct component parts" of a building-things like the
"interior drywall, stud framing, electrical wiring," or, as
here, the foundation. The (j)(6) exclusion therefore
applies only to the cost of repairing or replacing distinct
component parts on which the insured performed defective
work.
 
Fortney & Weygandt, Inc. v. American Mfrs. Mut. Ins. Co., 595
 
F.3d 308, 311 (6th Cir. 2010) (under Ohio law, insurer owed
 
general contractor defense against allegations that construction
 
defect in foundation necessitated building's demolition) 
(citation omitted). 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hilton's complaint did not specify which installation
 
was defective, nor did it specify what parts of the Kalia Tower
 
were damaged. Thus, there was a possibility that the exclusions,
 
if narrowly read, would not exclude coverage of all Hilton's
 
claims against Group Builders. 
We do not need to decide how to interpret "that 
particular part" here. See Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 290, 875 P.2d 
at 907; Tri-S Corp., 110 Hawaif i at 495 n.10, 135 P.3d at 104 
n.10. The insurer carries the burden of proof that an 
"exclusionary clause applies." Tri-S Corp., 110 Hawaif i at 484, 
135 P.3d at 93 (2006) (citing Sentinel, 76 Hawaif i at 297, 875 
P.2d at 914). In the absence of clear authority as to the interpretation of this phrase, Admiral could not prove that these 
exclusions applied to the Hilton's alleged damage. See York v. 
Sterling Ins. Co., 494 N.Y.S.2d 243, 244 (N.Y. App. Div. 1985) (finding duty to defend applied where "insurer has not met its 
burden of proving that its construction is the only one which can 
fairly be placed on the exclusion"). Thus, where the exclusions 
did not clearly exclude coverage, there was a possibility of 
coverage such that Admiral had a duty to defend. 
B. Plaintiffs' Appeal
 
1. The circuit court did not err in dismissing Count
Four, which alleged that Admiral acted in bad faith
against Group Builders.
 
Plaintiffs' first and fourth points of error claim the 
circuit court erred in dismissing Count Four of Plaintiffs' 
complaint, which alleged that Admiral acted in bad faith in 
denying Group Builders' coverage. In its April 3, 2007 Amended 
FOFs/COLs, the circuit court found that based on Sentinel "and 
its progeny," Admiral's "duty to defend is not an 'open question 
of law'" but that the duty to indemnify was an open question of 
law. The circuit court cited to Enoka v. AIG Hawaif i Ins. Co., 
Inc., 109 Hawaif i 537, 128 P.3d 850 (2006), which held that 
"where an insurer denies the payment of no-fault benefits based 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on 'an open question of law,' there is 'obviously no bad faith on
 
the part of [the insurer] in litigating that issue.'" Id. at
 
552, 128 P.3d at 865 (quoting Colonial Penn. Ins. Co. v. First
 Ins. Co. of Hawaii, Ltd., 71 Haw. 42, 43–44, 780 P.2d 1112, 1114
 
(1989)). The circuit court found that the issue of indemnity was
 
an open question and Admiral's interpretation was reasonable and
 
therefore did not constitute bad faith. The circuit court made
 
these findings, acknowledging that it had not adjudicated the
 
issue of indemnity, which it later did on September 23, 2008.
 
On June 13, 2008, Admiral filed its "Motion For Partial
 
Summary Judgment As To Count Four To Plaintiff's First Amended
 
Complaint Filed On May 30, 2006." Judge Kim granted the motion, 
stating: 
And I'm going to grant it basically 'cause in this Court's
view, its almost law of the case. . . . I think it just
about necessarily follows in this case, from everything
that's been presented to me and given Judge Lee's prior
ruling, granting Admiral's summary judgment on the bad faith
issue on indemnification. I just don't see a genuine issue
of material fact here on the bad faith claim in Count 4 on
 the duty to defend.
 
a. Separately deciding issue of bad faith
regarding indemnification and defense.
 
The duty to defend and the duty to indemnify are two 
distinct duties. Bad faith in handling a third-party claim may 
include "bad faith surrounding an insurer's duty to defend, to 
settle, or investigate a third-party claim[.]" Honbo v. Hawaiian 
Ins. & Guar. Co., Ltd., 86 Hawaif i 373, 378, 949 P.2d 213, 218 
(App. 1997). Although Plaintiffs contend that an insurer's bad 
faith cannot be "applied separately to the duty to defend and the 
duty to indemnify," Plaintiffs provide no citation for such a 
proposition and we find no case law that indicates that they 
could not be handled at different times. Plaintiffs claim that 
the "piecemeal dismissal of the bad faith claims" led the court 
to apply the "open question of law" rule enunciated in Enoka, 
which they claim is not valid law in the third-party insurance 
context. 
22
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs, citing to Honbo, maintain that there is a
 
distinction between first-party bad faith and third-party bad
 
7
faith, inferring that there is a different standard for
measuring bad faith in handling first-party and third-party 
insurance claims. Honbo differentiates between first-party and 
third-party bad faith claims "because each arise out of different sets of circumstances." 86 Hawaif i at 377, 494 P.2d at 217. 
Honbo made such a distinction to explain why a particular statute of limitations, HRS § 294-36(a)(4), did not apply to first-party 
bad-faith claims against a no-fault insurer, but would apply to a 
third-party bad-faith claim. 86 Hawaif i at 377-78, 949 P.2d at 
217-18. Honbo does not address what is the appropriate standard 
to be applied in analyzing bad faith in handling a third-party 
insurance claim. 
b. The "reasonableness" standard.
 
Admiral cites the standard for evaluating a bad-faith 
claim enunciated in the first-party insurance cases. Best Place, 
82 Hawaif i at 132, 920 P.2d at 346.
8 We agree with the federal 
District Court in Hawaif i that applied the Best Place standard to 
a third-party case, specifically one that alleges bad faith in 
handing a CGL claim, in Allen v Scottsdale Ins. Co., 307 F.Supp. 
2d 1170 (D. Haw. 2004). 
7
 "A 'third-party claim' is one where the insurer contracts to defend
the insured against claims made by third parties against the insured and to
pay any resulting liability, up to the specified dollar limit. In contrast, a'first-party claim' refers to an insurance agreement where the insurer agreesto pay claims submitted to it by the insured for losses suffered by theinsured." Best Place, Inc. v. Penn America Ins. Co., 82 Hawaif i 120,124 n.4,
920 P.2d 334, 338 n.4 (1996). While this court has categorized CGL,director's liability, errors and omissions insurance, etc. as third-partyinsurance, one treatise considers more specifically the benefits owed underthe contract before categorizing the breaches. Indemnification is a benefitgoing to a third party, "[t]he right to a defense is a first-party benefit,protecting the insured against defense costs." William T. Barker & Ronald D. Kent, New Appleman Insurance Bad Faith Litigation § 3.08[3] at 3-41 (2d ed.2011). 
8
 Plaintiffs do not suggest the standard to be applied. 
23
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The analysis of bad faith in Best Place began with the
 
premise that "conduct based on an interpretation of the insurance
 
contract that is reasonable does not constitute bad faith." Best
 
Place, 82 Hawaif i at 133, 920 P.2d at 347. The supreme court 
elaborated:
 
Under the Gruenberg [v. Aetna Ins. Co., 510 P.2d
1032 (Cal. 1973)] test, the insured need not
show a conscious awareness of wrongdoing or
unjustifiable conduct, nor an evil motive or
intent to harm the insured. An unreasonable
 delay in payment of benefits will warrant
recovery for compensatory damages under the
Gruenberg test. However, conduct based on an
interpretation of the insurance contract that is
reasonable does not constitute bad faith. In
 addition, an erroneous decision not to pay a
claim for benefits due under a policy does not
by itself justify an award of compensatory
damages. Rather, the decision not to pay a
claim must be in 'bad faith.' California
 Shoppers Inc. v. Royal Globe Ins. Co., 175
Cal.App.3d 1, 221 Cal.Rptr. 171 (1985) (bad
faith implies unfair dealing rather than
mistaken judgment).
 
Id. (citations omitted). Guajardo v. AIG Hawaif i Ins. Co., 118 
Hawaifi 196, 206, 187 P.3d 580, 590 (2008), another first-party 
case, stated: "A reasonableness standard governs bad faith
 
claims." See also 14 Couch on Insurance § 205:4 at 205-14 (3d
 
ed. 2001).
 
As to the rule of reasonableness, the Hawaif i Supreme 
Court has held that an interpretation of an insurance contract
 based on "open questions of law" was presumptively reasonable and
 
therefore could not be the basis of a bad faith claim. 
Enoka,
 
109 Hawaif i at 552, 128 P.3d at 865. The supreme court 
explained, "[B]ad faith implies unfair dealing rather than
 
mistaken judgment." Id. The circuit court applied the proper
 
standard in dismissing Plaintiffs' bad faith claims.
 
2. The circuit court did not err in dismissing the
claim for punitive damages against Admiral as a matter
of law
.
 
Plaintiffs' second point on appeal is that the court
 
erred by "sua sponte dismissing the punitive damage claim." In
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its March 6, 2007 motion for partial summary judgment on the bad-
faith claims, Admiral moved the court to dismiss the punitive
 
claims against it. Admiral argued there could be no punitive
 
damages in the absence of bad faith.
 
Plaintiffs argue there were genuine issues of material
 
fact relating to Admiral's intent but fails to point to anything
 
in the record demonstrating willfulness, wantonness and
 
recklessness on Admiral's part. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki
 
Beachcomber Investment Co.
, 74 Haw. 85, 139 n.23, 839 P.2d 10, 37
 
n.23 (punitive damage are warranted where the party has acted in
 
"such a wilful, wanton or reckless manner as to result in a
 
tortious injury"). The circuit court properly dismissed
 
Plaintiffs' punitive damages claim.
 
3. The circuit court did not err in dismissing the
bad-faith claims brought by Tradewind as an umbrella
insurer.
 
In its third point of error, Plaintiffs allege that the
 
circuit court erred in dismissing its Count 6, which alleges that
 
Admiral "as [a] primary insurer[] owed [Tradewind] duties of good
 
faith and fair dealings, as an umbrella insurer."
 
The duty of good faith and fair dealing is implied from 
the terms of the insurance contract. Best Place, 82 Hawaif i at 
132, 920 P.2d at 346. There was no contract between Admiral, the primary insurer, and Tradewind, the excess insurer. Hawaif i law 
does not provide for bad faith claims based on an insurance contract brought by a third-party to that contract. Weber v. 
Indemnity Ins. Co. of N. America, 345 F. Supp. 2d 1139, 1150 (citing Simmons v. Puu, 105 Hawaif i 112, 122-23, 94 P.3d 667, 
677-78). But cf. Hough v. Pacific Ins. Co., Ltd., 83 Hawaif i 
457, 468 n.15, 927 P.2d 858, 869 n. 15 (1996) (allowing bad faith 
claims against workers' compensation insurer by employee because 
employee is an intended beneficiary of the insurance). 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because Admiral did not owe a direct duty of good faith
 
and fair dealing to Tradewind, the circuit court did not err as
 
to Count Six.
 
VI. Conclusion
 
Therefore, we affirm the April 7, 2009 Partial Final
 
Judgment and the March 20, 2009 Partial Final Judgment both
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, April 15, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Wesley H. Sakai, Jr.
(Bendet, Fidell, Sakai & Lee)Melvyn M. MiyagiAngela T. Thompson(Watanabe & Ing)for Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees/Cross-AppelleesGroup Builders, Inc. and TradewindInsurance Company, Ltd. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Joseph F. Kotowski, III
and Allen R. Wolff (Olshan Grundman Frome Rosenzweig &Wolosky)for Defendant-Appellee/Cross­Appellant/Cross-AppelleeAdmiral Insurance Company. 
Gary W.K. Au Young
and Scott Noya(Daley & Heft)for Defendants-Appellees/Cross­Appellees/Cross-Appellants NationalInterstate Insurance Company,Servco Insurance Services Corp.,National Interstate Insurance Company of Hawaii, Inc. 
26
 