NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29480
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LAWRENCE P. PECK, ROBBYN L. PECK and
PECK, INC., a Hawai 'i Corporation, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. LYNN LINDER NAKKIM, CONTINENTAL PACIFIC, LLC, a
Delaware Limited Liability Company, Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-374)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lynn Linder Nakkim (
Nakkim) appeals
 
from the Judgment and Decree of Specific Performance (Judgment)
 
filed on October 2, 2008, in the Circuit Court of the Third
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court).  After a jury-waived trial, judgment
 
was entered against Nakkim and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellees
 
Lawrence P. Peck (Peck), Robbyn Peck (Mrs. Peck; together, the
Pecks), and Peck, Inc. (collectively, the Plaintiffs), on
 
Plaintiffs' Complaint for Specific Performance, Injunctive Relief
 
And Damages (Complaint).
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The parties in this case executed two documents: (1)
 
an Agreement of Sale for a 50-acre parcel of land (Property)
 
between Nakkim and the Pecks; and (2) a Construction Contract
 
between Nakkim and Peck, Inc., whereby Peck, Inc. would build a
 single story home (Home) for Nakkim on one of Nakkim's other
 
properties. The Agreement of Sale, dated November 29, 2003,
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provided that the Pecks would pay a purchase price of $180,000
 
for the Property by:
 
1) Assuming the NOTE on the Property. The balance of
 
$87,412.42 shall be assumed by [the Pecks] and [the
Pecks] accept[] the terms and conditions of the NOTE
[in favor of Continental Pacific, LLC (Continental
 Pacific)] . . . .
2) It is agreed that [the Pecks] shall build on
[Nakkim's] property a HOME as defined in CONSTRUCTION
CONTRACT documents.
 
The Agreement of Sale also provided that the Pecks
 
would lease 40 acres of the Property to Nakkim for the purpose of
 
grazing horses for five years at $1,000 per year. Under the
 Agreement of Sale, the Pecks were responsible for taxes and other
 charges. Finally, in the event of default, Nakkim was required
 to provide notice in writing, by registered or certified mail,
 after which the Pecks would have ten days to correct the default. 
Peck testified that he made timely monthly payments
 
beginning on or about December 1, 2003, with the exception of the
 March 2004 payment. Nakkim notified Peck of the arrearage on
 August 12, 2004 via letter. There is no evidence that the letter
 was sent through registered or certified mail, as required under
 the Agreement of Sale. Nakkim's records indicate that the Pecks
 sent Nakkim a check for the March 2004 payment, which was dated
 August 13, 2004.
 
The Construction Contract, also dated November 29, 
2003, was an agreement between Nakkim and Peck, Inc., whereby Peck, Inc. would build a single-story home on Nakkim's property in the Waiki
'i Ranch area for the sum of $223,396 (Construction 
Sum), to be applied to the Pecks' purchase of the Property. The 
Construction Contract included a clause (Additional Cost Clause) 
providing for an increase in cost: 
15 ADDITIONAL COST: If [Peck, Inc.] wishes to make a
2
Claim[ ] for an increase in the Contract Sum, written notice
as provided herein shall be given before proceeding to
execute the Work. Prior notice is not required for Claims
 
2
 A Claim for the purposes of the Construction Contract is a "demand
or assertion by one of the parties seeking adjustment or interpretation of the
Contract terms, ... with respect to the terms of the Contract[,] . . . [and]
also includes other disputes and matters in question between [Nakkim] and
[Peck, Inc.] arising out of or related to the Contract." A Claim must be made
 by written notice.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
relating to an emergency endangering life or property. If
 
the Contractor believes additional cost is involved for
 reasons including but not limited to (1) a written
interpretation from the Architect, (2) an order by [Nakkim]
to stop the Work where [Peck, Inc.] was not at fault, (3) a
written order for a minor change in the Work issued by
[Nakkim] or agent thereof, (4) failure, by [Nakkim], to make
payment due, (5) termination of the [Construction Contract]
by [Nakkim], or (6) other reasonable grounds, Claims shall
be filed in accordance with the procedure established
therein.
 
Under section 4.1 of the Construction Contract,
 
"[Nakkim] shall secure [for] and pay for necessary approvals,
 
easements, assessments and charges required for the construction,
 use or occupancy of structures."
 
The Circuit Court found, and Nakkim does not dispute,
 
that, although they were set forth in two documents, the
 Agreement of Sale and the Construction Contract were intended by
 the parties to be an expression of a single agreement between
 Plaintiffs and Nakkim (the Contract). 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Waiki
'i Ranch 
Homeowners' Association, the owner of a lot in Waiki 'i Ranch 
development must obtain approval from the Waiki 'i Design 
Committee (Design Committee) before constructing on their lot. 
Nakkim encountered a number of setbacks in seeking the Design 
Committee's approval of the construction of the Home due to deficiencies including the inability to produce an adequate topological map, the original design of the House being too small, and failure to submit a color board.
3 
On July 14, 2004, Peck, Inc. sent a letter to 
"Perspective" clients notifying them that construction costs in Hawai
'i had increased dramatically, and that Contract Sums for 
certain contracts would be increased accordingly. The letter noted that Peck, Inc. was entitled to increase the cost of construction through the Additional Cost Clause of the Construction Contract. The letter was not specifically directed to Nakkim, nor did it include a specific figure by which construction costs would rise. The letter stated, however, that 
3
 A color board is a piece of plywood with samples of colors and
styles of the exterior of the house. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"notice is hereby given that the Contract Sum will be increased
 
accordingly prior [to] the breaking ground and beginning
 construction on your project." Peck testified that the purpose
 of the letter was merely to keep clients abreast of recent cost
 increases in the construction industry. 
In response, Nakkim sent Peck a letter on July 21,
 
2004, in which she stated that "a deal was a deal," and began to
 take over payments on the Continental Pacific Mortgage "in
 anticipation of [Peck's] defection[.]" Additionally, Nakkim
 wrote that she would increase the sale price of the Property if
 he wanted to renegotiate the price of the Home. 
As early as October 7, 2004, Nakkim began listing the
 
Property for sale. Then, through a November 4, 2004 letter,
 Nakkim gave Peck, Inc. seven days to complete the Home. Citing
 the "Termination of Contract by Owner" clause of the Construction
 Contract, Nakkim alleged that Peck had "persistently and
 repeatedly failed to perform the work according to the contract
 and its specifications," and that such delays entitled her to
 "finish the work by whatever reasonable method [she] the owner
 may find expedient." This ultimatum was reiterated in a November
 5, 2004 letter, which also informed Peck that the "entire matter"
 was cancelled. However, it appears that, as of November 5, 2004,
 Nakkim had not obtained final approval to begin construction of
 the Home. 
On November 12, 2004, Plaintiffs filed their Complaint
 
seeking, inter alia, injunctive relief to prevent Nakkim from
 selling the Property and specific performance of the Agreement of
 Sale. Nakkim answered and filed a counterclaim seeking, inter
 alia, cancellation and rescission of the parties' agreements. 
Following a jury-waived trial in March and April of 2008, the
 Circuit Court issued its Findings of Fact (FOFs), Conclusions of
 
Law (COLs), and Order on July 23, 2008. The court's FOFs
 
included, inter alia:
 
4. On November 29, 2003, the Plaintiffs and [Nakkim]
signed two documents: An Agreement of Sale and a
Construction Contract. These two documents were intended by
the parties to be an expression of a single agreement
between Plaintiffs and [Nakkim].
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. Under the terms of the Agreement of Sale,
Plaintiffs Lawrence L. Peck and Robbyn L. Peck agreed to
purchase and Defendant Lynn Linder Nakkim agreed to sell the
[Property] for the sales price of One Hundred Eighty
Thousand Dollars ($180,000.00).
 
6. The payment by Plaintiffs for the [Property] under
the Agreement of Sale was to be made as follows: Payment of
$87,412.42 representing the balance on [Nakkim's] mortgage
due and owing to [Continental Pacific]; the balance of
$92,587.58 to be paid by providing Defendant credit for
payments due from [Nakkim] under the Construction Contract
to Plaintiff Peck Inc.[]
 
7. The Agreement of Sale makes specific reference to
the Construction Contract. In particular, the Agreement of
Sale states under the heading of "PAYMENT OF THE PURCHASE
PRICE" that:
 
It is agreed that BUYER [Plaintiffs Lawrence and
Robbyn Peck] shall build on SELLER'S [Nakkim] property
a HOME as defined in CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT documents. 
The balance of this AGREEMENT OF SALE shall be paid by
SELLER first benefits [sic] due on the CONSTRUCTION
CONTRACT and shall continue until the balance due on
 this AGREEMENT OF SALE is paid in full with the
exception of the NOTE amount.
. . . . 
9. The "Construction Sum" under the Construction
 
Contract was set at $223,396.00 but was subject to
adjustment. The Construction Sum was "subject to additions
and deductions as provided in the Contract documents."
Paragraph 15 of the General Conditions of the Construction
Contract permitted [Peck, Inc.] to make a claim for an
increase in the Contract Sum because of additional cost on
 certain specific grounds plus "other reasonable grounds".
 
10. The Court finds that increase in the cost of
 
construction costs which arose during delay in the
commencement date of construction is a reasonable ground for
seeking an increase in the Construction sum if the delay was
not the result of fault on the part of Plaintiff Peck Inc.
 
11. [Nakkim] was responsible for obtaining approvals
from the Design Committee of the Waiki i Ranch Homeowners'
Association ("Design Committee"). In order to build,
[Nakkim] was required to obtain a variance from the design
committee to allow for a trapezoidal building area. On
 August 19, 2004, the Design Committee gave notice to the
members of the Waiki'i Ranch Homeowners['] Association of a
public hearing to consider [Nakkim's] application for a
variance.
 
12. On September 28, 2004, the Design Committee
approved the variance and also gave preliminarily [sic]
approved [Nakkim's] project plans. The preliminary approval
required that [Nakkim] meet certain conditions, including
the submission of a landscape plan. Therefore, [Nakkim]
could not have given notice to Plaintiff Lawrence Peck to
begin construction on [Nakkim's] Waiki'i Ranch property
until after November 5, 2004.
 
13. As a result, the Court finds that the delay in
the start of the construction on [Nakkim's] Waiki i Ranch
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Property was not the fault of Plaintiffs, but primarily
attributable to [Nakkim's] failure to get approvals from the
Design Committee in a timely fashion.
 
14. The court finds that the Contract Sum was not in
 
fact increased by Plaintiffs. Rather, Plaintiff Lawrence P.
Peck or Plaintiff Peck, Inc. merely gave notice that he or
it intended to increase the [Contract Sum]. However, he or
it did not go forward with the procedure set forth in the
Construction Contract for an actual increase in the
 [Contract Sum].
 
15. The Court finds that Plaintiffs Lawrence P. Peck
 
and Robbyn L. Peck have continued to tender to [Nakkim] the
monthly payments due under the Agreement of Sale. In
 addition, [Nakkim] has not made demand [sic] upon Plaintiffs
Lawrence P. Peck and Robbyn L. Peck for the real property
taxes, association dues, etc. that they were required to pay
under the Agreement of Sale. In any case, [Nakkim] did not
give notice to Plaintiffs Lawrence P. Peck and Robbyn L.
Peck of the need to correct any default as to payments
before purporting to cancel the Agreement of Sale as
required under the Agreement of Sale.
. . . .
 
17. The Court determines that Plaintiffs Lawrence P.
 
Peck and Robbyn L. Peck are entitled to specific performance
of the Agreement of Sale. . . . 
18. The Court determines that the terms of the
 
Construction Contract are, at this juncture, too imprecise
to specifically enforce. For the same reason, the Court
determines that Plaintiffs have not proven that they are
entitled to recover damages for loss of profits under the
Construction Contract.
 
Based on its FOFs, the Circuit Court concluded, inter
 
alia:
 
1. Plaintiffs Lawrence P. Peck and Robbyn L. Peck
have substantially complied with the terms and conditions of
the Agreement of Sale and are entitled to specific
performance of the Agreement of Sale.
 
2. Specific performance is an appropriate remedy
under the Agreement of Sale since land is unique.
. . . . 
3. The Court determines that the terms of the
 
Construction Contract are, at this juncture, too imprecise
to specifically enforce. For the same reason, the Court
determines that Plaintiffs have not proven that they are
entitled to recover damages for loss of profits under the
Construction Contract.
 
4. The Court determines that Plaintiffs Lawrence P.
 
Peck and Robbyn L. Peck are entitled to specific performance
of the Agreement of Sale. Plaintiffs shall perform their
obligations by paying off the mortgage held by [Continental
Pacific]; paying the balance due under [the] Agreement of
Sale, less $5,000 for the horse grazing license; and paying
[Nakkim] for the advances made by [Nakkim] for expenses
which were Plaintiffs' obligations under the Agreement of
Sale to [Nakkim]. Full payment is to be made within 60 days
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
after either the parties agree as to the amounts payable or
the amounts are determined by the Court. If Plaintiffs
 Lawrence P. Peck and Robbyn L. Peck fail to make timely
payment of the balance due, then the Agreement of Sale shall
be cancelled or the property foreclosed upon as provided
therein.
 
The Circuit Court entered the Judgment on October 2, 
2008, pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
54(b). Nakkim timely filed this appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Nakkim challenges FOFs 9, 10, 15, and 17,
 
and COLs 1 and 4, and raises five points of error alleging that
 the Circuit Court erred in:
 
1. Concluding that the Pecks substantially complied
 
with the terms and conditions of the Agreement of Sale in that
 the non-performance and/or breach of the Construction Contract
 constituted a material default of the Agreement of Sale under the
 parties' indivisible agreement; 
2. Enforcing Nakkim's obligation to transfer the
 
property to the Pecks, notwithstanding the Circuit Court's
 failure to conclude that Nakkim was in breach of either the
 Agreement of Sale or Construction Contract;
 
3. Interpreting the Construction Contract to permit
 
unilateral price increases based upon Peck, Inc.'s increased
 expenses;
 
4. Enforcing Nakkim's obligation to transfer the
 
property notwithstanding the non-performance of the condition
 precedent and/or failure of consideration for Nakkim's
 obligation, and for the failure to order a rescission of the
 Contract and a return of the parties to their status quo ante;
 and
 
5. Finding that Nakkim failed to give notice of
 
default under the Agreement of Sale, in that Nakkim's letters to
 Peck constituted notice.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"As a general rule, the construction and legal effect 
to be given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an appellate court." Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai
'i 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996) (citations omitted). Findings
 
of fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard of
 review. Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai
'i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 
899 (2005) (citation omitted). 
A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when, despite
evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left
with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the
entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. A
 finding of fact is also clearly erroneous when the record
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. We have
 defined substantial evidence as credible evidence which is
 of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai 'i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004) 
(citation omitted). "However, a [conclusion of law] that 
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the court's conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances of each individual case." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Employees' Ret. Sys. of Haw., 106 
Hawai
'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
"The awarding of specific performance is a matter
 
addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court . . . and
 its decision will be set aside only where there has been a
 manifest abuse thereof." Clarkin v. Reimann, 2 Haw. App. 618,
 
623, 638 P.2d 857, 861 (1981) (citations omitted). A manifest
 abuse of discretion occurs where the lower court's decision
 "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
 principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
 party litigant." Id. at 624, 638 P.2d at 861 (citations
 
omitted).
 IV. DISCUSSION
 
Nakkim's overall argument is that Plaintiffs breached
 
both the Agreement of Sale and the Construction Contract, and the
 Circuit Court did not find her to be in breach of either, so the
 court should have ordered both parts of the indivisible Contract
 rescinded, and restored the Property to Nakkim.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A. Plaintiffs' Substantial Compliance
 
Nakkim makes several arguments in support of her first 
point of error. She first argues that the Circuit Court erred because it did not find that the construction of the Home was an unsatisfied condition precedent to her transfer of the Property under the Agreement of Sale. A condition precedent is "an event, not certain to occur, which must occur, unless its non-occurrence is excused, before performance under the contract becomes due." Brown, 82 Hawai
'i at 246, 921 P.2d at 166 (quoting R ESTATEMENT 
(SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 224 (1981)). Furthermore, "[a] condition is 
a limitation, and does not create an obligation, nonperformance of which would constitute default."  Adair v. Kona Corp., 51 Haw. 
105, 112, 452 P.2d 449, 454 (1969). "Where it is doubtful whether words [in a contract] create a promise or an express condition, they are interpreted as creating a promise[.]" Calderia v. Sokei, 49 Haw. 317, 325, 417 P.2d 823, 828 (1966) (citing R
ESTATEMENT (FIRST) OF CONTRACTS § 261 (1932)) (other 
citations omitted). 
Construction of the Home was part of the payment for
 
the conveyance of the Property. The Agreement of Sale states: 
PAYMENT OF THE PURCHASE PRICE. [The Pecks] agree[] to pay
the purchase price to [Nakkim] in by way [sic] of AGREEMENT
 OF SALE as follows: . . . 2) It is agreed that [the Pecks]
shall build on [Nakkim's] property a HOME as defined in
 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT documents.
 
Nakkim does not show why the construction of the Home was an 
event that had to have occurred before performance on the contract was to commence, nor can she rebut the presumption that the construction of the Home was a promise. See Brown, 82 
Hawai
'i at 246, 921 P.2d at 166; see also Calderia, 49 Haw. at 
325, 417 P.2d at 828. Construction of the Home as a condition precedent would also contravene the definition of that term under Adair, as construction of the Home was clearly an obligation, nonperformance of which would constitute default. See Adair, 51 
Haw. at 112, 452 P.2d at 454. Therefore, construction of the Home was not a condition precedent, but rather, part of the consideration for the transfer of the Property. 
9
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nakkim also alleges that the Agreement of Sale was 
breached because Peck failed to assist her in gaining the Design 
Committee's approval for construction because he did not prepare a color board, as required by the Design Committee. The Circuit Court found in (unchallenged) FOF 11 that Nakkim was responsible for obtaining approvals from the Design Committee.  Because 
Nakkim had difficulty obtaining the necessary approvals from the 
Design Committee, the Circuit Court also found, in (unchallenged) FOF 13, that "the delay in the start of construction on [the Property] was not the fault of the Plaintiffs, but primarily attributable to [Nakkim's] failure to get approvals from the [Design Committee] in a timely fashion." "Findings of fact . . . that are not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court." Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai
'i 
450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (citing Taylor–Rice v. State, 91 Hawai
'i 60, 65, 979 P.2d 1086, 1091 (1999) (noting that, in 
failing to challenge any of the trial court's findings of fact, the State had waived any challenge to those findings and, thus, that they were binding on appeal)) (additional citations omitted). Even if we were to construe Nakkim's argument as challenging these findings, we conclude that they are sufficiently supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, as the Construction Contract clearly states that "[Nakkim] shall secure and pay for necessary approvals, easements, assessments and charges required for the construction, use or occupancy of structures." 
Next, Nakkim argues that the Pecks failed to make all
 
of the required payments under the Agreement of Sale. However,
 in FOF 15, the Circuit Court found that the Pecks "continued to
 tender to [Nakkim] the monthly payments due under the Agreement
 of Sale." FOF 15 is supported by the record, as the Pecks made
 the $1,054.42 monthly payments to either Continental Pacific or
 Nakkim, as required under the Agreement of Sale. Nakkim argues
 
that "[Mr. Peck] could hardly have complied with the terms of the
 
[A]greement of [S]ale if he missed 16 of the fifty-six monthly
 payments due . . . ." It appears, however, that Peck continued
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to tender payments until April 1, 2007, well after this suit was
 
filed, but that some payments were tendered directly to Nakkim as
 she had directed Continental Pacific to cease accepting the
 payments. In its FOFs, COLs, and Order, the Circuit Court
 ordered the Pecks to pay off the balance of the mortgage and pay
 Nakkim for the "advances" made by her, which were the Pecks'
 obligations under the Agreement of Sale.
 
Nakkim also points to the missing March 2004 payment as
 
evidence of the Pecks' breach. The Pecks did not make the March
 2004 payment until August 13, 2004, after being notified of the
 arrearage through Nakkim's August 12, 2004 letter, well after the
 40-day grace period provided in the Agreement of Sale. The
 Pecks, however, appear to have cured the default within 10 days
 of Nakkim's August 12, 2004 letter, as required by the Agreement
 of Sale. Further, the record does not reflect that her August
 12, 2004 letter, or any other written notification, was sent
 through registered or certified mail, which was also required
 under the Agreement of Sale for notice of default. As such,
 although the Pecks' March 2004 payment was late, the Pecks
 nonetheless made all required payments under the Agreement of
 Sale by properly curing its default.
4 Accordingly, we conclude
 
that FOF 15 was not clearly erroneous.
 
Nakkim also contends that, by constructing a house on
 
the Property for a friend, Patricio Barbis, the Pecks breached
 Section VII of the Agreement of Sale, which states:
 
As stated above, a default will be construed if:
 
. . . . 
(b) [The Pecks] [t]ransfer[] possession of the property,
assigns this agreement, etc. without the permission and
consent of [Nakkim].
(c) [The Pecks] [c]reate[] any other liens against the
property or jeopardizes [Nakkim's] interest in same (with
 
4
 Hawai'i courts disfavor forfeiture in agreements of sale and have
held that "where the vendee's breach has not been due to gross negligence, orto deliberate or bad-faith conduct on his part, and the vendor can reasonablyand adequately be compensated for his injury, courts in equity will generallygrant relief against forfeiture and decree specific performance of theagreement." Jenkins v. Wise, 58 Haw. 592, 597, 574 P.2d 1337, 1341 (1978)
(citations omitted). Nakkim does not argue any grossly negligent or ill-intended reason for the late payment, nor does she argue that the late paymentwas not reasonably and adequately compensated by the August 13, 2004 check. 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Nakkim] giving [the Pecks] the opportunity to correct said
lien, etc. within TEN days of notification of same)[.]
 . . . .
 
A lien is generally defined as "[a] legal right or interest that
 
a creditor has in another's property . . . ." Black's Law
 
Dictionary 1006 (9th ed. 2009). Nakkim does not provide a cogent
 reason why the construction of the house on the Property created
 a "legal right or interest that a creditor has" on the Property,
 nor does she point to anything in the record to support her
 contention that "Barbis took out the building permit as the
 'legal' owner and later informed Nakkim that he had purchased
 part of the property from Peck." In contrast, Peck testified
 that Barbis had not purchased the Property. The record further
 reflects that Barbis remains in Peru, and that he was not allowed
 to leave due to problems with his visa. Thus, Nakkim's argument
 
that the Circuit Court erred by failing to find that the Pecks
 
violated the Agreement of Sale through the arrangements with
 Barbis is without merit.
 
Nakkim's next contention, that the Circuit Court erred
 
by failing to find that the Pecks violated the Agreement of Sale
 by failing to lease 40 acres of the Property for her horses, is
 also without merit. Peck testified that Nakkim brought four
 horses onto the Property in early 2004 and that two remained at
 the time of trial. Further, Nakkim did not make the $1,000 a
 year payment she was required to pay under the Agreement of Sale. 
Nakkim does not point to any facts in the record contradicting
 Peck's testimony, and accordingly, her argument of a breach
 related to the lease for horses is unavailing.
 
Finally, Nakkim contends that Peck, Inc. breached the
 
Construction Contract through its "failure to cooperate with
 Nakkim, and [its] persistent stalling and put-off tactics" and
 its "unwarranted demand for a price increase[.]" First, as
 discussed above, it was Nakkim's contractual responsibility to
 obtain the Design Committee's approval, and thus, the related
 delay in the construction of the Home was attributed to her. 
Nakkim also contends that Peck, Inc. was not allowed to
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unilaterally raise the price of the Contract Sum through its July
 
14, 2004 letter, and its demand to do so was an anticipatory
 breach of the Contract. However, in (unchallenged) FOF 14, the
 Circuit Court found that "the Contract Sum was not in fact
 increased" and that Peck or Peck, Inc. had merely given notice
 that "he or it intended to increase the Construction Sum. 
However, he or it did not go forward with the procedure set forth
 in the Construction Contract for an actual increase in the
 Construction Sum." 
In addition, in FOF 9, which Nakkim challenges on
 
appeal, the Circuit Court found that the Construction Sum "was
 subject to adjustment." Specifically, the Circuit Court noted
 that the Construction Contract provides that the Contract Sum is
 "subject to additions and deductions as provided in the Contract
 documents." The Circuit Court also found that the Additional
 Costs Clause "permitted [Peck, Inc.] to make a claim for an
 increase in the Contract Sum because of additional cost on
 certain specific grounds plus 'other reasonable grounds.'" In
 FOF 10, the Circuit Court found that, although the Plaintiffs did
 not increase the Construction Sum by its July 14, 2004 letter,
 they had "reasonable ground[s]" to do so under the Additional
 Cost Clause, namely, as stated in its July 14, 2004 letter, due
 to increases in construction costs during the delay caused by
 Nakkim's failure to obtain approval from the Design Committee. 
These findings are supported by the record and, therefore, not
 clearly erroneous. Accordingly, Nakkim's failure to cooperate
 and anticipatory breach arguments are without merit.
 
B. No Breach By Nakkim
 Nakkim argues that the Circuit Court erred by ordering
 
specific performance of the Agreement of Sale without concluding
 that Nakkim had breached the Contract. Nakkim points to the
 Circuit Court's apparent rejection (by crossing it out of the
 proposed form of order) of an FOF/COL stating that "[Nakkim]
 unilaterally cancelled and repudiated the Construction Contract
 without just cause thereby relieving [Peck, Inc.] of further
 performance thereunder." From this, Nakkim argues that the
 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court implicitly found that she had not breached the
 
Construction Contract.
 
In response, Plaintiffs argue that "[t]he trial
 
evidence clearly showed that [Nakkim] tried to unilaterally
 repudiate the agreement of sale while continuing to accept
 payments under the agreement of sale for years."  Specifically,
 
Plaintiffs point to the fact that Nakkim attempted to sell the
 
Property behind their backs.
 
Generally, "an action on a contract, either for
 
specific performance or damages, requires the allegation and
 proof of a breach by the defendant." Kaleikau v. Hall, 27 Haw.
 
420, 430 (Haw. Terr. 1923). "Where there has been a threatened
 or actual breach of a contract of sale, the determination of
 whether specific performance should be granted rests within the
 sound discretion of the trial court." Hawaiian Paradise Park
 
Corp. v. Friendly Broad. Co., 414 F.2d 750, 758 (9th Cir. 1969)
 (citing McFarland v. Gregory, 322 F.2d 737 (2d Cir. 1963); 5A
 C
ORBIN ON CONTRACTS, § 1136). Whether a party to a contract
 
committed an anticipatory repudiation is generally a question of
 fact. See Romig v. deVallance, 2 Haw. App. 597, 605, 637 P.2d
 
1147, 1153 (1981) (holding that whether lack of adequate
 assurance amounts to anticipatory repudiation is an unresolved
 factual issue on a motion for summary judgment); Lee v. Thunder
 Dev., Inc., 711 P.2d 978, 980 (Or. Ct. App. 1985) ("Whether or
 not an unequivocal repudiation occurred is a question of fact.").
 
Here, the Circuit Court clearly erred by failing to 
enter any findings of fact or conclusions of law as to whether Nakkim was threatening to or in actual breach of either the Agreement of Sale or the Construction Contract. In rendering its judgment of specific performance on the Agreement of Sale against Nakkim and in favor of the Plaintiffs, the Circuit Court simply found that "the delay in the start of construction on [Nakkim's] Waiki
'i Ranch property was not the fault of Plaintiffs, but 
primarily attributable to [Nakkim's] failure to get approvals 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the Design Committee in a timely fashion." However,
 
pursuant to the holdings in Kaleikau v. Hall and Hawaiian
 Paradise Park Corp. v. Friendly Broad. Co., there must be a
 finding by the Circuit Court on whether there the party against
 whom the specific performance has been issued was threatening to
 or in actual breach. Kaleikau, 27 Haw. at 430; Hawaiian Paradise
 
Park Corp., 414 F.2d at 758. In issuing its Judgment without
 such a finding, the Circuit Court "clearly exceeded the bounds of
 reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to
 the substantial detriment of [Nakkim]." Clarkin, 2 Haw. App. at
 
624, 638 P.2d at 861 (citations omitted). Without a finding of
 fact on whether Nakkim (anticipatorily) repudiated the Agreement
 of Sale, this Court cannot properly review the issue. 
Accordingly, it was error for the Circuit Court to order specific
 performance without entering a finding that Nakkim was
 threatening to or in actual breach.
 
C. Adequate Assurances
 Nakkim also argues that as a result of Peck, Inc.'s
 
July 14, 2004 letter regarding price increases due to increased
 expenses, she was entitled to adequate assurance of performance,
 and by the Plaintiffs' failure to provide her with such
 assurances, they anticipatorily repudiated the Contract. It
 appears, however, that the "adequate assurances" Nakkim claims
 were due were assurances that the Home would be built with no
 price changes, as opposed to adequate assurances that the Home
 would be built in accordance with the Contract. In light of our
 conclusion that the Circuit Court did not clearly err in FOFs 9
 and 10, and based on (unchallenged) FOF 14, we conclude that this
 argument is without merit.
 
D. The Indivisible Contract
 In Nakkim's final arguments, she contends that "the
 
Circuit Court made a double error in concluding (a) the agreement
 of sale and construction agreements were mutually independent,
 and (b) notwithstanding Peck's default of the construction
 
15
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement, Nakkim was still obligated to perform under the sale
 
5
agreement." Relatedly,  Nakkim argues that the Circuit Court
erred by ordering specific performance of the Agreement of Sale
 when the Home had not been completed, which she states was her
 bargained-for consideration. Further, she argues:
 
Where contracting parties provide for a tangible form of
consideration as opposed to money, the court cannot "remake"
the contract and force the promisee to accept money in place
of the tangible consideration he or she bargained for. It
 is the function of courts to construe and enforce contracts
 made by the parties, not to make or alter them. Strouss v.
 
Simmons, 66 Haw. 32, 40, 657 P.2d 1004, 1010 (1982).
 
Rather than specifically enforcing the Agreement of
 
Sale, Nakkim argues that the Circuit Court should have also
 
specifically enforced the Construction Contract because she had
 not received her bargained-for consideration, and claims error in
 the Circuit Court's finding that the terms of the Construction
 Contract were "too imprecise to specifically enforce." We
 consider these arguments in light of the Circuit Court's
 (unchallenged) FOF 4, wherein the court found that the Agreement
 of Sale and Construction Contract, although set forth in two
 documents "were intended by the parties to be an expression of a
 single agreement."
 
It is axiomatic that:
 
In rendering a decree of specific performance, the court has
no power to decree performance in any other manner than
according to the agreement of the parties. A court of
 equity cannot make a new contract for the parties or supply
any material stipulation of the contract, but must enforce
the contract according to its terms or not at all. It will
 not undertake to compel the defendant to do something he or
she did not contract or agree to do.
 
71 AM. JUR. 2D Specific Performance § 230 (2012) (footnotes
 
omitted); see also Schrader v. Benton, 2 Haw. App. 564, 567, 635
 
5
 In her final point of error, however, Nakkim asserted that the
Circuit Court "erred in finding that Nakkim failed to give notice of default
under the [Agreement of Sale] to Peck, in that Nakkim's letters to Peck
constituted notice." Because no argument was advanced in furtherance of this
point of error, this point of error is deemed waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7)
("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 562, 566 (1981) (rejecting alternative form of specific
 
performance that might deprive the parties of the full benefit of 
the substance or essence of their bargain); Vierra v. Ropert, 10
 Haw. 294, 300-01 (1896).
 
In this case, the Circuit Court abused its discretion
 
by ordering specific performance of the terms of the Agreement of
 Sale, but not the Construction Contract. There is nothing in the
 Agreement of Sale or Construction Contract to suggest that
 monetary compensation would suffice in lieu of the agreed-upon
 methods of payment for the Property, which were assumption of the
 Continental Pacific mortgage and construction of the Home. Thus,
 the Circuit Court's decree ordering the sale of the Property for
 monetary compensation was contrary to the literal terms of the
 Contract, which was thereby reformed.
 
Additionally, requiring Nakkim to accept monetary
 
compensation appears to have deprived her of the full benefit of
 the substance or essence of their bargain because, as the Circuit
 Court found, the parties intended the Agreement of Sale and
 Construction Contract to be the embodiment of a single agreement,
 and in that agreement, Nakkim was to convey the Property in
 exchange for the construction of the Home. Cf. Schrader, 2 Haw.
 
App. at 567, 635 P.2d at 564 (1981); also Paris v. Greig, 12 Haw.
 274 (Haw. Terr. 1899) (holding that specific performance of a
 part only of a contract may be decreed where, by its terms its
 different parts are divisible, or specific performance may be
 decreed pro tanto with an abatement of the purchase price even
 though the contract is not by its terms severable if the part
 that cannot be enforced is of little consequence as compared with
 the remainder). 
The Circuit Court's decree of specific performance as
 
to only the Agreement of Sale is irreconcilably conflicting with
 its unchallenged finding that the Agreement of Sale and
 Construction Contract were intended to form a single agreement. 
By ordering specific performance of only one part of that single
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement, the Circuit Court reformed the Contract and destroyed
 
Nakkim's bargained-for consideration by substituting monetary
 compensation for the construction of the Home. Therefore, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in ordering
 specific performance, as the court's decree "clearly exceeded the
 bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or
 practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." 
Clarkin v. Reimann, 2 Haw. App. at 624, 638 P.2d at 861
 (citations omitted). Accordingly, we vacate FOFs 17 and 18 (as
 further review of this finding also may be necessary on remand),
 as well as the Circuit Court's COLs (which may be altered,
 depending on the court's further review).
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 2, 2008
 
Judgment and Decree of Specific Performance is vacated and
 remanded for further proceedings consistent with this memorandum
 opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 20, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Paul J. Sulla, Jr. 
for Defendant-Appellant
LYNN LINDER NAKKIM
 Presiding Judge
Douglas L. Halsted for Plaintiffs-Appellees
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
18
 