   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29237
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ALFREDO BUENAFE and LUZVIMINDA BUENAFE, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
LEONARDO KIEHM, M.D., JOHN DOES 1-5; JOHN DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
JOHN DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5; ROE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 1-5,
and ROE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0233(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This medical malpractice case arises out of a thyroid
 
surgery performed on Plaintiff-Appellant Alfredo Buenafe
 
(Alfredo) by Defendant-Appellee Leonardo Kiehm, M.D. (Kiehm). 
Alfredo and his wife, Plaintiff-Appellant Luzviminda Buenafe
 
(collectively, the Buenafes), appeal from the June 6, 2008
 
Judgment filed in the Circuit Court for the Second Circuit
 
(circuit court) in favor of Kiehm.1
 
After submitting a claim to a Medical Claims
 
Conciliation Panel (MCCP), the Buenafes filed a complaint in the
 
circuit court against Kiehm, alleging that Kiehm's negligence
 
caused them harm. Following various motions, including the
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court's grant of partial summary judgment to Kiehm
 
precluding a claim based on informed consent, a jury trial was
 
held. A verdict was issued in favor of Kiehm, and the Buenafes
 
filed a timely Notice of Appeal on July 3, 2008.
 
On appeal, the Buenafes assert four points of error,
 
all of which relate to Defendant Kiehm's alleged failure to
 
obtain informed consent prior to rendering the surgical
 
procedure, a medical tort under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 671-1 (1993).2 The Buenafes contend that the circuit court
 
erred: (1) in granting Defendant Kiehm's motion for partial
 summary judgment on their "duty to disclose" (i.e., informed
 
consent) claim; (2) in ruling that they could not amend the
 
complaint to include their "duty to disclose" claim; (3) in
 
prohibiting them from presenting evidence at trial regarding the
 
"duty to disclose" claim; and (4) in refusing to instruct the
 
jury on Defendant Kiehm's "duty to disclose." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised therein, as well as
 
the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the Buenafes'
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court properly granted partial summary
 
judgment in favor of Defendant Kiehm on the informed consent
 
claim. Under HRS § 671-12(a) (1993):
 
any person or the person's representative claiming that a
medical tort has been committed shall submit a statement of
 the claim to the medical claim conciliation panel before a
suit based on the claim may be commenced in any court of
this State. Claims shall be submitted to the medical claim
 conciliation panel in writing. The claimant shall set forth
 facts upon which the claim is based . . . . 
2
 A medical tort is defined as: "professional negligence, the
rendering of professional service without informed consent, or an error or
omission in professional practice, by a health care provider, which
proximately causes death, injury, or other damage to a patient." HRS § 671-1
(1993). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(emphases added). In addition, "[t]he claimant may institute
 
litigation based upon the claim in an appropriate court only
 
after a party to a medical claim conciliation panel hearing
 
rejects the decision of the panel, or after the twelve-month
 
period under section 671-18 has expired." HRS § 671-16 (2003)
 
(emphasis added). The statutory scheme for medical claim
 
conciliation thus expressly requires a written statement of "the
 
claim" setting forth the "facts upon which the claim is based,"
 
which in turn delineates "the claim" for which litigation may be
 
instituted if the requirements of HRS Chapter 671, Part II are
 
met.
 
The requirements of HRS §§ 671-12 and 671-16 are 
jurisdictional obligations which must be fulfilled prior to 
filing suit. See Tobosa v. Owens, 69 Haw. 305, 314-15, 741 P.2d 
1280, 1286 (1987) ("The procedures outlined there are jurisdictional prerequisites to suit, and they will be 
enforced."); see also Lee v. Hawaii Pacific Health, 121 Hawai' i 
235, 247, 216 P.3d 1258, 1270 (App. 2009) (affirming a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction where claims were not first brought to 
the MCCP for review, as the legislature's intent was "to utilize 
the MCCP as the initial reviewer in the broadest possible range 
of health-care-related claims."); cf. Garcia v. Kaiser Found. 
Hosps., 90 Hawai' i 425, 439-41, 978 P.2d 863, 877-79 (1999) 
(affirming dismissal of claim for lack of subject matter jurisdiction where Plaintiffs filed their complaint before the 
MCCP filed its written decision). 
Dismissal of a medical tort claim is proper where a 
claimant files suit without first seeking resolution of that 
claim through an MCCP. See Dubin v. Wazukawa, 89 Hawai' i 188, 
198, 970 P.2d 496, 506 (1998) (holding that the circuit court did not err in dismissing plaintiff's first amended complaint where 
plaintiff "chose to sidestep the requirements of HRS §§ 671-12 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and 671-16 by filing the present lawsuit, rather than first 
seeking resolution of his claims by an MCCP, as required by those 
statutes."); see also Doe v. City and County of Honolulu, 93 
Hawai'i 490, 499, 6 P.3d 362, 371 (App. 2000) (concluding that 
medical torts asserted in the complaint "were required to be submitted to the MCCP before Jane could lawfully file this 
lawsuit."). 
In this case, the circuit court granted partial summary
 
judgment to Kiehm on the informed consent claim on grounds that
 
the court did not have jurisdiction of that claim because the
 
claim was not presented to the MCCP as required by HRS Chapter
 
671. "We review [a] circuit court's award of summary judgment de 
novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court." 
Garcia, 90 Hawai' i at 429, 978 P.2d at 867 (citation omitted). 
In the Buenafes' pre-hearing statement submitted to the
 
MCCP, the "THEORY OF THE CASE (LIABILITY)" section stated: "The
 
surgical and post surgical treatment rendered by DR. KIEM [sic]
 
on November 2, 2001, fell below the appropriate level of care. 
This resulted in injury and/or transection of the laryngeal nerve
 
which resulted in permanent voice loss." Moreover, the "DISPUTED
 
FACTS" section stated: "Dr. Kiehm was negligent in performing a
 
right thyroid lobectomy on ALFREDO that caused permanent voice
 
loss. That he also failed to diagnose, evaluate, understand,
 
investigate, or treat subsequent repeated complaints of post­
operative difficulty talking, loss of voice, pain and
 
hoarseness." Clearly, the Buenafes' "statement of the claim" to
 
the MCCP contained no reference to an informed consent claim.
3
 
3
 We further note that "professional negligence," "the rendering of
professional service without informed consent," and "an error or omission in
professional practice" are set out as separate medical torts. See HRS §§ 671­
1 and 671-3.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Buenafes point to the declaration of Lilia Kanae
 
(Kanae), the Buenafes' attorney at the MCCP hearing, and contend
 
that the circuit court erroneously disregarded her declaration as
 
lacking credibility. Kanae's declaration refers to her notes
 
from the MCCP hearing about statements made by Kiehm at the
 
hearing, and she attests that:
 
I do not recall if these statements came out on my cross-
examination of him, under questioning by a panel member, or
direct examination by his attorney, but I do know that my
notes enable me to advise that the issue concerning what had
been said by [Kiehm] to the patient about the surgery,
possibly causing loss of voice, arose at the MCCP.
 
She further attests that: "No doubt exists in my mind that the
 
issue of informed consent was gone into before the MCCP which
 
evaluated the claim of Mr. Buenafe. To what extent it influenced
 
the panel to find in favor of Mr. Buenafe I cannot state."
 
Kiehm responds that Kanae's declaration should not be
 
considered because it was presented as part of a motion for
 
reconsideration addressing the Buenafes' motion to amend their
 
complaint, and not properly raised in opposing Kiehm's motion for
 
judgment on the pleadings or for partial summary judgment. Even
 
assuming arguendo that Kanae's declaration was properly
 
considered by the circuit court related to Kiehm's motion for
 
judgment on the pleadings or for partial summary judgment, the
 
circuit court was correct that this evidence did not preclude
 
partial summary judgment on the informed consent claim. As a
 
matter of law, not credibility, we conclude that Kanae's
 
declaration does not raise or address any genuine issue of
 
material fact. As discussed above, HRS § 671-12 requires that
 
"the claim" be set forth in a written statement of the claim. 
Simply that Kiehm may have given testimony about what he told
 
Alfredo, under unclear circumstances at the MCCP hearing, does
 
not raise any genuine issue of material fact as to whether the
 
5
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Buenafes submitted an informed consent claim in writing to the
 
MCCP as required by HRS § 671-12.
 
Thus, as the requirements of HRS chapter 671 are
 
"jurisdictional," the circuit court was correct in determining
 
that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over an informed
 
consent claim.
 
(2) Our holding that the circuit court properly 
determined it did not have jurisdiction with regard to any 
informed consent claim, and that the circuit court properly 
granted partial summary judgment on that claim, necessarily 
disposes of the remainder of the Buenafes' issues on appeal, all 
of which stem from the informed consent claim. See Garcia, 90 
Hawai'i at 441 n.6, 978 P.2d at 879 n.6 ("Because we hold that 
the circuit court did not have subject matter jurisdiction with 
regard to Plaintiffs' claims against Dr. Davenport and HMG as a 
result of Plaintiffs' failure to comply with the requirements of 
HRS § 671-12, the points of error raised in the cross-appeals are 
moot inasmuch as the circuit court's ruling has effectively 
extinguished Plaintiffs' claims against Dr. Davenport and HMG."). 
Accordingly, the Judgment filed on June 6, 2008 in the 
Circuit Court for the Second Circuit is hereby affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 4, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
James Krueger
Cynthia K. WongLance A. Hevizyfor Plaintiffs-Appellants 
Dennis E.W. O'Connor Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Kelvin H. Kaneshiro 
Elmira K.L. Tsang(O'Connor Playdon & Guben LLP)for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
6
 