FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
NO. 29696 *
 
DOUGLAS LEONE and PATRICIA A. PERKINS-LEONE,
as Trustees under that certain unrecorded Leone-Perkins
 
Family Trust dated August 26, 1999, as amended,
Plaintiffs-Appellants v. COUNTY OF MAUI, a
political subdivision of the State of Hawai' i,
WILLIAM SPENCE, in his capacity as Director of the
Department of Planning of the County of Maui,
DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0496(3))
 
and
 
WILLIAM L. LARSON and NANCY H. LARSON,
as Trustees under that certain unrecorded
 
Larson Family Trust dated October 30, 1992,
as amended, Plaintiffs-Appellants v.
COUNTY OF MAUI, a political subdivision of the
State of Hawai' i, WILLIAM SPENCE, in his capacity
as Director of the Department of Planning of the
County of Maui, DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants-Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0413(2))
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NOS. 07-1-0496(3) and 09-1-0413(2))
 
JUNE 22, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY and LEONARD, JJ.
 
* On November 9, 2010, Case Nos. 29696 and 30159 were consolidated in Case No.
29696.
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
In this consolidated appeal, Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
Douglas Leone and Patricia A. Perkins-Leone (Leones), as Trustees
 
under that certain unrecorded Leone-Perkins Family Trust dated
 
August 26, 1999, as amended, appeal from the Circuit Court of the
 
Second Circuit's (Circuit Court) June 5, 2009 Amended Final
 
Judgment dismissing their inverse condemnation, equal protection,
 
due process, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims.1/ Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
William L. Larson and Nancy H. Larson (Larsons), as Trustees
 
under that certain unrecorded Larson Family Trust dated October
 
30, 1992, as amended, appeal from the Circuit Court's October 15,
 
2009 Final Judgment dismissing their inverse condemnation, equal
 
protection, due process, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983 claims, which are,
 
in relevant part, identical to the Leones' claims.2/
  
The Leones and Larsons (collectively, Appellants) argue
 
that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing their claims for lack
 of subject matter jurisdiction on ripeness grounds. They also
 
request that this court grant partial summary judgment against
 
Defendants-Appellees County of Maui (Maui County) and Director of
 
the Department of Planning of the County of Maui, William Spence
 
3/
 (Director),  on their claims of inverse condemnation. For the
 
reasons discussed below, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred
 
in dismissing Appellants' inverse condemnation claims as unripe. 
However, we decline to grant Appellants' request for partial
 
summary judgment. Accordingly, we vacate the judgments and
 
remand for further proceedings.
 
1/
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2/
 The Honorable Shackley R. Raffetto presided.
 
3/
 During the pendency of this Appeal, William Spence, Director of
the Department of Planning of the County of Maui, succeeded Jeffrey S. Hunt.
Thus, pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c),
Spence has been substituted automatically for Hunt in this case. 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This appeal arises from Maui County's troubled attempts
 
to create a public park at Palauea Beach in Makena, Maui. The
 
1998 Kihei-Makena Community Plan (Community Plan) assigned the
 
beach lots a "park" land use designation, which does not permit
 
the construction of single-family residences. In 1996, the Maui
 
County Council (County Council) adopted Resolution No. 96-121,
 
authorizing the Mayor to acquire the Palauea Beach lots for the
 
creation of a public park. At that time, Palauea Beach was "one
 
of the last undeveloped leeward beaches on Maui," and the County
 
Council noted "an outpouring of community support" for the
 
creation of a beach park. 
In 1999, the County Council adopted Resolution No. 99­
183, affirming its "official policy" to "preserve Palauea Beach
 
in South Maui." Despite the Mayor's "appropriately raised
 
concerns about the County's present financial constraints," the
 
County Council urged the administration to acquire two of the
 
Palauea Beach lots. Maui County purchased the two lots in
 
January of 2000. However, it was unable to allocate sufficient
 
funds to purchase the remaining seven lots, which were then sold
 
to private individuals. 
The Leones purchased Palauea Beach parcel 15 in
 
February of 2000. The Larsons purchased Palauea Beach parcels 16
 
and 17 in December of 2000. Their properties are zoned "Hotel-
Multifamily," permitting a variety of economically beneficial
 
uses, including single-family residences. However, these parcels
 
are among nine Palauea Beach lots that are designated "park" in
 
the Community Plan.
 
The Palauea Beach lots are also located in a "special 
management area" (SMA) under the Hawai' i Coastal Zone Management 
Act (CZMA). See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 205A-22 (2001). 
The CZMA was enacted, pursuant to the federal Coastal Zone 
Management Act, to protect valuable shoreline and coastal 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resources by establishing heightened land use controls on
 
developments within protected zones, or special management areas. 
HRS § 205A-21 (2001). The Legislature delegated responsibility
 
for administering the SMA provisions to the county planning
 
commissions or councils. HRS § 205A-22. 
The CZMA imposes stringent permit requirements for 
"developments" within special management areas. HRS §§ 205A-28,
 
205A-26 (2001). The term "development" expressly excludes, inter
 
alia, single-family residences, unless the relevant county
 
authority finds the proposed construction may have a "cumulative
 
impact, or a significant environmental or ecological effect on a
 
special management area[.]" HRS § 205A-22 (2001 & Supp. 2011). 
Three types of SMA permits are available, depending on the nature
 
of the proposed development: minor use permits, major use
 
permits, and emergency use permits. Id. The CZMA empowers the
 
county authorities to adopt rules implementing procedures for
 issuing SMA permits. HRS § 205A-29(a) (2001).
 
In its rules implementing the CZMA, Maui County offers
 
an assessment procedure allowing, inter alia, landowners to seek
 
a determination that their proposed use is not a "development"
 
under HRS § 205A-22. See Maui Department of Planning Special
 
Management Area Rules for the Maui Planning Commission Rule (SMA
 
Rule) 12-202-12 (2004).  Upon review of an assessment
 
application, the Director must make a determination that the
 
proposed use either:
 
(1) 	Is exempt from the requirements of this chapter
because it is not a development pursuant to section
205A-22, HRS, as amended;
 
(2) 	Requires a special management area minor permit
pursuant to section 205A-22, HRS, as amended, which
shall be processed in accordance with section 12-202­14;
 
(3) 	Requires a special management area use permit pursuant
to section 205A-22, HRS, as amended, which shall be
processed in accordance with sections 12-202-13 and
12-202-15;
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) 	Requires a special management area emergency permit
pursuant to section 205A-22, HRS, as amended, which
shall be processed in accordance with section 12-202­16; or
 
(5) 	Cannot be processed because the proposed action is not
consistent with the county general plan, community
plan, and zoning, unless a general plan, community
plan, or zoning application for an appropriate
amendment is processed concurrently with the SMA
permit application.
 
SMA Rule 12-202-12(f) (emphasis added).
 
Appellants and other Palauea Beach lot owners sought to
 
construct single-family residences on their respective
 
properties. The Director, inter alia, initiated a process for
 
changing the Community Plan designation from "park" to
 
"residential." Property owners, including Appellants, funded the
 
requisite environmental assessment because Maui County was unable
 
to do so. However, the Planning Commission refused to accept the
 
environmental assessment and instead requested additional
 
archaeological studies and historical narratives. Several
 
commissioners advocated for prolonging the amendment process as a
 
deliberate strategy to preserve the status quo – a de facto beach
 
park on the privately-owned lots. As one commissioner explained:
 
So if we decide on no action on this thing then the whole
beach would remain as it is now and they would not be able
to build on the land that they own. Granted, we can't buy
it but if we say no you can't develop it then we then have
access to it, at least the beach.
 
This strategy would "allow the people of Maui to
 
utilize [the] beach area" while preventing property owners from
 
constructing homes. Another commissioner acknowledged that
 
moving forward with the process would result in a loss of the "de
 
facto parking that people are enjoying now" on the private lots
 
and could force Maui County to use its own parcels for parking. 
At least one commissioner expressly sought to preserve the
 
public's illegal camping, which had resulted in littering,
 
defecating, and parking on the private beach lots, bemoaning the 
5
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
landowners' resort to hiring security guards to remove the
 
trespassers. 
Appellants nevertheless filed assessment applications
 
under SMA Rule 12-202-12, seeking a determination that their
 
proposed use is exempt from the SMA permit requirements. The
 
Director rejected Appellants' applications because, inter alia,
 
the proposed use was inconsistent with the properties' "park"
 
designation in the Community Plan.4/
 
Appellants then filed inverse condemnation claims under 
article I, § 20 of the Hawai' i Constitution and the Fifth and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, alleging that Maui County had engaged in regulatory takings by depriving 
their properties of any economically viable use. They also 
asserted equal protection and substantive due process violations 
and, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, sought compensatory damages, 
attorneys' fees, and punitive damages. In both cases, the Maui 
County filed motions to dismiss or, in the alternative, for 
summary judgment. The County's argument in both cases was that 
Appellants' claims were not ripe because they failed to exhaust 
available administrative remedies. 
The Circuit Court dismissed all claims in both cases
 
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction on ripeness grounds. It
 concluded that the claims were unripe for adjudication because
 
Appellants failed to exhaust administrative remedies, namely: 
(1) appealing the Director's decision to the Planning Commission;
 
(2) waiving assessment procedure and submitting an SMA permit
 
application; and (3) seeking an amendment to the Community Plan
 
to change the properties' designation from "park" to 
4/
 The Larsons' assessment application apparently did not comply with
certain other requirements of SMA Rule 12-202-12. However, upon the
Director's determination that the application could not be processed due to
inconsistency with the Community Plan, any other deficiencies became
irrelevant to the ripeness analysis because, even if such deficiencies were
remedied, the application could not be processed.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"residential." The court rejected Appellants' contention that
 
such remedies would be futile.
 
The Leones and Larsons timely filed notices of appeal.
 
II. POINTS ON APPEAL
 
Appellants' core argument on appeal is that the Circuit
 
Court erred in concluding their claims were unripe for
 
adjudication. More specifically, Appellants raise the following
 
points of error:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that they
 
were required to exhaust all available administrative remedies; 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that
 
Appellants' failure to appeal the Director's determination to the
 
Maui Planning Commission rendered their claims unripe; and
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that
 
Appellants' failure to seek a community plan amendment rendered
 
their claims unripe.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"It is axiomatic that ripeness is an issue of subject 
matter jurisdiction." Kapuwai v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, Dep't 
of Parks & Recreation, 121 Hawai' i 33, 39, 211 P.3d 750, 756 
(2009). "Whether a court possesses subject matter jurisdiction 
is a question of law reviewable de novo." Kaho'ohanohano v. 
Dep't of Human Servs., 117 Hawai' i 262, 281, 178 P.3d 538, 557 
(2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
The Circuit Court's sole determination was that
 
Appellants' claims were not ripe and, therefore, the Circuit
 
Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction. Accordingly, on this
 
appeal, we will consider only that issue.
 
A. Inverse Condemnation and Regulatory Takings
 The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution,
 
made applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment,
 provides, in relevant part, that "private property [shall not] be
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
taken for public use, without just compensation." Article I, 
§ 20 of the Hawai' i Constitution likewise provides: "Private 
property shall not be taken or damaged for public use without just compensation." Thus, a governmental body can take private 
property, but it is subject to the requirements of a "public 
purpose" and "just compensation" to the property owner. See, 
e.g., Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 537-38 (2005) (discussing the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment). 
Within these constitutional parameters, the State of 
Hawai'i or any county may exercise the power of eminent domain by 
instituting proceedings for the condemnation of private property, as set forth in HRS Chapter 101 (Eminent Domain). Although not 
specifically provided by statute, an "inverse condemnation" 
proceeding is the means by which a property owner can seek to 
recover the value of property that has been taken by the 
government for public use without exercising the power of eminent 
domain. See Black's Law Dictionary 332 (9th ed. 2009) (defining 
"inverse" condemnation). 
Until the United States Supreme Court's decision in
 
Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U.S. 393 (1922), only the
 direct appropriation or physical invasion of privately-held
 
property was considered to effect a taking. Lingle, 544 U.S. at
 
537. Beginning with Justice Holmes's decision in Pennsylvania
 
Coal, the Supreme Court recognized that, in some instances, land
 
use regulations can go "too far" and thus reduce the use of the
 
property to such an extent that it constitutes a "regulatory
 
taking" requiring just compensation under the Fifth Amendment. 
Id. at 537-39, citing, inter alia, Pennsylvania Coal, 260 U.S. at
 
413, 415; see also David L. Callies, Takings: An Introduction
 
and Overview, 24 U. Haw. L. Rev. 441, 443 (2002). 
The Supreme Court has recognized at least two
 
categories of compensable regulatory takings: (1) where
 
"regulations [] compel the property owner to suffer a physical
 
8
   
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
'invasion' of his property . . . no matter how minute the
 
intrusion"; and (2) "where regulation denies all economically
 
beneficial or productive use of land." Lucas v. South Carolina
 
Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1015 (1992) (citations omitted). 
In this case, Appellants appear to contend that, in denying them
 
the opportunity to build a single-family residence, Maui County
 
has deprived them of all economically beneficial use of their
 
property.
5/
 
B. Ripeness
 The Supreme Court has further held that, before a
 
property owner may initiate a suit seeking compensation for a
 taking, the claim must be ripe. Williamson Cnty. Reg'l Planning
 
Comm'n v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City, 473 U.S. 172, 186
 (1985). A claim that the application of a regulation effects a
 
taking becomes ripe when "the government entity charged with
 
implementing the regulations has reached a final decision
 
regarding the application of the regulations to the property at
 
issue." Id. In Williamson, the respondent sought to develop
 
residential homes on its tract of land. Id. at 178-81. The
 
Planning Commission refused to approve the preliminary plat
 
because it failed to conform to various subdivision regulations. 
Id. at 181, 187-88. The Court held that the takings claims were
 
unripe because the respondent failed to seek available variances,
 
and thus the decision was not final. Id. at 188, 193-94. 
Ripeness arises when the land-use authority "has arrived at a
 final, definitive position regarding how it will apply the
 
regulations at issue to the particular land in question." Id. at
 
191.
 
5/
 As the only issue before us is whether Appellants' claims are ripe
for adjudication, and Appellants' claim that they have been deprived of all
economically beneficial use, we need not address the distinction between total
takings and partial takings. See generally Callies, Takings, 24 U. Haw. L.
 
Rev. at 445-50.
 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This finality requirement is rooted in the nature of
 
the Takings Clause inquiry. Id. at 190-91. Absent a final
 
decision, courts cannot accurately examine the economic impact of
 
the regulation on the property at issue. Id.; Palazzolo v. Rhode
 
Island, 533 U.S. 606, 618 (2001). Courts cannot determine
 whether a land use restriction goes "too far," so as to
 
constitute a regulatory taking, until the appropriate agency has
 
determined just how far the regulation extends. MacDonald,
 
Sommer & Frates v. Yolo County, 477 U.S. 340, 348 (1986) (quoting
 Pennsylvania Coal, 260 U.S. at 415). Nor can they determine
 
whether any "beneficial use" remains, a core aspect of the
 
inverse condemnation inquiry. Williamson, 473 U.S. at 189 n.11. 
Likewise, the "just compensation" determination is dependent on a
 
final decision. Id. at 190-91. Ripeness is therefore a
 
prerequisite to the examination of the takings claim itself. Id.
 
Moreover, land use determinations often involve a high
 
degree of discretion. Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 620. The ripeness
 
doctrine, as applied in inverse condemnation cases, ensures that
 
courts do not prematurely deprive land-use authorities of the
 
opportunity to exercise discretion in favor of the landowner. 
Id. The relevant land-use authority, utilizing reasonable
 
procedures, must first have decided "the reach of a challenged
 regulation." Id. If the land-use authority retains the ability
 
to modify or revoke its decision, a court cannot possibly discern
 "the nature and extent of permitted development" on the subject
 
property. MacDonald, Sommer & Frates, 477 U.S. at 351. However,
 
"once it becomes clear that the agency lacks the discretion to
 permit any development, or the permissible uses of the property
 
are known to a reasonable degree of certainty, a takings claim is
 
likely to have ripened." Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 620.
 
C. Ripeness versus Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
 The Supreme Court in Williamson recognized the
 
distinction between the ripeness doctrine and the exhaustion of
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
administrative remedies. Williamson, 473 U.S. at 192-93. Citing
 
Patsy v. Florida Board of Regents, 457 U.S. 496 (1982), the
 
respondent in Williamson argued that it should not be required to
 
seek variances that would have allowed it to develop its property
 
"because its suit is predicated upon 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and there
 
is no requirement that a plaintiff exhaust administrative
 
remedies before bringing a § 1983 action." Id. at 192. The
 
Court explained why that assertion could not be sustained and, in
 doing so, explained the difference between ripeness and
 
exhaustion:
 
The question whether administrative remedies must be
exhausted is conceptually distinct, however, from the
question whether an administrative action must be final
before it is judicially reviewable. While the policies
underlying the two concepts often overlap, the finality
requirement is concerned with whether the initial
decisionmaker has arrived at a definitive position on the
issue that inflicts an actual, concrete injury; the
exhaustion requirement generally refers to administrative
and judicial procedures by which an injured party may seek
review of an adverse decision and obtain a remedy if the
decision is found to be unlawful or otherwise inappropriate.
Patsy concerned the latter, not the former.
 
The difference is best illustrated by comparing the
procedure for seeking a variance with the procedures that,
under 
Patsy, respondent would not be required to exhaust.
While it appears that the State provides procedures by which
an aggrieved property owner may seek a declaratory judgment
regarding the validity of zoning and planning actions taken
by county authorities . . ., respondent would not be
required to resort to those procedures before bringing its
§ 1983 action, because those procedures clearly are
remedial. Similarly, respondent would not be required to
appeal the Commission's rejection of the preliminary plat to
the Board of Zoning Appeals, because the Board was
empowered, at most, to review that rejection, not to
participate in the Commission's decisionmaking.
 
Resort to those procedures would result in a judgment
whether the Commission's actions violated any of
respondent's rights. In contrast, resort to the procedure
for obtaining variances would result in a conclusive
determination by the Commission whether it would allow
respondent to develop the subdivision in the manner
respondent proposed. The Commission's refusal to approve the
preliminary plat does not determine that issue; it prevents
respondent from developing its subdivision without obtaining
the necessary variances, but leaves open the possibility
that respondent may develop the subdivision according to its
plat after obtaining the variances. In short, the
Commission's denial of approval does not conclusively
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine whether respondent will be denied all reasonable
beneficial use of its property, and therefore is not a
final, reviewable decision.
 
Williamson, 473 U.S. 192-94 (citations omitted; emphasis added).6/
 
Thus, ripeness, in the context of a takings claim,
 
simply requires a final, definitive, decision by the initial
 
land-use decision-maker regarding how it will apply the
 
regulations at issue to the subject property, which inflicts an
 
actual, concrete injury. If the regulatory scheme allows for a
 
variance from the requirements of the land-use law, then a
 
decision that does not foreclose a variance is not a final
 
decision regarding the extent of governmental restriction on the
 
subject property. However, as noted above, once that final
 
decision is made, no appeal is required, and no collateral
 
declaratory judgment action attacking the application of the land
 
use law is required, for the takings claim to become ripe. The
 
exhaustion doctrine, by contrast, applies when a party seeks
 
judicial review of the substance of an adverse administrative
 
decision. Thus, exhaustion of any appeals permitted within the
 
administrative process is required before seeking relief from the
 
courts.
 
Although perhaps less explicitly, Hawai' i case law is 
in accord. Under the exhaustion doctrine, "if an administrative 
remedy is provided by statute, a claimant must seek relief first 
from the administrative body before judicial relief is 
available." Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai' i 1, 9, 210 P.3d 501, 
509 (2009) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In such cases, in the interest of judicial economy, "the doctrine of 
exhaustion temporarily divests a court of jurisdiction." Id. In 
Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 734 P.2d 161 
6/
 Williamson enunciated a second barrier to ripeness in federal
 
court takings cases, which is that the plaintiff must first seek compensation
through the procedures that a state provides for seeking just compensation, or
demonstrate that such procedures are unavailable or inadequate. Williamson,
 
473 U.S. at 194-97. This second requirement is plainly inapplicable to state
court proceedings.
 
12
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1987), the Hawai' i Supreme Court discussed "primary 
jurisdiction" cases, in which claims are "originally cognizable 
in the courts," but their enforcement requires resolution of 
issues that have been delegated to administrative agencies. Id. 
at 93, 734 P.2d at 168 (citation omitted). In such cases, courts 
should suspend review pending the administrative disposition of 
issues the agency is empowered to resolve. Id. Similarly, the 
exhaustion doctrine provides that where a claim is "cognizable in the first instance by an administrative agency alone", courts may 
not interfere in the agency's decision-making until all relevant 
administrative remedies have been exhausted. Id. at 93, 734 P.2d 
at 169 (citation omitted). These principles are doctrines of comity designed to outline the relationship between courts and 
administrative agencies and secure their proper spheres of 
authority. Id. at 93, 734 P.2d at 168. 
Where landowners seek to challenge the decision of a
 
land-use authority under the CZMA, HRS sections 91-14 and 205A­
6(c) provide the mechanism for judicial review. See Kona Old, 69
 
Haw. at 91-93, 734 P.2d at 167-69. This review requires judicial
 
intervention in matters that have been placed "within the special
 
competence of the county planning department." Id. at 93, 734
 
P.2d at 169 (internal quotations and citation omitted). 
Accordingly, for courts to exercise jurisdiction in this
 
situation, landowners must first demonstrate that they have
 
sought relief on their dispute through available administrative
 
remedies, including any administrative review process. Id. 
On the other hand, where landowners do not challenge
 
the substance of the decision of the land-use authority, but
 
instead raise constitutional claims based on the effect of the
 
decision, the doctrines of exhaustion and primary jurisdiction
 
are not implicated. In such cases, the ripeness doctrine
 
operates to "prevent courts, through avoidance of premature
 
adjudication, from entangling themselves in abstract
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disagreements over administrative policies, and also to protect 
the agencies from judicial interference until an administrative 
decision has been formalized and its effects felt in a concrete 
way by the challenging parties." Grace Bus. Dev. Corp. v. 
Kamikawa, 92 Hawai' i 608, 612, 994 P.2d 540, 544 (2000) (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). Ripeness only requires 
that the appropriate agency make a formal, final, concrete 
determination that affects the party before it. Id.; accord 
Williamson, 473 U.S. at 193 (takings claim is ripe when "the initial decisionmaker has arrived at a definitive position on the 
issue that inflicts an actual, concrete injury"). Thus, the 
ripeness issue before us is whether a formal, final, concrete 
determination has been made affecting Appellants' use of their 
properties. 
D. Application of the Ripeness Doctrine
 Turning to the case at hand, we must decide whether the
 
Director's refusal to process Appellants' assessment applications
 constituted final decisions regarding the application of the
 
subject regulations to the properties at issue. Williamson, 473
 
U.S. at 186. Maui County argues, and the Circuit Court
 concluded, that Appellants' claims are not ripe because: (1)
 
Appellants failed to exhaust the administrative remedy of an
 
appeal of the Director's decision to the Commission; and (2)
 
Appellants failed to apply for an Amendment to the Community
 
Plan.
 
1. The Director's Decision Was a Final Decision
 
The parties dispute whether, under the applicable
 
rules, an appeal from the Director's decision to the Commission
 was available to Appellants in this case. Maui County cites SMA
 
Rule 12-202-26, which provides that an "[a]ppeal of the
 
director's decision may be made to the commission." Appellants
 
contend, based on arguments of statutory construction, that the
 
appeals process set forth in SMA Rule 12-202-26 applies to other
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parts of the SMA Rules, but that it does not apply to the
 
Director's decision, under SMA Rule 12-202-12, refusing to
 
process Appellants' assessment applications due to inconsistency
 
with the Community Plan. We need not resolve this issue.
 
Maui County's argument concerning appealability to the
 
Commission would be pertinent to whether an applicant had
 
exhausted its administrative remedies prior to seeking judicial
 
review of a decision by the Director, but it is of no consequence
 
to the ripeness analysis applied to takings claims. The
 
Williamson decision was crystal clear:
 
While the policies underlying the two concepts [ripeness and
exhaustion] often overlap, the finality requirement is
concerned with whether the initial decisionmaker has arrived
 at a definitive position on the issue that inflicts an
actual, concrete injury; the exhaustion requirement
generally refers to administrative and judicial procedures
by which an injured party may seek review of an adverse
decision and obtain a remedy if the decision is found to be
unlawful or otherwise inappropriate.
 
Williamson, 473 U.S. at 193 (emphasis added).
 
The Supreme Court specifically rejected the proposition
 
that the initial, concrete, decision must be appealed before a
 
takings claim becomes ripe:
 
[R]espondent would not be required to appeal the
Commission's rejection of the preliminary plat to the Board
of Zoning Appeals, because the Board was empowered, at most,
to review that rejection, not to participate in the
Commission's decisionmaking.
 
Id. 
Accordingly, we conclude that Appellants were not
 
required to appeal the Director's decision that their assessment
 
application could not be processed because "[t]he proposed
 
Single-Family dwelling is inconsistent with the Commmunity Plan." 
The Director's decision satisfied the finality requirement for
 
ripeness by setting forth a definitive position regarding how 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Maui County will apply the regulations at issue to the particular
 
land in question.
 
2. Amendment to the Community Plan
 
Maui County argues that Appellants failed to obtain a 
final decision regarding the application of the "park" use designation for their properties because they did not seek an 
amendment to the Community Plan to change the "park" designation. 
The County argues that a Community Plan amendment is essentially 
a "variance" from the Community Plan and, thus, as with the 
possibility of a variance in Williamson, the Director's decision 
leaves open the possibility that Appellants may develop their 
properties after obtaining an amendment to the Community Plan. 
Cf. Williamson, 473 U.S. at 192-94. Appellants argue that, under 
GATRI v. Blane, 88 Hawai' i 108, 114, 962 P.2d 367, 373 (1998), 
the Community Plan has "the force and effect of law" and that the doctrine of ripeness does not require property owners to seek a 
change in law prior to seeking just compensation for a regulatory 
taking. 
It is undisputed that, in Williamson, the Supreme Court
 
held that the property owners claims were not ripe for
 
adjudication because they had not availed themselves of the 
procedure for obtaining variances. See Williamson, 473 U.S. at
 
188, 193-94. The dispute here is whether an amendment to the
 Community Plan is, in effect, a variance that must be sought in
 
order for Appellants' claims to be justiciable.
 
First, we must consider the nature of the Community 
Plan itself, as explicated by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in GATRI. 
The plaintiff in GATRI submitted an SMA minor permit application to the Director, seeking to build a 470 square foot snack shop on 
its property, which was zoned B-R Resort/Commercial, but 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
designated "single-family residential" in the Community Plan.7/ 
GATRI, 88 Hawai' i at 109, 962 P.2d at 368. It was undisputed 
that the proposed use was allowable under the applicable zoning. 
Id. Similar to the Director's decision in this case, the 
Director in GATRI concluded, inter alia, that "the proposed 
action cannot be processed because it is not consistent with the 
community plan[.]" Id. at 110, 962 P.2d at 369. 
The plaintiff in GATRI appealed the Director's decision 
to the Circuit Court. Id. The Circuit Court reversed the 
Director's decision and the Director appealed to the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court. Id. at 110-11, 962 P.2d at 369-70. The supreme 
court addressed two issues. The supreme court's disposition of the first issue, whether GATRI exhausted its administrative 
remedies prior to its appeal to the circuit court, is not 
relevant to the ripeness issue in this case. See GATRI, 88 
Hawai'i at 111-12, 962 P.2d at 370-71. In GATRI, the plaintiff 
sought direct judicial review of the substance of the Director's 
decision. Thus, the exhaustion of administrative remedies was at 
issue. Here, the Appellants have not sought direct judicial 
review of the Director's decision; rather, Appellants have 
brought claims based on the effect of the Director's decision. 
In the second issue before it, the supreme court held 
that the Director did not err in his decision not to process 
GATRI's application because it was inconsistent with the 
Community Plan, which in the County of Maui is a part of the 
general plan, and which contains a specific, relatively-detailed 
land use plan. GATRI, 88 Hawai' i at 112-15, 962 P.2d at 371-74. 
The supreme court based its conclusion on its interpretation of the governing law, reflected in its holding that the Community 
7/
 The Community Plan at issue in GATRI was Kihei-Makena Community
 
Plan, as adopted by the Maui County Council in 1985, in Ordinance No. 1490.
That Community Plan was updated in 1997 and is now referred to as the 1998
Kihei-Makena Community Plan, the same plan that is at issue in the instant
 case.
 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plan "was adopted after extensive public input and enacted into
 
law by the Maui County Council . . . as an amendment to section
 
2.80.050 of the Maui County Code", "[i]t is part of the general
 
plan of Maui County," and, "[t]herefore, it has the force and
 
effect of law and a proposed development which is inconsistent
 
with the [Community Plan] may not be awarded an SMA permit
 
without a plan amendment." Id. at 115, 962 P.2d at 374.8/
 
Accordingly, the supreme court has determined that the
 
Community Plan before us is a legislative enactment, with the
 
full force and effect of law. As the issue was not presented in
 
8/
 We note that the developer in GATRI sought an SMA minor use permit 
for a proposed "development" under the CZMA. 88 Hawai' i at 109-10, 962 P.2d
at 368-69. Here, by contrast, the proposed use – the construction of single-
family residences – is not considered a "development" under the CZMA unlessthe authority finds a cumulative impact or significant environmental effects.HRS § 205A-22. Although the CZMA does not expressly require consistency forproposed land uses that are not considered "developments," the Maui County
Code (MCC) renders the Community Plan binding on all county officials. MCC 2.80B.030(B) (2006). Under the express language of the code, neither the
director nor the Planning Commission may approve land uses that areinconsistent with the Kihei-Makena Commmunity Plan. Id.; see also Pono v. 
Molokai Ranch, Ltd., 119 Hawai' i 164, 192, 194 P.3d 1126, 1154 (App. 2008)
("Under the MCC, before the [Department of Public Works and Waste Management]or any other county agency issues a permit, the agency must ensure that theproject in question adheres to the specifications of the general plan andcommunity plans of Maui County"), abrogated on other grounds by County ofHawai'i v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai' i 391, 235 P.3d 1103 (2010); see also
MCC 19.04.015(A) (1991) (purpose of zoning is to regulate land usage inaccordance with general and community plans); MCC 19.510.040(A)(4)(b) (1991)(change of zoning must comply with community plan). The language of the SMARules comports with this outcome, stating in mandatory terms that "thedirector shall make a determination . . . that the proposed action 
either
: . .
. (5) Cannot be processed because the proposed action is not consistent withthe county general plan, community plan, and zoning[.]" SMA Rule 12-202-12(f)(emphasis added). In any case, the Director's decision that Appellants'assessment applications could not be processed had the same effect as adetermination that it was a development. If, because of a "cumulative impactor a significant environmental or ecological effect," a single-familyresidence is considered a development, then an SMA permit would be required.If a permit were required, it could not be approved because it would beinconsistent with the Community Plan. Thus, regardless of the denomination ofthe assessment application, the Director's determination of inconsistency withthe Community Plan precludes further processing under applicable law. See 
GATRI, 88 Hawai' i at 115, 962 P.2d 374; see also Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 620­
21; McCole v. City of Marathon, 36 So.3d 750, 754 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2010)(decision is ripe when it becomes clear that further applications would befutile); Howard v. County of San Diego, 109 Cal. Rptr. 3d 647, 653 (Cal. Dist.Ct. App. 2010) (recognizing futility as an exception to ripeness); accord,Schooner Harbor Ventures, Inc. v. United States, 92 Fed. Cl. 373, 381-82 (Fed.Cl. 2010). 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19GATRI, the supreme court did not consider whether an amendment to
the Community Plan was in the nature of a variance for the
purpose of a takings claim ripeness analysis.  Nevertheless, Maui
County's argument that a Community Plan amendment is essentially
an administrative remedy akin to a variance is incompatible with
the supreme court's characterization of the Community Plan.
Moreover, a legislative act "predetermines what the law
shall be for the regulation of future cases falling under its
provisions," whereas a non-legislative act "executes or
administers a law already in existence."  Sandy Beach Defense
Fund v. City Council of the City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 70 Haw.
361, 369, 773 P.2d 250, 256 (1989) (quoting Life of the Land v.
City Council of the City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 61 Haw. 390,
423-24, 606 P.2d 866, 887 (1980)).  Issuing SMA permits involves
"application of general standards to specific parcels of real
property," and is therefore an administrative act.  Id.  By
contrast, a Community Plan amendment can only be achieved by
ordinance of a legislative body, the Maui County Council -- an
act that does not merely execute or administer a law already in
existence.  See Maui County Charter § 3-6 (2003) (designating the
council as the county's legislative body); § 4-1 (2003) ("[e]very
legislative act of the council shall be by ordinance"). 
A Community Plan amendment cannot be equated with a
zoning variance or similar relief.  A variance is a thoroughly
administrative mechanism that changes the effect of an existing
law on a particular property.  See MCC § 19.520.050 (1991). 
Because the Community Plan is legally binding, an amendment
amounts to a change of the existing law rather than an
administrative exception to its application.
A comparison of the two processes supports this
conclusion.  The Maui Board of Variances and Appeals, an
administrative agency, has authority to grant variances from an
existing land use regulation if it determines the regulation FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imposes unique hardship on a specific property. MCC
 
§ 19.520.050(C). The landowner must file an appropriate
 
application, and the board must hold a public hearing. MCC
 
§§ 19.520.020 (1997), 19.520.030 (1991). 
In some respects, the process for obtaining a Community 
Plan amendment appears similarly administrative in nature: an 
individual landowner may apply, on an individual basis, at any 
time for an amendment on a promulgated form; and the Planning 
Commission reviews the application and sets it for a public 
hearing. MCC § 2.80B.110(A), (B) (2006). However, the bulk of 
the process is legislative. Following review of the application, 
the Planning Commission has no authority to approve or deny a 
proposed amendment. Instead, its role is limited to providing 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations. MCC 
§ 19.510.020(A)(6)-(7); Maui County Charter § 8-8.4. The 
Commission must transmit the application along with its 
recommendations to the Maui County Council, which has the 
ultimate decision-making authority. Maui County Charter § 8­
8.6(1); MCC § 2.80B.110(B), (C). The County Council must first 
hold another public hearing on the proposed amendment. MCC 
§ 2.80B.110(D). The council may approve an amendment only by 
ordinance, which must be submitted to the mayor and either 
approved or vetoed. Maui County Charter §§ 8-8.6(1), 4-3(1). 
Indeed, unlike an administrative variance, there are no specific 
criteria that govern the council's decision on whether to amend 
the Community Plan. The amendment process is therefore more akin 
to enacting a zoning ordinance than obtaining a variance from 
existing regulations. See Save Sunset Beach Coal. v. City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 102 Hawai' i 465, 473-74, 78 P.3d 1, 9-10 
(2003) (holding that rezoning is a legislative function). 
In Kailua Community Council v. City & County of 
Honolulu, the supreme court addressed this issue in the nearly 
identical context of a general plan amendment, which on O' ahu is 
20
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accomplished by ordinance of the city council. 60 Haw. 428, 432­
33, 591 P.2d 602, 605 (1979). The chief planning officer and the
 
planning commission performed "a purely advisory function," akin
 
to that of a legislative committee, in submitting their
 
recommendations to the city council. Id. at 433, 591 P.2d at
 
606. The court observed that "the final operative act giving
 
legal effect to the proposal is the legislative action of the
 
city council." Id. at 432, 591 P.2d at 605. As a result, the
 
council's approval or denial of a proposed general plan amendment
 is an "exercise of its legislative function." Id.
 
Because a Community Plan amendment is not an
 
administrative act, it cannot reasonably be required as a step in
 
reaching a final agency determination for ripeness purposes. 
See, e.g., Ward v. Bennett, 592 N.E.2d 787, 790 (N.Y. 1992)
 
(holding that landowners were not required to pursue a
 
legislative "demapping" procedure for ripeness purposes); Tahoe-
Sierra Pres. Council, Inc. v. Tahoe Reg'l Planning Agency, 938
 
F.2d 153, 157 (9th. Cir. 1991) ("[R]ipeness did not require the
 
plaintiffs to ask [the government] to amend the 1984 [regional]
 
Plan before bringing their [federal takings] claims."); GSW, Inc.
 
v. Dep't of Natural Res., 562 S.E.2d 253, 255 (Ga. Ct. App.
 
2002). Ripeness requires only that landowners take advantage of
 
any available variances or waivers under existing law; it does
 
not require them to undertake changing the law itself. See
 
Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 620. 
In a California case nearly identical to the one at
 
bar, the court held that the landowners' failure to obtain a
 general plan amendment was not a bar to ripeness. Howard, 109
 
Cal. Rptr. at 654-55. Although the process for obtaining a
 general plan amendment could be characterized as administrative
 
in nature, the ultimate decision was, as here, "a legislative one
 
to be voted on, after notice and a hearing, by the County's Board
 
of Supervisors." Id. at 654. Accordingly, the landowners could
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not be required to pursue a legislative remedy to attain
 
ripeness. Id. at 655. 
For these reasons, we hold that Appellants are not
 
required to seek a change in the applicable law, i.e., the
 
Community Plan, in order to satisfy the ripeness requirement for
 
their takings claims.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in its
 
determination that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction because
 
Appellants' claims were not ripe for adjudication. Accordingly,
 
we vacate the Circuit Court's June 5, 2009 Amended Judgment in
 
Civil No. 07-1-0496 and October 15, 2009 Final Judgment in Civil
 
No. 09-1-0413, and we remand for further proceedings.
 
Andrew V. Beaman
 
(Chun, Kerr, Dodd, Beaman
& Wong)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
(Leroy E. Colombe and
Bethany C.K. Ace, with him
on the briefs)
 
Mary Blaine Johnston
Deputy Corporation Counsel
for Defendants-Appellees
(Brian T. Moto, Corporation
Counsel, and Madelyn D'Enbeau,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
with her on the briefs)
 
22
 