NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28342
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DANE SCOTT COOPER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
BILLIE MILLER-COOPER, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 05-1-0280)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
In this divorce action, Plaintiff-Appellant Dane Scott
 
Cooper (Husband) appeals from the following orders of the Family
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (family court) : (a) the September 8,
2006 order granting Defendant-Appellee Billie Miller-Cooper's
 
(Wife) motion to dismiss on grounds of forum non conveniens
 
(dismissal order); (b) the December 7, 2006 order denying
 
Husband's motion to vacate the dismissal order and for
 
reconsideration of the dismissal order (December 7, 2006 order);
 
and (c) the March 1, 2007 findings of fact, conclusions of law
 
and order regarding the September 8, 2006 dismissal order
 
(March 1, 2007 findings and conclusions).
 
1
 The Honorable Karen M. Radius presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The parties were married on February 14, 1988 in
 
Sacramento, California and subsequently moved to Albuquerque, New
 
Mexico, where they resided from 1988 until 1991. With the
 
exception of living in Albuquerque, Wife resided in Sacramento
 
during the marriage. Husband is an officer in the Air Force and
 
during the marriage has been assigned to duty in various
 
locations, including Honolulu.
 
Husband filed the complaint for divorce in this action 
on January 28, 2005, at which point he resided in Honolulu. 
Approximately six months later in July of 2005, pursuant to 
military orders, Husband relocated to Alexandria, Virginia. 
When the family court entered its September 8, 2006 dismissal 
order on grounds of forum non conveniens, neither party had 
resided in Hawai 'i since Husband's move in July 2005. 
The parties' assets include accounts with national 
institutions and real estate properties in California, Virginia, 
and Florida. The value of the real estate properties are in 
dispute and will likely require out-of-state expert appraisal 
witnesses. Neither party owns real or tangible property located 
in the state of Hawai 'i. 
In its March 1, 2007 findings and conclusions, the
 
family court made numerous findings of fact and ultimately
 
concluded that:
 
1.	 This case is dismissed on the grounds of forum non
 
conveniens.
 
2.	 The alternative forum is California, where Defendant has a
viable and pending case and in which the divorce itself and
the disputed valuation and property division issues can be
handled appropriately.
 
3.	 Weighing the balances of conveniences, analyzing both the
private interests of the litigants and the public interest
factors, Hawaii is not the appropriate jurisdiction to try
this divorce case.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Husband's alleged points of error are 
summarized as follows: (1) the family court abused its discretion 
in relying on certain findings of fact and/or certain findings 
were clearly erroneous; (2) the family court abused its 
discretion in granting Wife’s motion to dismiss because: (a) the 
existence of an alternate forum was not established; (b) the 
family court failed to consider all of the relevant factors and 
properly balance those factors in evaluating whether Hawai 'i was 
an inconvenient forum; (c) the family court improperly based its ruling in part on Husband relocating from Hawai
'i after the 
action was commenced; and (d) Wife was barred from seeking dismissal under the doctrines of waiver and judicial estoppel 
because she entered a general appearance and actively 
participated in the litigation of the case. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
affirm the rulings of the family court.
 
I. Standards of Review
 
Husband challenges two findings of fact (FOF) on the
 
basis that they are clearly erroneous.
2 As to these alleged
 
points of error, the following standard of review applies. 
A[n] FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. "Substantial
 evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). 
2
 Husband contends that as to FOF No. 11 and FOF No. 38 in the March 1,
 
2007 findings and conclusions, the family court abused its discretion and
 these FOFs are clearly erroneous.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Husband's other challenges to specified FOF are
 
grounded in his assertion that the family court abused its
 
discretion in relying on certain findings for various reasons.3
 
These points of error are reviewed under the following standard:
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in
making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
 reason.
 
Id.
 
Regarding Husband's challenge to the family court's 
dismissal order, "it is inappropriate to disturb a circuit 
court's order granting a motion to dismiss the complaint on the 
grounds of forum non conveniens unless the trial judge committed 
an abuse of discretion." UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 Hawai 'i 137, 
142, 123 P.3d 1232, 1237 (2005) (citation and brackets omitted). 
A circuit court's denial of a motion for reconsideration is also 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki 
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992). 
II. Uncontested Facts

 
While Husband challenges certain FOFs, many of the
 
family court's findings are uncontested. The unchallenged FOFs
 
include the following:
 
22. The parties were married on February 14, 1988 in
Sacramento, California.
 
23. After the parties' marriage Plaintiff was
assigned to military duty at Kirkland Air Force Base, New
Mexico, and Defendant sold the home she owned in Sacramento,
California, and the parties purchased a home together in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, where they lived from 1988 until
1991.
 
3
 Husband contends the family court abused its discretion in relying on
FOFs Nos. 4-7, No. 11, No. 38., and No. 40 in the March 1, 2007 findings and
conclusions.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
24. In 1991 Plaintiff was assigned to military duty
in Korea. Defendant did not accompany him overseas for that
assignment. Instead, she returned to Sacramento,
California, where she purchased a home and where she lived
while Plaintiff was overseas.
 
25. In 1992 Plaintiff was assigned to military duty
at McClellan Air Force Base, Sacramento, California. He and
 Defendant lived together in Sacramento from 1991 until 1995.
 
26. In 1995 Plaintiff was assigned to military duty
at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio. Defendant did not
 accompany him for that assignment. Instead, she remained in
Sacramento, California, where she continued to live in the
home she had purchased in 1991.
 
27. After Plaintiff's tour of duty at Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base, he was assigned to military duty
at the Pentagon, Alexandria, Virginia. Defendant did not
 accompany him for that assignment. Instead, she continued
to reside in Sacramento California.
 
28. In July 2001 Plaintiff was assigned to military
duty at Hickam Air Force Base, Honolulu, Hawaii. Defendant
 did not accompany him for that assignment. Instead, she
continued to reside in Sacramento, California.
 
29. In July 2005 Plaintiff was again assigned to
military duty at the Pentagon, Alexandria, Virginia, and he
relocated from Hawaii at that time.
 
30. Defendant never lived in Hawaii; she has lived
in Sacramento, California since 1956 and throughout the
marriage with the exception of a three (3) year period from
approximately 1988-1991, where she lived in New Mexico.
 
31. It is undisputed that neither party resides or
is domiciled in Hawaii: Defendant never having resided in
Hawaii and Plaintiff having left Hawaii in July 2005. If
 trial were conducted in Hawaii, Plaintiff must fly from
Washington, D.C. to attend and Defendant must fly from
Sacramento to attend.
 
32. It is undisputed that neither party owns any real
property or tangible personal property located in the State of
Hawaii, although they do have accounts with national institutions
 
that also do business in Hawaii. Information with respect thereto
is available nationwide. It follows then that no pertinent
document(s), evidence or witnesses exists exclusively in Hawaii.
 
33. Defendant owns various real estate properties in
Sacramento, California. Defendant, individually, and the parties,
jointly, own real property in California. Plaintiff,
individually, owns real property in Virginia and Florida.
 
34. The values of those parcels are sharply disputed by
the parties.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
35. It is likely that expert real estate appraisal
witnesses from out of state will be needed to be called to enable
 
the Court to adjudicate the differences between the parties over
real estate valuation of the parcels.
 
36. Plaintiff Husband filed real estate appraisals from
California on June 2, 2006 indicating the Calvine Road Sacramento
property was valued at $1.5 million. The list of properties on
each parties Asset and Debt Statement vary greatly as to property
owned and the value of each.
 
37. Depositions of the parties and the experts named by
the parties would be expensive and inconvenient if conducted in
Hawaii as opposed to the Mainland.
 
. . . .
 
39. The Family Courts of the State of Hawaii have high
caseloads dealing with family and divorce issues for Hawaii
residents and domicilianes.
 
These unchallenged facts lay the groundwork for much of
 
the family court's rulings. 
III. Discussion
 
A. The Challenged Findings of Fact Were Not In Error
 
(1) FOFs No. 11 and No. 38 Were Not Clearly Erroneous
 
FOFs No. 11 and No. 38 in the March 1, 2007 findings
 
and conclusions state:
 
11. On January 26, 2006, the Court, at the hearing
on the Motion to Set, orally commented that since neither
party presently lived in Hawaii, and since the parties had
never lived in Hawaii as man and wife, and since there was
no significant property in Hawaii, that all the real estate
owned was outside of Hawaii in three separate states, and if
disputes arose out of state witnesses would be necessary.
The Court indicated it was inclined to dismiss the case sua
 sponte, reasoning that Hawaii had no involvement in this
case or present connection to the parties and, therefore,
should use its limited resources to assist in the resolution
 of the family problems of Hawaii residents, not out-of-state
residents with no connection to Hawaii.
 
. . . .
 
38. Since both parties reside on the Mainland; no
property, either real or personal exists in Hawaii; and no
pertinent documents or evidence remains in Hawaii, Hawaii has no
real state interest in resolving this dispute.
 
(emphasis in original).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband alleges there was no substantial evidence to 
support these findings to the extent they find the parties were 
not Hawai 'i residents (because Husband resided in Hawai 'i when he 
filed the complaint), that Hawai 'i had no connection to the 
parties, and Hawai 'i had no interest in resolving the case. We 
do not agree with Husband. These findings do not suggest that 
Husband was never a Hawai 'i resident. Rather, by the time the 
family court initially entered the dismissal order (and then subsequently entered the supporting findings and conclusions), 
Husband had no longer resided in Hawai
'i for over a year. Wife 
had never resided in Hawai 'i. The findings as to the parties' 
residence status were correct as of the time the findings were 
made. Additionally, given the extensive uncontested facts set 
forth in section II above, there is substantial evidence to 
support the family court's further findings that, at the time of 
the dismissal, Hawai 'i had no involvement in the case, no 
connection to the parties, and no interest in resolving the dispute. 
(2) Other Challenges to FOFs
 
Husband alleges the family court abused its discretion
 
in relying on FOFs No. 4-7, 11, 38 and 40 because: Husband's
 
relocation after commencement of the divorce action was
 
immaterial to the forum non conveniens analysis; Husband's
 
statements and filings before Wife entered a general appearance
 
in this proceeding were irrelevant or no longer represented his
 
position; and/or the family court had to presume jurisdiction to
 
reach the question of forum non conveniens.
 
Husband does not set out any argument regarding these 
points of error, and further we do not find merit in them. 
First, the fact that Husband relocated from Hawai
'i to Virginia 
about six months after this divorce action was initiated was 
highly relevant and material to the question of forum non 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conveniens. Indeed, given the uncontested facts that Wife had 
never resided in Hawai 'i, that the parties did not have any real 
or tangible assets in Hawai 'i, and that their accounts were held 
with national institutions, Husband's relocation from Hawai 'i was 
a severance of any relevant ties to Hawai 'i. 
Second, it was not an abuse of discretion for the
 
family court to consider and rely upon submissions and filings by
 
Husband, even if they were made prior to Wife's appearance in
 
this proceeding. The family court was simply setting out the
 
procedural history of the case and noting the initial position of
 
both parties as to whether issues in the case should be
 
bifurcated.4
 
Third, there is nothing in the family court's findings
 
to suggest that the court was questioning its jurisdiction. 
Rather, the family court properly considered whether to decline
 
its jurisdiction under the forum non conveniens doctrine.
 
B. Dismissal on Grounds of Forum Non Conveniens was Not an
 
Abuse of Discretion
 
(1) An Alternate Forum Exists
 
In Lesser v. Boughey, 88 Hawai 'i 260, 262, 965 P.2d 
802, 804 (1998), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court explained that: 
This court has previously described the doctrine of forum
non conveniens as "the discretionary power of a court to
decline to exercise a possessed jurisdiction whenever it
appears that the cause before it may be more appropriately
tried elsewhere." For the doctrine to apply, therefore, an
alternative forum must exist and the defendant must be
 amenable to process in the alternative forum.
 
(citations omitted). Husband correctly asserts that an
 
alternative forum is a requirement before a case can be dismissed
 
on grounds of forum non conveniens. He is incorrect, however, in
 
4
 Husband initially asked that the family court adjudicate the divorce
issue only and leave all other issues (including property division) to another
court. Wife asked that all issues be decided by the Hawai' i court. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
his argument that no alternative forum exists. That is, the
 
family court did not abuse its discretion in holding that an
 
alternate forum is available in California.
 
An alternative forum ordinarily exists when all defendants
 
are amenable to service of process in the foreign forum. See
 Lueck v. Sundstrand Corp., 236 F.3d 1137, 1143 (9th
Cir.2001) (holding that alternative forum was available
because all defendants had indicated that they would be
amenable to service of process in New Zealand); Alpine View
 Co. Ltd. v. Atlas Copco AB, 205 F.3d 208, 221 (5th Cir.2000)
("A foreign forum is available when the entire case and all
 parties can come within the jurisdiction of that forum."
(Emphasis added.)). A defendant's agreement to submit to
personal jurisdiction of the foreign country satisfies this
requirement. Lockman Found. v. Evangelical Alliance Mission,
930 F.2d 764, 768 (9th Cir.1991) (citation omitted).
 
UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 Hawai 'i 137, 145, 123 P.3d 1232, 1240 
(2005) (emphasis in original). In Lesser, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court held that, where the defendant had agreed to accept service 
of process in California and toll any applicable statute of 
limitations so that the plaintiff could re-file the action in 
California, a "suitable alternative forum existed" in that case. 
88 Hawai 'i at 263, 965 P.2d at 805. 
Here, the family court found, and it is uncontested, 
that: "[o]n June 19, 2006, Defendant Wife filed a Petition for 
Dissolution of Marriage in the Superior Court of California, 
County of Sacramento in Miller-Cooper v. Cooper, Case No. 06FL 
04490." Although Husband apparently filed a motion to quash or 
dismiss the California proceeding on the basis that the Hawai 'i 
5
case was pending,  the pertinent point for purposes of forum non
 
conveniens analysis is that Wife, defendant in this action, is
 
5
 Husband's motion in the California proceeding remained unresolved
when the family court dismissed this action.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not only amenable to service of process in California, but had
 
initiated the action in that jurisdiction.6
 
Husband argues, citing no authority, that the
 
availability of California as an alternative forum was
 
speculative because it was unclear whether he could meet the
 
jurisdictional requirements for initiating a filing in
 
California, and it was unclear if he was subject to jurisdiction
 
and process there. First, it is a non-issue whether he could
 
initiate a divorce proceeding in California because the record
 
establishes that Wife has already initiated a divorce proceeding
 
in that state. Second, it is uncontested that Husband jointly
 
owns real property with Wife in California. Under California
 
law, ownership of real property within that state is a basis to
 
confer personal jurisdiction over Husband. See Watts v.
 
Crawford, 896 P.2d 807, 820-21 n.16 (Cal. 1995) ("[t]he bases of
 a state's judicial jurisdiction over individuals include . . .
 
ownership, use, or possession of a res located within the
 
state"); Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 410.10 (West 2010). Further,
 
California statutes provide for service of process to out-of­
state parties, including by "first-class mail, postage prepaid,
 
requiring a return receipt.". Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 415.40.
 
We therefore conclude that the California proceeding
 
initiated by Wife provides an appropriate alternative forum.
 
6
 The California statute providing the requirements for filing a
divorce proceeding states: "A judgment of dissolution of marriage may not be
entered unless one of the parties to the marriage has been a resident of this
state for six months and of the county in which the proceeding is filed for
three months next preceding the filing of the petition." Cal. Fam. Code §
2320 (West 2010). Based on the uncontested facts in this case, Wife meets
these requirements for the filing of her action in California.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The Family Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion In
Balancing The Factors For Forum Non Conveniens
 
The family court did not abuse its discretion in 
balancing the relevant factors and concluding that California was 
an appropriate alternative forum. While Husband's choice of 
forum was an important consideration, in this case "the balance 
[of factors] is strongly in favor of the defendant." Lesser , 88 
Hawai» i at 263, 965 P.2d at 805 (bracket in original). 
It is uncontested, inter alia, that: (1) Wife lived in 
California for the vast majority of the marriage; (2) Wife never 
resided in Hawai» i; (3) Husband resided in Hawai» i when he filed 
the complaint in this action but did not live in either Hawai» i 
or California by the time the motion to dismiss was filed and 
decided; (4) the parties own no real or tangible property in 
Hawai» i; (5) the parties own real estate jointly in California, 
Wife owns real estate individually in California, and Husband 
owns real estate individually in other states; (6) accounts are 
held in national institutions such that information thereto is 
available nationwide; (7) it is likely that real estate appraisal 
witnesses from out-of-state will be needed to resolve valuation 
disputes; (8) depositions of parties and experts would be 
expensive and inconvenient in Hawai» i; and (9) the family court 
in Hawai» i has a high case load. 
Based on the unchallenged facts, it is clear that 
Hawai» i has no remaining connection with the parties and no 
significant interest in addressing the issues in this case. 
Although Husband argues that there is a question whether he would 
get a fair trial in California, that point is unsubstantiated. 
Moreover, Husband's repeated assertion that the family court 
disregarded his Hawai» i residency when the case was initiated 
misses the point. That is, although his residency at time of 
filing established the jurisdiction of the family court, the 
11
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant question as to forum non conveniens was whether the
 
family court properly exercised its discretion to decline such
 
jurisdiction.
 
(3) The Family Court Properly Considered Husband's
Relocation to the Mainland
 
The family court did not abuse its discretion in 
considering the fact that Husband had relocated from Hawai 'i 
after filing the divorce petition. As discussed above, nothing 
barred the family court from considering this fact and, to the 
contrary, it was highly pertinent to the court's balancing of 
conveniences. 
(4) Wife Was Not Barred From Seeking Dismissal
 
Husband argues that Wife should have been precluded 
from requesting dismissal on grounds of forum non conveniens 
because she participated in the case in Hawai 'i for a number of 
months and in her initial position statement argued, in opposing 
Husband’s request to bifurcate issues, that the entire case 
should be heard in Hawai 'i. Husband argues that Wife changed 
course five months after making her appearance in the case by filing for dismissal and should be barred from doing so. We do 
not agree. 
Waiver is defined as an "intentional relinquishment of 
a known right, a voluntary relinquishment of rights, and the 
relinquishment or refusal to use a right." Coon v. City and 
County of Honolulu, 98 Hawai
'i 233, 261, 47 P.3d 348, 376 (2002) 
(quoting In re Estate of Searl, 72 Haw. 222, 226-27, 811 P.2d 
828, 831 (1991)). "A waiver may be expressed or implied, and it 
may be established by express statement or agreement, or by acts 
and conduct from which an intention to waive may be reasonably 
inferred." Id. (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
Judicial estoppel precludes a party from repudiating a position earlier taken that has been accepted and acted upon by the court. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Lee v. Puamana Cmty. Ass'n, 109 Hawai 'i 561, 575-76, 128 P.3d 
874, 888-89 (2006); Rosa v. CWJ Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 
210, 220, 664 P.2d 745, 752 (1983). 
Notwithstanding Wife’s initial stance in this case, 
there is no indication that Wife expressly or impliedly waived 
her right to seek dismissal nor that the family court accepted 
and acted upon Wife’s initial position. Wife's first appearance 
in this case was the filing of her position statement on 
January 19, 2006. Soon thereafter, on January 26, 2006, the 
parties appeared before the family court, at which point the 
court questioned the connection of the case to Hawai 'i and 
indicated an inclination to dismiss sua sponte. However, because 
the parties were hopeful the case could be settled in mediation, 
the family court reluctantly permitted the case to remain open 
for mediation and the discovery needed for mediation. Once it 
became apparent that the parties would not be able to settle, 
Husband requested that the case be set for trial and Wife filed 
her motion to dismiss on grounds of forum non conveniens.7 While 
both parties did expend resources and time in connection with the 
proceedings in Hawai 'i, this was primarily due to their desire to 
attempt mediation after the family court gave notice that it was inclined to dismiss the case. We conclude that Wife’s motion to 
dismiss was not barred by waiver or judicial estoppel. 
7
 Both Husband and Wife changed their respective positions at this
point, with Husband now seeking to have all issues resolved in Hawai' i and 
Wife now seeking to have all issues resolved in California. 
13
         
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the September 8, 2006 dismissal
 
order, the December 7, 2006 order, and the March 1, 2007 findings
 
and conclusions entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit
 
are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 27, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Robert M. Harris 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Geoffrey Hamiltonfor Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
14
 