 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29671
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ROBERT L. TETU, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOSEPH PAUL MIOZZA, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05-1-0486)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert L. Tetu (Tetu) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed in 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged Tetu by 
complaint with (1) promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree (Count 1); (2) possession with intent to use drug paraphernalia; (Count 2); burglary in the second degree (Count 3); and (4) theft in the second degree (Count 4). After a jury trial, Tetu was found guilty of Counts 1 and 4 and acquitted of Counts 2 and 3. 
I.
 
When encountered by the police, Tetu, Joseph Paul
 
Miozza (Miozza), and John Lean (Lean) were in the proximity of
 drugs, drug paraphernalia, and stolen property. Miozza and Lean
 were seated in a car and Tetu was by the car on the sidewalk. 
1 The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tetu was charged in Counts 1 and 2 of the complaint
 
with drug and drug paraphernalia offenses based on an "ice" pipe
 
with methamphetamine residue, which was found in a pouch on top
 of a duffle bag on the sidewalk next to the car. Miozza was
 charged in Count 5 of the complaint with theft in the second
 degree regarding the same property that provided the basis for
 Tetu's theft charge in Count 4. Lean was not charged. The
 police recovered heroin, crystal methamphetamine, and marijuana
 in a black case on the center console of the car and an ice pipe
 on the ground in the area where Miozza had been placed after his
 arrest. No charges were filed based on the recovery of these
 items. Miozza made statements to the police after his arrest,
 pleaded no contest to Count 5, and testified for the State at
 trial.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Tetu argues that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
erred in denying his motion to suppress incriminating statements
 he made to the police; (2) the Circuit Court erred in improperly
 limiting his questioning of Miozza and other witnesses about
 Miozza's drug use and in excluding evidence about the recovery
 the ice pipe on the ground near Miozza and the drugs found in the
 car; (3) the Circuit Court erred in excluding evidence of the
 alleged prior bad acts of the arresting officer; (4) the Circuit
 Court erred in denying his request to grant immunity to Lean or
 to permit defense counsel to withdraw so that defense counsel
 could testify about a statement made by Lean; and (5) the guilty
 verdicts on Counts 1 and 4 should be overturned because they are
 inconsistent with the acquittals on Counts 2 and 3 and are not
 supported by sufficient evidence. 
We conclude that Tetu's arguments numbered (1), (3),
 
(4), and (5) lack merit. However, we agree with Tetu's argument
 number (2). Accordingly, we vacate Tetu's convictions on Counts
 1 and 4, and we remand the case for a new trial.
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
Prior to trial, Tetu filed a motion in limine
 
requesting permission to introduce evidence of Miozza's drug use
 
and of bias on Miozza's part with respect to the resolution of
 Miozza's criminal cases.
2 As an exhibit to this motion, Tetu
 
attached police reports showing that in addition to the ice pipe
 that formed the basis for Counts 1 and 2 against Tetu, the police
 recovered: (1) a black nylon zippered case which contained
 heroin, crystal methamphetamine, and marijuana on the center
 console of the car in which Miozza and Lean had been seated; and
 (2) an ice pipe with methamphetamine residue on the ground near
 where Miozza had been sitting after his arrest. The exhibit to
 the motion included the following statement by one of the
 investigating officers regarding Miozza's behavior before Miozza
 was searched incident to his arrest:
 
While MIOZZA was sitting on the ground I observed him
fidgeting with something under his shirt in his pants, he
then threw an item towards the chain link fence and began to
kick at a pile of leaves that were on the ground near his
feet. MIOZZA then reached into a rear pants pocket and
began to pull out a book of matches that he threw on the
ground. At this time I told him to stop reaching into his
pants and sit still. MIOZZA then said he was just pulling
stuff from his pockets. I then walked to the area of the
 fence were [sic] he was kicking the leaves and discovered a
clear glass pipe with residue resembling that of crystal
Methamphetamine partially hidden in the leaves. 
One of the police reports included in the exhibit also contained
 
the observation that "MIOZZA appeared to [be] under the influence
 of narcotics, he was giggling and laughing during the arrest
 process, and at times when seated by himself would just start
 laughing." Miozza was arrested for the drugs found in the car
 and the ice pipe found on the ground, but no charges based on
 these items were filed.
3
 
2
 In addition to Count 5 in this case, Miozza also pleaded no contest
to theft charges in two other cases.
 
3
 Lean was also arrested for, but not charged with, the drugs found in
the car.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At trial, the Circuit Court permitted Tetu to ask
 
Miozza whether he had used drugs on the day of and the day before
 
Miozza and Tetu were arrested in this case. Miozza denied using
 drugs on those days and testified that at that point, he had not
 used drugs for "a period of almost two weeks" and had just
 completed a detoxification program at the Salvation Army. Miozza
 had made similar statements regarding his drug use to the police. 
The Circuit Court also permitted Tetu to ask Miozza about
 Miozza's laughing during his arrest. The Circuit Court, however,
 precluded Tetu from asking Miozza or other witnesses about the
 ice pipe found on the ground next to Miozza or the drugs found in
 the car. 
Tetu argues that the Circuit Court erred in precluding
 
him from asking Miozza and other witnesses about the ice pipe
 found on the ground near Miozza and the drugs found in the car. 
Tetu argues that such evidence was relevant to impeach Miozza's
 credibility and expose Miozza as a possible perpetrator of the
 drug offenses with which Tetu was charged. We agree that the
 Circuit Court erred in precluding Tetu from eliciting the drug-
related evidence Tetu sought to adduce.
 
Miozza was an important witness for the State regarding
 
the burglary and theft charges against Tetu. The jury's
 acquittal of Tetu on the burglary charge suggests that the jury
 may have had some question about Miozza's credibility. The
 evidence of the ice pipe and the drugs found in close proximity
 to Miozza was relevant to impeaching his credibility. It would
 have served to cast doubt on Miozza's testimony at trial and his
 statements to the police that he did not use drugs on the date of
 his arrest and for a period of almost two week prior to his
 arrest. 
The excluded evidence was also relevant to Tetu's
 
defense to the drug and drug paraphernalia charges. These
 charges were based on an ice pipe with methamphetamine residue
 that was found in a pouch on top of a duffle bag. Tetu testified
 that the duffel bag belonged to Miozza and that Tetu had no
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knowledge of the ice pipe. Evidence that drugs and another ice
 
pipe (on the ground) were found in close proximity to Miozza
 would have served to support Tetu's defense that he had no
 knowledge of the ice pipe found in a pouch on the duffel bag. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in precluding
 
Tetu from questioning Miozza and other witnesses about the drugs
 and the ice pipe (on the ground) found in close proximity to
 Miozza and that such error was not harmless beyond a reasonable
 doubt. We therefore vacate Tetu's convictions on Counts 1 and 4. 
IV.
 
As noted, we conclude that the other arguments raised
 
by Tetu lack merit, and we resolve these arguments as follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Tetu's
 
motion to suppress incriminating statements. Tetu's initial
 statement that the bags belonged to him was made at a time when
 he was not in custody and thus no Miranda warnings were required.
 See State v. Melemai, 64 Haw. 479, 481-82, 643 P.2d 541, 544
 (1982); State v. Hoffman, 73 Haw. 41, 43-44, 54, 828 P.2d 805,
 
808, 813 (1992). Because Tetu's initial statement was lawfully
 obtained, Tetu's second statement that the tools belonged to him
 was not suppressible as the fruit of the poisonous tree. In
 addition, Tetu's second statement was not the product of police
 interrogation. See State v. Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 566-67, 698
 
P.2d 281, 283-85 (1985).
 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in excluding
 
evidence of the alleged prior bad acts of the arresting officer. 
Tetu did not demonstrate that the proffered evidence was
 relevant, and the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 excluding the evidence under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule
 403 (1993).
 
3. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Tetu's
 
request to grant immunity to Lean or to permit defense counsel to
 withdraw so that defense counsel could testify about a statement
 made by Lean. Under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 621C-2
 (1993), it is the State's prerogative to apply for witness
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
immunity. HRS ยง 621C-2; see State v. Feldhacker, 76 Hawai' i 354, 
357-58, 878 P.2d 169, 172-73 (1994); State v. Radcliffe, 9 Haw. 
App. 628, 636, 859 P.2d 925, 930 (1993). The Circuit Court did not err in refusing to grant Lean immunity based a request made by Tetu. 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
concluding that Lean's purported statement to defense counsel was not admissible pursuant to HRE Rule 804(b)(3) (1993). Tetu did not demonstrate that "corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement." HRE Rule 804(b)(3); see State v. Bates, 70 Haw. 343, 349, 771 P.2d 509, 512-13 (1989); State v. Christian, 88 Hawai' i 407, 418, 967 P.2d 
239, 250 (1998).
4 Because Lean's purported statement to defense 
counsel was not admissible pursuant to HRE Rule 804(b)(3), the Circuit Court did not err in refusing to permit defense counsel to withdraw to testify about the statement made by Lean.
5 
4. The guilty verdicts were not inconsistent and 
there was sufficient evidence to support Tetu's convictions. Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there was substantial evidence to support Tetu's convictions. See State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). Moreover, 
contrary to Tetu's claims, the jury's guilty verdicts were not inconsistent with its acquittals. Counts 1 and 2 required proof of different elements. The same is true of Counts 3 and 4. Based on the evidence presented and the jury's prerogative to 
4 We do not agree with the Circuit Court's alternate conclusion that
Lean's purported statement was inadmissible under HRE Rule 804(b)(3) because
it did not exculpate Tetu. HRE Rule 804(b)(3) imposes an additional
corroboration requirement for a hearsay statement "tending to expose the
declarant to criminal liability and offered to exculpate the accused." HRE
 Rule 804(b)(3) does not impose a separate requirement that the proffered
statement itself be exculpatory to qualify for admission under the rule.
Moreover, Lean's purported statement clearly was exculpatory with respect to
Tetu. 
5 We also note that defense counsel indicated some hesitation about his
 
ability to recall precisely what Lean had said. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
make credibility determinations and weigh the evidence, the jury
 
could rationally have found Tetu guilty of Counts 1 and 4 and not
 guilty of Counts 2 and 3.
 
V.
 
We vacate the Judgment filed by the Circuit Court on
 
February 23, 2009, and we remand the case for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 16, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Stuart N. Fujioka
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 