  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29969
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
HANALEI GARDEN FARMS, INC., Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
CADES SCHUTTE LLP, Judgment Creditor-Appellant,
v.
 
TOM PACE, aka THOMAS W. PACE,, Defendant/
Counterclaimant-Appellee,
and
 
CARDINAL INVESTMENT COMPANY, a Florida Corporation,
Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 00-1-0034)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Judgment Creditor-Appellant Cades Schutte LLP appeals
 
from the post-judgment "Order Partially Granting and Partially
 
Denying (1) Defendant Tom Pace's Motion for Partial Release and
 
Return of the Amount Deposited with the Court Filed April 15,
 
2009; and (2) the Cross Motion of Judgment Creditor Cades Schutte
 
LLP for Disbursement of Bond Posted by Defendant Tom Pace, Filed
 
April 24, 2009" (Order) filed on June 24, 2009, in the Circuit
 
Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court).1
  
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Cades Schutte LLP (Cades) contends:
 
(1) The circuit court erred by holding that Defendant/
 
Counterclaimant-Appellee Tom Pace (Pace) held a valid assignment
 of the October 13, 2004 Partial Judgment entered in favor of
 
Defendant-Appellee Cardinal Investment Company (Cardinal) and
 
against Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee Hanalei Garden
 
Farms, Inc. (Hanalei).
 
(2) The circuit court erred by ordering offset of
 
separate judgment components between Cades and Cardinal, judgment
 
creditors with no reciprocal liabilities against each other. 
Cades asks this court to reverse the Order insofar as the Order
 
offset Hanalei's judgment debt to Cardinal against Pace's
 
judgment debt to Cades.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Cades'
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) Cades contends that Cardinal's assignment of its
 
judgment to Pace was invalid because it was a partial judgment,
 
not a final judgment. Cades' argument is without merit. Cades'
 
argument relies on authority dealing with judgments in tort, not
 
contract.
 
Where the cause of action is of an assignable
character, as in the case of actions ex contractu, a valid
assignment may be made before the rendition of the judgment
that will become operative as soon as the judgment is
recovered. Where, however, the cause of action is in tort
there can be no assignment until the claim has been merged
in an actual judgment, even though a verdict has been given
for plaintiff, and an interest in a judgment to be recovered
in such a case is not assignable, although it has been held
in some cases that such assignment before judgment gives to
the assignee an interest in the judgment, when perfected,
which may be enforced in equity.
 
50 C.J.S. Judgments ยง 833 (2009) (footnotes omitted). 
Additionally, 
No particular phraseology is required to effect an
assignment. The ultimate test is the intention of the
 assignor to give and the assignee to receive present
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ownership of the claim. A valid assignment may be made by
any words or acts which fairly indicate an intention to make
the assignee the owner of a claim. The important thing is
the act and the evidence of intent; formalities are not
material. Thus, whether or not an assignment occurred is a
question of fact for the trial court.
 
Premier Capital, LLC v. Skaltsis, 155 N.H. 110, 115, 934 A.2d
 
496, 501 (2007) (internal quotation marks, citations, and
 
brackets omitted). The circuit court did not clearly err in
 
finding that Cardinal had assigned to Pace its interest in its
 
$32,669.12 judgment against Hanalei. 
Cades further argues that the evidence of the
 
assignment from Cardinal to Pace was hearsay. However, Cades did
 
not object to that evidence in the circuit court and "[t]he rule
 
that an appellate court will consider only such questions as were
 
raised at the trial is well settled." Bank of Hawaii v. Char, 43
 
Haw. 17, 21 (Haw. Terr. 1958).
 
(2) Cades contends that Cades and Cardinal are not
 
mutually indebted parties, Cades does not owe a debt to Pace or
 Cardinal, and therefore offset was invalid. Cades further
 
contends that Pace had no claim to equitable offset because Cades
 
had no notice of the assignment from Cardinal to Pace.
 
"A bona fide purchaser of a judgment stands in the
 
judgment creditor's shoes." 50 C.J.S. Judgments ยง 841 (2009)
 
(footnote omitted). "On the principle that the assignee of a
 
judgment takes it subject to all equities between the original
 
parties, one judgment may be set off against another, as a
 
general rule, although the latter judgment has been assigned to a
 
third person for value." Id. at ยง 900 (footnote omitted). "As a
 
general rule the assignee of a judgment takes it subject to the
 right of the debtor to set off against it any valid claims which
 
he or she has against the assignor, and which would be good as a
 
set-off against the judgment in the assignor's hands, although it
 
has been held that the assignee will be protected if he or she
 
had no notice of the judgment debtor's right to set-off." Id. at
 
ยง 902 (footnote omitted). "[A] judgment debtor who has, by
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assignment or otherwise, become the owner of a judgment or claim
 
against his judgment creditor, may go into the court in which the
 
judgment against him was rendered and have his judgment offset
 
against the first judgment." Harrison v. Adams, 20 Cal. 2d 646,
 
649 (1942).
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
held that (1) Cades received a judgment from Hanalei that was
 subject to offsets, (2) Hanalei's judgment against Pace was
 
subject to offset against a judgment Pace had against Hanalei via
 
an assignment from Cardinal, and (3) Cades was aware of
 
Cardinal's judgment against Hanalei.
 
Therefore,
 
The "Order Partially Granting and Partially Denying
 
(1)
 Defendant Tom Pace's Motion for Partial Release and Return of
 
the Amount Deposited with the Court Filed April 15, 2009; and
 
(2) the Cross Motion of Judgment Creditor Cades Schutte LLP for
 
Disbursement of Bond Posted by Defendant Tom Pace, Filed
 
April 24, 2009" filed in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
 
on June 24, 2009 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 5, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Philip J. Leas
Michael Schwartz (Cades Schutte LLP)for Judgment Creditor-Appellant Cades Schutte LLP. 
Chief Judge 
Daniel G. Hempey(Hempey & Meyers LLP)for Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee Tom Pace. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4
 