 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29758
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF DQ
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-J NO. 0081885)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
DQ, a minor, appeals from the December 5, 2008 Decree
 
Re: Law Violation Petition(s) ("Decree") of the Family Court of
 
1
the First Circuit  ("Family Court") adjudging DQ as a law
violator under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 571-11(1)
 
(2006), on three counts of sexual assault in the first degree
 under HRS § 707-730(1)(b) (Supp. 2008) and two counts of sexual
 assault in the third degree in violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(b)
 (Supp. 2008). 
On appeal, DQ contends that: (1) the Family Court erred
 
in relying on expert testimony concerning Complainant's
 credibility; (2) the Family Court erred in allowing Complainant's
 grandmother ("Grandmother") to be present in the courtroom during 
Complainant's testimony and to, thereafter, testify as a rebuttal
 witness; and (3) DQ's counsel was constitutionally ineffective
 for calling a witness that strengthened the State's case and
 weakened DQ's.
 
1
 The Honorable Karen Radius presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 affirm the Decree and resolve DQ's points of error as follows:
 
(1) DQ contends that the Family Court erroneously
 
relied upon inadmissible expert testimony regarding Complainant's
 credibility when making its own credibility determination. 
Specifically, DQ identifies Dr. Salle's testimony that her
 physical examination of Complainant was consistent with his
 history and, hence, lent credence to his story, that Complainant
 did not appear to be "fabricating large stories", and that she
 found the Complainant's story to be "credible." DQ concludes
 that the Family Court relied on Dr. Salle's testimony in finding
 that DQ committed the alleged acts because the Family Court found
 Complainant and Dr. Salle to be credible witnesses.
 
The testimony to which DQ objects, in fact, was
 
elicited by DQ's counsel during direct examination of Dr. Salle. 
Counsel did not object to or move to strike the testimony when it
 was offered, nor at any discernible time prior to this appeal. 
On that basis alone, we disregard the point of error. Haw. R.
 App. P. 28(b)(4). 
Even if we were to address the merits of DQ's point,
 
its review is unwarranted as plain error. DQ can not establish
 that the Family Court relied on any improper testimony.
 
This was a bench trial. In bench trials, "there is a
 
presumption that any incompetent evidence was disregarded and the
 issue determined from a consideration of competent evidence
 only." State v. Gutierrez, 1 Haw. App. 268, 270, 618 P.2d 315,
 
317 (1980) (inappropriate and prejudicial line of questioning did
 not influence the court); State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 353, 615
 P.2d 101, 107 (1980) (court not influenced by inappropriate
 testimony of prior arrest on a different rape charge). DQ does
 not overcome the presumption by observing that the Family Court
 found Dr. Salle's testimony to be credible. Thus, DQ's
 substantial rights were not affected, and the receipt of the
 testimony was not plainly erroneous.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The Family Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
permitting Grandmother to remain in the courtroom after she
 
testified in the State's case-in-chief, sit nearby while
 Complainant testified, and thereafter testify as a rebuttal
 witness.
2 Appellant must show that the trial court's decision to
 
allow the witness to remain "clearly exceeded the bounds of
 reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to
 the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Bloudell v.
 
Wailuku Sugar Co., 4 Haw. App. 498, 505, 669 P.2d 163, 169 (1983)
 ("[A]lthough the exclusion is generally a matter of right, the
 trial judge retains a measure of discretion in the application of
 the rule's exceptions. . . . An appellate court will not
 overturn the court's action unless an abuse of that discretion is
 shown."); see also 29 Charles Alan Wright et al., Federal
 Practice and Procedure § 6244 (1st ed.) ("FPP") ("Most courts
 hold that an appeal [arguing a violation of Federal Rules of
 Evidence Rule 615] must be based on a showing of prejudice."). 
There is nothing to suggest that Grandmother tailored
 
her rebuttal testimony based on what she heard while present
 during Complainant's testimony. In fact, Grandmother's rebuttal
 testimony was consistent with her direct examination testimony
 where she did not describe any interaction with DQ or any of the
 neighborhood children on the day in question. In addition, the
 Complainant did not testify as to whether his Grandmother had
 called anyone into the yard, and Grandmother was not in the
 courtroom when DQ testified on the subject. 
Grandmother lived with Complainant, had heard
 
Complainant's story, and transcribed Complainant's statement to
 the police. "[E]vidence that witnesses had significant out-of­court contact permits the inference that a failure to exclude
 
2
 For the first time in his reply brief, DQ argues that Grandmother
should not have been permitted to testify because she had already testified.
We will not consider an argument raised for the first time in a reply brief.
See Pleus v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals for the City & Cnty. of Honolulu, No.
28353, 2010 WL 2181496, at *13 n.9 (Haw. Ct. App. May 28, 2010) ("Appellants
. . . are not entitled to raise an argument for the first time in its reply
brief, and we decline to address this argument.").
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
witnesses during trial was unlikely to produce additional
 
collusion and, thus, was not prejudicial." FPP § 6244. Under
 the circumstances, Grandmother's presence during Complainant's
 testimony was of no apparent consequence; certainly, none was
 demonstrated. Therefore, any violation of the witness-exclusion
 rule was not substantially detrimental to DQ.
3
 
(3) DQ fails to show ineffective assistance of
 
counsel. The decision to call Dr. Salle was tactical and had an
 obvious beneficial purpose: to establish that there was no
 medical evidence to support Complainant's version of events. As
 such, the decision to call Dr. Salle will not serve as a basis
 for a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. See Briones v.
 
State, 74 Haw. 442, 462–63, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993) ("Specific
 actions or omissions alleged to be error but which had an obvious
 tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case will not be
 subject to further scrutiny."); State v. Onishi, 64 Haw. 62, 63,
 636 P.2d 742, 744 (1981) ("The decision whether to call witnesses
 in a criminal trial is normally a matter within the judgment of
 counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by
 judicial hindsight.") The decision will only be reviewed if "the
 action or omission had no obvious basis for benefitting
 defendant's case and it resulted in the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense[.]" Briones, 74
 
Haw. at 463, 848 P.2d at 976 (internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Similarly, counsel's failure to object to any portion
 
of Dr. Salle's solicited testimony did not result "in either the
 withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 defense." State v. Antone, 62 Haw. at 348–49, 615 P.2d at 104. 
Since this was a bench trial and there is nothing that suggests
 that the Family Court based its decision on improperly received
 evidence, the presumption that incompetent evidence was discarded
 
3
 Although DQ alleges violations of the state and federal
constitutions as a consequence of the Family Court permitting Grandmother to
remain in the courtroom while Complainant testified and to thereafter testify
on rebuttal in his point of error, DQ does not argue the constitutional issues
in the argument section of his briefs. Therefore, we deem those arguments to
have been waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
remains unrebutted. Id. at 353, 615 P.2d at 107.
 
Therefore, the Decree entered on December 5, 2008 in
 
the Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 28, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Stuart N. Fujioka
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 