 NO. 29601
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
IN RE: MARN FAMILY LITIGATION
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(MASTER FILE NO. 00-1-MFL)
 
ORDER DISMISSING APPEAL FOR LACK OF APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Appellant Alexander Y. Marn (Alexander) appeals from
 
two interlocutory orders entered by the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (Circuit Court):  (a) "Order Granting (1) James
K.M.
 Dunn's, Successor Trustee of the Annabelle Y. Dunn Trust,
 
Dated June 18, 1991, Motion for Order Authorizing the Liquidating
 
Receiver to Sell the McCully Shopping Center [(MSC)] (Filed July
 15, 2008) and (2) Receiver Thomas E. Hayes' Joinder in James K.M.
 Dunn's, Successor Trustee of the Annabelle Y. Dunn Trust, Dated
 June 18, 1991, Motion for Order Authorizing the Liquidating
 Receiver to Sell the [MSC] Filed July 15, 2008 (Filed September
 3, 2008)" (Order Authorizing Sale of the MSC by Liquidating
 Receiver), which was filed on October 9, 2008; and (b) "Order
 Granting in Part and Denying in Part Motion for Injunctive
 Relief, Reconsideration and/or Modification of Order Granting (1)
 
1
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
 James K.M. Dunn's Motion for Order Authorizing the Liquidating
 
Receiver to Sell the [MSC] and (2) Receiver Thomas E. Hayes'
 Joinder in James K.M. Dunn's Motion for Order Authorizing
 Liquidating Receiver to Sell the [MSC] filed October 20, 2008"
 (Order Regarding Injunction), which was filed on January 2, 2009. 
As explained below, we dismiss this appeal for lack of appellate
 jurisdiction.
 
I.
 A.
 
This appeal arises out of protracted litigation
 
involving members of the Marn family over the operation and
 management of Marn family businesses. Numerous lawsuits and over
 ten appeals have been filed. 
James Y. Marn, Jr. (James), Alexander, Eric Y. Marn 
(Eric), and Annabelle Y. Dunn (Annabelle) are siblings. They were the four limited partners of McCully Associates, a Hawai' i 
Limited Partnership (MA), when MA was formed. The general partner for MA was Ala Wai Investment, Inc. (AWI). MA owned and managed numerous properties, including the McCully Shopping Center (MSC). After Annabelle died in 1996, her limited partnership interest was held by the Annabelle Y. Dunn Trust (AYD Trust), and Annabelle's son, Gregory Y.Y. Dunn (Gregory) was elected to serve as a director of AWI along with James, Alexander, and Eric. Gregory's selection as a director resulted in a "hopeless deadlock" in the AWI's board of directors as Gregory and James opposed the actions and initiatives sought by Alexander and Eric. 
In October 1998, Alexander and Eric filed a lawsuit
 
seeking to purchase the partnership interest held by the AYD
 Trust (Buyout Lawsuit). In December 1998, James filed a lawsuit,
 in which the AYD Trust later joined, against Alexander and Eric,
 alleging breach of fiduciary duties and the partnership
 agreement, self-dealing, and fraud, and seeking a judicial
 accounting, appointment of a receiver for AWI, and removal of AWI
 as the general partner of MA (Judicial Accounting Lawsuit). In
 2002, the Circuit Court appointed a receiver, who took over the
 
2
 operation of MA, and in 2006, the Circuit Court converted the
 
interim receivership into a liquidating receivership. The
 Circuit Court held two trials relating to the Judicial Accounting
 Lawsuit in November 2005 and June 2006 and a trial relating to
 the Buyout Lawsuit in April 2007. 
B.
 
On October 9, 2008, the Circuit Court filed the Order 
Authorizing Sale of the MSC by Liquidating Receiver. By that time, the receiver had sold several other properties, besides the MSC, that had been owned by MA. On January 2, 2009, the Circuit Court issued the Order Regarding Injunction. With respect to the these two orders, the Circuit Court did not issue a Hawai' i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b) (2000) certification or authorize an interlocutory appeal pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 641-1(b) (1993). 
After Alexander filed his notice of appeal from the two
 
orders, the AYD Trust filed a motion to dismiss the appeal for
 lack of appellate jurisdiction, in which Appellee Thomas E.
 Hayes, Liquidating Receiver (Hayes), joined. This court issued
 an order that denied the motion to dismiss without prejudice to
 the parties addressing appellate jurisdiction in their appellate
 briefs. In our order, we noted that the Circuit Court had not
 yet entered a separate, final judgment that resolved all of the
 claims in the case, and therefore, Appellant's appeal was
 premature and we lacked jurisdiction, absent an exception to the
 final judgment requirement. We further noted two exceptions to
 the final judgment requirement -- the exception set forth in
 Forgay v. Conrad, 47 U.S. 201 (1848) (the Forgay doctrine), and
 the collateral order doctrine -- and we invited the parties to
 address in their appellate briefs whether the interlocutory
 orders being appealed satisfied the requirements for these two
 exceptions. 
After the parties filed their opening and answering 
brief, but before Alexander filed his reply briefs, Alexander filed a "Motion for Stay of the Sale of the McCully Shopping Center Pending Appeal" (Motion for Stay), pursuant to Hawai' i 
3
 Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 8 (2000). We denied the motion
 
without prejudice to Alexander seeking a stay from the Circuit
 Court, noting that the trial court was in a better position to
 determine such issues as the necessity for a bond and, if a bond
 was required, the amount of the bond. Alexander did not
 thereafter file with this court a further motion for a stay in
 this appeal.
 
II.
 
As a threshold matter, we must decide whether we have 
jurisdiction to entertain this appeal. Peterson v. Hawaii Elec. 
Light Co., 85 Hawai' i 322, 326, 944 P.2d 1265, 1269 (1997). 
Generally, an appellate court only has jurisdiction to review final judgments, orders, or decrees, which resolve all claims raised by all parties. See HRS ยง 641-1(a) (Supp. 2011); Leslie 
v. Estate of Tavares, 109 Hawai' i 8, 13 122 P.3d 803, 808 (2005). 
In addition, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that "[a]n appeal 
may be taken from circuit court orders resolving claims against parties only after the orders have been reduced to a [separate] judgment . . . ." Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 
Hawai'i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
Alexander does not dispute that the two orders he
 
appeals from are not final orders and have not been reduced to a
 separate judgment. However, he argues that these orders are
 appealable under exceptions to the final order and judgment
 requirements that are set forth in the Forgay doctrine and the
 collateral order doctrine. We disagree.
 
The Forgay doctrine allows the appeal of non-final 
orders "which require immediate execution of a command that property be delivered to [another], and the losing party would be subjected to irreparable injury if appellate review had to wait the final outcome of the litigation." Ciesla v. Reddish, 78 
Hawai'i 18, 20, 889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995) (internal quotation 
marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
Alexander's basic purpose for this appeal was to ensure
 
that the MSC was not sold until the Circuit Court entered an
 appealable final judgment that permitted him to challenge the
 
4
  underlying decisions of the Circuit Court. However, on October
 
25, 2010, before the sale of the MSC, the Circuit Court entered
 an appealable Partial Final Judgment that encompassed the
 underlying decisions of the Circuit Court that Alexander seeks to
 
2
challenge,  and Alexander has filed a separate appeal from the
Partial Final Order. Moreover, after this court denied
 Alexander's Motion for Stay without prejudice to his seeking a
 stay from the Circuit Court, Alexander did not thereafter file a
 further motion with this court for a stay in this appeal. In
 addition, the MSC is owned by MA, and not by Alexander, and
 therefore Alexander does not have a direct ownership interest in
 the MSC. Under these circumstances, we conclude that Alexander
 has not demonstrated the irreparable injury necessary to apply
 the Forgay doctrine. 
The collateral order doctrine permits appeals of non-
final orders under the following conditions:
 
In order to fall within the narrow ambit of the collateral
 
order doctrine, the "order must [1] conclusively determine
the disputed question, [2] resolve an important issue
completely separate from the merits of the action, and [3]
be effectively unreviewable on appeal from a final
judgment."
 
Abrams v. Cades, Schutte, Fleming & Wright, 88 Hawai' i 319, 322, 
966 P.2d 631, 634 (1998) (citation omitted; brackets in 
original). All three conditions must be satisfied for the collateral order doctrine to apply. Id. We conclude that, at 
minimum, the orders challenged by Alexander in this appeal do not satisfy the second condition of resolving an issue "completely separate from the merits of the action[.]" Id. Instead, the 
challenged orders arise out of, and are intertwined with, the merits of the action and the decisions encompassed by the Partial Final Judgment. 
2
 The Circuit Court certified the Partial Final Judgment as immediately
appealable pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b).
 
5
 III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we dismiss this appeal for
 
lack of appellate jurisdiction. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 20, 2012. 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
6
 