   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29994
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
TALELE MIKA, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0053)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard and Reifurth, JJ., and Foley,

Presiding Judge, concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Talele Mika ("Mika") appeals from
 
the September 23, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
("Judgment") of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 
1
Court")  convicting him of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
Third Degree under section 712-1243
Statutes ("HRS") and Unlawful Use of  of the Hawaii Revised
2
Drug Paraphernalia under HRS

 
3
§ 329-43.5 , and sentencing him to five years in prison.  Mika
 
contends that the Circuit Court erred by: (1) failing to instruct

 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided .
 
2
 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous drugs in the
third degree if the person knowingly possesses any dangerous drug
in any amount. 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 712-1243(1) (Supp. 2010). 
3
 Prohibited acts related to drug paraphernalia. (a) It is
unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who violates
this section is guilty of a class C felony . . . . 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 329-43.5(a) (2010).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the jury on the defense of mistake of fact; and (2) failing to
 
suppress the post-arrest evidence against Mika as the fruit of an
 unlawful seizure. 
We reverse.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Honolulu Police Department ("HPD") Detective Kongton
 
Sitachitta was assigned to investigate a burglary that occurred
 on January 2, 2008 in Village Park, Oahu. Because a neighbor of
 the victim identified Mika's vehicle as being involved in the
 burglary, Detective Sitachitta asked Mika to come down to the
 police station to discuss his whereabouts, his car, and who was
 driving his car at the time of the burglary. When another
 suspect identified Mika as the get-away driver for the burglary,
 Detective Sitachitta asked the HPD plain clothes unit to find
 Mika and ask him to come in to the police station again. At the
 time, Detective Sitachitta did not believe that he "had enough"
 to arrest Mika for burglary. 
Officer Duane Webster testified that he was asked to
 
obtain Mika's voluntary presence at the police station for
 questioning regarding a burglary. On January 10, 2008, the
 officers of the Crime Reduction Unit ("CRU officers") asked
 Mika's brother for assistance, and a meeting between Mika and his
 brother was arranged at the local 7-Eleven. The CRU officers
 went to the 7-Eleven to wait for Mika. 
Mika testified that on January 10, 2008, his brother
 
called him in a panic and asked him to meet at 7-Eleven. On the
 way, Mika heard something rattling inside the passenger door
 panel of his vehicle and found a methamphetamine pipe, which he
 believed belonged to his brother. Intending to confront his
 brother about it, Mika placed the pipe in his pocket. When Mika
 arrived at the 7-Eleven, his brother told him that he wanted
 cigarettes, so Mika went inside the store to purchase cigarettes
 for his brother and minutes for his cell phone. 
When Mika arrived, eight CRU officers dressed in plain
 
clothes and wearing body armor with the word "police" written
 across the front and back were waiting for him. They were
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
carrying firearms and badges, and were using unmarked vehicles. 
When Mika entered the 7-Eleven, four of the CRU officers
 followed, approached Mika, and identified themselves.
4 Officer
 
Webster testified, "I asked [Mika] for his identification to
 verify who he was and took down his information. The other
 officers talked to him and told him that we were looking for him
 to come in voluntarily." 
Officer Webster did not inform Mika that he had the
 
right to remain silent or the right to an attorney. Officer
 Webster testified that the other CRU officers told Mika that
 Detective Sitachitta wanted to talk to him about the burglary. 
Mika was calm and cooperative, and agreed to go to the police
 station. 
Mika was driven to the police station by the CRU
 
officers in their unmarked vehicle. Officer Webster's sergeant
 requested Mika's permission to drive Mika's car to the station,
 and Mika agreed.
5 The CRU officers did not obtain a consent form
 
from Mika providing that he was voluntarily going to the police
 station and letting the police drive his car. 
The CRU officers did not speak with Mika about the case
 
during the ride. The CRU officers did not ask Mika any questions
 other than to find out if he was willing to go with them. During
 the encounter, the CRU officers did not threaten Mika or make any
 threatening gestures, place him in handcuffs, or put their hands
 on him. Officer Webster denied that the CRU officers frisked or
 searched Mika outside the 7-Eleven.
6
 
Mika testified that he was willing to go to the police
 
4
 According to Mika, the CRU officers surrounded him inside the
store, "and [looked] like they was going to arrest me."
 
5
 To the contrary, Mika said that he told the CRU officers that he
would follow them to the station in his car, but one of the officers said "we
cannot let you drive your car." The CRU officers then told Mika that if he
 did not give them permission to drive his vehicle, they would have it towed to
the station. Mika offered to have his brother drive the car, but the CRU
officers said no. Believing that he had no choice, Mika told the officers to
"go right ahead."
 
6
 To the contrary again, Mika testified that the CRU officers pat
searched him outside the 7-Eleven "to see if I had any weapons. They grabbed
me by the arm. One grabbed me by the arm and one did the pat search."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
station. It is unclear from the context of the question or the
 
answer, however, whether Mika's self-described willingness was
 dictated by the presence of eight armed police officers dressed
 in body armor. At the station, Detective Sitachitta informed
 Mika of his rights, and told Mika that he had the right to remain
 silent and to have an attorney present. Mika appeared to
 understand, and told Detective Sitachitta that he understood. 
Mika signed the form indicating that he understood and was
 waiving his rights. 
Mika reiterated that he had not been involved with the
 
burglary. After Detective Sitachitta told him that they had a
 suspect under arrest who was telling a different story, however,
 Mika conceded that he played a role in the burglary. Mika
 admitted that he had parked near the Victim's house and waited
 for his brother, Pasion, and Hoopai to return. Mika knew when he
 parked his car that the others were planning to burglarize the
 house, and, when they returned, he drove them away. In return
 for driving, Mika was given some of the stolen property. 
Mika was arrested for his part in the burglary. During
 
the arrest, the police recovered the methamphetamine pipe from
 Mika's pocket. Later that evening, Mika was arrested again and
 charged with Promoting a Dangerous Drug III and Unlawful Use of
 Drug Paraphernalia. 
On October 31, 2008, Mika's counsel filed a Motion to
 
Dismiss Felony Information and/or, in the alternative Motion to
 Suppress Evidence ("Motion to Suppress"). The motion contended
 that the State lacked probable cause, that any statements from
 the January 5, 2008 interview should be suppressed because they
 were the product of custodial interrogation, and that any
 statements from the January 10, 2008 interview should be
 suppressed because Mika did not give a knowing and intelligent
 waiver of his rights due to his educational background, mental
 condition, the physical injuries that he had suffered, and the
 medication that he was taking.
 
At the January 21, 2009 hearing on the Motion to
 
Suppress, Mika's counsel argued that Mika was seized without a
 warrant at the 7-Eleven. The State objected, noting that the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5that point, and requested additional time.  The hearing was
rescheduled for March 16, 2009, and the State was permitted to
present additional testimony to address the newly-raised issue. 
Mika was allowed to testify on rebuttal.  The State did not
dispute Mika's argument that the State lacked probable cause to
arrest Mika. 
The Circuit Court denied the Motion to Suppress:
As to the statement on January 10th, 2008, the Court
finds the defendant was informed of his constitutional
rights and made a knowing, intelligent and voluntary waiver
of those rights.  
As to the issue regarding the vehicle, the Court is
going to find that the defendant consented to his vehicle
being driven by the police to the station and that he had
voluntarily gone to the station with the police where he
subsequently waived his constitutional rights and gave his
statement.  So the Court is going to deny the motion.
On April 2, 2009, the Circuit Court filed its Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Motion to Dismiss Felony
Information and/or, in the Alternative Motion to Suppress
Evidence, which stated in relevant part:
FINDINGS OF FACT
. . . .
8.On January 10, 2008, Detective Sitachitta
directed members of the Honolulu Police Department's Crime
Reduction Unit (hereinafter "CRU") to attempt to locate
Defendant to see if he would come in to provide information
on a burglary case under HPD Report No. 08-001981. 
9.Officer's (sic) Duane Webster (hereinafter
"Officer Webster"), Douglas Lee, Stuart Leong, and Seargeant
Douglas Iwamasa (hereinafter "Sergeant Iwamasa") made checks
in the Waipahu area and with the assistance of Defendant's
brother, . . . arranged to meet with Defendant at the
7-Eleven located at 94-911 Farrignton (sic) Highway.
10.At approximately 7:00PM, Defendant voluntarily
appeared at the 7-Eleven located at 94-911 Farrignton (sic)
Highway and was approached by Officer Webster and two other
officers.
11.  After being informed of Detective Sitachitta's
request, Defendant volunteered to come to the Pearl City
Police Station for a second interview with Detective
Sitachitta. 
12.Defendant gave Sergeant Iwamasa permission to
drive his vehicle to the Pearl City Police Station while he
rode in the Officers' CRU vehicle.
. . . .NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14. Defendant provided further details to Det.
Sitachitta about the burglary under HPD Report No. 08-001981
including what was given to him and [Pati] Mika by [Shannon]
Hoopai and [Joseph] Pasion after they returned from the
residence. Defendant admitted that he knew that Shannon and
 [Joseph] intended to burglarize a house but he was afraid so
he did not leave.
 
15. During the January 10, 2008, interview,
Defendant did not present any differently than he had during
the January 5, 2008 interview; he was lucid and able to
engage in conversation with Detective Sitachitta
intelligently.
 
16. Following the interview, Det. Sitachitta
instructed Officer Stuart Leong to arrest Defendant for
Burglary in the First Degree of the Hasegawa residence.
 
17. During the pre-incarceration search of
Defendant, a glass cylindrical pipe containing residue
resembling methamphetamine was recovered. . . . 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
3. The Hawaii Supreme Court (hereinafter "Supreme
Court") has stated that whether a defendant's statement
should be suppressed as the fruit of an unlawful warrantless
seizure requires a two-part analysis: "(1) At what point, if
at all, was the individual 'seized'; and (2) if so, whether,
prior to the seizure, the individual voluntarily and
intelligently consented." State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawaii 195,
203 (1997).
 
4. On January 10, 2008, Defendant voluntarily
accompanied Officer Webster to the Pearl City Police Station
for a second interview with Detective Sittachitta and
 willingly agreed to let Sergeant Iwamasa drive his vehicle
to the station. 
5. Defendant was not "seized" prior to his
January 10, 2008 interview with Detective Sitachitta and,
even if he was, he voluntarily and intelligently consented
prior to the seizure.
 
6. Miranda, also sets out that a Defendant may
waive his right to remain silent and be represented by an
attorney during questioning by the police. A waiver will be
 valid if it is made voluntarily, knowingly, and
intelligently. Miranda, supra, 384 U.S. [436, 444 (1966)].
See also State v. Green, 51 Haw. 260, 457 P.2d 505 (1969).
 
7. Viewing the totality of the circumstances in
which Defendant's statement was made it is clear that no
 violation of his constitutional rights occurred. Defendant
 was lucid and able to engage in conversation intelligently,
the detective informed Defendant of his constitutional
 rights with the aid of the HPD 81 form, and everything that
police officers should do to ensure that Defendant
understood his Miranda rights was done.
 
8. Defendant knowingly, voluntarily and
intelligently elected to waive his constitutional rights and
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Defendant's statements were freely and voluntarily given.
 
The case proceeded to trial and Mika was found guilty
 
by the jury of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree and
 
Unlawful use of Drug Paraphernalia. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Findings Of Fact/Conclusions Of Law - Criminal 
 
Appellate review of factual determinations made by the
trial court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal case is
governed by the clearly erroneous standard. A finding of
fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. The circuit
 court's conclusions of law are reviewed under the
 right/wrong standard.
 
State v. Walker, 106 Hawai 'i 1, 9, 100 P.3d 595, 603 (2004) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State
 
v. Naititi, 104 Hawai 'i 224, 233, 87 P.3d 893, 902 (2004)). "A 
conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings
 of fact and that reflects an application of the correct rule of
 law will not be overturned." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 428, 
879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994) (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted).
 
Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of
 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
 reasonable caution to support a conclusion." State v. Richie, 88
 
Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted).
 B. Motion To Suppress

 
Appellate review of factual determinations made by the trial
court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal case is governed by
the clearly erroneous standard. A finding of fact is clearly
erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to
support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in
support of the finding, the appellate court is left with a
definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. The
 circuit court's conclusions of law are reviewed under the
 right/wrong standard. Furthermore, . . . the proponent of a
motion to suppress has the burden of establishing not only that
the evidence sought to be excluded was unlawfully secured, but
also, that his own Fourth Amendment rights were violated by the
search and seizure sought to be challenged. The proponent of the
motion to suppress must satisfy this burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence.
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Balberdi, 90 Hawai 'i 16, 20-21, 975 P.2d 773, 777-78 
(App. 1999) (quoting State v. Anderson, 84 Hawai 'i 462, 467, 935 
P.2d 1007, 1012 (1997)). 
Consequently, the appellate court reviews "the circuit 
court's ruling on a motion to suppress de novo to determine 
whether the ruling was right or wrong." State v. Eleneki, 106 
Hawai'i 177, 180, 102 P.3d 1075, 1078 (2004). 
[W]hen a defendant's motion to suppress evidence is denied
prior to trial, the defendant need not object at trial to
the introduction of the evidence to preserve his or her
right to appeal the pretrial denial of his or her motion to
suppress and the introduction of the evidence at trial.
 
State v. Kong, 77 Hawai 'i 264, 266, 883 P.2d 686, 688 (App. 
1994). Further,
 
[W]hen the defendant's pretrial motion to suppress is denied
and the evidence is subsequently introduced at trial, the
defendant's appeal of the denial of the motion to suppress
is actually an appeal of the introduction of the evidence at
trial. Consequently, when deciding an appeal of the
pretrial denial of the defendant's motion to suppress, the
appellate court considers both the record of the hearing on
the motion to suppress and the record of the trial.
 
Id.
 
C. Whether A Seizure Has Occurred
 
"[A] person is seized if, given the totality of the
 
circumstances, a reasonable person would have believed that he or
 she was not free to leave. Whether a reasonable person would
 feel free to leave is determined under an objective standard that
 this court reviews de novo." State v. Kearns, 75 Haw. 558, 566,
 
867 P.2d 903, 907 (1994) (citations omitted).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Mika contends that the Circuit Court erred in (1)
 
finding that he volunteered to go to the Pearl City Police
 
Station to meet with Detective Sitachitta on January 10, 2008,
 and (2) concluding that (a) he was not seized prior to his
 interview that day with Detective Sitachitta and, even if he was,
 (b) he voluntarily and intelligently consented prior to the
 seizure. The State, on the other hand, contends that Mika was
 not seized, that he voluntarily went to the station, and that the
 Circuit Court's finding of voluntariness reflected the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence. 
Whether the pipe and its contents should have been 
suppressed as the fruit of an unlawful warrantless seizure 
requires a two-part analysis: (1) at what point, if at all, was Mika seized; and (2) if he was seized, whether, prior to the seizure, he voluntarily and intelligently consented. State v. 
Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i 195, 203, 948 P.2d 1036, 1044 (1997). The 
first step is to determine whether a seizure, in the constitutional sense, has occurred. Kearns, 75 Haw. at 566, 867 
P.2d at 907. The test is an objective one. 
[A] person is seized if, given the totality of the
circumstances, a reasonable person would have believed that
he or she was not free to leave. Whether a reasonable
 person would feel free to leave is determined under an
objective standard that this court reviews de novo.
 
Id. (citations omitted).
 
On January 5, 2008, Detective Sitachitta questioned
 
Mika about his possible involvement in the burglary. On
 
January 10, 2008, Mika was again asked to go to the police
 station for further questioning. 
[W]hen the activities of law enforcement officials convey
the impression that an investigation of specific and
identifiable criminal activity has commenced and they have
reason to believe that the citizen is involved or possesses
relevant information, a reasonable person is more likely to
believe that he or she is not free to ignore the official
request and walk away.
 
Kearns, 75 Haw. at 567, 867 P.2d at 907. "A reasonable person
 
feels a much stronger compulsion to cooperate with police when
 that person is the subject of the questioning than when the
 person is approached as a potential witness to the activities of
 others." Kearns, 75 Haw. at 568 n.4, 867 P.2d at 908 n.4. 
In Kearns, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that a 
seizure had occurred when a narcotics officer, who was investigating narcotics trafficking at the airport, stopped a passenger, identified himself as an officer, and asked to see the passenger's driver's license and airline ticket. Borrowing from Justice Brennan's concurring opinion in Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491 (1983), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court explained that: 
By identifying themselves and asking for the defendant's 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
airline ticket and driver's license the officers, as a
practical matter, engaged in a "show of authority" and
"restrained the defendant's liberty." It is simply wrong to
suggest that a traveler feels free to walk away when he has
been approached by individuals who have identified
themselves as police officers and asked for, and received,
his airline ticket and driver's license.
 
Kearns, 75 Haw. at 568, 867 P.2d at 908 (citing Florida v. Royer,
 
460 U.S. 491, 511-12 (1983) (Brennan, J., concurring) (brackets
 omitted)). Therefore, "all evidence obtained as a result of the
 seizure should have been suppressed." Id. at 572, 867 P.2d at
 
909-10. 
Not every police-initiated warrantless encounter 
amounts to an unlawful seizure. In Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i 195, 948 
P.2d 1036, for instance, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court found that 
there had not been an unlawful seizure when, following up on a tip potentially implicating the defendant, the police went to the defendant's home to ask him to go to the police station to speak with the detective. Only one officer went to the door while the other two remained in the police car, the officer told the defendant at least twice that he did not have to go to the police station, and the police did not ask the defendant any questions. The court held that an unlawful seizure had not occurred because, under the circumstances, a reasonable person would have felt free to leave or to simply return into the home. Id. at 203-04, 948 
P.2d at 1044-45. 
The police contact in this case is objectively more
 
coercive than it was in either Kearns or Kauhi. The police
 enlisted Mika's brother to lure Mika to the 7-Eleven. While Mika
 was inside the store, ostensibly on his brother's business, four
 officers dressed in body armor with the word "police" written on
 the front and back, and carrying weapons, approached Mika. The
 officers identified themselves as police, and asked for Mika's
 identification. 
Unlike the defendant in Kauhi, Mika was approached by
 
four officers instead of one, the police did not tell him that he
 was free to leave, and he did not have the option of retreating
 into his home. As the officer did in Kearns, the officers
 engaged in a show of authority by identifying themselves as
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police, asking for identification, and explaining that they
 
wished for the suspect to come down to police headquarters. We
 conclude that, under the circumstances, a reasonable person would
 not have felt free to walk away, and that Mika was seized when
 the four CRU officers approached him, identified themselves,
 requested identification, and asked him to go to the station with
 them without promptly informing Mika that he did not have to
 cooperate.
7 The fact that Mika went with the officers, just
 
moments after placing a methamphetamine pipe into his pocket, is
 tangible evidence of that perspective.
 
That conclusion does not end the analysis. The supreme 
court has recognized several exceptions to the warrant requirement of article I, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution 
in the context of seizures: 
the police may arrest an individual if they have probable
cause to believe that the individual is committing or has
committed an offense . . .; the police may temporarily
detain an individual if they have a reasonable suspicion
based on specific and articulable facts that criminal
activity is afoot . . .; and the police may engage in an
investigative encounter with an individual if the individual
"consents."
 
Kearns, 75 Haw. at 569, 867 P.2d at 908 (footnote and citations
 
omitted). 
Detective Sitachitta testified that he did not have
 
sufficient evidence at the time of the 7-Eleven confrontation to
 arrest Mika, and we determine no basis upon which the police
 might have determined that criminal activity was afoot. As a
 result, we focus our attention on whether Mika consented.
 
Whether a person has "consented" to an investigative
encounter-for the purpose of satisfying article I, section 7
of the Hawai' i Constitution . . . at the first level of 
analysis, a question of fact for the trial court to decide,involving a determination as to (1) whether the person wastimely advised that he or she had the right to decline toparticipate in the encounter and could leave at any time,and (2) whether, thereafter, the person voluntarilyparticipated in the encounter. Findings of fact arereviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. A finding offact is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to supportthe finding, the appellate court is left "with the definite 
7
 Our conclusion does not reflect an evaluation of the witnesses' 
testimony, demeanor or credibility, on which we defer to the trier of fact.
State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai' i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999). Rather, we
consider only the undisputed circumstances of the 7-Eleven encounter. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed."
 
At the second level of analysis, we ask whether the
facts as found amount to legally adequate "consent." "This
 
is a question of constitutional law, and we answer it by
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based
on the facts of the case."
 
State v. Trainor, 83 Hawai 'i 250, 255, 925 P.2d 818, 823 (1996) 
(citations and ellipses omitted) (holding that police had seized 
defendant when they questioned him in order to investigate him for a crime and had made him aware of that from the outset). 
The consent exception "will rarely be applicable" 
because most seizures "occur at the inception of the interaction between the police and the individual" and because consent must be given prior to the seizure. Kearns, 75 Haw. at 570 n.5, 867 
P.2d at 908 n.5. In considering whether consent to a search has been given, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has examined the following 
factors: (1) the number of officers present; (2) the degree to which they emphasize their authority; and (3) the display of weapons. State v. Patterson, 58 Haw. 462, 471, 571 P.2d 745, 751 
(1977). 
In Kearns, the court held that the defendant had not
 
consented to his seizure by police. The court reasoned that
 prior to the time of his seizure, that is when the police asked
 him for his airline ticket and driver's license, the defendant
 had not been informed of his right to decline to participate in
 the encounter. Thus, the defendant could not have consented to
 the seizure. Kearns, 75 Haw. at 571-72, 867 P.2d at 909. 
Similarly, in this case, Mika was not told that he
 
could decline to participate or that he did not have to go to the
 station. Officer Webster testified, "I asked [Mika] for his
 identification to verify who he was and took down his
 information. The other officers talked to him and told him that
 we were looking for him to come in voluntarily." As in Kearns,
 there was no consent to the seizure. Furthermore, Mika was
 approached by four armed police officers dressed in body armor
 while four more waited in the parking lot. These factors weigh
 further in favor of finding that Mika did not voluntarily consent
 to the seizure. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Consequently, we conclude that Mika did not consent. 
As a result, we conclude that the Circuit Court clearly erred in
 
finding that Mika volunteered to meet with Detective Sitachitta
 on January 10, 2008, and further erred in concluding that Mika
 was not seized and/or consented to the seizure. Therefore, the
 Circuit Court erred as well in not granting the Motion to
 Suppress.
 
In light of our determination above, we need not
 
address Mika's contention that the Circuit Court erred in not
 providing a mistake of fact instruction.
 
"[A]ssuming an unreasonable search or seizure, any 
evidence derived therefrom is inadmissible in a criminal prosecution, and a conviction obtained thereby must be reversed." State v. Maldonado, 108 Hawai
'i 436, 445, 121 P.3d 901, 910 
(2005) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i 382, 393, 910 P.2d 695, 706 (1996)). As 
there was no evidence on which the Circuit Court could convict if the Motion to Suppress was granted, we reverse the September 23, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 30, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard D. Gronna,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu, Associate Judge
for Defendant-Appellee. 
13
 