NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. 29727 and 29728
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE THOMAS H. GENTRY REVOCABLE TRUST
 
and
 
IN THE MATTER OF T.H.G. MARITAL TRUSTS
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(T. NOS. 02-1-0030 (EEH) and 06-1-0044(EEH))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard, J., and
Circuit Judge Crandall, in place of Nakamura, C.J.,
and Fujise, J., all recused)
 
In this consolidated appeal, beneficiaries of the
 
Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust and Marital Trust appeal from
 
February 27, 2009 judgments of the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (
Circuit Court) filed in two related matters: In re
 
T.H.G. Marital Trusts, TR 06-1-0044 (Marital Trust), and In re
 
Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Trust, TR 02-1-0030 (Revocable Trust). 
The Marital Trust appeal challenges the following orders and
 
judgments, both filed on February 27, 2009: (1) Order Approving
 
Sonnenschein Nath & Rosenthal LLP Fees as Set Forth in Co-
Trustees' Petition for Income and Principal Accounts for the
 
Period January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007, Filed June 12,
 
2008; and (2) Judgment Regarding Order Approving Sonnenschein
 
Nath & Rosenthal LLP Fees as set Forth in Co-Trustees' Petition
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Approval of Income and Principal Accounts for the Period 
January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007, Filed on June 12, 
2008.1/ The Revocable Trust appeal challenges the following, 
also filed on February 27, 2009: (1) Order Granting in Part and Continuing in Part Co-Trustees' Petition for Approval of Income 
and Principal Accounts for the Period January 1, 2007 through 
December 31, 2007, Filed on June 12, 2008; and (2) Judgment 
Regarding Order Granting in Part and Continuing in Part Co-
Trustees' Petition for Approval of Income and Principal Accounts 
for the Period January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007, Filed 
on June 12, 2008. The judgments in both matters were certified 
for appeal in accordance with Hawai' i Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 
34(b) and Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b). 
The appealed orders and judgments collectively approved
 
the trusts' 2007 accounts with respect to the payment of
 
attorneys' fees totaling approximately $1.1 million from the two
 
Gentry trusts to a California law firm, Sonnenschein Nath &
 
Rosenthal LLP (SNR). Petitioners-Appellees Mark L. Vorsatz and
 
First Hawaiian Bank (collectively, Trustees) incurred the fees in
 
2007 during the course of administering the trust, including
 
litigation concerning several years of trust accounts. 
The appealing beneficiaries (collectively,
 
Beneficiaries) are Diane "Kiana" Gentry (Kiana), the settlor's
 
wife; Norman, Tania, and Mark Gentry, his children from a prior
 
marriage; and Scott A. Makuakane, guardian ad litem for unborn,
 
contingent beneficiaries. They argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in approving the accounts with respect to the payments of
 
attorneys' fees from the trusts to SNR, contending that the fees
 
were unreasonable, excessive, and not incurred for the benefit of
 
the trusts. They also challenge SNR's billing invoices as a
 
basis for the fees, arguing that the invoices reflect prohibited
 
1/
 The Honorable Elizabeth Eden Hifo presided in both matters.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
billing practices such as block billing, double billing, and non­
compensable administrative work. We conclude that the Circuit
 
Court did not abuse its discretion in approving the trusts' 2007
 
accounts, including the payment of the trustees' attorneys' fees
 
as reasonable, necessary, and beneficial to the trusts.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This consolidated appeal concerns the reasonableness of
 
trustees' payment of approximately $1.1 million to SNR for
 
attorneys' fees and costs incurred in 2007. These fees were
 
incurred during the course of trust administration, including
 
litigation of several years of contested trust accountings. To
 
understand the context in which the fees were incurred, it is
 
necessary to briefly examine the history of the trusts'
 
administration and the litigation that culminated in two
 
settlement agreements in August and December of 2007.
 
Thomas H. Gentry (Mr. Gentry), a prominent Hawai' i real 
estate developer, died in 1998 after a catastrophic boating accident left him comatose for more than three years. His assets 
passed to his family primarily in two trusts, the Revocable Trust 
and a Marital Trust. 
At the time of Mr. Gentry's accident, his assets were
 
largely held in the Revocable Trust. Mr. Gentry executed the
 
Revocable Trust in 1986 and restated it in 1992. Pursuant to the
 
terms of the Revocable Trust, Mr. Gentry's long-time business
 
associate, Mark L. Vorsatz (Vorsatz), was appointed as a trustee,
 
together with a corporate trustee, Hawaiian Trust Company. After
 
Hawaiian Trust Company indicated it would no longer be willing to
 
serve as a trustee, First Hawaiian Bank was appointed to serve as
 
a co-trustee, with Vorsatz, for both trusts. The terms of the
 
Revocable Trust provided also that "[t]his instrument shall be
 
construed and administered in accordance with the laws of the
 
State of California." 
The Revocable Trust terms provided for the creation of
 
several subtrusts upon Mr. Gentry's death. After Mr. Gentry
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
became incapacitated in 1994, the court gave effect to the
 
Marital Trust. Its purpose was to provide for Kiana during Mr.
 
Gentry's incapacity and after his death. Like the Revocable
 
Trust, the Marital Trust directed that it be administered
 
according to California law. 
At the time of Mr. Gentry's accident, the trust assets,
 
and particularly the Gentry Companies, faced significant
 
financial difficulties. The Gentry Companies were saddled with
 
nearly $300 million of indebtedness to third-party lenders; the
 
Gentry Companies' assets and Mr. Gentry's personal assets were
 
collateralized and cross-collateralized to secure the outstanding
 
debt; the Gentry Companies carried over $100 million of inter­
company indebtedness; and financial predictions for the Gentry
 
Companies anticipated annual negative cash flow of $45 million. 
The Trustees exerted significant efforts to steer the trust
 
assets toward financial stability. By 2007, the trusts were
 
estimated to have a net worth over $100 million. 
A. Early Administration of Trusts
 1. Revocable Trust
 
On March 27, 2002, the Trustees filed a Petition for
 
Approval of Income and Principal Accounts for the Period January
 
16, 1998 through December 31, 1999. Kiana filed objections
 
alleging that the Trustees breached their fiduciary duties by: 
(1) failing to properly establish and fund the subtrusts; (2)
 
failing to provide sufficient information regarding allocation of
 
legal fees; and (3) failing to provide sufficient information to
 
render clear and accurate accounts. Several other beneficiaries
 
filed limited objections concerning the subtrusts. The Circuit
 
Court approved, in part, the 1998-99 accounting, but deferred
 
resolution of issues regarding funding of the subtrusts. Twelve
 
issues regarding Kiana's objections to the 1998-99 accounting
 
remained unresolved until 2007. 
On October 1, 2004, the Trustees filed a Petition for
 
Approval of Income and Principal Accounts for the Period January
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1, 2000 through December 31, 2003. Kiana filed objections to the
 
petition, arguing that the Trustees breached their fiduciary
 
duties by: (1) failing to establish and fund the subtrusts in
 
accordance with the Revocable Trust's terms; (2) failing to
 
provide sufficient information to render clear and accurate
 
accounts; (3) failing to properly allocate certain expenses
 
between income and principal; and (4) failing to adequately
 
diversify the Trust's holdings. These issues also remained
 
unresolved until 2007.
 
On June 15, 2006, the Trustees filed a Petition for
 
Instructions Regarding Initial Funding of Subtrusts. The
 
petition sought to establish and fund the subtrusts in accordance
 
with the terms of the Revocable Trust. Kiana filed objections,
 
primarily contesting the proposed funding of the subtrusts,
 
proposed distributions, and allocations between principal and
 
income. She also requested the appointment of a master to
 
oversee the increasingly complex disputes. The subtrust issues,
 
including those raised in the 1998-99 accounts, remained largely
 
unresolved until 2007.
 
On August 29, 2006, the Trustees filed a Petition for
 
Approval of Income and Principal Accounts for the Period January
 
1, 2004 through December 31, 2005. Kiana filed objections,
 
arguing that the Trustees breached their fiduciary duties by: 
(1) providing incomplete accountings for both years; (2) failing
 
to properly allocate expenses and sales proceeds between
 
principal and income; (3) failing to make the trust assets
 
productive; (4) failing to diversify; and (5) failing to
 
distribute net income. 
On March 30, 2007, the Trustees filed a Petition for
 
Approval of Income and Principal Accounts for the Period January
 
1, 2006 through December 31, 2006. Kiana filed objections,
 
alleging that the Trustees breached their fiduciary duties by:
 
(1) failing to make trust assets productive; (2) failing to
 
diversify the trust assets; (3) failing to properly allocate
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proceeds and expenses between principal and income; and (4)
 
failing to distribute net income. 
2. Marital Trust
 
The Marital Trust accountings and objections largely
 
mirrored those in the Revocable Trust matter. On March 30, 2006,
 the Trustees filed a Petition for Approval of Income and
 
Principal Accounts for the Period July 15, 1997 through December
 
31, 2004 for the Marital Trust. On June 29, 2006, the Trustees
 
filed a Petition for Approval of Income and Principal Accounts
 
for the Period January 1, 2005 through December 31, 2005. On
 
March 30, 2007, the Trustees filed a Petition for Approval of
 
Income and Principal Accounts for the Period January 1, 2006
 
through December 31, 2006. Kiana filed objections to all three
 
petitions, asserting substantially the same allegations of breach
 
of fiduciary duty as she had in the Revocable Trust matter.
 
B. Initial Involvement of SNR
 Because the terms of both the Revocable Trust and the 
Marital Trust directed that they be administered under California law, the Trustees engaged SNR, a California law firm, for 
guidance on various administrative issues. In late 2004, First 
Hawaiian Bank initially sought SNR's advice on California trust 
law. At that time, the Trustees were also represented by Hawai' i 
counsel, Carroll Taylor (Taylor). In March of 2005, the Trustees 
also retained Keith Bartel (Bartel), a California trust lawyer, 
to assist in the Revocable Trust matter and provide expertise on 
California trust and estate law. Bartel was later admitted pro 
hac vice in the Marital Trust matter as well. 
In July of 2006, the Trustees decided to have SNR take
 
a more active role in the proceedings. SNR filed a notice of
 
appearance in both the Revocable Trust and Marital Trust matters. 
In December of 2006, SNR began preparing a Request for a Private
 
Letter Ruling (PLR Request) from the Internal Revenue Service on
 
behalf of one of the subtrusts. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. 2007 Trust Administration, Litigation, and Settlements
 
1. Litigation and Discovery
 
On December 12, 2006, the Circuit Court set all
 
outstanding issues in the Revocable Trust and Marital Trust
 
matters for a concurrent bench trial to begin on November 27,
 
2007. The trial was estimated to take twelve days. 
Trial was set to encompass the following issues: (1)
 
approval of accounting petitions in the Revocable Trust for 1998­
99, 2000-2003, 2004-2005, and 2006; (2) Kiana's objections to
 
those accounts, including allocation of assets, income,
 
distributions, and expenses, and the Trustees' alleged breaches
 
of fiduciary duties; (3) initial and final funding of the
 
subtrusts; (4) approval of accounting petitions in the Marital
 
Trust for 1997-2004, 2005, and 2006; and (5) Kiana's objections
 
to those accounts, including allocation of assets, income
 
distribution, and expenses; and the Trustees' alleged breaches of
 
fiduciary duty. The issues for trial thus concerned a combined
 
total of nineteen accounting periods, numerous alleged breaches
 
of fiduciary duty, and the funding of various subtrusts. Among
 
the various beneficiaries, Kiana remained the sole objector to
 
the accounting petitions before the court. In early 2007,
 
counsel for the Trustees and counsel for several other
 
beneficiaries reportedly urged Kiana to withdraw her objections
 
and avoid the substantial expense of litigation. She declined to
 
do so, as was her right.
 
In her pretrial statements, Kiana identified thirty lay
 
witnesses and an unspecified number of expert witnesses to be
 
called in both matters. The Trustees listed eleven lay witnesses
 
and seven expert witnesses. 
Kiana served Requests for Production of Documents on
 
the Trustees in each trust matter. The Trustees asked SNR to
 
coordinate the review of trustee files as well as responses to
 
discovery requests. 
7
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In April of 2007, on behalf of the Trustees, SNR filed
 
the PLR Request regarding the subtrust. SNR had been primarily
 
responsible for researching issues, drafting the request, and
 
ensuring compliance with the applicable tax and filing statutes,
 
rules, and regulations. 
In May of 2007, the Trustees served numerous discovery
 
requests on Kiana, including Requests for Interrogatories,
 
Production of Documents, and Admissions. SNR was primarily
 
responsible for drafting and coordinating the discovery. 
On June 21, 2007, the Trustees filed a Motion for
 
Summary Adjudication of Issues. The motion sought to adjudicate
 
seven specific issues. It was the first of several planned
 
motions for partial summary judgment that the Trustees asked SNR
 
to research and prepare. The hearing on the motion was never
 
held because the parties reached a partial settlement agreement
 
in August of 2007 (discussed below). 
In July of 2007, the parties had failed to reach a
 
settlement following three-day mediation. Discovery continued. 
The Trustees deposed Kiana, and Kiana deposed James Lawhn of
 
First Hawaiian Bank. SNR was primarily responsible for
 
representing the Trustees in these depositions.
 
The Trustees and Kiana collectively noticed at least
 
sixteen depositions, with Kiana requesting leave to depose more
 
than ten witnesses. Anticipating these numerous depositions, the
 
Trustees sought the admission of SNR attorney Hank Zangwill
 
(Zangwill) pro hac vice. A member of SNR's insurance and
 
litigation groups, Zangwill supervised discovery and was prepared
 
to participate in the depositions. Ultimately, however, Zangwill
 
did not attend any depositions, as the parties only conducted two
 
before reaching a settlement agreement.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. August Settlement Agreement
 
On August 20, 2007, the Trustees reached a partial
 
settlement with Kiana (August Settlement Agreement). Kiana
 
agreed to withdraw, with prejudice, all claims of breach of
 
fiduciary duty against the Trustees. The Trustees agreed to
 
withdraw their Motion for Summary Adjudication, to suspend all
 
existing discovery requests and scheduled depositions, and to the
 
appointment of a master to assist the beneficiaries with
 
evaluating the issues and evidence. 
Pursuant to the August Settlement Agreement, the
 
Trustees filed an amended petition for instructions regarding the
 
final funding of subtrusts and accountings. The Petition set
 
forth the remaining issues for trial: (1) approval of the
 
accounting petitions in the Revocable Trust from 1998-99, 2000­
2003, 2004-2005, and 2006; (2) approval of the accounting
 
petitions in the Marital Trust from 1997-2004, 2005, and 2006;
 
and (3) final funding of the subtrusts.
 
3. Trial and the December Settlement Agreement
 
At trial, the Trustees were represented in court by 
Taylor and Alan Yoshitake (Yoshitake), an SNR partner licensed in 
both Hawai' i and California. The Trustees sought to utilize 
Yoshitake's experience and expertise in California trust law, 
particularly in the cross-examination of one of Kiana's expert 
witnesses.2/ 
After six days of trial, the parties resumed settlement
 
discussions. All parties entered a further settlement agreement
 
on December 21, 2007 (December Settlement Agreement). The
 
2/
 In support of SNR's fees, Yoshitake attested that he had been practicing
for over twenty-two years, holds an LLM in taxation, and is a certified
specialist in estate planning, trust, and probate law. He attested that he is
 the head of SNR's west coast trusts and estates department and had
"successfully chaired several trials and negotiated numerous settlements in
adversarial trust and estate administrations." 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Agreement dismissed Kiana's objections to all of the unresolved
 
accounting petitions in the Revocable and Marital Trusts (through
 
December 31, 2006). It also approved immediate distributions to
 
each of the beneficiaries, totaling $60 million. 
The Trustees requested all fees, costs, and
 
distributions under the December Settlement Agreement to be paid
 
by the end of 2007 in order to obtain a tax deduction for the
 
trusts. 
4. 2007 Attorneys' Fees
 
As reflected in the 2007 accountings, the trusts made
 
the following disbursements for the attorneys' fees of the
 beneficiaries: $718,682 to Kiana's attorney;
3/ $74,073 to
 
beneficiary Corin Gentry-Balding's attorney; $60,177 to
 beneficiaries Norman Gentry, Mark Gentry, and Tania Gentry's
 
attorney; $105,320 to the guardian ad litem for minor
 
beneficiaries; $101,459 to the guardian ad litem for unborn and
 
contingent beneficiaries; and $77,920 to beneficiaries Race and
 
Arielle Gentry's attorney. Not all attorneys' fees disbursed in
 
2007 were for services performed in 2007.
 
The attorneys' fees distributed to the Trustees'
 
lawyers in 2007 were as follows: $184,768 to Taylor; $99,370 to
 
Bartel; and $1,051,293 to SNR. During that year, it appears that
 
SNR had been solely or primarily responsible for the following: 
(1) drafting and coordinating nearly all discovery matters,
 
including discovery requests, review of approximately nine years'
 
worth of trustee records, scheduling matters, and meet and
 
confers; (2) preparing for, conducting, and defending
 
depositions; (3) preparing documents pertaining to mediation,
 
including the mediation brief, the Trustees' response to the
 
3/
 Approximately $106,585 was paid from the Revocable Trust's principal and
income assets, with the balance being paid from a distribution to Kiana.
 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mediator's report, and the initial draft of the settlement
 
agreement; (4) preparing and filing the PLR Request with the IRS;
 
(5) preparing and filing the petitions for approval of the 2006
 
accountings in both the Marital and Revocable Trusts; (6)
 
preparing the petition for approval of final funding for the
 
various subtrusts; and (7) serving as lead counsel at trial. 
Collectively, the attorneys' fees and costs paid from
 
the trusts to beneficiaries' counsel and guardians ad litem
 
during 2007 totaled $1,137,631. The fees and costs paid to the
 
Trustees' counsel during that period totaled $1,335,430. 
D. 2008 Trust Administration; Approval of Attorneys' Fees
 
On June 14, 2008, the Trustees filed petitions to
 
approve the accountings in the Revocable and Marital Trusts for
 the period of January 1, 2007 through December 31, 2007,
 
including payment of $1,051,293 to SNR in 2007 for attorneys'
 
fees and costs. The petitions did not include detailed
 
supporting documents for the trusts' income and expenses, such
 
as, with respect to the payments made to the trusts' attorneys,
 
invoices or affidavits showing the services provided, hours
 
worked, or rates charged. A number of the beneficiaries filed
 
objections, arguing that the Trustees failed to demonstrate the
 
reasonableness of the attorneys' fees and seeking disclosure of
 
SNR's billing invoices.
 
Following hearings held on July 30 and 31, 2008, the
 
Circuit Court approved in part the 2007 accountings, but
 
continued the issue of the Trustees' payment for the legal
 
services provided SNR. The Trustees objected to disclosure of
 
the unredacted invoices, arguing that they contained privileged
 
information. They offered to provide redacted invoices, to
 
provide a summary of the invoices, or to provide the invoices for
 
in camera review. The Circuit Court instructed the Trustees to
 
submit the unredacted invoices to the court for in camera review.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court personally reviewed all of SNR's 2007 invoices, 
redacted them to remove privileged matters, and distributed the 
redacted invoices to the beneficiaries. It provided the 
beneficiaries an opportunity to review the invoices and file 
supplemental objections, followed by the Trustees' opportunity to 
respond. It also directed SNR to provide information regarding 
hourly rates of the various SNR timekeepers and requested it to 
provide comparable attorneys' rates from California or New York. 
The court stated that it would deem these supplemental pleadings 
to satisfy the requirements of the Hawai' i Probate Rules. 
In early September, 2008, the Beneficiaries submitted
 
their supplemental objections relating to the approval of the
 
2007 accounts with respect to SNR's fees, asserting that SNR's
 
services did not benefit the trust and that retaining an
 
expensive California law firm was not necessary. They also
 
objected to specific time entries in the invoices contending: 
(1) no benefit to the trust; (2) reflected secretarial, 
administrative, and other non-legal work that should be 
categorized as overhead expenses; (3) constituted duplicate 
billing; (4) "double billing" for the same work involving 
multiple attorneys; (5) ambiguous or incomplete work 
descriptions; or (6) unreasonable time spent on particular tasks. 
They objected to costs for airfare travel, meals, messenger 
services, ground transportation, and conferencing services. 
They argued that the reasonableness of the fees should be 
governed exclusively by Hawai' i law, not California law. 
Finally, Kiana submitted hourly rates of the Beneficiaries' attorneys, which ranged from $140 to $350. 
On October 3, 2008, the Trustees filed the requested
 
information on hourly rates and a response to the Beneficiaries'
 
supplemental objections, arguing that California law governed the
 
administration of the trusts, including the reasonableness of
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trustees' retention of and payment to SNR. They responded to the
 
Beneficiaries' objections to specific time entries as follows: 
(1) the work done in defending the trust accountings, preparing
 
the PLR Request, and advising First Hawaiian Bank on its
 
insurance policy benefitted the trusts; (2) the alleged
 
"clerical" work reflected "vital services related to discovery"
 
that were legal in nature but were assigned to paralegals and
 
litigation support because of their lower billing rates; (3) the
 
alleged duplicate entries reflected work done in the two separate
 
trust matters that was later consolidated into a single invoice;
 
(4) the "double billing" reflected the unique contributions of 
multiple attorneys whose involvement was necessary for the work 
performed; (5) the invoices sufficiently described the work 
performed; and (6) the complexity and volume of the issues set 
for trial justified the number of hours spent on specific tasks. 
The Trustees argued that the travel costs reflected only those 
necessary for travel between Hawai' i and California and asserted 
that the messenger fees were incurred as the most cost-effective means of filing voluminous documents for the PLR Request. 
Finally, they argued that SNR attempted to keep fees low by 
delegating tasks to associates, paralegals, and other legal staff 
with lower billing rates, thus resulting in the high number of 
timekeepers. 
The Trustees also filed hourly rates and credentials
 
for the various timekeepers reflected in the invoices. These
 
rates ranged from $175 to $490. They also provided the
 
comparable rates of three attorneys in the California area with
 
similar experience and background as Yoshitake, which ranged from
 
$700 to $750 (far exceeding the rate charged by Yoshitake). 
Finally, Yoshitake submitted a declaration attesting that
 
although his usual rate at the time was $495 per hour, he only
 
billed $445 in the trust matters. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 27, 2009, after conducting an in camera 
review of the unredacted invoices and taking into consideration
 
the extensive arguments of all parties, the Circuit Court entered
 
orders and judgments in both trust matters approving SNR's
 
attorneys' fees.4/ The court noted that its review was based in
 
part on having reviewed each invoice. It concluded that the fees
 "were reasonable and necessary" and complied with "Hawaii and/or
 
California law." The court found SNR's responses to the
 
Beneficiaries' objections regarding billing issues to be
 
credible. It found the timekeepers' hourly rates, as well as the
 
time recorded in each billing entry, to be reasonable. It
 
concluded that the "high quality of work" provided by SNR
 
benefitted the trust, especially regarding California law. It
 
found there was "no basis for reduction in fees, particularly
 
when compared to the aggregate fees of Beneficiaries and the
 
scope of litigation involving a decade of accounts as well as the
 
ultimately settled claims against the Trustees." 
The Beneficiaries filed timely notices of appeal and
 
cross-appeal between March 25, 2009 and April 8, 2009. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
In their points of error on appeal, Appellants contend 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) failing to exclusively 
apply Hawai' i law in approving the attorneys' fees; (2) 
determining the reasonableness of SNR's rates based on comparable rates from California instead of Hawai' i; (3) approving the 
attorneys' fees because SNR's invoices contained improper block billing, double billing, ambiguous billing, billing for clerical 
and overhead services, and billing for services that provided 
little or no benefit to the trusts; and (4) approving SNR's 
4/
 Although denominated as an order approving SNRs' attorneys' fees, the
Circuit Court's order was in fact approving the trusts' 2007 accounts with
respect to trustees' payment of the attorneys' fees from the assets of trusts.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unsubstantiated costs for interstate travel, messenger services, 
and other miscellaneous expenses, contrary to Hawai' i law. 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
When reviewing a request for the approval of a trust's
 
accounts, a court of equity is called upon to determine the
 propriety of each entry reflected in the accounts and may
 
exercise its discretion in conjunction with such review. In re
 
Estate of Bishop, 53 Haw. 604, 605, 499 P.2d 670, 671 (1972). 
"The relief granted by a court in equity is discretionary and
 
will not be overturned on review unless the circuit court abused
 
its discretion by issuing a decision that clearly exceeds the
 
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or
 
practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant." Aickin
 
v. Ocean View Invs. Co., Inc., 84 Hawai' i 447, 453, 935 P.2d 992, 
998 (1997) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets 
omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. California Law Applies to the Trusts' Administration
 
First, we address the Beneficiaries' contention that 
Hawai'i law applies to the propriety of the Trustees' payment of 
SNR's attorneys' fees. They argue that the Circuit Court erred 
in failing to exclusively apply Hawai' i law.
5/ They maintain that 
because the fees were incurred in Hawai' i, the reasonableness of 
the fees must be construed according to Hawai' i law. The 
Trustees have maintained that under the terms of the trusts, California law applies to trust administration, including the 
professional fees incurred by the trustees in conjunction with 
5/
 The Circuit Court found that the fees were reasonable under "Hawaii
 
and/or California law." 
15
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their administration of the trusts.6/ We agree that the terms of
 
both trusts dictate the application of California law.
 
To determine which law applies, we look first to 
Hawai'i conflicts-of-law principles. See Restatement (Second) of 
Conflict of Laws § 8 (2010). The Uniform Probate Code, as 
enacted in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 560, governs 
choice-of-law provisions in trust instruments. See HRS § 560:2­
703 (2006). It provides that the "meaning and legal effect of a 
governing instrument is determined by the local law of the state 
selected in the governing instrument[.]" Id. (emphasis added)7/ 
However, it does not expressly provide for choice of law 
regarding the administration of trusts. See id. 
However, a number of authorities agree that a settlor's
 
choice of law regarding trust administration is enforceable. See
 
Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 272; George Gleason
 
Bogert, George Taylor Bogert & Amy Morris Hess, The Law of Trusts
 
and Trustees § 297 (3d ed. 2011).8/ A settlor may "freely
 
regulate most matters of administration[,]" including which state
 law is to govern the administration of the trust. Restatement
 
(Second) of Conflict of Laws § 272 cmt. c. The designated state
 does not need to have any connection with the trust itself. Id.;
 
Bogert et al., The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 297 ("As to
 
6/
 On appeal, the Trustees also argue that the rates were reasonable under
both Hawai' i and California law, and the Circuit Court thus did not abuse its
discretion regardless of which law applies. 
7/
 A "governing instrument" includes a trust. HRS § 560:1-201 (2006).
 
8/
 This rule accords with HRS § 560:7-305 (2006), which provides that a
settlor's designation of the place of administration is controlling "unless
compliance would be contrary to efficient administration or the purposes of
the trust." It also finds support from legislative history. In adopting the
choice-of-law provision of the Uniform Probate Code, the legislature sought to
follow its approach toward enforcing choice-of-law provisions except where
contrary to public policy, such as preserving a spouse's elective share.
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 77 in 1996 House Journal, at 993, 1996 Senate Journal, at
775.
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
matters of trust administration, the settlor may designate the
 
local law of a particular state to govern such matters even
 
though that state has no connection with the trust.").
 
Here, both trust instruments contain substantially the
 
same choice-of-law provision:
 
This instrument shall be construed and administered in
 
accordance with the laws of the State of California and the
 
United States of America; and unless otherwise indicated all
words and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as
they have in the California Probate and Civil Codes and the
Internal Revenue Code.
 
(Emphasis added.) Both thus select California law to govern
 
trust administration. 
Matters of trust administration include the approval of
 
annual accountings, including responding to beneficiaries'
 
objections. See HRS § 560:7-303 (2006) (trust administration
 
includes trustee's duty to inform and account to beneficiaries);
 Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 271 cmt. a;
 
Restatement (Third) of Trusts §§ 76, 83 (2010); Bogert et al.,
 
The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 293 (trust administration
 
concerns management of trust, including trustees' powers, duties,
 
liabilities, and right to compensation and indemnity for
 
expenses). The approval of the trustees' payment of SNR's fees
 
pertains to trust administration, since the fees are part of the
 
annual trust accountings. As a result, California law applies to
 
the approval of accountings, including the attorneys' fees to be
 
paid from the trust.
 
The Beneficiaries argue that Hawai' i law must apply 
because the attorneys' fees were incurred in Hawai' i-based 
litigation. However, where the fees were incurred is not 
determinative of which law governs the administration of the 
trusts. As the fees were incurred in the course of trust 
administration, California law regarding their compensability and 
reasonableness applies. 
17
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Beneficiaries also argue that because SNR's 
attorneys were either licensed or admitted pro hac vice in 
Hawai'i, their rates are subject to regulation under the Hawai' i 
Rules of Professional Responsibility (HRPR). Although attorneys 
practicing law in Hawai' i are clearly subject to the disciplinary 
jurisdiction of the Hawai' i Supreme Court, this is not a 
disciplinary matter. The questions before this court concern the 
approval of the trusts' accounts for 2007, in particular the 
payment of attorneys' fees in the course of administering the 
trusts. The reasonableness of the attorneys' fees as a matter of 
trust administration is subject to California law. 
Finally, the Beneficiaries maintain that the
 
compensability of attorneys' fees is governed by HPR Rule 40(a)
 
(1997), which provides:
 
A fiduciary may pay fees for services of a fiduciary,
attorney, or other professional that are not set by statute
or court rule as long as the fees are just and reasonable in
amount for the scope of services rendered. The
reasonableness of the fees allowed shall be determined by
all the facts and circumstances of the work performed
including the complexity or ease of the matter, the
experience, expertise, and uniqueness of services rendered,
the amount of time spent on the matter, and the amount
charged by others in similar situations.
 
The commentary to this rule notes that "professional fees,
 
including those of an attorney, shall be compensated based on the
 
types of services rendered." HPR Rule 40 cmt. Here, the Circuit
 
Court clearly took into consideration the indicia of
 
reasonableness set forth in the text and commentary to HPR Rule
 
40(a), as reflected in the court's February 27, 2009 orders.
 
B. Application of California Law
 Various provisions of the California Probate Code
 
authorize trustees to obtain payment from the trust for their
 attorneys' fees. Trustees have the power to hire attorneys and
 
other professionals "to advise or assist the trustee in the
 
performance of administrative duties." Cal. Prob. Code § 16247
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(West 2011). They are entitled to pay "reasonable compensation"
 
to employees and agents of the trust, and for other expenses
 
incurred "in the collection, care, administration, and protection
 
of the trust." Id. at § 16243 (West 2011). Finally, trustees
 
are "entitled to the repayment out of the trust property" for
 "[e]xpenditures that were properly incurred in the administration
 
of the trust." Id. at § 15684 (West 1991).
 
Under California law, it is well-established that
 
trustees are entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs
 
incurred in completing and defending trust accounts. In re
 
Hanson's Estate, 114 P. 810, 812 (Cal. 1911) ("It is well settled
 [that] . . . a trustee has a right to employ attorneys, and to
 
have an allowance in a reasonable amount made by the court from
 
the trust funds for their compensation."); accord Kasperbauer v.
 
Fairfield, 88 Cal. Rptr. 3d 494, 499 (Cal. Ct. App. 2009); Terry
 
v. Conlan, 33 Cal. Rptr. 3d 603, 614-15 (Cal. Ct. App. 2005); In
 
re Griffith's Estate, 218 P.2d 149, 153 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App.
 
1950) ("A trustee is entitled to employ counsel and be reimbursed
 
from the funds of the trust for reasonable sums paid for the
 
services of such counsel whenever it is necessary to the proper
 
administration, preservation or execution of the trust."); In re
 
Spencer's Estate, 63 P.2d 875, 876 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1936). 
Preparing the accounts and responding to beneficiaries'
 
objections "are aspects of trust administration." Kasperbauer,
 
88 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 499. Thus, reasonable attorneys' fees and
 costs may be paid from the trust. Id. 
Like Hawai' i, California law recognizes that trial 
courts possess "broad authority to determine the amount of a 
reasonable fee" for attorneys. PLCM Grp., Inc. v. Drexler, 997 
P.2d 511, 518 (Cal. 2000). Trial courts possess their own expertise in determining the value of legal services and may make 
such a determination "contrary to, or without the necessity for, 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expert testimony." Id. at 519 (internal quotation marks and
 
citation omitted). This is because "[t]he experienced trial
 
judge is the best judge of the value of professional services
 
rendered in his [or her] court[.]" Ketchum v. Moses, 17 P.3d
 
735, 741 (Cal. 2001) (internal quotation marks and citation
 omitted). A trial court's fee determination "will not be
 
disturbed unless the appellate court is convinced that it is
 
clearly wrong." Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
 
omitted); see also In re Duffill's Estate, 206 P. 42, 49 (Cal.
 1922) (an appellate court may only overturn a lower court's fee
 
determination if there is a "plain and palpable abuse of its
 
discretion[.]"); accord Press v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 667 P.2d
 
704, 712 (Cal. 1983).
 
California courts have set forth a well-developed
 
"lodestar" method for analyzing the reasonableness of attorneys'
 
fees.
9/ Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 743-44. The goal of this method is
 
to arrive at an objectively reasonable amount reflecting the
 value of the attorneys' services. PLCM Grp., Inc., 997 P.2d at
 
518. The analysis is aimed at approximating the fair market
 
value of the attorneys' services. Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 741. 
The starting point for reasonable attorneys' fees is
 
the "lodestar" -- the "hourly amount to which attorneys of like
 
9/
 The lodestar method originated in "common fund" and "private attorney
general cases," such as class action suits, where a fee award is necessary to
incentivize attorneys to take on such high-risk cases. See Serrano v. Unruh,
652 P.2d 985, 997-1000 (Cal. 1982); Serrano v. Priest, 569 P.2d 1303, 1306-17
(Cal. 1977). However, the California Supreme Court later clarified that the
lodestar method is applicable to all statutory attorneys' fees unless the
legislature clearly indicates otherwise. Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 743-44; see also
Press, 667 P.2d at 710-11 (trial court's discretion "must be based on the
lodestar adjustment method."); Donahue v. Donahue, 105 Cal. Rptr. 3d 723, 732
(Cal. Ct. App. 2010) (citing cases applying lodestar method for determining
reasonableness of attorneys' fees in trust accounting); Komarova v. Nat'l
Credit Acceptance, Inc., 95 Cal. Rptr. 3d 880, 898-99 (Cal. Ct. App. 2009)
(discussing development of lodestar method as the only way of addressing a fee
determination objectively). Because the payment of attorneys' fees from the
trust is pursuant to statute (i.e., provisions of the California Probate
Code), the lodestar method applies to determining their reasonableness.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
skill in the area would typically be entitled" multiplied by the
 
"number of hours reasonably expended." Id. at 742-43 (citations
 
and quotation marks omitted). This analysis involves two steps:
 (1) determining the number of hours reasonably spent; and (2)
 
determining a reasonable hourly rate. Id. We will address each
 
step in turn.
 
1. Reasonable Time Spent, Generally
 
The first step involves determining the number of hours
 
reasonably expended on the case. Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 742. The
 
time spent should be "appropriate to the purposes and
 circumstances of the trust." Donahue, 105 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 729
 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). It should also
 reflect the difficulty of the case and complexity of the issues. 
Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 746. "Time is compensable if it was
 
reasonably expended and is the type of work that would be billed
 
to a client." MBNA Am. Bank, N.A. v. Gorman, 54 Cal. Rptr. 3d
 
724, 733 (Cal. App. Dep't Super. Ct. 2006) (citation omitted).
 
To determine the amount of hours reasonably expended,
 
the trial court must review the supporting documentation offered
 in support of the fees. Donahue, 105 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 731-32. 
The party seeking fees is not necessarily required to submit
 contemporaneous daily billing records or invoices.
10/  See PLCM
 
10/
 The Beneficiaries argue that the Trustees' submission of invoices did
not comply with HPR Rules 26 (2006) and 41 (1997), which govern the form and
content of a petition for accounting and for approval of attorneys' fees.
Rule 26 requires "a detailed accounting of the transactions of the trust or
estate during the accounting period[.]" However, the commentary clarifies
that the rule "does not mandate any form of detailed accounting, leaving that
to the fiduciary's discretion."
 
Rule 41 sets forth evidentiary requirements for attorneys' fees.
It provides, in relevant part:
 
Whenever there is an objection to the fees of a fiduciary or
attorney, or court approval of such fees is sought for any
reason, the fiduciary or attorney whose fees are at issue
shall file an affidavit, setting forth the amount and basis
(continued...)
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Grp., Inc., 997 P.2d at 519 (upholding fee determination based on
 
detailed reconstruction of time spent where law firm did not keep
 
contemporaneous billing records); Chavez v. Netflix, Inc., 75
 
Cal. Rptr. 3d 413, 432 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008) ("[D]etailed time
 
sheets are not required" in fee determinations for class action
 
cases, applying lodestar method); Margolin v. Reg'l Planning
 
Comm'n, 185 Cal. Rptr. 145, 149 (Cal. Ct. App. 1982) (upholding
 
fee determination based on counsel's estimates for portion of
 
time spent). The supporting documentation should be sufficient
 
to "allow the court to consider whether the case was overstaffed,
 
how much time the attorneys spent on particular claims, and
 
whether the hours were reasonably expended." Donahue, 105 Cal.
 
Rptr. 3d at 732. (citations and internal quotation marks
 omitted). The trial court must review such documentation to
 
eliminate "padding in the form of inefficient or duplicative
 
efforts[.]" Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 741 (citation and internal
 
quotation marks omitted).
 
Several cases help shed light on this step of the
 
lodestar analysis. In Duffill's Estate, for example, the
 California Supreme Court upheld attorneys' fees of $75,000 for a
 
trust worth just over $1 million. 206 P. at 47-49. It examined
 
10/(...continued)
of calculation of the fees sought and any costs advanced
which are to be reimbursed, at the same time as any petition
seeking approval of such fees or any response to a petition
objecting to such fees. The affidavit should specifically
detail the charges for the services and costs rendered to
the date of the affidavit and the anticipated charges and
costs to complete the matter through preparation,
processing, and service of the order.
 
The initial petition for the 2007 accounting set forth the total fees and
included an affidavit attesting to the accuracy of the accounting. Following
the Beneficiaries' objections, the Circuit Court requested all parties to
submit supplemental pleadings. It stated that it would deem the signed
pleadings to satisfy the requirements of the HPR. Although the Beneficiaries
previously objected to the approval of the attorneys' fees in part because of
the lack of an affidavit, they did not object to this determination. 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[t]he nature of the litigation, its difficulty, the amount
 
involved, the attention given, and the success or failure of the
 
attorney's efforts." Id. at 47 (citation and internal quotation
 
marks, brackets, and ellipses omitted). It concluded that
 although the amount of the fee "impresses us as large -- larger,
 
perhaps, than we would have named[,]" the lower court was within
 
its discretion. Id. at 49. The record itself furnished evidence
 
of the services performed, and other attorneys testified that for
 a trust of its size, a ten to fifteen percent fee was not
 
unreasonable. Id. at 48-49. Thus there was no "plain and
 
palpable" abuse of discretion. Id. at 49.
 
Here, as discussed in more detail below, it is clear
 
from the record that the Circuit Court assessed each of these
 factors. Although a substantial amount, the total fees incurred
 
by SNR were less than 2% of the total distribution resulting from
 
the December Settlement Agreement.
11/  The Circuit Court clearly
 
considered SNR's work toward achieving this result of significant
 benefit to the trust beneficiaries.
 
A recent California case provides additional guidance. 
Donahue, 105 Cal. Rptr. 3d 723. There, the trust beneficiary
 
challenged the trustee's petition for more than $5 million in
 
attorneys' fees incurred while defending a final accounting that
 
involved allegations of breach of trust. Id. at 726. The
 
trustee had been represented by multiple attorneys from three
 large firms. Id. at 726-27. Several billed at rates as high as
 
$690 per hour. Id. at 726. One attorney alone billed more than
 
$1.5 million during his involvement. Id. 
Upon review, the California appellate court set forth a
 
11/
 Other cases have upheld attorneys' fees of similar or greater
percentages. See, e.g., Bixby v. Hotchkis, 136 P.2d 597, 599-602 (Cal. Dist.
Ct. App. 1943) (approving attorneys' fees of $22,000 from trust worth about
$750,000; or 2.9%).
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
number of factors for the trial court to consider. First, it
 
must engage in careful review of the supporting documentation to
 
avoid an overly deferential approach. Id. at 731-32. The court
 
should consider "whether the case was overstaffed, how much time
 the attorneys spent on particular claims, and whether the hours
 
were reasonably expended." Id. at 732 (citations and internal
 
quotation marks omitted). It must exclude compensation for
 "padding in the form of inefficient or duplicative efforts." Id.
 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). It must
 consider whether the fees incurred are "proportional to the
 
trust's objectives." Id. at 734. Finally, it must determine
 
whether the fees were "reasonably incurred for the benefit of the
 
trust." Id. at 735 (emphasis in original). The overarching
 
standard is based upon the time spent and the "reasonable value
 
of that time[.]" Id. at 732 (citation and internal quotation
 
marks omitted).
 
Here, the Circuit Court explained its basis for the fee
 
award. It found credible SNR's explanations for the
 reasonableness and necessity of the fees. The Circuit Court
 
personally reviewed and redacted each page in the voluminous
 
invoices. The Circuit Court allowed all parties to file
 
additional pleadings, and it considered the comparable rates of
 
similar attorneys, as well as the itemized objections of the
 
Beneficiaries. The amount of time spent by SNR is not patently
 
unreasonable in proportion to the trusts' objectives and the
 
scope of the work undertaken by SNR. There is no indication that
 
the Circuit Court merely rubber-stamped the Trustees' approval of
 
the fees request. To the contrary, it engaged in a
 
comprehensive, detailed, and thoughtful review of the time
 
entries that is well-supported by the record.
 
24
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court also took into account each of the
 
factors set forth in Donahue. It carefully considered and
 
rejected the Beneficiaries' claims that the Trustees had
 
overstaffed the case, that the amount of time spent was
 
unreasonable, and that the invoices were padded. 105 Cal. Rptr.
 
3d at 732. The Circuit Court's determination is thus in accord
 
with California law.
 
2. Specific Challenges to Invoices
 
The Beneficiaries raise a number of specific objections
 
to the time billed by SNR, which we have carefully reviewed. The
 majority of these challenges concern the sufficiency of the
 
invoices.
12/ The Beneficiaries argue that the invoices contain
 
improper block billing, duplicate entries and double billing,
 
vague and ambiguous descriptions, improper billing for
 
administrative work, excessive hours, and improper costs. They
 
appear to assert that because the invoices are deficient in these
 
respects, they cannot support the Circuit Court's determination
 
that the fees were reasonable. 
Detailed invoices are not required to support a fee
 
determination so long as there is sufficient documentary evidence
 
12/
 The Beneficiaries also assert that the Circuit Court imposed the wrong
burden of proof by telling the Beneficiaries at a hearing that they failed to
prove the requested fees were unreasonable. They cite solely Hawai' i law in 
support of this point. Under California law, however, the burden is lessclear. See Premier Med. Mgmt. Sys., Inc. v. Cal. Ins. Guar. Ass'n, 77 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 695, 706 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008) ("In challenging attorney fees asexcessive because too many hours of work are claimed, it is the burden of thechallenging party to point to the specific items challenged, with a sufficientargument and citations to the evidence."). 
In any event, taken in context, the Circuit Court does not appear
to have been espousing any particular burden of proof. It merely remarked
that after performing a partial in camera inspection of the invoices, it "does
not find that unreasonableness has been proven but will look forward to briefs
that would be informed by the invoices and supplemental pleading to be filed
about rates, et cetera." It further stated that it declined to make a final
 judgment at that time but would continue to review additional briefs and
pleadings. In its orders approving the SNR fees expenditures, it
affirmatively concluded that the fees were reasonable and necessary.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on which the court may base its conclusion. PLCM Grp., Inc., 997 
P.2d at 519. Thus a challenge to the documentation in support of 
attorneys' fees is essentially an insufficiency of the evidence 
claim. Margolin, 185 Cal. Rptr. at 149. "The problem then 
becomes one of fact finding." Id. So long as substantial 
evidence supports the Circuit Court's findings, they will not be 
disturbed on appeal. Id. (holding that trial court's 
determination was supported by ample evidence in form of contemporaneous billing records); accord Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui, 
109 Hawai' i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 (2005). 
Moreover, where counsel submits contemporaneous time
 
statements, such records are "the starting point" for the court's
 
fee determination and "are entitled to credence in the absence of
 
a clear indication the records are erroneous." Horsford v. Bd.
 
of Trs. of Cal. State Univ., 33 Cal. Rptr. 3d 644, 673-74 (Cal.
 Ct. App. 2005) (holding that trial court erred in disregarding
 
attorneys' verified time records). A trial court acts well
 
within its discretion in weighing the credibility of counsel's
 
submissions regarding fees. Bernardi v. Cnty. of Monterey, 84
 
Cal. Rptr. 3d 754, 769 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008). This is
 particularly true where, as here, the trial court is "familiar
 
with the quality of the services performed and the amount of time
 
devoted to the case." PLCM Grp., Inc., 997 P.2d at 519. 
The Beneficiaries' arguments are similar to those
 
offered in Margolin. There, the appellants argued that the
 
attorneys' fees were based on inadequate time records. 185 Cal.
 
Rptr. at 149. The attorneys' supporting documentation provided
 
only estimates for some of the hours worked. Id. On appeal, the
 
court treated the appellants' arguments as an insufficiency of
 the evidence claim. Id. It concluded that contemporaneous time
 
records supported most of the hours awarded, providing
 substantial evidence in support of the trial court's findings. 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. It upheld the trial court's determination that the estimated
 
hours were reasonable. Id. 
Similarly, the California Supreme Court upheld a fee
 
award where the attorneys did not keep contemporaneous billing
 
records, but merely submitted a detailed reconstruction of the
 
time spent on specific legal tasks. PLCM Grp., Inc., 997 P.2d at
 
519, incl. n.4. It cautioned trial courts against becoming
 "enmeshed in a meticulous analysis of every detailed facet of the
 
professional representation." Id. at 520 (citation and internal
 
quotation marks omitted). The analysis of attorneys' fees should
 not become so extensive as to "dwarf[] the case in chief." Id.
 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). See also In re
 
Marriage of Green, 7 Cal. Rptr. 2d 872, 877 (Cal. Ct. App. 1992)
 
(holding that attorney declarations and itemized bills
 
constituted sufficient evidence to support fee award, even though
 
award did not provide mathematical breakdown of particular fees
 
awarded); Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 747 (upholding fee determination
 
where trial court reviewed extensive documentation regarding
 
reasonableness of rate).
 
Finally, a California Court of Appeal upheld a fee
 
award where the opposing party failed to provide any evidence to
 
contradict the fees claimed. Premier Med. Mgmt. Sys., Inc., 77
 
Cal. Rptr. 3d at 702. As in this case, the appellants argued
 that the fee award was based on excessive hours and duplication
 
of effort. Id. at 701-04. The court on appeal noted that the
 
appellants failed to proffer evidentiary support for these
 allegations by either (1) providing evidence that fees claimed in
 
the itemized billings were not appropriate, or (2) obtaining
 
declarations from experienced attorneys to demonstrate that the
 
fees were unreasonable. Id. at 706. The appellate court had "no
 
evidentiary basis to second guess the conclusion of the trial
 court" that the fees were not unreasonable or duplicative. Id.
 
27
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 704. It refused to determine that the hours claimed were
 
unreasonable "as a matter of law[.]" Id. at 703.
 
Here, likewise, the Beneficiaries have adduced no 
evidence in support of their arguments. Aside from their proffer 
of comparable Hawai' i rates, which the Circuit Court considered, 
they did not offer any declarations or other evidence in support of their challenge to the hours spent. Essentially, they argue 
that the fees are unreasonable as a matter of law due to improper 
billing practices. Such an argument is unsustainable in light of 
Premier. Id. 
Nonetheless, we will address each of the Beneficiaries'
 
objections in turn.
 
The Beneficiaries argue that SNR should not be 
compensated from the trust for "block-billed" entries, or those where multiple tasks are lumped in a single time entry. However, 
the case they cite in support of this argument is 
distinguishable. It merely illustrates that block billing is 
problematic where certain tasks are compensable but others are 
not. Haw. Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 116 Hawai' i 465, 476-77, 
173 P.3d 1122, 1133-34 (2007) (block billing rendered it impossible to separate work in scope of receiver's duties, which 
was compensable, from work performed in defense of receiver's 
fees, which was not). In such cases, block-billed entries render 
it impossible to apportion fees between tasks that are 
compensable and those that are not. Id. Here, no delineation is 
strictly necessary, as all of the tasks concerned compensable services performed in the administration of the trust. 
The Beneficiaries argue that SNR should not be
 
compensated for entries with vague and insufficient descriptions
 
of work performed. They argue that entries notating only
 
"discovery," "review discovery issues," and "draft discovery" are
 
insufficient to support SNR's fee request. However, the record
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
29reveals the extensive discovery issues involved in this case. 
The litigation involved nearly twenty years of combined
accountings for trusts which, by the end of 2006, were estimated
to be worth over $100 million and involved extensive and complex
holdings.  The parties exchanged numerous discovery requests and
filed notices for sixteen depositions.  The Trustees submitted a
declaration attesting that SNR was primarily responsible for
handling these requests and coordinating discovery.  The Circuit
Court presided over the discovery and was familiar with the tasks
involved.  It thus did not abuse its discretion in approving
compensation for those entries.       
The Beneficiaries argue that SNR "double- and triple-
billed the trusts for inter-office conferences and team project
pleadings."  They challenge entries for conference calls,
meetings, correspondence, and other work involving multiple
attorneys.  SNR explained that the meetings and discussions
required coordinating issues and tasks delegated to multiple
timekeepers in an effort to keep hourly rates low.  The
participation of multiple timekeepers was necessary for
coordinating strategy and analysis.  Moreover, each attorney
"provided unique contributions to the issues discussed at the
meetings," as the various timekeepers served independent roles
and were responsible for "different issues, perspectives, and
tasks."  SNR asserted that each timekeeper's involvement was
"reasonable and necessary for the effective and efficient
representation of [the Trustees]."  The Circuit Court found this
explanation credible and concluded that the high quality of SNR's
work benefitted the trust. 
The Beneficiaries also argue that SNR submitted
duplicate time entries, billing both trusts for the same block of
time.  SNR explained that these entries were originally split 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
between the Marital and Revocable trusts in accordance with the
 
time spent on each matter. However, SNR later recombined the
 
separate billings from the Revocable and Marital Trusts into a
 
unified billing format for purposes of payment. This
 
consolidated invoice reflected identical entries for time spent
 
on the Revocable and Marital Trust matters, respectively. The
 
Circuit Court found SNR's explanation credible and thus rejected
 
the allegation of impermissible duplicate billing. We cannot
 
conclude that Circuit Court abused its discretion in this
 
consideration of the parties' conflicting views in this regard.
 
The Beneficiaries argue that SNR should not be
 
compensated for time entries that reflect clerical and
 
administrative duties. They argue these entries reflect overhead
 
expenses that should be included in the attorneys' hourly rates. 
The challenged entries indicate such services as coordinating
 
filings, transmitting discovery documents, creating deadline
 
calendars, and finalizing data for production. SNR explained
 
that these services were vital to discovery and were legal, not
 
administrative, in nature. Although the tasks were appropriate
 
for associate attorneys, in order to keep costs low, SNR
 
delegated some of these tasks to paralegals and litigation
 
support staff. The Circuit Court found this explanation credible
 
and the services to be beneficial. 
The Beneficiaries argue that the invoices reflect an
 
excessive amount of time spent on the trust matters. They
 
contend that SNR was not justified in billing almost $1.1 million
 
to prepare for depositions that never took place, a motion for
 
summary adjudication that was never heard, and a trial that
 
lasted only six days. 
This argument mischaracterizes the nature and extent of
 
the services SNR rendered in 2007, as is evident from the record. 
In early 2007, both the Trustees and counsel for several other
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
beneficiaries advised Kiana that her continued objections to the
 
unresolved accounting issues would result in substantial
 
litigation costs. She declined to retract her objections. The
 
parties thus undertook extensive discovery in anticipation of a
 
lengthy trial concerning nearly twenty combined years of trust
 
accounts. Many of the depositions, as well as the hearing on the
 
motion for summary adjudication, were ultimately cancelled due to
 
the August Settlement Agreement. In late 2007, the trial was
 
already ongoing, but cut short when the parties entered the
 
December Settlement Agreement, disposing of the remaining issues
 
in dispute. Yet by that time, the year was nearly complete, and
 
SNR had already performed a significant amount of work in
 
anticipation of the full trial. Arguably, it would have been
 
imprudent for the Trustees and SNR not to have fully prepared for
 
the events that were discontinued due to the settlements.
 
In addition to the litigation of the prior accounts,
 
SNR also took the lead in preparing and filing petitions for the
 
2006 accounts for both trusts, preparing the petition for
 
approval of funding for various subtrusts, and preparing and
 
filing the PLR Request to the IRS. The Circuit Court, having
 
presided over the 2007 proceedings, found the fees to be
 
reasonable and necessary in light of the substantial work
 
performed. 
The Beneficiaries also argue that billing approximately
 
333 hours to prepare a motion for summary adjudication is
 
patently excessive. They point out that the motion only cited
 
six cases and assert that it merely re-used "factual allegations
 
from prior pleadings." However, the Beneficiaries provided no
 
evidence in support of their argument that the amount of time
 
spent is excessive. Instead, they essentially argue that the
 
time billed is excessive as a matter of law. Such an argument is
 
unavailing. See Premier Med. Mgmt. Sys., Inc., 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d
 
31
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 703-04 (rejecting argument that 345 hours billed for single
 
motion was excessive as a matter of law; trial court was within
 
its discretion in approving hours as reasonable).
 
Moreover, the motion concerned several important issues
 
stemming from a lengthy and procedurally complex trust history. 
It included a declaration from Vorsatz setting forth the detailed
 
history of the trust administration. Though the motion itself
 
only involved only seven issues, its preparation required sorting
 
through the numerous outstanding issues. Twelve discrete issues
 
remained unresolved from the 1998-99 Revocable Trust accounting
 
alone. To prepare the motion, SNR reviewed and evaluated the
 
issues for each of the nine accounting periods before the Circuit
 
Court. Given the complexity of the underlying litigation, the
 
Circuit Court acted within its discretion when it found the hours
 
spent to be reasonable. 
The Beneficiaries also challenge the costs for 
interstate travel and messenger services. They argue that, under 
Hawai'i law, (1) such requests must be accompanied by receipts or 
documentation; and (2) costs for interstate travel and messenger 
services are not compensable. However, the cases they cite in 
support of the first proposition are inapposite. The first case, 
Rapozo v. Better Hearing of Hawaii, LLC, 120 Hawai' i 257, 264, 
204 P.3d 476, 483 (2009), denied a request for copying costs because the petitioner failed to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 39(d)(1), which specifically 
requires "an itemized and verified bill" of such expenses. The 
second case similarly concerned the taxation of costs under HRAP 
Rule 39(c)(5). Tortorello v. Tortorello, 113 Hawai' i 432, 444, 
153 P.3d 1117, 1129 (2007) (denying requested costs because they were unsubstantiated). Those rules are not strictly applicable 
to the Trustees' ability to recover costs incurred in trust 
administration -- an issue governed by California trust law. 
32
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For their second argument on this point, the 
Beneficiaries rely on HRS § 607-9 (1993), regarding the taxation 
of costs, and various Hawai' i cases interpreting that 
provision.13/  As noted above, such detailed documentation is not 
necessary to support a request for approval of reasonable 
attorneys' fees and costs in a trust accounting. PLCM Grp., 
Inc., 997 P.2d at 519. HRS § 607-9 and related Hawai' i cases 
thus do not apply to the approval of the trusts' accounts here. 
We note that SNR represented that it was careful to
 
avoid unnecessary travel expense. Yoshitake attended hearings by
 
teleconference whenever possible. Where travel was necessary,
 
Yoshitake scheduled multiple meetings and hearings for the same
 
trip to maximize the benefit to the trust. The Circuit Court
 
found this explanation credible and determined the fees and costs
 
to be reasonable and necessary. 
The Beneficiaries also challenge the costs billed for
 
messenger services and FedEx charges. SNR submitted that these
 
services were a necessary expense incurred in filing the PLR
 
Request with the IRS and retrieving trust documents from First
 
Hawaiian Bank for purposes of discovery. SNR utilized FedEx in
 
filing the PLR Request "to ensure delivery of a complex technical
 
document" to Washington, D.C. In responding to Kiana's discovery
 
requests, SNR was required to review "over a hundred thousand
 
pages of documents" from First Hawaiian Bank. It determined that
 
shipping the documents would be more cost-effective than sending
 
13/
 HRS § 607-9 provides, in relevant part:
 
All actual disbursements, including but not limited to,
intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and counsel,
expenses for deposition transcript originals and copies, and
other incidental expenses, including copying costs,
intrastate long distance telephone charges, and postage,
sworn to by an attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable by
the court, may be allowed in taxation of costs.
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorneys and paralegals to Hawai' i to review the documents. 
The Circuit Court found these explanations credible and 
determined the costs incurred to be reasonable and necessary. 
Finally, the Beneficiaries argue that SNR's services
 
were performed solely for First Hawaiian Bank and did not benefit
 
the trusts. They also challenge the trustees' need to hire SNR
 
in the first place, arguing that the retention of a "mainland law
 
firm" was not necessary or prudent. The record amply supports
 
both the need for SNR's services and their benefit to the trust. 
The trust administration involved complex issues requiring the
 
application of California law. Kiana retained an expert on
 
California law as a witness at trial. The Circuit Court
 
encouraged both parties to fully brief and research California
 
law. In approving the fees, it found that SNR's "knowledge of
 
California law was essential to the trust[s] and this
 
litigation." 
The lead SNR attorney possessed extensive experience
 
and expertise in complex trust administration involving
 
California law. SNR performed substantial work for both Trustees
 
in their joint administration of the trust. It prepared and
 
coordinated discovery matters, prepared various filings essential
 
to the administration of the trust, and served as lead counsel at
 
trial. 
Because much of the work involved preparing and
 
defending the trusts accounts, the fees were incurred for the
 
benefit of the trusts. Kasperbauer, 88 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 499; In
 
re Estate of Trynin, 782 P.2d 232, 235 (Cal. 1989).14/  The
 
14/
 A line of California cases holds that attorneys' fees are not
compensable where the trustees merely defend their own interests or those of
 
certain beneficiaries over others. See, e.g., In re Gartenlaub's Estate, 198
P. 209, 211 (Cal. 1921); Terry, 33 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 614-15; Whittlesey v.
Aiello, 128 Cal. Rptr. 2d 742, 746 (Cal. Ct. App. 2002); In re Estate of Gump,
2 Cal. Rptr. 2d 269, 283 (Cal. Ct. App. 1991). For example, a trustee is not
(continued...)
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court specifically found that SNR's "high quality of work
 
benefitted the trust[s], whether in connection with this
 
litigation or insurance coverage or other administrative
 
matters." 
In sum, the Trustees provided explanations refuting
 
each of the Beneficiaries' objections. The Circuit Court found
 
these explanations credible and persuasive. In determining the
 
reasonableness of the fees, the Circuit Court was intimately
 
familiar with the extensive scope of litigation, the complexity
 
of the issues, and the specialized knowledge involved in this
 
case. The same judge who ruled on the attorneys' fees also
 
presided over the 2007 litigation which gave rise to the majority
 
of the attorneys' fees and costs at issue. Judge Hifo had
 
personal knowledge of the litigated matters and the facts
 
relevant to the fee issue. She personally reviewed and redacted
 
each of SNR's time records. 
Given the supporting documentation provided by SNR and
 
the Circuit Court's familiarity with the litigation and in-depth
 
review of the invoices, we conclude that the Circuit Court did
 
not abuse its discretion in approving SNR's fees.
 
3. Reasonable Hourly Rate
 
The Beneficiaries also argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in approving SNR's hourly rates. Specifically, they
 
14/(...continued)
entitled to recover attorneys' fees where a court has determined that the
trustee breached the trust. Estate of Gump
, 2 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 283. Nor was
 
a trustee entitled to recover fees where she sought to establish her interests
as a beneficiary concerning the validity of one trust over another. Terry, 33
 
Cal. Rptr. 3d at 615. Here, by contrast, Kiana's breach-of-trust allegations
were never ruled upon, as they were dismissed pursuant to the August
Settlement Agreement. Nor were the Trustees in the sort of dual trustee-
beneficiary role that often masks a defense of their own interests. As in
 Kasperbauer, the defense of the trust accountings was a necessary part of
trust administration and was therefore beneficial to the trust. 88 Cal. Rptr.
3d at 499.
 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maintain that the court erred by: (1) refusing to consider 
comparable Hawai' i rates; and (2) failing to consider comparable 
rates for each of the SNR timekeepers reflected in the invoices. 
An award of attorneys' fees must generally be based on
 
the reasonable hourly rate prevailing in the local community for
 similar legal work. Envtl. Prot. Info. Ctr. v. Cal. Dep't of
 
Forestry and Fire Prot., 118 Cal. Rptr. 3d 352, 377 (Cal. Ct.
 App. 2010). In general, the court should consider the market
 
rate in the "community where the services are rendered, i.e.,
 
where the court is located." MBNA Am. Bank, N.A., 54 Cal. Rptr.
 
3d at 733 (citation omitted). However, in some circumstances,
 the court may consider higher rates of out-of-town counsel. 
Envtl. Prot. Info. Ctr., 118 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 377 (citation
 
omitted). For example, where no local counsel could take a case
 
because it required specialized knowledge, a trial court acted
 
within its discretion in basing the reasonable rate on that of
 
out-of-town counsel. Id.; accord Horsford, 33 Cal. Rptr. 3d at
 
675 (where party made good faith effort but could not retain
 local counsel, court could base fees on higher hourly rates of
 
out-of-town counsel). 
Here, special circumstances justified taking California
 
rates into account. California law was at the crux of the trust
 
accountings. An expert on California law testified for Kiana at
 
trial. The lead SNR attorney possessed the requisite expertise
 
in complex trust administration under California law. The
 
Circuit Court expressly found that such "knowledge of California
 
law was essential to the trust and this litigation" and that SNR
 
provided a "high quality of work." Thus the court did not err in
 
taking into account California rates, as special circumstances
 
justified retaining California counsel.
 
In any event, the Circuit Court did consider comparable 
Hawai'i rates. Kiana submitted comparable hourly rates for seven 
36
  
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i attorneys, ranging from $140 to $350. Yoshitake also 
submitted a declaration attesting that he charged a lower hourly 
rate in this case because one of the trustees was a Hawai' i 
client. The Circuit Court reviewed the comparables and found that SNR's hourly rates were reasonable. 
The Beneficiaries also maintain that the Circuit Court
 
erred in failing to request and consider comparable rates for
 
each of the SNR timekeepers. SNR provided descriptions of each
 
timekeeper's credentials, but only submitted comparable rates for
 
Yoshitake, the lead SNR attorney. However, as with determining
 
the reasonable time spent, in considering a reasonable hourly
 
rate, the court is entitled to rely on its own expertise. PLCM
 
Grp., Inc., 997 P.2d at 519. Expert witnesses or additional
 evidence are not required. Id. 
Moreover, the record indicates that the Circuit Court
 
considered all factors relevant to determining a reasonable
 
hourly rate. These factors include the level of skill required,
 
time limitations, the amount involved in the litigation, the
 
attorney's reputation and experience, the quality of the
 
representation, the attorney's success or failure in the outcome,
 
and the "undesirability" of the case. Ketchum, 17 P.3d at 746;
 
PLCM Grp., Inc., 997 P.2d at 519. The aim of such an analysis is
 
to approximate the fair market value of the attorneys' services. 
Margolin, 185 Cal. Rptr. at 147. 
Here, the case required a high level of skill and
 
expertise in California law. It involved complex issues
 
regarding the administration of two trusts, together worth over
 
$100 million. SNR, and Yoshitake in particular, possessed a high
 
level of experience and expertise as well as a strong reputation
 
in trust administration. The other timekeepers billed their time
 
at lower rates, which the Circuit Court viewed as reasonable in
 
light of the comparable rates submitted by the parties. The
 
37
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court found that SNR achieved a favorable outcome in
 
reaching the settlements and that its "high quality of work"
 
benefitted the trusts. It thus did not abuse its discretion in
 
determining the hourly rates to be reasonable.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing discussion, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court did not err in approving the trusts' 2007 accounts, 
in particular, the trustees' payment of SNR's attorneys' fees. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgments entered on February 27,
 
2009, in the Revocable and Marital Trust matters.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 31, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser 
and Margery S. BronsterJae B. Park (Bronster Hoshibata)for Respondent-AppellantKiana Gentry 
Carol Lee M.I. Chin 
for Respondents/Cross-AppellantsNorman Hal Gentry, Tania V.Gentry and Mark T. Gentry Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Acting Associate Judge 
Scott A. Makuakane 
for Respondent/Cross-AppellantGuardian Ad Litem for Unborn,Contingent Beneficiaries andCross-Appellant 
Carroll S. Taylor(Taylor Leong & Chee)for Petitioners-AppelleesMark L. Vorsatz and First Hawaiian Bank as Co-Trustees 
Alan T. Yoshitake (Seyfarth Shaw LLP)for Plaintiff-AppelleeFirst Hawaiian Bank as Co-Trustee 
38
 