NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28788
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JAKE FARMER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
PACIFIC SPECIALTY INSURANCE COMPANY;
MFA INSURANCE, INC.,
Defendants/Cross-Claimant/Cross Claim Defendant/Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT

 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 06-1-1459)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Jake Farmer (Farmer) appeals from
 
the "First Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and
 
Order for Entry of Judgment" that was filed on September 21,
 2007, in the District Court of the Second Circuit (district
 court).
1 This case involves a dispute over insurance coverage
 
for a used motorcycle purchased by Farmer from a third party that
 was later stolen. Based on an application for insurance prepared
 by MFA Insurance, Inc. (MFA) and signed by Farmer, Pacific
 Specialty Insurance Company (PSIC) issued an insurance policy to
 Farmer for a 2000 Harley-Davidson Model FLTR motorcycle. After
 the motorcycle was stolen, it was determined that the motorcycle
 
1 The Honorable Douglas H. Ige presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was not a Harley-Davidson, but a kit bike that was obtained
 
through a magazine. PSIC refunded the insurance premiums paid by
 Farmer and rescinded the insurance policy.
 
I.
 
Farmer filed a complaint in the district court against
 
Defendants-Appellees PSIC and MFA (collectively, the Defendants). 
The complaint sought judgment in the amount of $20,000 for money
 the Defendants owed to Farmer on his "claim for the stolen
 Harley[-]Davidson made on [the] insurance policy [issued by
 PSIC]." PSIC and MFA answered the complaint and filed cross-
claims for indemnity and contribution against each other. 
Pursuant to a stipulation signed by all parties, the district
 court subsequently dismissed all claims by and against MFA
 without prejudice.
 
After a bench trial, the district court determined that
 
Farmer's motorcycle was not a Harley-Davidson and that although
 Farmer had not engaged in fraud or intentional misrepresentation,
 he had made a material misrepresentation that the motorcycle was
 a Harley-Davidson in the insurance application. The district
 court set forth its decision in the "First Amended Findings of
 Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order for Entry of Judgment." 
The district court relied upon Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 431:10-209 (2005) and the doctrine of mutual mistake pursuant
 to the Restatement (Second) of Contracts §§ 151-52 (1979), in
 entering judgment in favor of PSIC and against Farmer. 
II.
 
On appeal, Farmer challenges numerous findings and
 
conclusions relied upon by the district court in entering its
 judgment. Based upon our review of the record and the arguments
 presented in the briefs filed by the parties, we affirm the
 district court's judgment.
 
In ruling in favor of PSIC, the district court relied

 
on HRS § 431:10-209, which provides:
 
Warranties, misrepresentations in applications.  All
 
statements or descriptions in any application for an
insurance policy or in negotiations therefor, by or on
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
behalf of the insured, shall be deemed to be representations
and not warranties. A misrepresentation shall not prevent a
recovery on the policy unless made with actual intent to
deceive or unless it materially affects either the
acceptance of the risk or the hazard assumed by the insurer.
 
(Emphasis added.) The district court found that Farmer made a
 
material misrepresentation with respect to the manufacturer of
 the subject motorcycle, namely, that the motorcycle was a Harley-
Davidson, when it was not.
 
The crux of Farmer's argument on appeal is that the
 
district court erred in relying on HRS § 431:10-209 because
 Farmer did not misrepresent the manufacturer of the motorcycle as
 being Harley-Davidson. Farmer contends that he did not make any
 "incorrect representation" regarding the manufacturer of the
 motorcycle, but simply provided the Maui certificate of title for
 the motorcycle which indicated that it was a Harley-Davidson. 
However, Jolene Trenholm (Trenholm), an agent for MFA who
 assisted Farmer in preparing the insurance application, testified
 that Farmer told her that the motorcycle was a Harley-Davidson,
 in addition to providing her with the Maui certificate of title. 
Trenholm's testimony that Farmer told her the motorcycle was a
 Harley-Davidson provides substantial evidence to support the
 district court's finding that Farmer had made a misrepresentation
 regarding the manufacturer of the motorcycle.
 
At trial, a representative of PSIC provided testimony 
that the misrepresentation of the motorcycle as a Harley-Davidson was material to the acceptance of the risk or the hazard assumed by PSIC in issuing the policy to Farmer, and that PSIC would not have issued the policy had it known the motorcycle was a kit bike. Farmer did not significantly challenge this testimony at trial, and the district court found that the materiality component of HRS § 431:10-209 had been satisfied. On appeal, Farmer does not argue that the district court's finding of materiality was erroneous, and he thus waived this claim. See 
Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) (2008) 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, under the circumstances presented here, we 
conclude that the district court did not err in relying on HRS 
§ 431:10-209 in entering judgment in favor of PSIC. See Park v. 
Gov't Employees Ins. Co, 89 Hawai 'i 394, 398-99, 974 P.2d 34, 38­
39 (1999). This conclusion is sufficient to affirm the district court's judgment. Thus, we need not address Farmer's arguments regarding whether the district court erred in relying on the doctrine of mutual mistake set forth in the Restatement (Second) of Contracts §§ 151-52 as an alternative ground for its decision. 
III.
 
We affirm the judgment entered on September 21, 2007,
 
by the district court in favor of PSIC and against Farmer.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 30, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Carl H. Osaki
 
for Plaintiff/Appellant.
 
Chief Judge

Paul T. Yamamura
 Wesley D. Shimazu
(Yamamura & Shimazu)
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
4
 