 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29930
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GABRIEL APILANDO, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(S.P.P. NO. 08-1-0006; CR. NOS. 01-1-0424 & 01-1-0098)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant, the State of Hawai 'i (State) 
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order 
Granting Defendant's Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Order 
Granting Post-Conviction Relief), filed on June 9, 2009, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On January 16, 2001, Petitioner-Appellee Gabriel 
Apilando (Apilando), along with three other co-defendants, was 
charged with Robbery in the First Degree, in violation of Hawai 'i 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-840 in Cr. No. 01-1-0098. On February 21, 2001, Apilando was charged with Accomplice to 
Attempted Escape in the First Degree, in violation of HRS §§ 702­
221(2)(c), 702-222(1)(b), 705-500, and 710-1020, in Cr. No. 01-1­
0424. 
On March 15, 2004, Apilando appeared before the Circuit
 
Court for a change of plea hearing in both cases. During the
 
hearing, the following exchange occurred:
 
The Court: Under both change of plea forms on the
second page there appears to be a signature Gabriel
Apilando. Did you sign those documents today?
 
[Apilando] A. Yes.
 
1
The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q.	 Before you signed those document did you have an
opportunity to go over both forms with your
lawyer and was he able to answer any questions
you had?
 
A.	 Yes, he did.
 
. . . .
 
Q.	 You understand you're here to in 01-1-0424 to
plead to one count accomplice to escape which
has a maximum penalty of five years in jail and
a fine up to $10,000.
 
A.	 Yes.
 
Q.	 Also under Criminal 01-1-0098 you're going to
plead to the offense of robbery in the first
degree which carries a maximum penalty of 20
years in jail and a fine up to $25,000.
 
You understand that under the law that term of
 
imprisonment could be extended to life with the
possibility of parole.
 
Knowing the possible maximum punishment that you
face, do you still want to change your pleas in
these cases?
 
A.	 Yes.
 
. . . . 
Q.	 You understand that by changing of your plea to
these offenses you give up all those rights and
I will sentence you without a trial of any kind
and you cannot come back later and say now you
want a trial?
 
A.	 Yes.
 
. . . . 
Q.	 Okay, the record should reflect Mr. Apilando
that I have discussed these matters with your
counsel and I understand that there's a concern
 was whether or not the sentences would be run
 consecutively or any other time be imposed upon
 you. I shared with your attorney that it is my
responsibility to make sure that both parties
prosecution and the State on equal steps when
they reach an agreement of any sort. And, more
significantly, I shared with the attorneys that
this court gives credit to the individuals who
own up to their own actions, okay, and I told
your attorney that I would run these sentences
concurrently or run at the same time, okay.
 
A.	 Yeah.
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q.	 Now other than that, were any other promises
made to you in exchange for your pleas today?
 
[Defense Counsel]: May I at this point interject
although it's not part of the plea agreement robbery,
we have an understanding with the prosecution that the
prosecution will write a letter to the parole board in
regards to recommendation of one year as far as
minimum term in light of the fact that Mr. Apilando
has done very well on supervised release in the sense
that he has taken over the family appliance business,
he's reconciling with his wife, he had a falling out
with when he got into drugs, which led to these cases.
He went to My Brother's Keeper and he has a full
clinical discharge from Doctor Jerry Brannon and he
had excellent standing with ISC counselor Franklin
Young. In light of all this there is a one year
recommendation.
 
[Deputy Prosecutor Wada]: That's Correct. I also 
checked with the police and the defendant did work
with the police on a number of cases. With that
 consideration, Mr. Choy's representations are correct.
 
The Court: Okay, thank you.
 Q:	 Now, other than what the court had stated, what
your attorney just stated and the prosecutor
confirmed, were there any other promises made to
you in exchange for your pleas today?
 
A.	 Not that I know of.
 
On September 30, 2004, the Circuit Court held a
 
sentencing hearing for both cases. Apilando was sentenced to a
 
twenty-year term of imprisonment for Robbery in the First Degree
 
and, initially, he was sentenced to a five-year term for
 
Accomplice to Attempted Escape in the First Degree, with the
 
terms to be served concurrently. Later that same day, after the
 
parties discovered that the sentence for Attempted Escape in the
 
2
First Degree was incorrect,  and after Apilando further consulted
with his counsel, Apilando appeared again before the Circuit

 
Court:
 
2
 Pursuant to HRS § 710-1020, Escape in the First Degree is a class
B felony. Upon a court's decision to sentence a class B felon to
imprisonment, the person is sentenced by the court to the maximum ten-yearterm, with the minimum length of imprisonment to be determined by the Hawai' i 
paroling authority. See HRS § 706-660. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Court:	 Okay, the record should reflect the
presence of counsel. Mr. Choy, are you
ready to proceed?
 
Mr. Choy:	 Yes, Your Honor.
 
The Court:	 The record should reflect that the
 previously entered plea under Criminal 4­1-0424 is hereby withdrawn. Can you state
your full name for the record, Mr.
Apilando. 
. . . . 
The Court:	 Has any deals or promises been made to you
in exchange for your change of plea today?
 
The Defendant:	 Yes.
 
The Court:	 Other than the fact that I already shared
with you that I will run the sentence
concurrent?
 
The Defendant:	 Yes.
 
The Court:	 Is there anything else?
 
The Defendant:	 The Prosecution promised to
recommend to the Parole Board a one-
year minimum.
 
The Court:	 And that this part of - -
Mr. Choy:	 That was stated on the record at the
 original change of plea.
 
The Court:	 I do recall that. Was there anything
else, Mr. Apilando? In other words, was
there anything not on the record?
 
The Defendant:	 No, that's it.
 
The Circuit Court then accepted Apilando's guilty plea
 
for Accomplice to Attempted Escape in the First Degree and
 
sentenced him to a ten-year maximum term of imprisonment on that
 
charge. 
Eight days later, on October 8, 2004, the Parole Board
 
held a hearing to set Apilando's minimum term. The Parole Board
 
did not have a letter from Deputy Prosecutor Wada recommending a
 
one-year minimum. However, Apilando's attorney read aloud the
 
transcript of Deputy Prosecutor Wada's confirmation of that
 
recommendation at the change of plea hearing and fully apprised
 
the Parole Board of the State's agreement. The State's one-year
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recommendation was referenced several times by Apilando's
 
attorney and was central to his argument for a one-year minimum. 
No concern was raised about the fact that an actual letter had
 
not been received by the Parole Board.
 
On October 15, 2004, Apilando's minimum term of
 
imprisonment was fixed at one year and six months, below the two-
to five-year range – the lowest range – set forth in the
 
guidelines established by the Hawaii Paroling Authority for a
 
person sentenced to a maximum twenty-year term. On November 26,
 
2004, more than a month after Apilando's minimum term was set,
 
Deputy Prosecutor Uehara submitted a letter to the Parole Board
 
recommending a ten-year minimum term.
 
Apilando did not appeal from the judgment, conviction
 
and sentence in either criminal case. He was released on parole
 
in April of 2005, after serving his minimum sentence.
 
On December 5, 2007, Apilando's parole was revoked due
 
to violations of the terms and conditions of his parole.
 
On December 12, 2007, Apilando wrote to the Circuit 
Court, wanting to appeal his robbery conviction. The court 
designated Apilando's correspondence as a non-conforming petition 
for post-conviction relief pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40. The petition was later amended to 
include the Accomplice to Escape in the First Degree conviction. 
Relief was denied as to all grounds, except Ground Two, which 
stated: 
Plea agreement unlawfully induced. Plea agreement breached,
Counsel Choy made agreement of protection with prosecution
(see Exhibit A) as agreed to.
 
The Circuit Court construed this ground as alleging,
 
inter alia, that the prosecution breached a plea agreement, which
 
resulted in an unlawful inducement of Apilando's guilty pleas.
 
Rule 40 counsel was appointed for Apilando and the
 
Circuit Court held an evidentiary hearing. The Circuit Court
 
heard testimony from Apilando and Apilando's trial counsel, and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reviewed the parole hearing tapes. At a further hearing, the
 
Circuit Court ruled that the State did not fulfill the promise
 
that served as an inducement for Apilando's change of plea, that
 
there was a manifest injustice as a matter of law, and that the
 
only suitable relief would be to allow Apilando to withdraw his
 
guilty pleas in both criminal cases. For these reasons, the
 
Circuit Court granted in part the Rule 40 petition.
 
The Order Granting Post-Conviction Relief was entered
 
on June 9, 2009; it provided: 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1.	 The Defendant entered a guilty plea on March 15,
2004 in CR. No. 01-1-0098 and 01-1-0424.
 
2.	 In exchange for the Defendant's guilty plea,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Lori Wada made a
promise to the Defendant to submit a written
letter to the Hawaii Paroling Authority
recommending a one-year minimum term of
imprisonment.
 
3.	 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) Wada's promise
served as an inducement for the Defendant's
 guilty pleas in both cases.
 
4.	 The Hawaii Paroling Authority (the "parole
board") did not receive DPA Wada's
recommendation letter.
 
5.	 At the Defendant's parole minimum hearing,
Defense counsel for the Defendant, Glenn Choy,
mentioned the recommendation letter to the
 parole board and he also read transcripts from
the change of plea hearing where DPA Wada agreed
to submit the letter.
 
6.	 At the end of the Defendant's parole minimum
hearing, the parole board mentioned that it
would "discuss DPA Wada'a recommendations to the
 court."
 
7.	 The parole board did not indicate whether
Defense counsel, Glenn Choy's presentation of
the transcript was sufficient to represent DPA
Wada's recommendation, or that the parole board
would strongly consider Mr. Choy's
representations of DPA Wada's promise.
 
8.	 Even though DPA Wada had promised a written
letter recommending a one-year minimum term to
the parole board, DPA Russ Uehara submitted a
letter recommending a 10-year minimum term.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
9.	 In the absence of DPA Wada's recommendation
 
letter, any argument that the parole board
considered DPA Wada's recommendation for a one-
year minimum term is speculation.
 
10.	 Based on the foregoing facts, it appears there
was a violation of due process in this case.
 
11.	 The State of Hawaii did not fulfill its promise
in the plea agreement which served as the
inducement the Defendant's guilty pleas.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1.	 The Court finds that there was manifest
 injustice in this case as a matter of law.
 
2.	 The Court finds that the Defendant is entitled
 to withdraw his guilty pleas in both cases.
 
The State timely filed a notice of appeal.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR RAISED ON APPEAL
 
On appeal, the State raises seven points of error,
 
challenging the Circuit Court's Findings of Fact (FOFs) 7, 8, 9,
 
10, and 11, and Conclusions of Law (COLs) 1 and 2.
 
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The disposition of an HRPP Rule 40 petition is based on 
findings of fact, which are reviewed under the clearly erroneous 
standard, and conclusions of law, which are reviewed de novo. 
Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai 'i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 493, 496 (2007). 
A plea agreement implicates constitutional 
considerations, including the fairness and voluntariness of the 
plea. We answer questions of constitutional law by exercising 
our independent judgment based on the facts of a case. 
See, e.g., State v. Prendergast, 103 Hawai 'i 451, 453, 83 P.3d 
714, 716 (2004). IV.	 DISCUSSION
 
The issue, as presented by the State on this appeal, is
 
whether the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Apilando was
 
entitled to withdraw his guilty pleas, post-sentencing, due to a
 
technical violation of his plea agreement with the State, where
 
he received the benefit of the plea agreement and then waited
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
over four years before bringing the technical violation to the
 
court's attention.
 
First, we address the challenged FOFs. We cannot
 
conclude that FOFs 7, 8, or 11 are clearly erroneous. There
 
appears to be substantial evidence in the record to support these
 
findings. However, we conclude that FOF 9 is not supported by
 
the record in this case and is, therefore, clearly erroneous. 
There is ample evidence in the record that the Parole Board
 
considered Deputy Prosecutor Wada's recommendation. Defense
 
counsel specifically mentioned it several times at the Parole
 
Board hearing. He presented the written transcript of the
 
Circuit Court hearing in which Wada stated her recommendation. 
The Parole Board acknowledged the recommendation when it stated
 
on the record that it would consider Wada's suggestion to the
 
court. And, most compelling perhaps, the Parole Board set a
 
minimum sentence below the lowest minimum sentence established
 
under the Hawaii Paroling Authority Guidelines for Establishing
 
Minimum Terms of Imprisonment. FOF 10 is a conclusion of law
 
and, therefore, will be reviewed accordingly.
 
We next consider whether the Circuit Court's
 
conclusions of law are right or wrong, i.e., whether Apilando's
 
due process rights were violated (FOF 10), whether there was
 
manifest injustice in this case (COL 1), and whether Apilando, as
 
a result of due process violations and manifest injustice, is
 
entitled to withdraw his guilty pleas (COL 2).
 
In State v. Adams, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that 
"where a defendant is denied due process because the prosecution 
violates a plea agreement, 'there is manifest injustice as a 
matter of law,' and the defendant is entitled to withdraw his 
guilty plea." Adams, 76 Hawai 'i 408, 414, 879 P.2d 513, 519 
(1994) (citations omitted). In Adams, after agreeing to stand silent at sentencing and to not oppose defendant's deferral 
request, at sentencing the State made reference to its lengthy 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presentence investigation report, saying, "I think the
 
presentence report pretty much sets forth the position of the
 
State." Id. at 409-10, 879 P.2d at 514-15. The supreme court
 
concluded that the State was attempting "to accomplish indirectly
 what it had promised not to do directly." Id. at 413, 879 P.2d
 
at 518. Under those circumstances, the supreme court held that
 the State breached its plea agreement. Id. In fashioning the
 
remedy, the court held that the defendant's choice is given
 considerable weight, but that factors including "the timeliness
 
of the motion, the extent of the breach, the prejudice to the
 
parties, and which alternative will best serve the effective
 
administration of justice" should be considered. Id. at 414-15,
 
879 P.2d at 519-20.
 
Apilando also relies on State v. Miller, 122 Hawai
'i 
92, 223 P.3d 157 (2010). However, in Miller, much like in Adams, the prosecution made comments at the sentencing hearing that the 
supreme court found "directly violated" the prosecution's 
agreement to take no position on the deferral motion. Id. at 
105, 223 P.3d at 170. In addition, the Miller court concluded that the State was "attempting to influence the court's decision 
as to whether to grant the DANCP plea after explicitly promising 
not to do so." Id. at 106, 223 P.3d at 171. Finally, the 
supreme court concluded that the error was not harmless because the court appeared to rely particularly on the comments offered 
by the prosecutor. Id. Miller's sentence was vacated and the 
case was remanded for resentencing before a different judge. Id. 
at 133, 223 P.3d at 198. 
The case at bar is, however, clearly distinguishable
 
from Adams, Miller, and the other cases cited by Apilando. In
 
this case, while there was arguably a technical breach inasmuch
 
as the Parole Board did not have an actual letter from Deputy
 
Prosecutor Wada when Apilando's minimum term was set, the Parole
 
Board clearly had before it and understood the State's
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recommendation of a one-year minimum term. Contrary to the cited
 
cases, at the time of the Parole Board's decision, there was no
 
statement or action by the State to attempt to influence the
 
Parole Board in a way that was inconsistent with the plea
 
agreement.3 Indeed, the only reasonable explanation for the
 
Parole Board's setting of a minimum term less than the lowest
 minimum in the Hawaii Paroling Authority Guidelines is that the
 
Parole Board was favorably influenced by the State's
 
recommendation of a one-year minimum term.
 
For these reasons, we conclude that Apilando received
 
the benefit of the bargain that he struck with the State and
 
that, under the unique circumstance of this case, any breach of
 
the plea agreement was not material and, therefore, did not
 
negatively impact Apilando's due process rights or create a
 
manifest injustice.
 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the State materially
 
breached the plea agreement by failing to deliver its
 
recommendation in writing, based on the factors articulated by
 
the supreme court in Adams, allowing Apilando to withdraw his
 
guilty pleas was not an appropriate remedy. While that was
 
Apilando's preferred remedy, which must be given considerable
 
weight, the other factors in this case are compelling. 
As his counsel acknowledged, Apilando received a very
 
favorable minimum term of imprisonment. He did not write to the
 
court seeking relief from his guilty pleas until more than three
 
years later, after having served the balance of his minimum,
 
being paroled, and having his parole revoked for multiple
 
3
 The transmission of Deputy Prosecutor Uehara's later letter was at
best inept, and at worst troubling. Nevertheless, given its timing, it was
impossible that Uehara's letter had any influence whatsoever on Apilando's
minimum term of imprisonment. Thus, it did not impinge on Apilando's due
process rights or create a manifest injustice in the way that the prosecutor's
actions did in Adams and Miller. At oral argument, defense counsel agreed
that there was no indication that Uehara's letter reflected anything other
than a failure of communication in the prosecutor's office. Nevertheless, had
the letter been received by the Parol Board prior to the setting of Apilando's
minimum term, it would have materially changed the circumstances of this case.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violations of the conditions of his parole. His motion was not 
timely. The extent of any breach was minimal and appears to have 
had no impact on his minimum sentence. Thus, he suffered no 
prejudice. As the underlying offenses occurred on December 24, 
2000, and February 7, 2001, it appears that the State would be 
substantially prejudiced by faded memories and destroyed 
evidence. As there was no complaint raised concerning the lack 
of a letter, the State was never given an opportunity to 
investigate or correct the situation by submitting the letter. 
It does not "best serve the effective administration of justice" 
to allow Apilando to withdraw his pleas at this late date. See 
Adams, 76 Hawai 'i at 414-15, 879 P.2d at 519-20. It appears that 
specific performance and a new minimum sentencing hearing would 
be futile. Thus, no remedial action was warranted in this case. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 9, 2009
 
Order Granting Defendant's Petition for Post-Conviction Relief is
 
vacated and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court so that
 
the judgment and sentence in the underlying cases can be
 
reinstated.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 28, 2010. 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate
 
for Respondent-Appellant
 
Chief Judge

Jeffrey A. Hawk
for Petitioner-Appellee
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
11
 