NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28917
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CIVIL NO. 03-1-1922
 
NST HOLDINGS CORP., dba BUDGET HAWAIIAN HOLIDAYS, GENE MIYAKE
and DANNY CHING, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
ALTRES, INC., Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
NAUTILUS INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
GARY DIFALCO, JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS
1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
and DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
AND
 
CIVIL NO. 04-1-0776
 
NST HOLDINGS CORP., dba BUDGET HAWAIIAN HOLIDAYS, DANNY CHING
and GENE MIYAKE, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
ALTRES, INC., Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
ISLAND INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
and
 
GARY DIFALCO, JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS
1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
and DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
NST Holdings Corp. doing business as Budget Hawaiian
 
Holidays ("NST"), Gene Miyake ("Miyake"), and Danny Ching
 
("Ching") (collectively, "NST Parties") appeal from (1) the
 Second Amended Final Judgment, filed November 23, 2007, and (2)
 the Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Ching's] Motion
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Award of Attorney's Fees and Costs, filed November 23, 2007
 
("Order Denying Ching's Motion for Fees/Costs"), entered in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1 Altres,
 
Inc. cross-appeals from the Circuit Court's (1) Order Denying
 [Altres, Inc.'s] Motion to Join Real Party in Interest, filed
 April 3, 2007 ("Order Denying Motion to Join Real Party"), (2)
 Order Denying [Altres, Inc.'s] Motion for Prejudgment Interest,
 Filed June 8, 2007, filed July 12, 2007 ("Order Denying Motion
 for Prejudgment Interest"), (3) Order Denying Ching's Motion for
 Fees/Costs, (4) Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law,
 filed November 23, 2007 ("Amended FOF/COL"), and (5) Second
 Amended Final Judgment. 
This appeal originated with two lawsuits seeking 
declaratory relief filed by the NST Parties in Hawai' i against 
insurers Nautilus Insurance Company ("Nautilus") and Island Insurance Company ("Island"), Gary DiFalco ("DiFalco"), Altres, Inc., and Doe defendants to determine the insurers' obligations to defend or indemnify the NST Parties in an employment-related action brought by DiFalco in California Superior Court stemming from the closure of NST's Manhattan Beach, California office at which DiFalco worked. Altres, Inc. filed counterclaims against the NST Parties and cross-claims against the insurers. The cases were consolidated for trial in the Circuit Court. The insurers settled with the NST Parties and the Circuit Court issued a judgment that addressed the claims of the remaining parties. 
I. Background
 A. Agreements
 In a service agreement dated February 5, 1992 ("1992
 
Agreement"), NST, a travel-services company doing business in
 
California as Budget Holidays, Inc. ("Budget"), hired Employee
 Management Corporation ("EMC") to provide it with personnel
 staffing and/or payroll services for one year, beginning
 January 15, 1992. Under the terms of the 1992 Agreement, EMC
 would hire personnel as its own employees and then assign them to
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
work for Budget. EMC agreed to "be responsible for the
 
administration of all employment matters, payment of periodic
 payrolls, including the withholding of applicable State, Federal
 and other payroll-related taxes[.]"
 
Pursuant to the 1992 Agreement, Budget instructed EMC
 
to hire DiFalco. EMC subsequently hired DiFalco as an employee
 and leased him to Budget to be Budget's Regional Manager. 
Subsequent to the 1992 Agreement, Altres, Inc. replaced
 
EMC as Budget's employment-services provider. On or about March
 15, 1996, Budget and Altres, Inc. entered into a one-year
 agreement, beginning March 1, 1996, concerning the provision and
 management of Budget's workforce ("Workforce Agreement").
2 The
 
Workforce Agreement states in pertinent part:
 
1. This Proposal is for the provision of a
workforce to BUDGET HOLIDAYS ("Customer") . . . . Under
 
this Agreement, [Altres, Inc.] is responsible for the
employment of the workforce, and CUSTOMER is the business
responsible for the workplace.
 
2. a. This Agreement covers the workforce
employed by [Altres, Inc.]. [Altres, Inc.] shall implement
its human resources, risk management, and communications
policies, and shall otherwise manage said employment
relationship within CUSTOMER's workplace. [Altres, Inc.]
shall have the right to hire, discipline, communicate with
its employees at any time, determine whether to retain,
compensate, terminate, and otherwise direct and control, the
employment of the workers covered by this Agreement.
CUSTOMER shall have the right to reject the services of any
[Altres, Inc.] employee, but CUSTOMER may neither hire nor
fire the employees covered by this Agreement. . . .
 
b. CUSTOMER shall be responsible for the
workplace and the activity in it . . . . CUSTOMER's
 workplace must continue to comply with all regulatory
aspects of doing business which applied to CUSTOMER before
execution of this Agreement, including without limitation,
the obligations to maintain a safe and accessible workplace
under the Occupational Safety & Health Act, and the
Americans with Disabilities Act, and all related and similar
regulatory requirements. . . .
 
. . . .
 
4. a. Each party to this Agreement is
responsible for its own actions or lack thereof. Any action
or lack of action of any [Altres, Inc.] employee shall be
attributed to that party which at the time of the action or
lack of action was directing the activities of the worker.
 
2
 Although the Workforce Agreement states that it runs for one year
and has no evident provision for roll-over, there was no subsequent agreement
presented by the parties and the Circuit Court found that the Workforce
Agreement was in effect "at the time the controversy in this matter arose."
The finding is unchallenged.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
.  .  .  .
 
c. CUSTOMER is responsible for the workplace
and the activity in it, just as it is solely responsible for
the conduct of its business . . . . [Altres, Inc.] has no
responsibility whatsoever for said business, product, or
service, and CUSTOMER indemnifies and holds [Altres, Inc.]
harmless for any and all liabilities or consequences arising
out of CUSTOMER's business, product, or service. Further,
but without limitation of the foregoing, CUSTOMER agrees to
hold [Altres, Inc.] harmless and indemnify it against all
claims for any negligent act, other tortuous conduct,
violation of any statute, law, or regulation, criminal or
dishonest activity attributed to any assigned employee
maintained hereunder or CUSTOMER's failure to perform under
the terms of this agreement, or due to any action by
CUSTOMER which may result in a violation of any law or
regulation for which it has any responsibility pursuant to
law or any provision of this Agreement.
 
Consistent with the agreement, DiFalco became an employee of
 
Altres, Inc. while continuing to perform his job at Budget. 
Some time later, Altres Employer Services, Inc.
 
("AES"), a business entity distinct from but related to Altres,
 Inc., was incorporated in Utah. Over time, control of Altres,
 Inc.'s employees working in California was transferred to AES. At
 some point, although the record is unclear as to when, DiFalco
 became employed by AES. 
B. The California DiFalco Case
 
On April 23, 2004, DiFalco filed a second amended
 
3
complaint  , in the California Superior Court, against AES;
Altres, Inc.; Barron Guss ("Guss") (Altres, Inc.'s president);
 
NST, doing business as Budget; Miyake (NST's vice president); and
 Ching (NST's president). 
DiFalco asserted eighteen claims for
 
relief, most of which related to discriminatory statements
 allegedly made by Miyake and other actions relating to the
 workplace and DiFalco's position. Two of DiFalco's claims
 asserted wrongdoing on the part of Altres, Inc. 
The NST Parties subsequently settled with DiFalco
 
("NST/DiFalco Settlement"). 
Under the NST/DiFalco Settlement, in
 
exchange for the release of DiFalco's claims, the NST Parties
 paid a cash settlement and assigned to DiFalco "any and all tort
 and common law claims they may have against the Altres entities
 
3
 DiFalco's initial complaint was filed in California Superior Court
on May 15, 2003. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
arising from the claims asserted in the lawsuit," subject only to
 
a few exceptions ("Assigned Claims"). 
Altres, Inc., AES, and Guss, in turn, settled DiFalco's
 
claims for $195,000.00 ("Altres, Inc./DiFalco Settlement"). Of
 the $195,000.00 total settlement, $19,500.00 was explicitly
 allocated for DiFalco's 2001 compensation; $73,000.00 was
 allocated for DiFalco's personal injury damages; $19,500.00 was
 allocated for the Assigned Claims; and (4) $85,000.00 was
 allocated for DiFalco's attorneys' fees. 
C. The Hawai' i declaratory judgment suits 
On October 14, 2003, the NST Parties filed a second
 
amended complaint in Circuit Court against Nautilus, DiFalco,
 Altres, Inc., and various Doe defendants ("Nautilus Case"). The
 NST Parties alleged, among other things, that Nautilus was
 contractually obligated to defend and/or indemnify them for
 claims asserted in the DiFalco Case. On April 27, 2004, the NST
 Parties filed a separate complaint in Circuit Court against
 Island, DiFalco, Altres, Inc., and various Doe defendants,
 similarly seeking, among other things, a judgment declaring that
 Island was contractually obligated to defend and/or indemnify the
 NST Parties for claims asserted in the DiFalco Case ("Island
 Case"). 
On July 14, 2005, the Circuit Court granted Nautilus's
 
and Island's respective motions for summary judgment as to the
 NST Parties' claims against them. Those orders are not
 challenged on appeal.
 
The NST Parties did not assert any claims against
 
Altres, Inc. in either the Nautilus Case or the Island Case. 
Altres, Inc., however, asserted counterclaims against the NST
 Parties for breach of contract, indemnification, negligence,
 wrongful exposure to lawsuit and fees, and entitlement to
 insurance proceeds. Consequently, the Nautilus Case and the
 Island Case were consolidated for trial. 
At the bench trial, there was an issue as to whether
 
DiFalco was actually employed by Altres, Inc. during the time
 period when DiFalco's claims arose. Guss testified that while
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DiFalco had been employed by AES during the relevant period and
 
that DiFalco was "not a W-2 employee of ALTRES, Inc.," DiFalco
 "was co-employed by ALTRES[, Inc.] for the purposes of
 administrative employment at the time he filed his you know –– I
 won't say at the time he filed his claim, but during that
 relevant period, he was employed by [AES]." Guss further
 testified that there was a "very good possibility" that DiFalco
 was employed by Altres, Inc. at some time relevant to the
 California DiFalco Case. 
Although the Circuit Court, when ruling on a motion for
 
judgment as a matter of law, stated that DiFalco "was an employee
 of [AES] which is a separate corporation from ALTRES, Inc.," the
 Circuit Court held that indemnification provisions in the
 Workforce Agreement were broad enough to encompass "the type of
 conduct that we have in this particular case." 
The Circuit Court entered its Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law on May 23, 2007, and the Amended FOF/COL on
 November 23, 2007. The Circuit Court did not make a finding
 stating whether DiFalco had or had not been an employee or co­employee of Altres, Inc. during the relevant time period.
 
On September 12, 2007, the NST Parties filed a petition
 
for approval of good faith settlement ("Settlement Petition")
 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 663-15.5, noting
 that they had settled with Nautilus and Island. On September 13,
 2007, the Circuit Court entered the Final Judgment, adjudging,
 among other things, that NST and Miyake were liable to pay
 $110,000.00 to Altres, Inc., as a portion of the Altres,
 Inc./DiFalco Settlement, and that the NST Parties were jointly
 and severally liable for Altres, Inc.'s attorneys' fees stemming
 from the Nautilus Case and the Island Case. 
On October 15, 2007, the Circuit Court announced that
 
it found that the settlements between the NST Parties and
 Nautilus and Island had been entered into in good faith, and that
 it would therefore grant the NST Parties' Settlement Petition. 
An order granting the Settlement Petition was filed on
 November 5, 2007. 
On October 16, 2007, the NST Parties filed a post-
judgment motion to amend and/or correct the Final Judgment and an
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order regarding Altres, Inc.'s request for attorneys' fees and
 
costs with language that would reflect (1) that Altres, Inc.'s
 cross-claims against Nautilus and Island were moot as a result of
 a settlement between various parties and (2) that only NST and
 Miyake, and not Ching, were liable for Altres, Inc.'s attorneys'
 fees and costs in the amount of $35,437.53. On October 23, 2007,
 Ching filed a motion to recover attorneys' fees and costs from
 Altres, Inc. on the ground that he was the prevailing party in
 the litigation. 
On October 26, 2007, the Circuit Court filed the
 
Amended Final Judgment, which stated that, "[p]ursuant to the
 Court's granting on October 22, 2007 of [NST Parties' Motion to
 Amend and/or Correct], judgment is further entered in favor of
 ALTRES, Inc. and against [NST and Miyake], jointly and severally,
 for attorneys' fees and costs in the amount of $35,437.53[,]"
 omitting reference to Ching. The Amended Final Judgment added a
 provision stating that "[p]ursuant to the Court's granting on
 October 22, 2007 of [NST Parties' Settlement Petition], filed
 herein on September 12, 2007, ALTRES, Inc.'s Cross-claims against
 [Nautilus and Island] have been statutorily resolved and the
 settling parties are discharged from all liability for any
 contribution from any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor." 
The Amended Judgment further stated that "[a]ll claims and
 parties not addressed herein are dismissed." The Circuit Court
 entered the written order granting the Motion to Amend and/or
 Correct on November 1, 2007. 
On November 23, 2007, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Order Denying Ching's Motion for Fees/Costs. On the same day,
 the Circuit Court also entered a Second Amended Final Judgment,
 which differed from the Amended Judgment primarily in that it (1)
 explicitly entered judgment in favor of Ching on Counts I and II
 of the Counterclaim, (2) explicitly entered judgment in favor of
 Miyake and Ching, in addition to NST, on Count IV of the
 Counterclaim, and (3) noted the denial of Ching's October 23,
 2007 motion for attorneys' fees and costs. 
On December 21, 2007, the NST Parties filed a joint
 
notice of appeal from the (1) Second Amended Final Judgment and
 (2) Order Denying Ching's Motion for Fees/Costs. On January 3,
 
7
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2008, Altres, Inc. filed a notice of cross-appeal from, among
 
other things, the Second Amended Final Judgment.4
 
II. Points of Error
 
5
On appeal,  the NST Parties contend that the Circuit
Court erred in (1) concluding that NST breached the Workforce
 Agreement when it refused to indemnify Altres, Inc. for its
 payments to settle with DiFalco because (a) DiFalco's claims
 arose while he was employed by AES and not Altres, Inc.; (b) the
 Circuit Court did not find that NST was liable to DiFalco; (c)
 some of the claims against Altres, Inc. were for Altres, Inc.'s
 own actions; (d) NST is being forced to indemnify third parties;
 and (e) the NST/DiFalco Settlement resolved all of DiFalco's
 claims arising from NST's conduct. The NST Parties further
 
contend that the Circuit Court erred in (2) finding and
 
concluding that Altres, Inc. expended its own money in its
 defense of the DiFalco Case, and (3) concluding that Altres, Inc.
 paid the attorneys' fees and costs in this case.
 
On cross-appeal, Altres, Inc. contends that (1) the
 
Circuit Court erred in considering a failure-to-mitigate-damages
 defense that was raised by the Circuit Court itself for the first
 time at the close of trial. Altres, Inc. further contends that
 the Circuit Court erred (2) in refusing to require that NST
 indemnify Altres, Inc. for that portion of the Altres,
 Inc./DiFalco Settlement apportioned for the payment of DiFalco's
 attorneys' fees; (3) in not ordering NST to indemnify Altres,
 Inc. for its attorneys' fees and costs incurred in litigating the
 DiFalco Case because the Circuit Court (a) incorrectly
 interpreted the Workforce Agreement, (b) erred by denying Altres,
 
Inc. its attorneys' fees on mitigation-of-damages grounds, (c)
 
incorrectly identified the amount of attorneys' fees and costs in
 controversy, and (d) failed to consider certain attorney
 
4
 Although the cases were only consolidated for trial, and only one
appellate docket number was assigned to both the Nautilus Case and the Island
Case, both cases are properly before this court. See Ainoa v. Unemployment
 
Compensation Appeals Div., 62 Haw. 286, 287 n.1, 614 P.2d 380, 382 (1980).
 
5
 Altres, Inc. contends that the notice of appeal as to NST and
Miyake is untimely.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
invoices; and in denying its (4) Motion to Join Real Party in
 
Interest and (5) Motion for Prejudgment Interest. 
Finally, (1) Altres, Inc. argues that the Circuit Court
 
erroneously concluded that Ching was a prevailing party, and (2)
 Ching argues that the Circuit Court erroneously denied him
 recovery of any attorneys' fees and costs. 
III. Discussion
 
A. The NST Parties' appeal was timely.
 
HRS § 641-1(a) authorizes appeals from "final 
judgments, orders, or decrees[.]" Haw. Rev. Stat. § 641-1(a) 
(1993 & Supp. 2011). Appeals under HRS § 641-1 "shall be taken in the manner and within the time provided by the rules of the court." HRS § 641-1(c) (1993 & Supp. 2011). Rule 58 of the Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") requires that "[e]very 
judgment shall be set forth on a separate document." Haw. R. Civ. P. 58. Based on this requirement under HRCP Rule 58, the Supreme Court of Hawai' i has held that "[a]n appeal may be taken 
from circuit court orders resolving claims against parties only after the orders have been reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been entered in favor of and against the appropriate parties pursuant to HRCP [Rule] 58[.]" Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming 
& Wright, 76 Hawai' i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
[I]f a judgment purports to be the final judgment in a case
involving multiple claims or multiple parties, the judgment
(a) must specifically identify the party or parties for and
against whom the judgment is entered, and (b) must (i)
identify the claims for which it is entered, and (ii)
dismiss any claims not specifically identified[.]
 
Id.
 
The Circuit Court entered three judgments that resolved
 
all claims against all parties by entering judgment on some of
 
the claims and dismissing all other claims:
 
(1) the September 13, 2007 judgment;
 
(2) the October 26, 2007 first amended judgment; and
 
(3) the November 23, 2007 second amended judgment.
 
All three of these judgments satisfy the requirements for an
 appealable final judgment under HRS § 641-1(a), HRCP Rule 58, and
 the holding in Jenkins.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When the Circuit Court amended the September 13, 2007 
judgment, an issue arose as to which of the multiple judgments 
triggered the time period under Hawai' i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure ("HRAP") Rule 4 for filing a notice of appeal: 
The general rule is that where a judgment is amended
in a material and substantial respect, the time within which
an appeal from such determination may be taken begins to run
from the date of the amendment, although where the amendment
relates only to the correction of a clerical error, it does
not affect the time allowed for appeal.
 
Poe v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Bd., 98 Hawai' i 416, 418, 49 P.3d 
382, 384 (2002) (citation, internal quotation marks, and ellipsis
 
omitted).
 
If the amendment of a final judgment or decree for the
purpose of correcting a clerical error either materially
alters rights or obligations determined by the prior
judgment or decree or creates a right of appeal where one
did not exist before, the time for appeal should be measured
from the entry of the amended judgment. If, however, the
amendment has neither of these results, but instead makes
changes in the prior judgment which have no adverse effect
upon those rights or obligations or the parties' right to
appeal, the entry of the amended judgment will not postpone
the time within which an appeal must be taken from the
original decree.
 
Id. (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
We conclude that the October 26, 2007 first amended
 
judgment is the judgment that triggered the time period under
 
HRAP Rule 4 for filing a notice of appeal. The October 26, 2007
 first amended judgment made a substantial and material change to
 the September 13, 2007 judgment in that the October 26, 2007
 first amended judgment deleted the portion of paragraph 5 of the
 September 13, 2007 judgment that referred to Ching as one of the
 parties who was liable for the award of attorneys' fees and costs
 in favor of Altres, Inc. in the amount of $35,437.53. In other
 words, while the Circuit Court is not required to include an
 award of attorneys' fees and costs within a judgment, the Circuit
 Court in the instant case nevertheless chose to include a
 provision within the September 13, 2007 judgment that entered
 judgment in favor of Altres, Inc. and against, among others,
 Ching for attorneys' fees and costs in the amount of $35,437.53. 
The October 26, 2007 first amended judgment deleted this
 provision as to Ching, and, thus, eliminated Ching's monetary
 liability as set forth in the first judgment. Therefore, we
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conclude that the October 26, 2007 first amended judgment made a
 
substantial and material change to the September 13, 2007
 judgment. In contrast, however, the November 23, 2007 second
 amended judgment did not make material and substantial changes to
 the October 26, 2007 first amended judgment. Therefore, the
 October 26, 2007 first amended judgment is the judgment that
 triggered the time period under HRAP Rule 4 for filing a notice
 of appeal.
6
 
Ching's timely motion for attorneys' fees extended the
 
time for filing a notice of appeal for all parties "until 30 days
 after entry of an order disposing of the motion[.]" Haw. R. App.
 P. 4(a)(3). When the Circuit Court entered the Order Denying
 Ching's Motion for Fees/Costs on November 23, 2007, each party
 had 30 days from that date in which to file a notice of appeal. 
The NST Parties filed a timely joint notice of appeal on
 December 21, 2007. Altres, Inc. filed a timely notice of cross-
appeal on January 3, 2008. See Haw. R. App. P. 4.1(b)(1). 
Therefore, the NST Parties' appeal and Altres, Inc.'s
 
cross-appeal are properly before us for consideration. 
B.	 The Circuit Court misinterpreted the Workforce
Agreement.
 
The NST Parties contend that the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding that NST breached the Workforce Agreement in failing
 
to indemnify Altres, Inc. for its payments to settle with
 DiFalco. The NST Parties contend that NST does not owe Altres,
 Inc. a duty to indemnify under the Workforce Agreement because
 DiFalco was employed by AES at all times relevant in the DiFalco
 Case. 
For purposes of identifying any duty to indemnify or
 
defend owed by NST to Altres, Inc. arising from the DiFalco
 
6
 The fact that the parties's notice of appeal and notice of
cross-appeal mistakenly designate the November 23, 2007 second amended
judgment rather than the October 26, 2007 first amended judgment does notinvalidate the appeal and cross-appeal in this case. Our appellate courtshave consistently held that, "a mistake in designating the judgment . . .should not result in [the] loss of the appeal as long as the intention toappeal from a specific judgment can be fairly inferred from the notice and the
appellee is not misled by the mistake." State v. Graybeard, 93 Hawai' i 513,
516, 6 P.3d 385, 388 (App. 2000) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quotingCity & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275-76, 554 P.2d 233, 235
(1976)). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lawsuit, Paragraph 2.a. of the Workforce Agreement is crucial. 
It states: "This Agreement covers the workforce employed by
 Altres. Altres shall implement its human resources, risk
 management, and communications policies, and shall otherwise
 manage said employment relationship within CUSTOMER'S workplace." 
(Emphasis added). The Workforce Agreement governs Altres, Inc.'s
 relationship with NST vis-à-vis Altres, Inc.'s employees. We
 conclude that the indemnification provisions operate only when
 the alleged liability for which Altres, Inc. seeks
 indemnification is somehow connected to an Altres, Inc. employee.
 
The allegations of wrongdoing against Altres, Inc. in
 
DiFalco's complaint start from a period beginning in December
 2001. The questions, then, are whether DiFalco was Altres,
 Inc.'s employee during this relevant time period or whether there
 is any merit to Altres, Inc.'s contentions that DiFalco was co­employed by Altres, Inc. The Circuit Court did not make findings
 of fact on either of these points because it erroneously
 concluded that Section 4.c of the Workforce Agreement would allow
 Altres, Inc. to seek indemnification from NST irrespective of who
 was DiFalco's employer. 
"When an appellate court discerns that a [trial court]
 
has failed to make a finding because of an erroneous view of the
 law, the usual rule is that there should be a remand for further
 proceedings to permit the trial court to make the missing
 findings." Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 291 (1982). 
This principle applies in this case where testimony was presented
 that, while DiFalco was certainly employed by AES, he was "co­employed by [Altres, Inc.] for the purposes of administrative
 employment." See B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 602 (9th ed. 2009) (an
 
employee is "a person who works in the service of another person
 (the employer) under an express or implied contract of hire,
 under which the employer has the right to control the details of
 work performance"); 27 Am. Jur. 2d Employment Relationship § 5
 (2007) ("A dual employment relationship may exist if more than
 one individual or company has the right to control or direct an
 employee in the performance of the work or if an employee is
 under a contract of hire with two different employers.").
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in concluding that
 
NST was required to indemnify Altres, Inc. without a finding,
 
based on the evidence, that DiFalco was an employee of Altres,
 Inc. when some or all of DiFalco's claims arose. We remand for
 further findings of fact.
7
 
C. Ching's Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
Finally, we address the issue of Ching's attorneys'
 
fees and costs. Ching argues that although the Circuit Court
 
correctly held that he was a prevailing party, the Circuit Court
 erred in denying him fees on the ground that he was entitled to
 mandatory indemnification under HRS §§ 414D-165 and 414D-161. 
Altres, Inc., on cross-appeal, contests the Circuit Court's
 conclusion that Ching is a prevailing party.
8 We address Altres,
 
Inc.'s argument first.
 
1. Ching is a prevailing party vis-à-vis Altres, Inc.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 607-14 (Supp. 2011), in all actions
 
in the nature of assumpsit, "there shall be taxed as attorneys'
 fees, to be paid by the losing party and to be included in the
 sum for which execution may issue, a fee that the court
 determines to be reasonable" to be paid to the prevailing party. 
Altres, Inc. argues that Ching cannot be a prevailing party
 because, as a plaintiff in the underlying action, he lost his
 affirmative claims in the complaint. 
"In multiple parties cases, a party may be a losing
 
party vis-a-vis two other parties, and a party may be a loser as
 to one party and a winner as to another[.]" Rosa v. Johnston, 3
 
Haw. App. 420, 431, 651 P.2d 1228, 1236 (1982) (internal
 citations omitted). The NST Parties' complaint in the Island
 Case and second amended complaint in the Nautilus Case, although
 naming Altres, Inc. as a defendant, sought damages from Island
 
7
 Our holding renders the remaining points of error relating to
indemnification purely academic, and we decline to address them.
 
8
 Altres, Inc. further contends that Ching's request for fees was
untimely. The "victory" to which NST refers in its opposition brief may have
"existed" when the September 13, 2007 Final Judgment was entered, but it was
not determinable until the Amended Judgment was filed on October 26, 2007.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and Nautilus under their respective insurance policies with
 
Altres, Inc. and alleged no claims against Altres, Inc. Ching
 did not assert any claims against Altres, Inc., but prevailed on
 all of Altres, Inc.'s counterclaims against him. Consequently,
 the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in holding that
 Ching was the prevailing party vis-à-vis Altres, Inc.
 
2.	 The Circuit Court's basis for denying Ching
attorneys' fees was erroneous.
 
Although holding that Ching was a prevailing party, the
 
Circuit Court denied Ching recovery of any attorneys' fees and
 
costs. Citing Rosa v. Johnston, 3 Haw. App. 420, 431, 651 P.2d
 1228, 1237 (1982), the Circuit Court stated that "[a] court may
 properly deny an individual defendant's request for attorney's
 fees and costs, when the same attorney defends both an individual
 and corporate defendant, and the individual defendant has not
 show [sic] what part of attorneys' fees were actually incurred by
 him." The Circuit Court reasoned that Ching could not be liable
 for any attorneys' fees and costs because (1) the same attorneys
 represented NST and Ching and (2) pursuant to HRS §§ 414D-165(a)
9
 
and 414D-161,10 NST, and not Ching, "would be liable for any
 
attorneys' fees and costs attributable to CHING as an officer of
 NST" because NST would be required to indemnify Ching.
11
 
9
 HRS § 414D-165(a) (2004) states:
 
An officer of the corporation who is not a director, unless
limited by a corporation's articles of incorporation, is
entitled to mandatory indemnification under section 414D­161, and is entitled to apply for court-ordered
indemnification under section 414D-163 in each case, to the
same extent as a director.
 
10
 HRS § 414D-161 (2004) states:
 
Unless limited by its articles of incorporation, a
corporation shall indemnify a director who was wholly
successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of
any proceeding to which the director was a party because the
director is or was a director of the corporation, against
reasonable expenses actually incurred by the director in
connection with the proceeding.
 
11
 HRS §§ 414D-165 and 414D-161 are part of the Hawaii Nonprofit
Corporations Act. Although NST appears to be a for-profit corporation, HRS§§ 414-243 and 414-247(c), found in the Hawai' i Business Corporation Act,
provide equivalent protections. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We hold that the Circuit Court's statutory
 
indemnification rationale for denying Ching any attorneys' fees
 
and costs is incorrect. It does not follow that if one party
 merely has a right to indemnification from a third party, then he
 cannot recover attorneys' fees. When a party has a right to
 indemnification, the party suffers loss that may or may not be
 indemnified should the indemnitor have the financial capability
 and will to cover the loss. B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 837 (9th ed.
 
2009) ("indemnification" is "[t]he action of compensating for
 loss or damage sustained"). To uphold the Circuit Court's
 conclusion in this case would, in another case, give little
 solace to an officer of a bankrupt or intransigent corporation,
 who has paid significant attorneys' fees and costs in litigation
 out-of-pocket but who, for any number of possible reasons, does
 not secure reimbursement from the company.
12
 
Here, Ching filed a declaration on November 14, 2007
 
that, pursuant to an agreement with his attorney, he has been
 "personally responsible for payment of 1/3 of the attorneys' fee
 and costs incurred defending against [Altres, Inc.]'s
 counterclaims." Thus, Ching requested $21,138.71 ($63,416.14 ÷
 3) and costs of $1,080.75 ($3,242.26 ÷ 3). The Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion by denying Ching fees on the basis that he
 was entitled to indemnification from NST because Ching claims
 that he has paid or is contractually responsible for one-third of
 the attorneys' fees in defending the Altres, Inc. counterclaims. 
Whether Ching is otherwise entitled to attorneys' fees and costs
 and whether the amount claimed is reasonable are issues properly
 addressed on remand. See Rosa, 3 Haw. App. at 431, 651 P.2d at
 
1237.
 
Therefore, we vacate the Order Denying Ching's Motion
 
for Fees/Costs and remand for consideration of the amount, if
 
12
 Furthermore, whether pursuant to contract, statute, or common law,
indemnitors and indemnitees frequently have differences of opinion whether
indemnification is legally required in a given situation. Litigation might be
required to come to a determination on this point—this case is a prime
example. See generally Sherman v. Am. Water Heater Co., Inc., 50 S.W.3d 455
(Tenn. Ct. App. 2001) (litigation over whether corporation required to
indemnify former employee under mandatory-indemnification statute). Given
 that NST was not even asked to comment on this matter, the Circuit Court was
not in a position to declare NST's legal obligation to indemnify Ching.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
any, Ching is entitled to as a prevailing party under HRS § 607­
14.
 
V. Conclusion
 
The judgments and underlying orders in this appeal are
 
vacated, and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for
 
proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 21, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Roy F. Epstein and
Carlos D. Perez-Mesa
 (Epstein & Perez-Mesa)
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees
NST Holdings Corp. dba
Budget Hawaiian Holidays,Danny Ching and Gene Miyake.
 
Stuart M. Cowan,
Mark T. Shklov, andMichel A. Okazaki
 for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant
Altres, Inc. 
16
 