NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29923 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CORNELIUS WESLEY DURHAM, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0220(2))
 
ORDER RE APPELLANT'S MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.;
and Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting)
 
Upon review of the Motion for Reconsideration of

 
Summary Disposition Order (Motion) filed on December 6, 2010 by
 
Appellant Cornelius Wesley Durham (Durham), the records and files
 herein, and the arguments asserted, we hereby deny the Motion for
 the reasons set forth below.
 
Appellant Durham's Motion contends the Summary
 
Disposition Order issued on November 24, 2010 should be
 reconsidered, and that a new order should be issued reversing the
 June 26, 2009 Order Revoking Probation and Resentencing Defendant
 
1
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit
court), because: (1) a newly discovered Confidential Letter by a
 probation officer dated September 10, 2008 was sent to the
 circuit court, was not disclosed to Durham, and contains false
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
factual information; (2) the circuit court allegedly reviewed and
 
relied on the false information in the Confidential Letter in
 revoking Durham's probation, without allowing Durham an
 opportunity to dispute the false information; and (3) Durham was
 fully compliant with the conditions of his probation.
 
In the instant appeal, the points of error raised by
 
Durham focused on: (a) the facts and circumstances of Durham
 being terminated from a sex offender treatment program and
 whether that constituted an inexcusable failure on his part to
 comply with a substantial condition of his probation; and (b)
 whether he had ineffective assistance of counsel. With regard to
 these points of error, the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion in revoking Durham's probation. The stated basis for
 the circuit court's revocation order was that Durham failed to
 comply with Special Condition J of his probation because he was
 terminated from the sex offender treatment program without being
 clinically discharged. In addressing Durham during the
 revocation hearing, the circuit court stated: "[y]ou were
 deceptive; you weren't open to treatment; you didn't follow
 through with treatment; you were supposed to complete – you're
 supposed to complete satisfactorily the Hawaii Sex Offender
 Treatment Program with the . . . concurrence of your probation
 officer, and you didn't do that." Nowhere in the record does the
 circuit court mention or allude to other factors in revoking
 Durham's probation.
 
Although Durham's current allegations of false
 
information in the Confidential Letter raise a potentially
 
2
significant issue,  the record is not sufficiently developed in
that regard. Durham's allegations regarding the false
 information and also whether the information had any role in the
 circuit court's revocation decision will need to be addressed by
 
2
 Although Durham was not entitled to receive a copy of
the probation officer's confidential recommendation letter, a
defendant "will have access to all factual information used in
 sentencing." State v. Paaaina, 67 Haw. 408, 411, 689 P.2d 754,
757 (1984).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
way of a petition pursuant to Rule 40 of the Hawai 'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the motion for
 
reconsideration is denied without prejudice to Durham filing an
 
HRPP Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 30, 2010. 
On the motion:
 
Leslie K. Iczkovitz
 
for Defendant-Appellant Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge

 
NAKAMURA, C.J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING
 
I agree with the majority's conclusion that Defendant­
Appellant's arguments regarding newly discovered evidence do not 
warrant granting his motion for reconsideration, but may be raised by way of a petition pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure Rule 40. However, for the reasons set forth in my Dissenting Opinion to this court's November 24, 2010, Summary Disposition Order, I would grant Defendant-Appellant's motion for reconsideration to the extent it challenges the substantive basis for the Summary Disposition Order. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from this court's order denying the motion. 