NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29652
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
KAM CENTER SPECIALTY, CORPORATION,
a Hawai'i Corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee, Cross-Appellant/Appellee,
vs.
 
LWC IV CORPORATION, a Hawai' i corporation,
dba Eastern Garden Chinese Seafood Restaurant;
LAWRENCE CHAN and LINDA CHAN,
Defendants-Appellants, Cross-Appellees
 
and
 
LWC IV CORPORATION, a Hawai' i corporation
dba Eastern Garden Chinese Seafood Restaurant;
LAWRENCE CHAN and LINDA CHAN,
Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellants, Cross-Appellees,
vs.
 
JOHN E. KOBAYASHI, and V.I.P. INVESTMENTS, INC.,
a Hawai'i corporation,
Third-Party Defendants-Appellees, Cross-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-2075)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Kam Center Specialty Corporation (Kam Center) filed a
 
summary possession complaint against LWC IV Corporation (LWC),
 
Lawrence Chan, and Linda Chan (collectively "the Chans"). The
 Chans filed a counterclaim against Kam Center and a third-party
 complaint against John E. Kobayashi and V.I.P. Investments, Inc.
 (collectively, "Kobayashi"). Kam Center prevailed on its
 complaint and the Chans' counterclaim, and the Circuit Court of
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court) entered a judgment which 
awarded $337,776.17 to Kam Center, including $74,562.75 in attorney's fees and costs. The Chans appealed from this judgment. The Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the Circuit Court 
had erred in denying the Chans' motion to amend their counterclaim to assert an unfair competition claim against Kam Center pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 480-2 (2008),
1 
but did not otherwise disturb the $337,776.17 awarded to Kam Center. Kam Center Specialty Corp. v. LWC IV Corp., No. 27439, 
2007 WL 2827589, at *1 (Hawai' i Sept. 27, 2007) (mem. op.) 
(hereinafter, "Kam Center I"). 
On remand, the Chans filed an amended counterclaim
 
which asserted a claim of unfair competition against Kam Center
 pursuant to HRS § 480-2. The Circuit Court ultimately granted
 summary judgment in favor of Kam Center on the Chans' amended
 counterclaim. Kam Center moved for attorney's fees pursuant to
 
2
HRS § 607-14 (Supp. 2012)  and costs pursuant to HRS § 607-9
1 HRS § 480-2 provides in relevant part:
 
§480-2 Unfair competition, practices, declared unlawful. (a)
Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or
practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce are unlawful.
 
(b) In construing this section, the courts and the office
of consumer protection shall give due consideration to the rules,
regulations, and decisions of the Federal Trade Commission and the
federal courts interpreting section 5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade
Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(1)), as from time to time amended.
 
. . . .
 
(e) Any person may bring an action based on unfair methods
of competition declared unlawful by this section.
 
2 HRS § 607-14 provides in relevant part:
 
In all the courts, in all actions in the nature of assumpsit
and in all actions on a promissory note or other contract in
writing that provides for an attorney's fee, there shall be taxed
as attorneys' fees, to be paid by the losing party and to be
included in the sum for which execution may issue, a fee that the
court determines to be reasonable; provided that the attorney
representing the prevailing party shall submit to the court an
(continued...)
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3
(1993)  and Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(d)
(2000).4 The Circuit Court granted the motion and awarded Kam
 
Center $l32,987.49 in attorney's fees and $4,167.38 in costs.
 
On appeal, the Chans argue that the Circuit Court5
 
erred in awarding attorney's fees and costs to Kam Center on the
 Chans' amended counterclaim for unfair competition brought
 pursuant to HRS § 480-2. As explained below, we conclude that:
 (1) the Chans' unfair competition counterclaim was not an action
 in the nature of assumpsit or an action on a contract that
 provides for an attorney's fee within the meaning of HRS § 607­
2(...continued)
affidavit stating the amount of time the attorney spent on the
action and the amount of time the attorney is likely to spend to
obtain a final written judgment, or, if the fee is not based on an
hourly rate, the amount of the agreed upon fee. The court shall
 then tax attorneys' fees, which the court determines to be
reasonable, to be paid by the losing party; provided that this
amount shall not exceed twenty-five per cent of the judgment.
 
. . . .
 
The above fees provided for by this section shall be
assessed on the amount of the judgment exclusive of costs and all
attorneys' fees obtained by the plaintiff, and upon the amount
sued for if the defendant obtains judgment.
 
3 HRS § 607-9 provides:
 
No other costs of court shall be charged in any court in
addition to those prescribed in this chapter in any suit, action,
or other proceeding, except as otherwise provided by law.
 
All actual disbursements, including but not limited to,
intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and counsel, expenses for
deposition transcript originals and copies, and other incidental
expenses, including copying costs, intrastate long distance
telephone charges, and postage, sworn to by an attorney or a
party, and deemed reasonable by the court, may be allowed in
taxation of costs. In determining whether and what costs should
be taxed, the court may consider the equities of the situation.
 
4 HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) provides in relevant part: 
(d) Costs; attorneys' fees.
 
(1) COSTS OTHER THAN ATTORNEYS' FEES. Except when express
provision therefor is made either in a statute or in these rules,
costs shall be allowed as of course to the prevailing party unless
the court otherwise directs . . . . 
5 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
14, and therefore, the Circuit Court erred in awarding attorney's
 
fees to Kam Center pursuant to HRS § 607-14; and (2) the Circuit
 Court properly awarded costs to Kam Center pursuant to HRCP Rule
 54(d) and HRS § 607-9.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
LWC entered into a lease agreement with Kam Center
 
(Lease), with LWC as the "Tenant" and Kam Center as the
 "Landlord," for the lease of business premises. Lawrence and
 Linda Chan guaranteed LWC's obligations under the Lease. The
 Lease contained a provision regarding attorney's fees that read:
 
Tenant's Liability. In the event Landlord is, without
fault on its part, made a party to any litigation (other
than condemnation proceedings) commenced by or against
Tenant arising out of Tenant's occupancy of the demised
premises or any act of Tenant or any person taking by,
through or under it concerning the demised premises or this
Lease, or in the event suit is brought for recovery of
possession of the demised premises, for the recovery of rent
or any other amount due under the provisions of this Lease,
or for enforcement of any covenant or condition of this
Lease, or because of the breach of any covenant herein
contained, on the part of Tenant, Tenant shall indemnify,
save harmless and defend Landlord, and shall pay to Landlord
all expenses incurred in connection therewith, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.
 
The Chans operated a restaurant on the premises they leased from
 
Kam Center.
 
Soon after the Chans entered into the Lease, their
 
restaurant began losing money. The Chans hired Kobayashi, their
 long-time real estate broker, as their agent to negotiate a lower
 rent with Kam Center. Kobayashi negotiated an amendment to the
 Lease, which reduced the monthly rent for a period of time in
 exchange for payment of percentage rent and 50 percent of the net
 proceeds of sale, if the Lease was sold. The Chans also entered
 into an exclusive listing agreement with Kobayashi, seeking to
 sell the Lease for $200,000 and authorizing Kobayashi to find a
 new tenant for the premises. The listing agreement provided that
 Kobayashi could only represent the Chans, unless the existence of
 dual agency was disclosed. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Chans continued to experience difficulties even
 
after Kobayashi negotiated the reduced rent. The Chans
 
eventually stopped paying rent and closed the restaurant while
 Kobayashi continued his efforts to sell the Lease. The Chans
 through Kobayashi sought to negotiate further rent concessions
 with Kam Center in furtherance of their plans to renovate the
 premises and reopen as a lower-priced restaurant. While these
 negotiations were ongoing, Kam Center advised the Chans that it
 was considering terminating the Lease due to the Chans'
 delinquency in rent payments.
 
Meanwhile, Coffee Partners Hawai' i (Starbucks) became 
interested in leasing the premises leased to the Chans. Starbucks's agent sent Kobayashi a letter of intent (LOI), which incorrectly identified Kobayashi as Kam Center's broker, offering to negotiate a new lease for the premises. Kobayashi gave the LOI to Kam Center's attorney and suggested terms for a counteroffer. The Chans sent Kam Center a letter regarding the date it planned to complete the renovations and its proposal to pay double rent when the new restaurant opened, which would bring their rent current after six months. Upon receiving a copy of the letter, Kobayashi suggested that the Chans stop the renovations because Starbucks was interested in purchasing their Lease. The Chans stopped their renovations. 
Kam Center gave Kobayashi a counteroffer to the LOI to
 
deliver to Starbucks. The counteroffer correctly identified
 Kobayashi as acting as the agent for the Chans and also stated
 that the Chans would pay the real estate commissions.
6 Kobayashi
 
delivered the counteroffer to Starbucks. Kobayashi later
 informed the Chans that Starbucks was obtaining a new lease
 directly from Kam Center and that the Chans were still liable for
 the back rent owed on the Lease. The Chans made a $10,000
 partial payment of rent to assist Kobayashi in attempting to
 
6
 The Chans deny ever representing that they would pay the brokerage
commission for Starbucks's new lease.
 
5
   
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negotiate a rent concession, but Kam Center demanded full
 
payment. The Chans did not make further rent payments, and Kam
 Center terminated the Lease.
 
II.
 
Kam Center filed a complaint against the Chans for
 
summary possession, unpaid rent, and other charges due under the
 Lease.
7 The Chans filed a first amended answer, a counterclaim
 
against Kam Center, and a third-party complaint against
 Kobayashi. In their counterclaim against Kam Center, the Chans
 alleged (1) tortious interference, (2) negligence, and (3)
 punitive damages. In their third-party complaint against
 
Kobayashi, the Chans alleged (1) breach of fiduciary duties and
 
(2) unfair and deceptive acts or practices.
 
The Chans filed a motion for leave to file a second-
amended answer, an amended counterclaim, and an amended third-
party complaint. Relevant to the instant appeal, the Chans
 sought to add a claim for unfair competition pursuant to HRS 
§ 480-2 against both Kam Center and Kobayashi. The Circuit Court
 denied the Chans' motion.  The Circuit Court entered summary
 
judgment in favor of Kam Center on its complaint and the Chans'
 
counterclaim. Kam Center filed a motion seeking the attorney's
 fees and costs it incurred in pursing the complaint and defending
 against the counterclaim. The Circuit Court granted Kam Center's
 motion and awarded it $68,571.10 in attorneys' fees and $5,991.65
 in costs, and it incorporated this award into the judgment it
 entered. 
The Chans appealed from this judgment. The Hawai' i 
Supreme Court issued its Memorandum Opinion, in which it: (1) reversed the Circuit Court's order denying the Chans' motion for leave to file an amended counterclaim to add a claim for unfair competition against Kam Center; but (2) affirmed the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Kam Center on (a) 
7
 Kam Center filed its complaint in the District Court of the First
Circuit, but the case was later transferred to Circuit Court. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kam Center's complaint for summary possession and damages and (b)
 
the Chans' existing counterclaims; and (3) left undisturbed the
 award of attorney's fees and costs to Kam Center. Kam Center I,
 
2007 WL 2827589, at *1, *27-28. 
III. 
On remand, the Chans filed an amended counterclaim
 
against Kam Center for unfair competition pursuant to HRS 
§ 480-2(e) (hereinafter, the "amended counterclaim" or the
 "unfair competition counterclaim"). The Chans alleged that at
 all relevant times, the Chans operated a restaurant at the leased
 premises; that they hired Kobayashi, a licensed real estate
 broker, to assist them in the sale and/or renegotiation of the
 Lease; that the Chans intended to continue operating a restaurant
 if a new investor could not be found; and that Kobayashi was in a
 fiduciary relationship with the Chans and owed them a duty of
 care to use his best efforts on the Chans' behalf and to refrain
 from representing parties with adverse interests. The Chans
 further alleged that:
 
9. [Kam Center] knew or had reason to know of the
fiduciary relationship between [the Chans] and [Kobayashi].
 
10. [Kam Center] and [the Chans] were in competition
with each other for a new investor for the subject premises.
 
11. Alternately and/or in addition, [Kam Center] and
[the Chans] were also in competition with respect to the
subject premises as [the Chans] intended to continue
operating a restaurant if [the Chans] could not sell the
Lease while [Kam Center] wanted to terminate the Lease
and/or reacquire the premises in order to be able to lease
the premises to a new investor.
 
12. [Kam Center] encouraged, induced and/or caused
[Kobayashi] to breach [his] fiduciary duties and duties of
absolute loyalty to [the Chans] in order to compete with
[the Chans] for a new investor for the subject premises.
 
13. In addition and/or conjunction with the above,
[Kam Center] wrongfully used [Kobayashi] to obtain a new
investor for the subject premises.
 
14. After wrongfully obtaining the new investor,
[Kam Center] terminated the Lease and evicted [the Chans]
from the subject premises, causing [the Chans] to suffer
substantial loss to their business and/or property.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15. [Kam Center] would not have terminated the Lease
and evicted [the Chans] had [Kobayashi] not breached [his]
fiduciary duties to [the Chans] and/or had [Kam Center] not
been able to take advantage of [Kobayashi's] breach of those
duties.
 
16. The acts or omissions of [Kam Center] complained
of above constitute unfair methods of competition and
violated and/or are actionable under Chapter 480, HRS,
including but not limited to HRS § 480-2(e) and HRS § 480­
13.[ 8
]
The Chans' amended counterclaim requested "treble damages against
 
[Kam Center] in amounts to be proven at trial, as well as their
 costs and such other and further relief as the court deems
 appropriate."
 
In response to an interrogatory, the Chans explained
 
that they were seeking damages of $706,768.98, comprised of: (1)
 the lost profits that the Chans would have made if the Lease had
 not been terminated and they had reopened with the lower-priced
 restaurant; (2) the $337,776.17 awarded to Kam Center in the
 prior judgment in the case; and (3) fees and costs awarded to Kam
 Center on appeal.  Kam Center filed a series of three motions for
 
summary judgment with respect to the amended counterclaim. The
 
Circuit Court denied the first motion; granted the second motion
 with respect to the Chans' second and third items of alleged
 damages; and granted the third motion with respect to the first
 item of alleged damages for lost profits, ruling that the Chans
 could not prove lost profits with reasonable certainty. Having
 granted summary judgment with respect to all of the damages 
8 HRS § 480-13 (2008) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) . . . any person who is injured in the person's business
or property by reason of anything forbidden or declared unlawful
by this chapter:
 
(1)	 May sue for damages sustained by the person, and, if
the judgment is for the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall
be awarded a sum not less than $1,000 or threefold
damages by the plaintiff sustained, whichever sum is
the greater, and reasonable attorney's fees together
with the costs of suit[.] 
8
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged by the Chans, the Circuit Court dismissed the Chans'
 
unfair competition counterclaim against Kam Center.9
 
Kam Center filed a motion for the award of attorney's
 
fees and costs it incurred in defending against the Chan's
 amended counterclaim.  Kam Center sought its attorney's fees
 
pursuant to HRS § 607-14 and its costs pursuant to HRCP Rule
 
54(d) and HRS § 607-9. The Chans opposed the motion. The
 Circuit Court awarded Kam Center $132,987.49 in attorneys' fees
 and $4,167.38 in costs, for a total award of $137,154.87.  The
 
Circuit Court entered its Final Judgment on February 13, 2009
 (Final Judgment), and this appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, the Chans contend that the Circuit Court 
erred in awarding attorney's fees and costs incurred by Kam Center in defending against the Chans' unfair competition counterclaim. We review an award of attorney's fees and costs under the abuse of discretion standard. Kahala Royal Corp. v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawai' i 251, 266, 151 P.3d 
732, 747 (2007). "The trial court abuses its discretion if it bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence." TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu 
Corp., 92 Hawai' i 243, 253, 990 P.2d 713, 723 (1999) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). We conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in awarding attorney's fees to Kam Center, but that it properly awarded costs to Kam Center. 
9
 In the Chans' first appeal, the Hawai' i Supreme Court also ruled that
the Circuit Court had erred in denying the Chans' motion to amend their third-
party complaint to assert an unfair competition claim against Kobayashi and ingranting summary judgment in favor of Kobayashi on the Chans' claims in theirthird-party complaint for breach of fiduciary duty and punitive damages. Kam 
Center I, 2007 WL 2827589, at *1-2, *28. On remand, the Chans filed anamended third-party complaint asserting an additional claim against Kobayashifor unfair competition and proceeded to trial against Kobayashi on the amendedthird-party complaint. The jury returned a special verdict finding thatKobayashi had breached the fiduciary duty owed to the Chans, but that thisbreach was not a legal cause of damages to the Chans. The Chans subsequentlyentered into a settlement with Kobayashi, which resulted in the dismissal ofthe Chans' appeal against Kobayashi and Kobayashi's cross-appeal against theChans. Therefore, the litigation between the Chans and Kobayashi is not inissue. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kam Center has cross-appealed. In its cross-appeal,
 
Kam Center argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying Kam
 
Center's first motion for summary judgment and in failing to
 grant Kam Center's second motion for summary judgment in its
 entirety, with respect to the Chans' unfair competition
 counterclaim. We conclude that Kam Center's cross-appeal is
 moot. The Chans did not appeal the Circuit Court's grant of
 summary judgment in favor of Kam Center on the Chans' unfair
 competition counterclaim, and therefore, the Circuit Court's
 Final Judgment in favor of Kam Center on the unfair competition
 counterclaim stands. The question of whether the Circuit Court
 should have fully granted Kam Center's earlier motions for
 summary judgment is immaterial and will not be addressed. 
I.
 
Generally, under the "American Rule," each party to a 
lawsuit is responsible for paying his or her own litigation expenses. Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of State of Hawai' i, 
120 Hawai' i 181, 218, 202 P.3d 1226, 1263 (2009). One of the 
exceptions to this general rule is when a statute authorizes attorney's fees to be chargeable against the opposing party. Id. 
In this case, Kam Center sought the award of attorney's fees it incurred in defending against the Chans' unfair competition counterclaim pursuant to HRS § 607-14. See Kaanapali Hillside 
Homeowners' Ass'n ex rel. Bd. of Dirs. v. Doran, 114 Hawai' i 361, 
370-71, 162 P.3d 1277, 1286-87 (2007) (concluding that a prevailing party is only entitled to the award of attorney's fees based on the grounds asserted). 
HRS § 607-14 provides in relevant part that "[i]n all
 
the courts, in all actions in the nature of assumpsit and in all
 actions on a . . . contract in writing that provides for an
 attorney's fee, there shall be taxed as attorneys' fees, to be
 paid by the losing party and to be included in the sum for which
 execution may issue, a fee that the court determines to be
 reasonable[.]" (Emphasis added.) As it argued in the Circuit
 Court, Kam Center argues on appeal that it was entitled to
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attorney's fees under both the "assumpsit prong" and the
 
"contract prong" of HRS § 607-14. We disagree.
 
A.
 
Under the assumpsit prong of HRS § 607-14, the 
prevailing party is entitled to the award of attorney's fees "in all actions in the nature of assumpsit." In construing HRS § 607-14, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that "'assumpsit' 
is 'a common law form of action which allows for the recovery of damages for non-performance of a contract, either express or implied, written or verbal, as well as quasi contractual obligations.'" TSA Int'l, 92 Hawai' i at 264, 990 P.2d at 734 
(citation omitted; emphasis in original). In ascertaining the nature of the proceeding, we look to "the essential character of the underlying action in the trial court. The character of the action should be determined from the facts and issues raised . . . , the nature of the entire grievance, and the relief sought." Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai' i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 
(2001) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
"The mere fact that [the underlying claims] relate to a 
contract between the parties does not render a dispute between the parties an assumpsit action." TSA Int'l, 92 Hawai' i at 264, 
990 P.2d at 734. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that an 
action is not in the nature of assumpsit where the underlying claims "do not involve monetary damages based upon the non­performance of a contractual or quasi-contractual obligation (i.e., breach of contract)." Id.; see also Kahala Royal Corp., 
113 Hawai' i at 282, 151 P.3d at 763. 
Here, prior to the proceedings on remand, Kam Center's
 
complaint for summary possession and damages based upon the
 Chans' breach of the Lease had been resolved and Kam Center had
 been awarded the attorney's fees it incurred before the remand. 
On remand, the sole claim raised by the Chans in their amended
 counterclaim was a claim for unfair competition pursuant to HRS 
§ 480-2. The Chans' unfair competition counterclaim against Kam
 Center is not a claim for monetary damages based upon a breach of
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contract or the non-performance of a contractual or quasi-
contractual obligation. Instead, it is a claim based on the
 violation of a statutory duty created by HRS § 480-2 to refrain
 from engaging in unfair methods of competition for which the
 Chans sought statutory remedies set forth in HRS § 480-13. 
Although the Chans' amended counterclaim relates to the Lease,
 which the Chans allege was terminated as a consequence of Kam
 Center's unfair competition, the Chans' amended counterclaim does
 not allege that Kam Center breached the Lease and does not seek
 damages based on the breach of any obligation arising out of the
 Lease.
 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Chans' 
unfair competition counterclaim under HRS § 480-2 was not an action in the nature of assumpsit within the meaning of HRS § 607-14. See Kahala Royal Corp., 113 Hawai' i at 282, 151 P.3d 
at 763 (concluding that a complaint alleging a claim of unfair methods of competition under HRS Chapter 480 was not an action in the nature of assumpsit under HRS § 607-14); Leibert v. Finance Factors, Ltd., 71 Haw. 285, 287, 294, 788 P.2d 833, 835, 838 (1990) (stating that prevailing plaintiffs in an action for unfair and deceptive business practices brought under HRS § 480-2 were not entitled to statutory attorney's fees in assumpsit under HRS § 607-14); see also Walker v. Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., 121 Cal Rptr. 2d 79, 95 (Cal. Ct. App. 2002) (stating that "where a plaintiff sues solely under the unfair competition law, [attorney's] fees may not be recovered by a prevailing defendant"). Accordingly, Kam Center was not entitled to the award of attorney's fees under the assumpsit prong of HRS § 607­14.
 
B.
 
Based on essentially the same analysis, we also
 
conclude that Kam Center was not entitled to the award of
 attorney's fees under the contract prong of HRS § 607-14. Under
 the contract prong, a prevailing party is entitled to the award
 of attorney's fees "in all actions on a . . . contract in writing
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that provides for an attorney's fee[.]" HRS § 607-14. Here, the
 
Chans' unfair competition counterclaim was not an action on a
 contract, but rather was an action based on Kam Center's alleged
 violation of its statutory duty under HRS § 480-2 to refrain from
 engaging in unfair methods of competition.
 
C.
 
For the foregoing reasons, Kam Center was not entitled
 
to the award of attorney's fees under either the assumpsit prong
 or the contract prong of HRS § 607-14. We conclude that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in awarding to Kam Center
 under HRS § 607-14 the attorney's fees Kam Center incurred on
 remand in defending against the Chans' unfair competition
 counterclaim. Accordingly, we reverse the Circuit Court's award
 of $l32,987.49 in attorney's fees to Kam Center.
10
 
II. 
The Chans also challenge the Circuit Court's award of
 
$4,167.38 in costs to Kam Center. HRCP Rule 54(d)(1) provides
 that "[e]xcept when express provision therefor is made either in
 a statute or in [the HRCP], costs shall be allowed as of course
 to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs[.]" 
(Emphasis added). The Chans do not dispute that Kam Center was
 the prevailing party with respect to the amended counterclaim or
 the reasonableness of the cost items on which Kam Center's award
 of costs was based. Instead, the Chans contend that the award of
 costs to Kam Center should be precluded as a violation of public
 policy embodied in HRS Chapter 480. 
HRS § 480-13(a)(1) provides that a prevailing plaintiff
 
who has brought a claim under HRS Chapter 480 is entitled to
 recover "reasonable attorney's fees together with the costs of 
10
 In light of our decision, we need not address the Chans' contention
that the award of attorney's fees to Kam Center violated public policy as
embodied in HRS Chapter 480.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
suit[.]" The Chans infer that because HRS Chapter 480 only
 
authorizes a prevailing plaintiff raising HRS Chapter 480 claims
 to recover costs, HRS Chapter 480 establishes a public policy
 that precludes the award of costs to Kam Center. We disagree.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has concluded that "[HRCP] 
Rule 54(d) creates a strong presumption that the prevailing party will recover costs[.]" Wong v. Takeuchi, 88 Hawai' i 46, 52, 961 
P.2d 611, 617 (1998) (block quote format, brackets in original, and citation omitted); Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 
19, 143 P.3d 1205, 1221 (2006). This presumption "must be overcome by some showing that an award would be inequitable under the circumstances. The losing party bears the burden of making this showing." Wong, 88 Hawai' i at 52, 961 P.2d at 617 (block 
quote format omitted). 
The Chans do not cite any case precluding the award of
 
11
costs to a prevailing defendant  in an action brought under HRS
Chapter 480 or an analogous statutory scheme. 
HRS Chapter 480 
does not expressly preclude the award of costs to a prevailing defendant, and we are not persuaded by the Chans' argument that the public policy they infer from HRS Chapter 480 is strong enough to override the provisions of HRCP Rule 54(d)(1). In addition, the Chans do not present any basis for this court to conclude that the Circuit Court's award of costs was "inequitable under the circumstances." 
See Wong
, 88 Hawai' i at 52, 961 P.2d 
at 617 (block quote format omitted); HRS § 607-9. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in awarding costs of $4,167.38 to Kam Center pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d)(1), and we affirm the award of costs. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment to the extent that it enters judgment in 
11
 By "prevailing defendant" we mean a prevailing party against whom a
claim under HRS Chapter 480 was brought.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18favor of Kam Center for attorney's fees in the amount of
$132,987.49.  We affirm the Final Judgment in all other respects.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 31, 2013.
Steven K.S. Chung
Chanelle M. Chung
for Defendants/Third-Party
   Plaintiffs-Appellants/
   Cross-AppelleesChief Judge
James H. Ashford
Amanda M. Jones
(Cades Schutte)
for Plaintiff-Appellee/
   Cross-AppellantAssociate Judge
Associate Judge