NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29060
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
BARRY SILVER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05-1-0282(3))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley, and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Barry Silver (Silver) appeals from
 
the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
 
(circuit court).1/ Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai <i (State) 
charged Silver by indictment with five counts of third degree
 sexual assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 707-732(1)(b) (Supp. 2009).
2/  The complaining witness (Minor)
 
1/ The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2/ HRS § 707-732(1)(b) provides:
 
§ 707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the third degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 The person knowingly subjects to sexual contact
another person who is less than fourteen years old or
causes such a person to have sexual contact with the
person[.]
 
HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2009) defines the term "sexual contact"
as follows:
 
"Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts
of "sexual penetration", of the sexual or other intimate
parts of a person not married to the actor, or of the sexual
or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether
directly or through the clothing or other material intended
to cover the sexual or other intimate parts.
 
After the time period of the alleged offenses, the
definition of "sexual penetration" was amended in ways not
material to this appeal. See 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 230, § 26
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was eleven years old at the time of the alleged offenses and
 
Silver was forty-six years old. The indictment alleged that
 "during or about the period of July 16, 2004, through July 17,
 2004, inclusive," Silver did knowingly subject Minor, who was
 less than fourteen years old, "to sexual contact or cause him to
 have sexual contact" with Silver by: touching Minor's buttocks
 (Count 1); touching Minor's penis (Count 2); touching Minor's
 buttocks (Count 3); touching Minor's penis (Count 4); and
 touching Minor's buttocks (Count 5).
 
The charges against Silver arose out of a vacation trip 
he took from Florida to Hawai
'i, where he stayed at a condominium 
along with Minor and Minor's father, who were on vacation from Washington. Silver and Minor's father had not previously met, but they were former students of the owner of the condominium. 
Prior to trial, the circuit court issued an order 
granting Silver's motion for a bill of particulars. The circuit
 court incorporated the State's response to Silver's motion as an
 exhibit to its order. The State's response clarified that Count
 1 alleged "conduct that occurred at the pool"; Counts 2 and 3
 alleged "conduct that occurred during the first 'massage'
 perpetrated by [Silver] on [Minor]"; and Counts 4 and 5 alleged
 "conduct that occurred during the second 'massage' perpetrated by
 [Silver] on [Minor]." 
After the close of the evidence, the circuit court
 
granted Silver's motion for judgment of acquittal as to Count 2. 
The jury subsequently returned verdicts of guilty as to the
 remaining counts--Counts 1, 3, 4, and 5. The circuit court
 sentenced Silver to concurrent terms of five years of
 imprisonment on each of these counts. 
On appeal, Silver asserts that the circuit court erred
 
by: 1) refusing to dismiss the indictment because the prosecutor
 failed to tender "clearly exculpatory" evidence of Minor's
 
2/(...continued)
at 1013-14.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inconsistent statements to the grand jury; 2) refusing to admit,
 
on the ground of lack of foundation, extrinsic evidence proffered
 by the defense of Minor's prior inconsistent statement to an
 investigator; 3) allowing expert testimony regarding the behavior
 of child sex abuse victims, because such testimony was tantamount
 to an opinion that Minor was telling the truth; 4) finding that
 the prosecutor's statements during closing argument did not
 constitute prosecutorial misconduct; 5) failing to conduct a
 timely hearing on Silver's allegations that a juror was sleeping
 during trial and denying Silver's motion for a new trial based on
 that allegation; and 6) determining that there was sufficient
 evidence to support the guilty verdicts.  Silver further contends
 
that if it is determined that there was sufficient evidence to
 
support his convictions, then HRS § 707-700, the statute which
 defines "sexual contact," is void for vagueness. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm Silver's
 
convictions. 
BACKGROUND
 
I. Trial Evidence
 The following is based on the evidence presented at
 
trial. Minor's father and Minor traveled from Seattle to Maui
 for a vacation. During their trip, Minor's father and Minor
 stayed with Alan and Vickie Josefsberg. Alan Josefsberg was the
 former teacher of Minor's father. When Minor's father and Minor
 arrived at Alan Josefsberg's condominium, they met Silver. 
Silver, also a former student of Alan Josefsberg, happened to be
 visiting Maui and staying with the Josefsbergs during the same
 time as Minor's father and Minor. Neither Minor's father nor
 Minor knew Silver prior to this meeting. However, Minor's
 father, Minor, and Silver spent significant time together on the
 trip.
 
At one point, Minor's father, Minor, and Silver were
 
swimming together at the condominium pool. Minor referred to an
 incident at the pool when asked at trial whether there were times
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
he felt Silver had touched him inappropriately. Minor testified
 
as follows:
 
[Minor]: And then we were like messing around in the
pool, and then [Minor's father and Silver] were kind of like
throwing me back and forth. And my dad would pick me up
like from like right here (indicating) and kind of like toss
me. And then [Silver] would kind of like hold under my butt
to like hoist me up and throw me, but I don't remember like
him grabbing me or anything.
 
[Prosecutor]: And what part of your body did he
touch?
 
[Minor]: Kind of like my crotch to throw me or under
my butt to throw me.
 
Minor's father testified that he "saw a lot of physical
 
contact in the pool" between Silver and Minor, but did not see
 
any "[a]ctual sexual contact." However, Minor's father "wouldn't
 have known" if Silver "ever had his hands underneath Minor's
 behind" because Minor's father "had trouble seeing a lot of times
 because of just the water . . . splashing up."
 
A few days into the trip, the sleeping arrangements in
 
the condominium changed. Originally, Minor's father and Minor
 were sharing a pull-out bed that unfolded from a couch, while
 Silver was sleeping on a cot in a separate room. However, Silver
 moved from sleeping on the cot to sleeping on an extension of the
 couch adjacent to the pull-out bed. Silver claimed that he had a
 "bad back" and that "his back was getting even worse because of
 the lousy cot he was sleeping on." Minor's father slept on the
 far end of the pull-out bed, and Minor slept on the side of the
 bed adjacent to the couch extension where Silver was now
 sleeping, in between Silver and Minor's father. 
According to Minor, one night when Silver was sleeping
 
next to him on the couch extension, Silver woke him up around
 midnight. Silver was rubbing Minor's back, whispered in Minor's 
ear to "scoot closer," and told Minor, "shh, don't wake anybody
 up." Minor described the subsequent events as follows:
 
[Prosecutor]: . . . Okay. And you said you felt him
touching you. Where did you feel his hand first?
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Minor]: Well, first it kind of was like on my arm
and stuff, and I think I was on my stomach first. And then
 
[Silver] kind of like moved to my back, and he was rubbing
my back and stuff, and I wasn't really thinking anything
that much. And then the -- I was like, all right. It's
 okay. I'm going to go to bed now. 
And I kind of scooted away and kind of like fell back
asleep for a couple minutes. And then I woke up, and he was
like rubbing me again. And this time I was kind of like on
 my side and so --
. . . .
 
[Minor]: Yeah, [Silver's] on the sofa the whole time,
and he was rubbing me. And then he rubbed like my arms and
stuff. I was -- kind of moved to my stomach again, and he
rubbed like down on my lower back. 
. . .
 
[Minor]: Kind of like then I shifted all the way onto
my stomach, and then [Silver] kind of like rubbed and kind
of went lower onto my back, and then kind of like brushed
over my butt really slow. And then he kind of like stopped
and like rubbed somewhere else again like up here
(indicating).
 
And then I was like okay, well, I'm just going to go
to bed now. And then I kind of like went back and then like
 scooted closer to my dad a little bit and kind of fell back
asleep for a couple minutes. And then I woke up again with
him rubbing me, but this time I was on my back, and he's
kind of like rubbing my arm and stuff.
 
And then he I had kind of like shifted or something
and then somehow he brushed over my crotch and my penis and
came up, and then he was like rubbing -- I was like, all
right, look, I want to go to bed now, and scooted all the
way close to my dad, and now I kind of just like fell back
asleep. And then I don't remember anything happening after
that.
 
Minor stated that the first time Silver was rubbing
 
him, Silver did not touch Minor's buttocks or penis. Minor
 
testified that after he dozed off and was reawakened, Silver was
 "kind of rubbing my back and then goes lower and rubs over my
 butt but doesn't like massage it, just brushes over it."
3/ Minor
 
explained that while Silver was massaging or "rubbing" Minor's
 back and arms, "it seemed like [Silver] just kind of brushed over
 
3/ Minor stated that he used the term "massage" to mean "like using,
like, your fingers, like, to push harder and soft." Minor testified that he
 
had received back massages from his parents before, but, unlike Silver, his
parents did not "brush over any of [his] private areas."
 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the other areas." In response to the prosecutor's question over
 
whether Silver's brushing over the other areas seemed on purpose
 or accidental, Minor responded: 
Well, for the first time it seemed like he might have
done it on accident, but towards the second and third time
that he did it, it seemed like he did it more on purpose
because it's kind of just like weird because it -- he did it
again. Because each time he did it, I kind of jerked away a
little because I didn't know if he was accidentally doing it
because it was really dark.
 
When asked to elaborate on his testimony that Silver
 
had touched his "penis area," Minor stated:
 
[Minor]: . . . I remember during the back rub he
rubbed over my penis. He didn't rub it. He just kind of
brushed it. 
[Prosecutor]: Okay. So not rubbing with his finger?
 
[Minor]: Yeah, just kind of slowly brushed over it.
 [Prosecutor]: Did that seem accidental? Inadvertent? 
On purpose? Could you describe it?
 
[Minor]: Well, like the speed of him brushing over
it, it seemed like he did it on purpose.
 
[Prosecutor]: How fast was it?
 [Minor]: It was just kind of like -- just kind of
like this (indicating). It wasn't quick like that. It was
 
just like slow.
 
Minor testified that he thought that the slow brushing happened
 
"once on my penis and twice on the butt . . . ."
 
Minor's father was sleeping next to Minor when the
 
alleged massages occurred, but Minor did not tell his father
 until the following morning. Upon hearing Minor's accusation,
 Minor's father talked to Vickie and Alan Josefsberg. Minor's
 father also called the police and filed a complaint. Minor's
 father and Minor moved to a hotel, and Minor's father changed
 their flight arrangements and left Maui early. 
II. Procedural History
 
Prior to trial, Silver moved to dismiss the indictment
 
on the ground that the prosecutor failed to present "clearly
 exculpatory evidence" to the grand jury. The circuit court
 denied the motion.
 
6
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When the State rested after its case in chief at trial, 
Silver moved for judgment of acquittal on all five counts, which
 
the court denied. Silver then rested, electing not to call any
 witnesses, and renewed his motion for judgment of acquittal. The
 circuit court, after reviewing the trial transcripts, granted
 Silver's motion as to Count 2.
 
On January 29, 2007, Silver filed a Motion for New
 
Trial. On March 27, 2008, the circuit court entered findings of
 fact, conclusions of law, and an order denying Silver's Motion
 for New Trial. 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion to Dismiss Indictment
 
"A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss an
 
indictment is reviewed for an abuse of discretion." State v.
 
Mendonca, 68 Haw. 280, 283, 711 P.2d 731, 734 (1985). "Dismissal
 of an indictment is required only in flagrant cases in which 
the grand jury has been overreached or deceived in some
 significant way, as where perjured testimony has knowingly been
 presented . . . ." Id. (internal quotation marks and citations
 
omitted).
 
B. 
Evidentiary Rulings
 
With regard to evidentiary rulings,
 
different standards of review must be applied to trial court
decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence, depending
on the requirements of the particular rule of evidence at
issue. When application of a particular evidentiary rule
can yield only one correct result, the proper standard for
appellate review is the right/wrong standard. However, the
traditional abuse of discretion standard should be applied
in the case of those rules of evidence that require a
"judgment call" on the part of the trial court.
 
Kealoha v. County of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319-20, 844 P.2d 670,
 
676 (1993).
 
A trial court's decision on whether to admit opinion 
testimony is subject to review for abuse of discretion. State v. 
Toyomura, 80 Hawai 'i 8, 23-24, 904 P.2d 893, 908-09 (1995). 
"Generally, to constitute an abuse of discretion, it must appear that the trial court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
 
substantial detriment of a party litigant. Id. at 24, 904 P.2d
 
at 909 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets
 omitted).
 
C. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction.
 
Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the
 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of
the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's
right to a fair trial. In order to determine whether the
 alleged prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of
reversible error, we consider the nature of the alleged
misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative
instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence
against defendant. 
State v. Mars, 116 Hawai 'i 125, 133, 170 P.3d 861, 869 (App. 
2007) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)
 
D. New Trial
 
"As a general matter, the granting or denial of a
 
motion for new trial is within the sound discretion of the trial
 
court and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse of
 discretion. The same principle is applied in the context of a
 motion for new trial premised on juror misconduct. State v.
 
Yamada, 108 Hawai
'i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005). 
E. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we view
the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution.
The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established
beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial
evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. . .
. . "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. . . . It is the
 province of the jury, not the appellate courts, to determine
the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence.
 
State v. Smith, 106 Hawai 'i 365, 372, 105 P.3d 242, 249 (App. 
2004) (citations, internal quotation marks, and ellipsis points
 
omitted; block quote format changed).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
F. Constitutionality of Statute
 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by
 
exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of the 
case. . . . 
Thus, we review questions of constitutional law 
under the 'right/wrong' standard." State v. Fields, 115 Hawai 'i 
503, 511, 168 P.3d 955, 963 (2007) (citation omitted and ellipsis in original). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has "long held that: (1) 
legislative enactments are presumptively constitutional; (2) a party challenging a statutory scheme has the burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) the constitutional defect must be clear, manifest, and unmistakable." Convention Ctr. Auth. v. Anzai, 78 Hawai
'i 157, 162, 890 P.2d 
1197, 1202 (1995) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Silver argues that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying his motion to dismiss the indictment
 (Motion to Dismiss). Silver's Motion to Dismiss alleged that the
 prosecutor "failed and/or omitted to present clearly exculpatory
 evidence to the Grand Jury." The evidence specifically
 identified and attached as exhibits to the Motion to Dismiss was
 the affidavits of Alan Josefsberg and his wife, Vickie
 Josefsberg. On appeal, Silver argues that in addition to the
 Josefsbergs' affidavits, the prosecutor should have presented
 statements Minor made to his father, Broward County School Board
 officials in Florida, and the King County police in Washington to
 the grand jury.
4/
 
Silver argues that the inconsistencies in Minor's
 
statements constituted clearly exculpatory evidence that would
 have negated guilt on four counts of the five-count indictment 
and that if the statements had been provided to the grand jury,
 
4/ Silver was apparently a school teacher in Broward County, Florida at
the time of the charged offenses, and Minor was a resident of Washington. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"it would probably have issued a no bill." We disagree with
 
Silver's contention that the circuit court abused its discretion
 in denying his Motion to Dismiss.
 
A.
 
In State v. Bell, 60 Haw. 241, 243-44, 589 P.2d 517, 
519 (1978), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court quoted the following 
passage from United States v. Clandra, 414 U.S. 338, 343-44 (1974), regarding the nature of grand jury proceedings: 
A grand jury proceeding is not an adversary hearing in
which the guilt or innocence of the accused is adjudicated.
Rather, it is an Ex parte investigation to determine whether
a crime has been committed and whether criminal proceedings
should be instituted against any person.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated that "[t]o require the 
prosecutor to present any and all information which may have a 
tendency to exculpate the accused would, in our view, confer upon grand jury proceedings the adversary nature which is more properly reserved for the actual trial phase of prosecution." Bell, 60 Haw. at 244, 589 P.2d at 519. 
The supreme court held that "the prosecution is
 
required only to present to the grand jury evidence which is
 clearly exculpatory in nature." Id. at 242, 589 P.2d at 518. 
The supreme court gave the following examples of clearly
 exculpatory evidence:
 
Clearly exculpatory evidence may be manifested, for example,
by a witness whose testimony is not directly contradicted by
any other witness and who maintains that the accused was
nowhere near the scene of the crime when it occurred. Also,
where it has become apparent to the prosecution, for
example, that a sole eyewitness testifying as to the
perpetration of the crime has perjured himself before the
grand jury, that perjury must be revealed to the grand jury.
 
Id. at 245, 589 P.2d at 520.
 
A court should dismiss an indictment only when the
 
prosecution failed to present evidence that "would have negated
 
guilt or undermined the authority of the grand jury to act at 
all . . . ." Id. at 247, 589 P.2d at 521 (quoting United States
 v. Mandel, 415 F. Supp. 1033, 1041-42 (D. Md. 1976)). "The
 prosecution is not required to produce before the grand jury all
 evidence which may tend to undermine the credibility of the
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witnesses presented." Id. at 253-54, 589 P.2d at 525. In Bell,
 
the supreme court held that the victim's identification of
 
someone other than the defendant at a lineup only reflected upon
 the victim's credibility in general and did not constitute
 clearly exculpatory evidence. Id. at 253, 589 P.2d at 525. The
 
supreme court cited with approval cases from other jurisdictions
 holding that the prosecution was not required to present evidence
 of a witness's inconsistent statements to the grand jury, because
 such evidence bore on the witness's credibility and could be
 explored by both sides at trial. Id. at 254-55, 589 P.2d at 525. 
B.
 
At the outset, we note that Silver only preserved his
 
argument with respect to the State's failure to present the
 Josefsbergs' affidavits to the grand jury. Those were the only
 statements that Silver specifically identified and attached as
 exhibits to his Motion to Dismiss and that he argued to the
 circuit court at the hearing on his Motion to Dismiss. In later
 denying Silver's motion for a new trial, the circuit court ruled
 that because Silver did not challenge the State's failure to
 present Minor's statement to Broward County officials in his
 Motion to Dismiss, Silver waived any claim related to that
 statement under Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 12.
5/
 
5/ HRPP Rule 12 (1997) provided, in relevant part:
 
(b) Pretrial motions. Any defense, objection, or request
which is capable of determination without the trial of the general
issue may be raised before trial by motion. Motions may be
written or oral at the discretion of the judge. The following
must be raised prior to trial:
 
(1) defenses and objections based on defects in the
institution of the prosecution;
 
(2) defenses and objections based on defects in the charge
(other than that it fails to show jurisdiction in the court or to
charge an offense which objections shall be noticed by the court
at any time during the pendency of the proceedings); 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We agree and also conclude that Silver similarly waived any
 
claims related to Minor's statements to his father and the King
 County police by not raising them in his Motion to Dismiss. See
 
HRPP Rule 12; see also State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150, 785
 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990) ("Generally, the failure to properly raise
 an issue at the trial level precludes a party from raising that
 issue on appeal.").
6/
 
C.
 
Minor's father talked separately with Vickie and Alan
 
Josefsberg after Minor disclosed to Minor's father what Silver
 had done. The affidavit of Vickie Josefsberg stated in relevant
 part: 
[Minor's father] approached me and stated that [Minor], his
11-year old son, told him that Barry Silver had behaved
inappropriately with him. I spoke with [Minor's father] &
[Minor] and all [Minor] said to me was that, "[Silver] kept
rubbing my back."
 
The affidavit of Alan Josefsberg stated in relevant part:
 
[Minor] claimed that [Silver] rubbed his back and that his
hand crossed over his buttocks and thigh. [Minor] said that
he told [Silver] to stop, but [Silver] continued rubbing his 
5/(...continued)
(f) Effect of failure to raise defenses or objections. 
Failure by a party to raise defenses or objections or to make
requests which must be made prior to trial, within the time set by
the court pursuant to section (c), or within any extension thereof
made by the court, shall constitute waiver thereof, but the court
for cause shown may grant relief from the waiver.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
6/ We are not persuaded by Silver's argument that he did not waive the
right to challenge the State's failure to provide the grand jury with Minor's
statements to his father, Broward County officials, and the King County police
because those statements were included as exhibits to Silver's motion for bill
 of particulars, which was filed nine months before his Motion to Dismiss.
Silver did not specifically raise these statements as bases for his Motion to
Dismiss. Thus, the circuit court was not informed that Silver was relying on
these statements to support his Motion to Dismiss. The mere fact that these
 statements were made available to the circuit court in connection with a
 different motion was not adequate to preserve Silver's right to rely on the
statements to attack the circuit court's denial of his Motion to Dismiss on
 appeal.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
back. I asked [Minor] if [Silver] touched any other
inappropriate area and [Minor] said, "No!"
 
We conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in concluding that the Josefsbergs' affidavits were
 
"not clearly exculpatory, and the Prosecutor was not under an
 obligation to present them to the Grand Jury." The Josefsbergs
 did not purport to be eyewitnesses to the alleged incidents of
 sexual abuse. The affidavit of Vickie Josefsberg does not
 indicate what questions, if any, she posed to Minor. Neither
 affidavit details the nature and extent of the affiant's
 questioning of Minor or whether Minor displayed any reluctance to 
speak to or discuss matters with the affiant. While the
 Josefsbergs' affidavits reflect upon Minor's credibility in
 general, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 concluding that the affidavits did not constitute clearly
 exculpatory evidence that the prosecution was required to present
 to the grand jury. See Bell, 60 Haw. at 253-56, 589 P.2d at 525­
26.
 
Moreover, even if we were to consider the other
 
statements Silver claims that the State should have presented to
 the grand jury, we would conclude that these statements did not 
constitute clearly exculpatory evidence. Minor's prior
 statements to his father, Broward County officials, and the King
 County police, if presented to the grand jury, would not have
 clearly negated Silver's guilt or undermined the authority of the
 grand jury to act. In these prior statements, Minor did not
 detail all of the incidents of inappropriate touching he
 testified to in the grand jury. However, these prior statements
 all contained allegations by Minor that Silver had touched him
 inappropriately. Minor did not recant his allegations of sexual
 abuse. Although these prior statements could have served to
 impeach Minor's credibility, the grand jury need not be advised
 of all matters bearing upon a witness's credibility. See id. at 
253-54, 589 P.2d at 525; State v. Pulawa, 62 Haw. 209, 215, 614
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 373, 377 (1980). As such, the State was not required to
 
present these prior statements to the grand jury.7/
 
II.
 
Silver contends that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in refusing to admit a transcript of an interview
 between Minor and a Broward County School Board investigator in
 which Minor purportedly made a prior inconsistent statement. 
Silver argues that he laid the proper foundation for the
 admission of the transcript under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 
8/	 and HRE Rule 802.1 (1993)9/
Rule 613(b) (1993)  . We conclude
 
that Silver did not lay an adequate foundation for the admission 
7/ Based upon our analysis, we reject Silver's claim that his trial
counsel provided ineffective assistance for failing to argue all of Minor's
prior statements in support of the Motion to Dismiss.
 
8/ HRE Rule 613(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
(b) Extrinsic evidence of prior inconsistent statement of
witness. Extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent statement by
a witness is not admissible unless, on direct or cross-
examination, (1) the circumstances of the statement have been
brought to the attention of the witness, and (2) the witness has
been asked whether the witness made the statement.
 
9/ HRE Rule 802.1 provides, in relevant part:
 
The following statements previously made by witnesses who
testify at the trial or hearing are not excluded by the hearsay
rule:
 
(1)	 Inconsistent statement. The declarant is subject to
cross-examination concerning the subject matter of the
declarant's statement, the statement is inconsistent
with the declarant's testimony, the statement is
offered in compliance with rule 613(b), and the
statement was:
 
(A)	 Given under oath subject to the penalty of
perjury at a trial, hearing, or other
proceeding, or in a deposition; or
 
(B)	 Reduced to writing and signed or otherwise
adopted or approved by the declarant; or
 
(C)	 Recorded in substantially verbatim fashion by
stenographic, mechanical, electrical, or other
means contemporaneously with the making of the
statement[.]
 
14
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the transcript, and thus the cirucit court did not abuse its
 
discretion in refuing to admit the transcript.
 
A.
 
The issue here involves Silver's cross-examination of
 
Minor during trial. In summary, Silver attempted to impeach
 Minor by questioning him about a prior inconsistent statement
 Minor purportedly made under oath during a recorded phone call
 interview with a Broward County School Board investigator, James
 Wolischiager (Wolischiager), where Minor allegedly told
 Wolischiager that Silver did not touch his penis. After Minor
 testified he did not remember whether he made this statement,
 Silver attempted to introduce extrinsic evidence of this
 statement in the form of a transcript of the interview between
 Minor and Wolischiager. The circuit court refused to admit the
 transcript because an adequate foundation had not been laid. 
While Silver frames the issue as whether the foundational
 requirements of HRE Rule 613(b) and HRE Rule 802.1 were met, we
 view the issue more simply as whether a sufficient foundation was
 laid to establish the authenticity of the interview transcript.
 
On cross-examination by defense counsel, Minor
 
remembered that he got a call from the Broward County School
 Board special investigation unit. Minor could not recall the
 
name of investigator who interviewed him, nor could he remember
 
much of the content of the interview. Minor agreed with defense
 counsel that Minor told the investigator that Silver started to
 rub Minor's back, then moved to down to Minor's butt, and then
 Minor moved. But when defense counsel asked, "you never said
 anything about [Silver] touching your penis; correct?", Minor
 replied, "I'm not sure. I don't remember if I told him or not." 
Minor further testified, "I don't really remember the phone call. 
I just remember from who it was." 
After repeated questioning by defense counsel about
 
whether Minor remembered what was said during the phone call,
 Minor was apparently given a copy of the transcript to refresh
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his recollection, and his testimony continued, in relevant part,
 
as follows:
 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. So you remember speaking to
the officer, but you don't remember what was said during the
phone call?
 
[Minor]: Correct.
 
. . . .
 [Defense Counsel]: Okay. Tell the ladies and
 
gentlemen of the jury what the conversation was during those
24 minutes that aren't reflected in the sworn statement that
 you gave?
 
[Minor]: I don't remember what was said in the phone
call.
 
[Defense Counsel]: Okay. You don't remember, but
you're sure it wasn't them telling you what to say?
 
[Minor]: Yeah, I remember that I never had that
happen.
 
[Defense Counsel]: But then after the 24-minute
 
break, they started asking you questions under oath again.
Do you remember that?
 
[Minor]: No.
 
[Defense Counsel]: No, you don't. So you don't
recall them telling you that you're still sworn, and you
need to tell the truth?
 
[Minor]: No.
 
[Defense Counsel]: And you don't recall them asking
you did he touch your penis and you saying no?
 
[Minor]: No.
 [Defense Counsel]: Do you recall questions that were
asked during the conversation about where Barry Silver
touched you allegedly?
 
[Minor]: No.
 
[Defense Counsel]: So you don't remember anything
about this sworn statement that you gave, but you do
remember giving it?
 
[Minor]: Yeah.
 
At this point, defense counsel approached the bench and
 
informed the circuit court he planned to move a transcript of the
 
interview into evidence. The State objected, arguing in relevant
 part:
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Prosecutor]: I object; its hearsay. Number one, its
hearsay. Number two, improper foundation. Number three,
they can't prove it up through a piece of paper. They have
to prove it up through a witness. They have to bring Mr.
Wolischiager here and have Mr. Wolischiager testify.
 
The circuit court sustained the State's objection,
 
explaining: 
[Court]: [Minor] does not remember the phone call.
On more than one occasion, he said he didn't remember the
phone call. He remembered speaking to someone, but he
didn't remember the phone call or what was said during the
phone call.
 
. . . I don't think I have a foundation here on the
 
record. Unless there's an agreement of the parties, I don't
think I have a foundation that would allow me to receive
 this statement into evidence. So I'm not going to do it at
this point.
 
. . . .
 
[Court]: I think the current foundation is lacking.
I mean, you can try to supplement it. I don't have a
 
problem with that. But at the present time what I'm dealing
with is a witness who really does not -- has not expressed
any real recollection of any of this and this would be
coming in --
[Defense counsel]: As a prior sworn inconsistent
statement.
 
[Court]: Maybe. But for that matter, given the
current foundation, we could be talking about any statement.
He doesn't really recall it. There are other ways of
getting it in, but given the current foundation or lack of
it, I can't receive it.
 
So I'm going to deny the request. That does not mean
it won't ever come in, but given the current foundation, I
can't see -- I can't receive it. 
Defense counsel made no subsequent attempt to lay more foundation
 
or enter the transcript into evidence.
 
B.
 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that at
 
the time defense counsel attempted to introduce the transcript of
 the Broward County interview into evidence, there was
 insufficient foundation laid to authenticate the transcript. 
HRE Rule 901 (1993) provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 901 Requirement of authentication or
identification. (a) General provision. The requirement of
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authentication or identification as a condition precedent to
admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support
a finding that the matter in question is what its proponent
claims.
 
As stated by Professor Addison M. Bowman:
 
The authentication requirement of rule 901 applies to
all forms of real and demonstrative evidence and to
 testimony about telephone conversations and other verbal
exchanges not conducted face to face. The general thrust of
the rule is to require extrinsic evidence of the item in
question. . . .
 
. . . .
 
The rule 901 foundation is "evidence sufficient to
 
support a finding that the matter in question is what its
proponent claims." The "evidence sufficient" language . . .
identifies authentication as a matter of conditional
 relevancy under rule 104(b), and effects the requirement of
extrinsic evidence of authenticity.
 
Addison M. Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual, § 901-1 and 
§ 901-1[2] (2008-09 ed.).
 
The transcript Silver sought to introduce purports to
 
be a transcription of a recorded interview. It is not a self-
authenticating document under HRE Rule 902 (1993 & Supp. 2009). 
Regardless of Silver's efforts to satisfy the requirements of HRE
 Rule 613(b) or HRE Rule 802.1(1), Silver failed to lay a
 sufficient foundation to authenticate the transcript in question. 
He failed to present "sufficient to support a finding that the
 matter in question is what its proponent claims." HRE Rule
 901(a). "Transcripts, like other evidence, must be properly
 authenticated before they can be admitted." United States v.
 
Devous, 764 F.2d 1349, 1354-55 (10th Cir. 1985); see also State
 v. Joseph, 77 Hawai
<i 235, 239, 883 P.2d 657, 661 (App. 1994) 
("Simple logic dictates that the party wishing to introduce an item in evidence must present proper proof of its authenticity and identification. In other words, the proponent of the evidence must prove that the item is what the proponent claims it is." (Citations omitted.)). 
Here, Minor did not recall the substance of the phone
 
conversation and his testimony did not establish that the
 purported transcript of the phone conversation accurately
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reflected the phone conversation. As the circuit court properly
 
ruled, Minor's testimony did not authenticate the transcript and
 did not establish a proper foundation for its admission.
 Therefore, the circuit court did not err in declining to admit
 the transcript in evidence.
10/
 
III.
 
Silver argues that the circuit court erred in admitting
 
the testimony of Dr. Alexander Jay Bivens, Ph.D. (Dr. Bivens), a
 clinical psychologist who specializes in the treatment of
 adolescents. Dr. Bivens testified about the dynamics of sexual
 abuse and the reaction of children who have been molested. His
 testimony included that children often do not immediately report
 the sexual abuse and underreport the extent of the abuse. Silver
 contends that Dr. Bivens's testimony at trial was improperly
 admitted because it was tantamout to an opinion that Minor was
 telling the truth. We disagree. 
Dr. Bivens's testimony was confined to the behavior of 
child sexual abuse victims in general, the type of testimony which the Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded was admissible in State 
v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 557-58, 799 P.2d 48, 51-52 (1990). Dr.
 Bivens's testimony was based on psychological studies. He
 testified that he had never met, seen, interviewed, or evaluated
 Minor and indicated that he was not familiar with the details of
 Minor's case. Dr. Bivens's testimony did not include a specific
 personal opinion of whether Minor was truthful or believable. 
A.
 
In Batangan, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court recognized that 
"sexual abuse of children is a particularly mysterious 
10/ In his points of error, Silver asserts that to the extent the circuit
court's ruling was correct, his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to
provide the necessary foundation. Silver, however, presents no argument insupport of this point of error, and, accordingly, this point of error isdeemed waived. See Hawai< i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7)
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). Moreover, Silver does not directus to evidence in the record that would permit us to determine whether trialcounsel had the ability to establish the necessary foundation by other means. 
19
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
phenomenon, and the common experience of the jury may represent a
 
less than adequate foundation for assessing the credibility of a
 young child who complains of sexual abuse." Batangan, 71 Haw. at
 
557, 799 P.2d at 51 (citations and internal quotation marks
 omitted). The court went on to hold:
 
[W]hile expert testimony explaining "seemingly bizarre"
behavior of child sex abuse victims is helpful to the jury
and should be admitted, conclusory opinions that abuse did
occur and that the child victim's report of abuse is
truthful and believable is of no assistance to the jury, and
therefore, should not be admitted.
 
Id. at 558, 799 P.2d at 52. The court stated that "[t]he
 
pertinent consideration is whether the expert testimony will
 assist the jury without unduly prejudicing the defendant." Id. 
In Mars, this court quoted with approval the following
 
passage from a decision of the Georgia Court of Appeals:
 
[T]here is absolutely nothing wrong with expert opinion
testimony that bolster's [sic] the credibility of the
indicted allegations of sexual abuse, e.g., the victim's
physical examination showed injury consistent with sexual
abuse, or the victim's psychological evaluation was
consistent with sexual abuse. Establishing the credibility
of the indicted acts of sexual abuse is what the State's
 case is all about and is the purpose for such expert
testimony in the first place; the fact that such testimony
may also indirectly, though necessarily, involve the child's
credibility does not render it inadmissible.
 
What is forbidden is expert opinion testimony that
"directly addresses the credibility of the victim," i.e., "I
believe the victim; I think the victim is telling the
truth," or expert opinion testimony that implicitly goes to
the ultimate issue to be decided by the jury, when such
issue is not beyond the "ken" of the average juror, i.e.,
"In my opinion, the victim was sexually abused." Although
the distinction may seem fine to a layman, there is a world
of legal difference between expert testimony that "in my
opinion, the victim's psychological exam was consistent with
sexual abuse," and expert testimony that "in my opinion, the
victim was sexually abused." In the first situation, the
expert leaves the ultimate issue/conclusion for the jury to
decide; in the second, the weight of the expert is put
behind a factual conclusion which invades the province of
the jury by providing a direct answer to the ultimate issue:
was the victim sexually abused?
 
Mars, 116 Hawai 'i at 140, 170 P.3d at 876 (brackets and "[sic]" 
in original) (quoting Odom v. State, 531 S.E.2d 207, 208-09 (Ga.
 
Ct. App. 2000)).
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. 
Dr. Bivens's testimony was relevant to assisting the
 
jury to understand the reaction and behavior of children to
 
sexual abuse in general terms. He did not express any personal
 opinion about whether Minor's report of sexual abuse was
 truthful. Although Dr. Bivens's testimony may have assisted the
 jury in evaluating Minor's credibility, it did not constitute an
 impermissible personal opinion that Minor's report of abuse was
 truthful. See id. at 140-41, 170 P.3d at 876-77.
 
IV.
 
Silver argues that the prosecutor engaged in misconduct
 
during closing argument by arguing matters not supported by the
 evidence, specifically: 1) grooming techniques of sexual
 predators, and 2) presenting a PowerPoint slide which stated that
 Minor "[n]ever changed his account of events." We conclude that
 Silver is not entitled to any relief based on these claims.
 
A.
 
Silver argues that the prosecutor's closing argument
 
and PowerPoint slides improperly argued that Silver had engaged
 in "grooming" Minor to submit to sexual abuse, even though the
 circuit court had excluded expert testimony regarding grooming
 because of lack of a factual basis to support such testimony. 
Although it excluded expert testimony on grooming, the circuit
 court permitted the State to argue facts and reasonable
 inferences from the evidence.
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, just one more thing. To be
 
clear, though. Anything that makes common sense or
something that's within the realm of the lay witness, I can
argue regardless of whether an expert talks about it;
correct?
 
[Court]: You can argue the facts and reasonable
inferences therefrom.
 
As Hawai 'i courts have recognized, 
[d]uring closing arguments, a prosecutor is permitted to
draw reasonable inferences from the evidence and wide
 latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence. It is also
 within the bounds of legitimate argument for prosecutors to
state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as well as to
draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence. In other
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
words, closing argument affords the prosecution (as well as
the defense) the opportunity to persuade the jury that its
theory of the case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced
and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom.
 
Mars, 116 Hawai <i at 142, 170 P.3d at 878 (brackets omitted; 
block quote formated changed) (quoting State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i 
405, 412-13, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238-39 (1999)). 
During closing argument, the prosecutor argued that
 
Silver's conduct was consistent with his gradually testing the
 
limits with Minor to see how far Silver could go. The prosecutor
 argued that Silver was getting "green lights" and felt he could
 keep going because, for example, "nobody said anything" about
 Silver's touching Minor in the pool. The prosecutor also argued
 that Silver planned the abuse, selected Minor because Silver did
 not think Minor would tell, and waited for an opportunity when
 Minor was tired and would be vulnerable. The circuit court
 sustained several objections made by Silver to the prosecutor's
 arguments.
 
In denying Silver's motion for a new trial, the circuit
 
court made a finding of fact, which stated:
 
12. No portion of the Deputy Prosecutor's closing
argument or rebuttal argument constituted "misconduct." The
 
Court sustained four objections to portions of [the] State's
closing and rebuttal arguments due to the way the arguments
were phrased, but those arguments did not amount to an
attempt by the Deputy Prosecutor to persuade the court or
jury by use of deceptive or reprehensible methods.
 
The circuit court also found:
 
20. The State did not refer to inadmissible evidence
 
during closing or argument. The State did not elicit
 prohibited testimony from Dr. Bivens and did not argue
theories of "grooming" when discussing Defendant's conduct
in the terms of "getting all these green lights" which
drew the first of the Defense objections in closing
argument. The Deputy Prosecutor's argument "Since the
defendant was getting all these green lights, he felt he
could keep going. How far can I go? Well, you know, nobody
said anything about touching in the pool. Guess I can go
further. I thought, move next to [Minor], nobody said a
thing. I can keep going. Nighttime, [Minor] wore the
pajamas, just like I asked. Guess I can keep going." This
 argument included facts in evidence during trial, but
improperly phrased these as Defendant's actual thoughts,
which were inferences, but not reasonable inferences, to
draw from the facts presented. The objection was sustained
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
due to the way this argument was phrased, not because it
argued precluded "theories of grooming."
 
We agree with the circuit court's assessment. Although
 
Dr. Bivens's expert testimony regarding grooming was excluded,
 
this ruling did not prohibit the State from arguing the evidence
 and reasonable inferences from the evidence. Based on the
 evidence presented, it was permissible for the prosecutor to
 argue that Silver had targeted Minor, because Minor appeared
 vulnerable, and that Silver had engaged in a series of steps to
 see how far he could go with Minor.
 
In analyzing allegations of prosecutorial misconduct, 
we consider "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai
'i 
20, 24, 108 P.3d 974, 978 (2005) (block quote format and citation omitted). Here, the nature of the prosecutor's arguments complained of were not deceptive or reprehensible. The arguments were objectionable because of the way they were phrased, but they were based on evidence admitted at trial. The circuit court sustained Silver's objections to the challenged arguments and promptly instructed the jury to disregard them. The alleged misconduct relating to "grooming" did not affect Silver's substantial rights. 
B.
 
We also reject Silver's contention that the
 
prosecution's PowerPoint slide which stated that Minor "[n]ever
 changed his account of events" and referred to people Minor
 "[t]old" constituted misconduct that requires Silver's
 convictions to be vacated. Silver did not object to this slide
 when it was displayed. During Silver's closing argument, Silver
 attempted to rebut this slide by arguing that the jury did not
 hear evidence of Minor's inconsistent statements because the
 prosecution did not introduce Minor's statements. The
 prosecution objected to Silver's argument. 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At a bench conference, the circuit court advised the
 
parties that both the prosecution's slide and Silver's attempt to
 
rebut the slide by suggesting that the prosecution was "hiding
 the ball" were improper. The circuit court, however, permitted
 Silver to rebut the prosecution's contention that Minor "never
 changed his account of events" by arguing that there was no
 evidence to support the prosecution's claim. We conclude that
 the circuit court's ruling was sufficient to dissipate any
 prejudice from the prosecution's slide and thus the prosecution's 
use of the slide did not affect Silver's substantial rights. 
V.
 
Silver argues that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by failing to conduct a timely hearing on the sleeping
 juror allegation. We disagree.
 
A.
 
After the circuit court completed its reading of the
 
jury instructions to the jury, the circuit court asked, "I'm
 about to excuse the alternates [sic] jurors. Anything before I
 do so?" Silver's counsel responded, "I'll note that the juror up
 in the top row . . . I think is our last juror has been sleeping
 almost the entire trial. I would . . . ask that he be excused
 and that we move the alternate into his place." The juror was
 identified as Juror Number 12. 
The prosecutor responded, "[Juror Number 12 has] been
 
paying attention when I've been speaking to the jury. I saw him
 paying attention when I was speaking to the jury." The circuit
 court noted, "I make it a practice to observe the jurors. The
 juror in seat number 12, I have not seen sleeping through the
 trial." The circuit court denied Silver's request to replace
 Juror Number 12 with an alternate. The jury began deliberating
 on January 17, 2007, and returned its guilty verdicts on January
 18, 2007.
 
On November 6, 2007, the circuit court conducted a
 
hearing on Silver's Motion for New Trial. Silver called three
 witnesses. David Sereno, one of Silver's trial counsel,
 
24
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that he saw Juror Number 12 sleeping. Elizabeth
 
Silver, Silver's sister-in-law, testified that she saw two jurors
 sleeping during the trial. Silver testified that he saw Juror
 Number 12 sleeping "during various state witnesses' testimony[.]" 
The circuit court orally granted Silver's request to summon the
 jurors for questioning. 
On January 17, 2008, the circuit court questioned the
 
twelve jurors and three alternate jurors. All twelve jurors and 
three alternate jurors testified that they did not doze off or
 fall asleep during the trial and that they did not notice anyone
 else on the jury appear to doze off or fall asleep during the
 trial.  The circuit court made findings of fact that stated,
 
"[t]here was no credible evidence that any juror or alternate
 
juror was sleeping or dozing off during portions of the trial[,]"
 and that "Juror Number 12 did not fall asleep during the trial." 
B.
 
When alleging juror misconduct, 
[t]he defendant must first make a prima facie showing of a
deprivation that could substantially prejudice his or her
right to a fair trial by an impartial jury. We also
 suggested that the defendant should first present some
specific, substantial evidence showing a juror was possibly
biased. Once the defendant has satisfied this burden, the
trial court then determines whether the nature of the
 alleged deprivation rises to the level of being
substantially prejudicial. If the trial court determines
 that the alleged deprivation is substantially prejudicial,
the trial court then becomes duty bound to further
investigate the totality of circumstances surrounding the
alleged deprivation to determine its impact on jury
impartiality.
 
State v. Yamada, 108 Hawai <i 474, 479, 122 P.3d 254, 259 (2005) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and emphases in original 
omitted). Silver does not cite to any case law which imposes a specific time limit upon the trial court to hold a hearing on allegations of juror misconduct. Silver waited until the end of trial to raise the allegation that a juror had been sleeping "almost the entire trial." Silver also stipulated to a continuance of the hearing on his Motion for New Trial and then asked for additional delay after new counsel was retained to 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
represent him. The circuit court held hearings to investigate
 
Silver's sleeping juror allegation and found that there was no
 credible evidence that any juror or alternate juror, including
 Juror Number 12, had been sleeping during the trial. We will not
 disturb the circuit court's finding on appeal. We conclude that
 the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in resolving
 Silver's sleeping juror allegation. 
VI.
 
Silver argues that the State failed to introduce
 
sufficient evidence to support his convictions for third degree
 sexual assault and, in the alternative, that HRS § 707-700 is
 void for vagueness. Among other things, Silver notes that HRS 
§ 707-700 defines "sexual contact" as "any touching . . . of the
 sexual or other intimate parts of a person," and argues that
 buttocks are not "intimate parts" under this definition.
 
Silver was charged with third degree sexual assault in
 
violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(b), which prohibits a person from
 "knowingly subject[ing] to sexual contact another person who is
 less than fourteen years old." The term "sexual contact," in
 turn, is defined by HRS § 707-700 to mean
 
any touching, other than acts of "sexual penetration", of
the sexual or other intimate parts of a person not married
to the actor, or of the sexual or other intimate parts of
the actor by the person, whether directly or through the
clothing or other material intended to cover the sexual or
other intimate parts.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
A.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court construed the definition of 
"sexual contact" in State v. Kalani, 108 Hawai 'i 279, 118 P.3d 
1222 (2005). The defendant Kalani was charged by indictment with 
two counts of sexual assault for twice kissing a nine-year-old complaining witness (CW) on the lips and placing his tongue in her mouth. Id. at 281, 118 P.3d at 1224. Kalani moved to 
dismiss the indictment on the ground of lack of sufficient evidence to support the charges. Id. Kalani argued that his 
alleged conduct did not constitute "sexual contact" as defined in 
26
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 707-700 (1993).11/  Id. The circuit court denied Kalani's
 
motion to dismiss. Id.
 
The circuit court acknowledged that the statute did not
 
indicate what body parts are to be considered as "sexual or other
 
intimate parts" within the statutory definition of "sexual
 contact." Id. The circuit court concluded that "intimacy, with
 
respect to parts of the body, must be viewed within the context
 in which the contact takes place. In other words, a body part
 that might be intimate in one context might not be intimate in
 another." Id. The circuit court stated although the mouth and
 
tongue may not constitute "intimate parts" in all circumstances
 or contexts, they did constitute "intimate parts" in the context
 of Kalani's alleged conduct. Id. at 281-82, 118 P.3d at 1224-25. 
On appeal, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded that as 
used in the HRS § 707-700 definition of "sexual contact," the term "'sexual parts' clearly refers to the sex organs" and the term "'intimate parts' . . . refers to only those parts of the body typically associated with sexual relations." Id. at 284-85, 
118 P.3d at 1227-28. Based on this construction, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court held that Kalani's conduct constituted "sexual contact," and it therefore upheld the circuit court's denial of Kalani's motion to dismiss and affirmed Kalani's convictions. Id. at 287, 118 P.3d at 1230. The supreme court also rejected Kalani's claim that the statutory definition of "sexual contact" was void for vagueness, holding that "Kalani fails to establish that a person of ordinary intelligence would not know that 
11/ The definition of "sexual contact" construed by the Supreme Court in
Kalani provided as follows:
 
"Sexual contact" means any touching of the sexual or other
intimate parts of a person not married to the actor, or of the
sexual or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether
directly or through the clothing or other material intended to
cover the sexual or other intimate parts. 
See Kalani, 108 Hawai' i at 281 n.2, 118 P.3d at 1224 n.2. 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kalani's conduct in the instant case constituted sexual contact." 
Id. at 288, 118 P.3d at 1231. 
B.
 
We conclude, like the circuit court in Kalani, that
 
whether a particular body part qualifies as an "intimate part"
 within the statutory definition of "sexual contact" depends on
 the context and circumstances of the case. "[A] body part which
 might be intimate in one context, might not be intimate in
 another [context]." People v. Rivera, 525 N.Y.S. 2d 118, 119
 
(N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1988). 
For example, with respect to the buttocks, it is not
 
uncommon for youth team coaches to give their players a
 congratulatory pat on the buttocks in recognition of a good play
 or outstanding effort. Parents hugging or carrying a young child
 may also place their hands on the child's buttocks. In these
 situations, adults are knowingly touching the buttocks of another
 person who is less than fourteen years old. But because of the
 context, it would be unreasonable to regard the child's buttocks
 as an "intimate part" for purposes of applying the sexual assault
 
statutes.12/
 In these contexts, the child's buttocks would not be 
a body part "typically associated with sexual relations." See 
Kalani
, 108 Hawai 'i at 284-85, 118 P.3d at 1227-28. 
C.
 
When viewed in context, we conclude that there was
 
sufficient evidence to show that Silver's touching of Minor's
 buttocks during the late night massages constituted the touching
 of an "intimate part" of Minor's body. These touchings took
 
12/ As noted in Kalani, when first enacted, HRS § 707-700 (Special
Pamphlet 1975) provided that "'[s]exual contact' means any touching of the
sexual or other intimate parts of a person not married to the actor, done withthe intent of gratifying the sexual desire of either party[.]" Kalani, 108 
Hawai'i at 285, 118 P.3d at 1128 (citation and quotation marks omitted;
brackets in original). In 1984, a penal code review committee recommended"that HRS § 707-700 be amended to limit the definition of 'sexual contact' tooffensive contact with specifically enumerated parts of the body." Id. The 
Legislature did not accept the committee's recommendation and instead, in1986, "expanded the definition of 'sexual contact' by removing the requirementthat the proscribed conduct be done 'with the intent of gratifying the sexualdesire of either party.'" Id.; see 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 314 § 48 at 615. 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
place in the context of Silver, a 46-year-old adult, sleeping
 
next to Minor, an eleven-year-old boy, waking Minor up late at
 night, telling Minor to be quiet, and then giving Minor 
unsolicited massages that included slowly "brushing" over Minor's
 buttocks and penis.
13/
 
With respect to the pool incident, if this were the
 
only charged sexual assault and we limited our consideration to
 the evidence of Silver's conduct in the pool, we would conclude
 that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction on
 that count. The touching of a child's buttocks during horseplay
 in a pool normally would not constitute the touching of an
 "intimate" body part. However, viewing the evidence of Silver's
 conduct in the pool in the context of his subsequent conduct
 during the late night massages, and considering all the evidence
 presented in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude
 that there was sufficient evidence that Silver's touching of
 Minor's buttocks in the pool constituted the touching of an
 "intimate" body part. Considering the evidence in the strongest
 light for the State, we conclude that a rational jury could infer
 a direct connection between Silver's conduct in the pool and his
 late night massages and that Silver's actions were all part of a
 deliberate plan and concerted effort by him to subject Minor to
 sexual contact. 
We reject Silver's contention that Minor's testimony
 
was insufficient to support Silver's convictions. Minor's
 credibility was for the jury to decide. Based on our review of
 the record, we conclude that there was substantial evidence to
 support the jury's finding that Silver had sexually assaulted
 Minor as charged in Counts 1, 3, 4, and 5. We also reject
 Silver's argument that the statutory definition of "sexual
 
13/ Silver does not dispute that Minor's penis constituted a sexual or
intimate part under the statutory definition of "sexual contact." We reject
Silver's claim that the jury could not find that Silver touched Minor's
buttocks and penis during the late night massages based on Minor's testimony
that Silver slowly brushed over Minor's buttocks and penis.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contact" is void for vagueness. As applied to Silver's conduct 
in this case, the statutory definition of "sexual contact" was not unconstitutionally vague. See Kalani, 108 Hawai
'i at 288, 
118 P.3d at 1231; State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 31-32, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1239-40 (1998). 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the March 7, 2008, Judgment of the circuit 
court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser 
Myles S. BreinerAttorneys for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of MauiAttorney for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
30
 