NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29230
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SEASIDE ESTATES, LP; THE SCUDDER GILLMAR TRUST;
THE STANLEY F. GILLMAR TRUST; QUEEN EMMA LAND COMPANY,
fka THE QUEEN EMMA FOUNDATION, Petitioners-Appellants,
v.
 
WTC OWNERS, LLC, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS NO. 08-1-0115)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth, J.;
and Leonard, J., concurring separately)
 
Petitioners-Appellants Seaside Estates, LP; The Scudder
 
Gillmar Trust, and The Stanley F. Gillmar Trust (collectively
 
"Gillmar Trusts"); and Queen Emma Land Company, formerly known as
 The Queen Emma Foundation ("QELC") (collectively "Lessors")
 appeal from the June 2, 2008 Order Granting in Part and Denying
 in Part [Lessors] Petition for Order Confirming Arbitration Award
 and for Award of Prejudgment Interest, Filed on April 2, 2008
 ("Order"), of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
1 On appeal, Lessors contend that the Circuit Court
 
erred when it denied their request for prejudgment interest due,
 allegedly, to an incorrect interpretation of the terms of two
 separate leases between the Gillmar Trusts and Respondent­
2
Appellee Waikiki Trade Center Investors, LLC  ("WTCI" or
"Lessee"), and QELC and WTCI, respectively ("the Leases"). 
1
 The Honorable Karen S. S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 Pursuant to an order of this court dated August 4, 2010, WTC
Owners LLC ("WTC") was substituted as Respondent-Appellee in place of WTCI.
Consequently, we refer hereafter to WTC in place of WTCI.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 affirm the Order and resolve the appeal as follows:
 
The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that WTC
 
was not liable to pay pre-judgment interest under the Leases on
 the difference between what Lessee would have paid under the new
 minimum annual rent and what it did pay under the old minimum
 annual rent, as calculated from the beginning of the new rental
 period through the date of the timely payment of the difference
 following the arbitrators' decision. Section 2.02 of the Leases
 ("Section 2.02") provides in relevant part:
 
The appraisers . . . shall appraise and determine said fair
market value and the then going rate of return as aforesaid.
In the event the appraisers shall render their decision
after the commencement of the period for which the minimum
annual rent is being determined, minimum annual rent shall
be payable at the rate in effect for the prior period until
their decision is rendered, but the new minimum annual rent
 established by such appraisal shall be effective
 
retroactively to the commencement of the period in question,
 and the Lessee shall make up any deficiency with the next
 payment of minimum annual rent.  Lessor and Lessee shall
 
each pay the fees of its own appraiser, attorneys and
witnesses and shall each pay one-half (½) of all other
proper costs and expenses of the appraisal.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The term "deficiency" is not defined in the Leases. 
To the extent that the word is unclear, the canon of construction 
noscitur a sociis ably guides us to our conclusion. See State v. 
Dowling, 125 Hawai' i 406, 410 n.4, 263 P.3d 116, 120 n.4 (App. 
2011) ("Noscitur a sociis is Latin for 'it is known by its associates' and is '[a] cannon [sic] of construction holding that the meaning of an unclear word or phrase should be determined by the words immediately surrounding it.'" (first brackets in original) (citing B
LACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 1160–61 (9th ed. 2009))). 
As the Circuit Court recognized, the Leases are
 
sophisticated, comprehensive contracts. Furthermore, the Leases
 are laden with detailed provisions intended to protect the
 parties should a number of eventualities come to pass. Section
 2.02 is itself a comprehensive guide for the parties and defines
 the proper procedure to follow, and the liabilities of the
 parties, should a new minimum annual rent not be determined by
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the date of the new rental period. Section 2.02 provides for the
 
allocation of appraiser, attorney, and witness fees and other
 costs associated with appraisal. It does not, however, make any
 mention of interest. 
Interest, however, is addressed elsewhere in the
 
Leases. Section 15.03 of the Leases, found in Article XV which
 gives the Lessors multiple rights in the event of Lessee's
 default, specifically provides for the payment of interest:
 
Interest. Lessee shall pay to Lessor, on demand,
interest at the rate of twelve per cent (12%) per annum on
all sums payable by Lessee to Lessor pursuant to the
provisions hereof from the due date until paid.
 
(Emphasis added.) Lessors could have negotiated for inclusion of
 
a similar term requiring the payment of interest on the unpaid
 difference of rent within Section 2.02; the absence of such a
 provision is telling. 
Lessors argue that interest must be a part of "any
 
deficiency" because the new minimum annual rent is "effective
 retroactively." However, the fact that the new minimum annual
 rent applies retroactively does not mean that any higher rent was
 "due" with the preceding rental payments. To the contrary, the
 process provided for in the Leases required Lessee to pay the
 rent based on the old minimum annual rent until the arbitrators
 made their decision — that is, the Lessors were never
 contractually entitled to the use of the money equal to the
 difference in rental rates during the time between the new rental
 period and the payment of rent following the appraisal. If the
 Lessors intended for interest to attach to the difference in
 rent, they needed to make that intent more explicit in the
 Leases.
 
Reading the contract as a whole and paying particular
 
attention to the context in which the term appears in Section
 2.02, we hold that "deficiency" only refers to the difference
 between what Lessee would have paid under the new minimum annual
 rent versus what it had been paying under the old minimum annual
 rent and does not include pre-judgment interest.
 
Lessors seek pre-judgment interest under Section 15.03. 
However, the recovery of interest is only available under Section
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
15.03 when the subject sum is past due. In this case, there is
 
no dispute that Lessee paid the deficiency in minimum annual
 rents with the next payment of minimum annual rent following the
 arbitrators' decision. Thus, the payment of the deficiency was
 not made after its due date as defined in Section 2.02. As a
 result, Lessors are not entitled to pre-judgment interest under
 Section 15.03 of the Leases.
 
The cases cited by Lessors in support of their position
 
– Gadd v. Kelley, 66 Haw. 431, 667 P.2d 251 (1983), Loyalty Dev.
 Co. v. Wholesale Motors, Inc., 61 Haw. 483, 605 P.2d 925 (1980),
 and Waialua Agric. Co. v. Oahu Ry. & Land Co., 19 Haw. 446 (Haw.
 Terr. 1909) — are distinguishable. These cases stand for the
 proposition that rents retroactively owed based on a rent
 arbitration are subject to pre-judgment interest after they
 become due. See Gadd, 66 Haw. at 445–46, 667 P.2d at 260;
 
Loyalty Dev., 61 Haw. at 489–90, 605 P.2d at 929; Waialua Agric.,
 19 Haw. at 449–50.  In this case, however, Section 2.02 states a
 due date for payment of the deficiency with which the Lessee
 complied. Thus, there was no past-due rent owed by Lessee on
 which to award pre-judgment interest.
 
In their motion to confirm below, Lessors contended
 
that they were entitled to pre-judgment interest under Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 478-2 (or its predecessor, HRS § 478­1). Although Lessors do not appear to make that argument on
 appeal, they reference us to cases holding that pre-judgment
 interest was warranted under the statute. See Gadd, 66 Haw. at
 
445–46, 667 P.2d at 260; Loyalty Dev., 61 Haw. at 489–90, 605
 P.2d at 929; Waialua Agric., 19 Haw. at 449–50. To the extent
 that Lessors claim entitlement to pre-judgment interest under HRS
 § 478-2, it is only available on a written instrument when the
 money owed is past-due. H
AW. REV. STAT. § 478-2(1). Since, as
 
noted, the deficiency based on the rent arbitration was not past-
due at the time it was paid, the Circuit Court did not err in
 failing to award pre-judgment interest under the statute.
 
Finally, Lessors' argument that the construction of the
 
Leases we have adopted would give Lessees an incentive to delay
 the arbitration process in the future is not persuasive. Section
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
2.02 provides several safeguards against delay, including
 
intervention by the Circuit Court if certain time limits are not
 met. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's June 2, 2008 Order is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 31, 2012. 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
I concur in the result.
 
Associate Judge
 
On the briefs:
 
William C. McCorriston,
Joel D. Kam, and
Becky T. Chestnut
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon LLP)
for Petitioners-Appellants
 
James T. Paul,
Corey Y.S. Park, and
Ronald N.W. Kim
 (Paul Johnson Park & Niles)
for Respondent-Appellee
 
5
 