FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
ROBERT KUTKOWSKI, Plaintiff-Appellant/Plaintiff-Cross-Appellee,
v. PRINCEVILLE PRINCE GOLF COURSE, LLC, a Delaware Limited
Liability Company, Defendant-Appellee/Defendant-Cross-Appellant,
and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5, DOE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES
1-5, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE ENTITIES 1-5, JOHN DOES
1-5, AND JANE DOES 1-5, Defendants
 
NO. 28826
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0004)
 
MARCH 20, 2012
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, and LEONARD, J.; with
GINOZA, J., concurring separately
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Robert Kutkowski
 
(
Kutkowski) appeals from the Final Judgment entered on October 2,
 
2007 (Judgment), and challenges the Order Granting in Part and
 
Denying in Part Defendant Princeville Prince Golf Course, LLC's
 
Motion for Summary Judgment Filed May 11, 2007, Denying Plaintiff
 
Robert Kutkowski's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed on June 1,
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2007, and Ordering the Entry of Final Judgment Herein, entered on
 
August 6, 2007 (
Summary Judgment Order), by the Circuit Court of
 
1
the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).  This case arises from a
 
dispute over a right of first refusal contained in a lease
 
agreement for a half-acre parcel that is part of a much larger
 
undivided parcel, the owner of which, Princeville Corporation
 
(
Princeville Corp.), sold the parcel to Defendant-Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Princeville Prince Golf Course, LLC. (Princeville LLC). 
At the time of the sale, Kutkowski was a holdover tenant. The
 
case was resolved on cross summary judgment motions, with the
 
Circuit Court concluding that the right of first refusal carried
 
over to the holdover period, but that it was not triggered by the
 
sale of the large undivided parcel. 
On appeal, Kutkowski challenges the Circuit Court's
 
conclusion that the right of first refusal was not triggered. In
 
its cross appeal, Princeville LLC challenges the Circuit Court's
 
conclusion that the right of first refusal carried over to the
 
holdover period. 
We affirm the Judgment, holding that: 
(1) when a lease 
for a specified term is not extended or renewed, and the lessee 
holds over after the expiration of the lease, unless otherwise 
agreed, Hawai' i law implies that the parties' rights and 
obligations with respect to that holdover tenancy continue as set forth in the expired lease agreement; (2) although a holdover 
tenancy continues subject to the conditions of that tenancy 
determined by the original lease, the law will not imply a 
continued obligation to sell the leased property, absent an 
expression of the lessor's agreement to continue such obligation 
during a holdover tenancy; (3) where, as in this case, a right-
to-first-refusal provision is not expressly limited to the term 
of the lease, another lease provision expressly makes all 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"applicable" lease provisions applicable to a holdover tenancy, 
and nothing in the lease agreement renders the right-to-first­
refusal provision inapplicable to the holdover tenancy, the right 
to first refusal is applicable during the holdover tenancy; (4) 
generally, the desire to sell a large tract of land may not be 
taken as a manifestation of the seller's intention or desire to 
sell a smaller, undivided, parcel contained within it, so as to 
convert a right of first refusal on the smaller parcel into an 
exercisable option for its purchase; (5) Kutkowski's requested 
relief of specific performance would require a wholesale 
reformation of the parties' agreement and, inter alia, require 
judicial establishment of a price term, which would directly 
contradict the bargained-for rights of the parties; (6) Hawai' i 
courts will not allow a property owner and a purchaser to, in effect, destroy a bargained-for right of first refusal before its 
expiration and, in many circumstances, would order an injunction 
of a prospective sale or the rescission and/or reconveyance of a 
completed sale, in order to maintain the status quo, preserving a 
lessee's right of first refusal until its exercise, waiver, or 
termination at the expiration of the lease; and (7) under the 
circumstances of this case, including that the lessee holding the 
right of first refusal did not seek to enjoin or rescind the sale 
of a large undivided parcel of land that neither triggered nor 
destroyed a right of first refusal applicable to a small portion 
of that land, the requested relief of specific performance of the 
right of first refusal was properly denied. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Prior to 1998, Princeville Corp. owned an approximately 
1,040-acre parcel of land located on the North Shore of Kaua' i, 
above Anini Beach (Master Parcel). Kutkowski's licensed premises 
(Premises) is an approximately one-half acre portion of the 
Master Parcel, located at 3731A Anini Road, Kilauea, Kaua' i, 
Hawai'i. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In 1971, Kutkowski entered into an agreement to
 
sublease the Premises from John Kai, the tenant of the Premises
 
at the time. On November 1, 1984, after Mr. Kai's death,
 
Kutkowski entered into an Agricultural Lease for the Premises,
 
2
with Princeville Development Corp.,  for a five-year term ending
on November 1, 1989, with a monthly rent of $80.
 
Prior to the expiration of the Agricultural Lease,
 
Kutkowski and his wife, Janet Kutkowski (collectively, the
 
Kutkowskis), wrote a letter to Michael Y. Loo (Mr. Loo), then the
 
Vice President of Real Estate and Development for Princeville
 
Development Corp., dated October 5, 1989, to request a renewal of
 
the lease for another five-year term and an option to purchase
 
the Premises. Kutkowski testified in a deposition that he did
 
not remember whether he signed a new lease, but between 1989 and
 
1998 the Kutkowskis remained on the Premises, paying $200 per
 
month for rent. 
In 1998, Mr. Loo received another letter from the
 
Kutkowskis, dated March 28, 1998, expressing their desire to
 
negotiate a fixed rent of $750 per month and also include in the
 
lease an option to purchase the Premises. This letter stated,
 
"If this property is dividable from the large amount of property
 
Princeville owns, we would be very serious about making a market
 
value offer on this parcel." 
Mr. Loo received a memorandum from William Powell (Mr.
 
Powell), of Wm. Powell Associates, Ltd., the managing agent for
 
the Premises, dated April 26, 1998. The memorandum stated, in
 
relevant part:
 
This will confirm our verbal conversation regarding the
above tenant [Robert Kutkowski]. Their lease will be for
 five years at $750.00 per month, net to the Landlord.
 
The tenant will be provided a first right of refusal in case
of subdivision and sale of the property he occupies. This
 
2
 Although the record is unclear, it appears that Princeville
Development Corp. is an affiliate of Princeville Corp.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
first right of refusal shall not survive termination of the
lease.
 
Kutkowski sent a letter addressed to Mr. Powell, dated
 
April 30, 1998, and copied Mr. Loo. Kutkowski expressed in his
 
letter that he would like to retract his initial acceptance of
 
the $750 monthly rental rate and have it lowered to $550 per
 
month with a $50 increase each year for 5 years, or a fixed
 
monthly rent of $600. He also stated, "We are still very
 
interested in keeping the first option to buy this property in
 
the lease agreement." 
Kutkowski sent another letter to Mr. Powell, dated June
 
15, 1998, with a copy to Mr. Loo. In the letter, Kutkowski
 
confirmed that he accepted the new rent increase proposed in a
 
letter he received on June 3rd and he stated, "Also I hope the
 
new Lease Agreement will state an option for me to purchase the
 
property if it's available someday."
 
On August 23, 1998, the Kutkowskis entered into a
 
License Agreement with Princeville Corp. in which Princeville
 
Corp. granted the Kutkowskis a license for a five-year term to
 
continue to occupy and use the Premises. The License Agreement
 
commenced on May 1, 1998 and expired on April 30, 2003. The rent
 
was set at $600 per month, increasing each year to an amount of
 
$900 per month for the last year of the term. The License
 
Agreement included a clause captioned "Option to Purchase," which
 
expressly reserved to the licensor, Princeville Corp., the right
 
to "sell the licensed premises" during the term of the License
 
Agreement and provided Kutkowski a right to purchase the Premises
 
if Princeville Corp. decided to sell. The offer would be subject
 
to terms and conditions provided by Princeville Corp. Paragraph
 
2 of the License Agreement sets forth this term, more properly
 
characterized as a right of first refusal (Right of First
 
Refusal), as follows:
 
2. Option to Purchase: Licensor [Princeville Corp.]
expressly reserves the right to sell the licensed premises
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
during the term of this license and to place such signs and
notices on or about the premises for such purpose, subject
only to the rights of the Licensee [the Kutkowskis]
contained herein. In the event Licensor decides to sell the
 premises, it shall be first offered to Licensee on terms and
conditions provided by Licensor; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that
Licensee shall have at all times faithfully and punctually
performed all of the covenants and conditions of this
agreement on the part of Licensee to be performed. Licensee
 shall have sixty (60) days to accept the Licensor's offer or
make a counter offer; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that if no sales
contract is executed within one hundred twenty (120) days
after Licensor's initial offer, (1) Licensor shall be free
to offer the premises for sale to the general public and (2)
this license agreement shall be automatically amended with
occupancy to continue on a month to month term. Should the
 premises be thereafter sold during the term of the month to
month license, Licensor shall give Licensee forty-five (45)
days prior notice of termination of this license, upon which
Licensee shall relinquish all rights hereunder.
 
The License Agreement also includes a holdover
 
provision in Paragraph 22 (Holdover Provision), which reads as
 
follows:
 
22. Effect of Licensee's holding over: Any holding over
after the expiration of the term of this agreement, with
consent of Licensor, shall be construed to be a license from
month to month, at the same rate as required to be paid by
Licensee for the period immediately prior to the expiration
of the term hereof, and shall otherwise be on the terms and
conditions herein specified, so far as applicable.
 
The License Agreement did not contain any provision for
 
renewal or extension. Upon the expiration of the License
 
Agreement, the parties did not execute a new lease, or renew or
 
extend the License Agreement. 
On May 1, 2003, Kutkowski's tenancy became a month-to­
month tenancy by way of holdover. Kutkowski moved his primary
 
residence to another house in the Princeville area in 2003, but
 
his son continued to reside on the Premises. 
On July 14, 2004, Princeville Corp. and Princeville 
Associates, LLC (Princeville Associates) entered into a Purchase 
and Sale Agreement (Sale Agreement). Princeville Corp. sold to 
Princeville Associates, pursuant to the terms of the Sale 
Agreement, resort holdings located at the Princeville Resort on 
Kaua'i, including the Master Parcel, buildings, structures, and 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
other improvements, including a hotel, golf course, clubhouse, 
shopping center, and an airport. The Sale Agreement also 
included tangible and intangible property, and contracts and 
leases located at the Princeville Resort on Kaua' i. 
Pursuant to the terms of the Sale Agreement,
 
Princeville Associates assigned ownership of the Master Parcel to
 
Princeville LLC. Princeville Corp. and Princeville LLC also
 
entered into an Assignment and Assumption Agreement pertaining to
 
certain contracts and leases in which Princeville LLC agreed to
 
accept the assignment, grant, conveyance, and transfer of all
 
contracts and agreements relating to the ownership, management,
 
or operation of the Master Parcel (Assumption Agreement).
 
Kutkowski received a memorandum, dated September 6,
 
2004, from Mr. Powell, who had apparently changed his employment
 
to Asset Realty Corporation, but remained as Princeville Corp.'s
 
real estate agent. The memorandum stated, in relevant part:
 
Attached is an amendment to the license agreement
Princeville Corporation has with you. Princeville has
 decided to eliminate any Option to Purchase from its
existing month to month tenancy or license agreements. The
 enclosed amendment reflects this change.
 
Can you please have the agreement executed and returned to
me?
 
The attached Amendment to License Agreement (Amendment)
 
stated, in relevant part:
 
THIS AMENDMENT TO LICENSE AGREEMENT (The "Amendment")
is made and entered effective as of September 1, 2004, by
and between PRINCEVILLE CORPORATION, a Colorado corporation,
("Licensor") and Robert Kutkowski ("Licensee").
 
. . . .
 
NOW, THEREFORE, for good and valuable consideration,
the receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged
by the parties hereto, Licensor and Licensee hereby agree to
amend the License Agreement as follows:
 
1. Paragraph 2, Option to Purchase shall be deleted
in its entirety.
 
2. The License Agreement shall continue on a month to
month basis until either party gives notice to the other
party to terminate this License Agreement.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. The effective date of this Amendment to License
 
Agreement is August 1, 2004. 
EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY PROVIDED HEREIN, all other terms
and conditions of the License Agreement shall remain as is
and in full force and effect.
 
Kutkowski refused to sign or return the Amendment. 
Kutkowski informed Princeville Corp. by letter, dated October 25,
 
2004, that he desired to exercise the "Option to Purchase" and
 
would offer $250,000 for the Premises. It is undisputed that
 
Princeville Corp. did not first offer to sell the Premises to
 
him, and that neither Princeville Corp. nor Princeville LLC had
 
accepted his offer to purchase the Premises. 
The sale including the Master Parcel closed in March
 
2005. It appears that Kutkowski continued to pay the monthly
 
rent for the Premises and that Princeville LLC accepted the
 
payments. 
On January 10, 2005, Kutkowski filed suit against
 
Princeville Corp. alleging a single claim for specific
 
performance of the right of first refusal in the License
 
Agreement. On January 12, 2005, Kutkowski filed a Notice of
 
Pendency of Action with the Bureau of Conveyances. Through an
 
August 3, 2005 stipulation, Princeville Corp. was dismissed as a
 
defendant and replaced by Princeville LLC (Stipulation). On
 
October 20, 2005, Kutkowski filed a First Amended Complaint
 
against Princeville LLC, again alleging a single claim for
 
specific performance of the right of first refusal in the License
 
Agreement, but seeking the relief from Princeville LLC. 
On November 18, 2005, Princeville LLC filed an answer
 
to the First Amended Complaint, and a Counterclaim for
 
Declaratory Relief asking that the Circuit Court declare that the
 
License Agreement was ineffective in conveying to Kutkowski any
 
rights in the Premises. 
On May 11, 2007, Princeville LLC filed its motion for
 
summary judgment, and a request to expunge Kutkowski's notice of
 
8
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pendency of action, arguing that the right of first refusal
 
expired by its own terms on April 30, 2003, and did not carry
 
over to the holdover period, or alternatively, if the Circuit
 
Court found that the right of first refusal had not terminated,
 
summary judgment should still be granted to Princeville LLC
 
because (1) the offering for sale of the Master Parcel by
 
Princeville Corp. to Princeville Associates did not constitute a
 
decision to sell the Premises and, thus, the right of first
 
refusal was not triggered, and/or (2) it would have been legally
 
impossible to perform the terms of the right of first refusal
 
making it void and unenforceable.3
 
On June 4, 2007, Kutkowski filed his motion for summary
 
judgment, arguing that the right of first refusal survived the
 
expiration of the License Agreement, was still valid in the
 
holdover tenancy, and was triggered by the Sale Agreement, and he
 
sought a declaration of rights and specific performance. 
On June 21, 2007, the Circuit Court heard the cross
 
motions for summary judgment. 
On August 6, 2007, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Summary Judgment Order, concluding that the right of first
 
refusal survived the expiration of the License Agreement and
 
carried over into the holdover tenancy, but that it was not
 
triggered by the Sale Agreement because the decision to sell the
 
Master Parcel did not constitute a decision to sell the Premises. 
On October 2, 2007, Final Judgment was entered. 
On November 1, 2007, Kutkowski filed a notice of
 
appeal; Princeville LLC timely filed a notice of cross-appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
The appellant and cross-appellant each raise a single
 
point of error on appeal. Notably, both parties argue that the
 
Circuit Court erred as a matter of law with respect to some
 
3
 Although, on appeal, the parties present their arguments on this
point, we need not address it.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
aspect of the Summary Judgment Order. Neither party contends in
 
their respective points of error that there were any genuine
 
issues of material fact in dispute. 
Kutkowski raises the following point of error:
 
The Circuit Court erred when it denied equitable
relief to Kutkowski because it held that the sale of the
 
Master Parcel did not constitute a 'decision to sell' the
 Premises which would trigger Kutkowski's right of first
refusal under paragraph 2 of the Agreement.
 
Princeville LLC raises the following point of error:
 
Did the Circuit Court err in denying in part
[Princeville LLC's] Motion for Summary Judgment in its Order
dated August 6, 2007, when it stated that the Right of First
Refusal did not expire on April 30, 2003 but was carried
over to the period that Kutkowski was a holdover tenant even
though there was no right of renewal in the License
Agreement?
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews the trial court's grant of 
summary judgment de novo. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & 
Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). "Under the 
de novo standard, we examine the facts and answer the question 
without being required to give any weight to the circuit court's 
answer to it." Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 
438, 457, 164 P.3d 696, 715 (2007) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
[The Hawai' i Supreme Court] has stated that "'[a]s a
general rule, the construction and legal effect to be given
a contract is a question of law.'" Found. Int'l, Inc. v.
E.T. Ige Const., Inc., 102 Hawai' i 487, 494-95, 78 P.3d 23,
30-31 (2003) (quoting Hanagami v. China Airlines, Ltd., 67Haw. 357, 364, 688 P.2d 1139, 1144 (1984)). Accordingly,"[a]bsent an ambiguity, [the] contract terms should beinterpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and acceptedsense in common speech." Id. at 495, 78 P.3d 23 (brackets inoriginal, citation omitted). 
Koga Eng'g & Constr., Inc. v. State of Hawai' i, 122 Hawai' i 60, 
72, 222 P.3d 979, 991 (2010).
 
The relief granted by a court in equity is
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless
the circuit court abused its discretion. An abuse of
 discretion occurs when the trial court has clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant.
 
Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 899 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and 
ellipsis omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Kutkowski's claim for specific performance is dependent
 
upon the continued enforceability of the Right of First Refusal
 
during the holdover tenancy. Accordingly, we turn first to this
 
issue, which is raised in the cross-appeal.
 
A. The Terms of the Holdover Tenancy
 Princeville LLC argues that Hawai' i courts should adopt 
the rule prevailing in the "majority" of jurisdictions: when a lease agreement is not renewed or extended, a right of first 
refusal therein (or an option to purchase) is terminated upon the 
expiration of the term of the lease agreement and does not carry 
over to the holdover period. Kutkowski argues, inter alia, that 
Princeville LLC's position is directly refuted by Hawai' i 
precedent and the "majority" rule in other jurisdictions: lease 
terms and conditions, including provisions for an option or right 
of first refusal, continue into a holdover period. A careful 
reading of the case law suggests that differences in the drafting 
of lease terms may account for the varying outcomes, perhaps as 
much as, if not more than, differences in judicial philosophy. 
Thus, we begin with a close examination of the operative terms of 
the License Agreement. 
As set forth above, the Holdover Provision states:
 
22. Effect of Licensee's holding over: Any holding over
after the expiration of the term of this agreement, with
consent of Licensor, shall be construed to be a license from
month to month, at the same rate as required to be paid by
Licensee for the period immediately prior to the expiration
of the term hereof, and shall otherwise be on the terms and
conditions herein specified, so far as applicable.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
11
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This provision sets out several covenants governing the
 
holdover tenancy. First, any continued tenancy is conditioned
 
upon the lessor's consent. Thus, the lessee has no right to
 
renew or extend the period of the tenancy, or to continue its use
 
and occupancy of the Premises, without the consent of the lessor. 
That said, no formality such as a further written agreement is
 
required; so, the lessor's consent to the lessee's continued use
 
and occupancy of the Premises could be verbal or implied from the
 
parties' conduct.
 
Second, the holdover tenancy is agreed to be a month­
to-month tenancy, thus requiring the lessor to provide at least
 
forty-five days, and the lessee to provide at least twenty-eight
 
days, advance written notice of termination of the tenancy. See
 
HRS § 521-71(a)&(b) (2006) (Landlord-Tenant Code notice
 requirement).
4
 
Third, the Holdover Provision sets the rent, for
 
continued month-to-month occupancy with the lessor's consent, at
 
the same rate as required to be paid by the lessee for the period
 
immediately prior to expiration of the License Agreement.5
 
Finally, the Holdover Provision states that any holding
 
over "shall otherwise be on the terms and conditions herein
 
specified, so far as applicable." Thus, the parties expressly
 
agreed to maintain the terms and conditions of the License
 
Agreement during a holdover tenancy, so far as such terms are
 
applicable to the holdover tenancy. Princeville LLC argues that: 
(1) the Right of First Refusal is not "applicable" because it
 
could not be applicable to that right as it is drafted in
 
4
 As the lessee's use of the Premises was residential, and paragraph
6 of the License Agreement expressly provides that the Premises are used for
residential purposes, the notice requirements in the Hawai' i Residential 
Landlord-Tenant Code are applicable. See HRS § 521-31(a) (2006) (limiting
parties' right to waive rights or remedies under HRS Chap. 521).
5
 As the issue is not before us, we need not address whether,
pursuant to HRS § 521-71(c), a different rate of rent might be applicable
after a proper notice of termination.
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
paragraph 2 of the License Agreement; (2) the Right of First 
Refusal states that it is applicable only during the term of the 
License Agreement; and (3) based on the majority rule in other 
jurisdictions, where there is no (lessee's) right to renew in a 
lease agreement, the Right of First Refusal is not applicable to 
a holdover tenancy. Kutkowski argues that: (1) under the clear 
and unambiguous language of the License Agreement, the Right of 
First Refusal is applicable to the holdover tenancy; (2) under 
Hawai'i law, the terms and conditions of a written lease 
agreement continue to be applicable during a holdover tenancy;6 
and (3) under the majority rule, a right of first refusal is 
applicable when a lease is extended in accordance with its terms 
and, as here, an extension by way of a holding over fits within 
this rule. 
Princeville LLC's two contract-interpretation arguments
 
concerning whether the Right of First Refusal is "applicable" are
 
both focused on the wording of the Right of First Refusal:
 
Licensor [Princeville Corp.] expressly reserves the
right to sell the licensed premises during the term of this
license. . . . In the event Licensor decides to sell the
 premises, it shall be first offered to Licensee on terms and
conditions provided by Licensor. . . . Licensee shall have
 sixty (60) days to accept the Licensor's offer or make a
counter offer; PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that if no sales contract
is executed within one hundred twenty (120) days after
Licensor's initial offer, (1) Licensor shall be free to
offer the premises for sale to the general public and (2)
this license agreement shall be automatically amended with
occupancy to continue on a month to month term. Should the
 premises be thereafter sold during the term of the month to
month license, Licensor shall give Licensee forty-five (45)
days prior notice of termination of this license, upon which
Licensee shall relinquish all rights hereunder.
 
In the first argument, Princeville LLC argues that the
 
parties clearly intended that the Right of First Refusal would
 
only apply to the five-year term, because they made specific
 
6
 We note that, in his Opening Brief, Kutkowski argues both that
this is a case of first impression and that the outcome is controlled by
applicable Hawai' i law. We conclude that the Hawai' i appellate courts have not
squarely addressed the issue. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provisions to change the five-year term to a month-to-month term
 
if a sales contract was not executed within a certain time period
 
by the lessee. Thus, Princeville LLC argues, if the parties had
 
intended that the Right of First Refusal be carried over to a
 
holdover tenancy, paragraph 2's requirement that the lease term
 
be amended to a month-to-month tenancy "would be surplus and in
 
fact wouldn't make sense during a holdover because under
 
paragraph 22, the holdover period is already month-to-month." 
The logic of this argument is not sound. Paragraph 2
 
expressly reserves the lessor's right to sell the Premises during
 
the term of the License Agreement. However, if the lessor
 
desires to sell the Premises, the lessor has to offer it to the
 
lessee on terms and conditions provided by the lessor. The
 
lessee can accept or counter within sixty days of the lessor's
 
offer. If a sales agreement is not completed within one hundred
 
and twenty days of the lessor's offer, then the lessee's right of
 
first refusal is no longer effective and the License Agreement is
 
converted from a five-year term to a month-to-month tenancy. 
Clearly, the intent of the language is to truncate the five-year
 
term of the License Agreement, by converting it to a month-to­
month tenancy, if the lessor decides to sell the Premises during
 
the five-year term and no sales contract with the lessee is
 
signed within the specified period. The fact that this
 
conversion to a month-to-month tenancy automatically takes place
 
at the expiration of the five-year term does not render it
 
surplusage in the context of an earlier sale of the Premises. 
While the parties were free to contract otherwise, the parties
 
presumably perceived a benefit to shortening their mutual
 
commitments if the Premises were being offered, and possibly
 
sold, to a third party prior to the end of the five-year term. 
Thus, we reject Princeville LLC's argument that this clause in
 
the Right of First Refusal necessarily causes the Right of First
 
Refusal to be "not applicable" to the holdover tenancy.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Princeville LLC's other contract-construction argument
 
is that the Right of First Refusal in paragraph 2 "says it is for
 
the 'term of the license' which is a five-year term[.]" It is
 
notable, however, that Princeville LLC does not argue that
 
paragraph 2 explicitly limits the exercise of the Right of First
 
Refusal to the five-year term or that the Right of First Refusal
 
is expressly made not applicable to a holdover tenancy. Nothing
 
in paragraph 2, or any other provision of the License Agreement,
 
expressly states that the lessee's right to exercise the Right of
 
First Refusal expires at the end of the initial five-year term or
 
expressly states that the Right of First Refusal is "not
 
applicable" during a holdover tenancy.
 
Instead, Princeville LLC in effect asks this court to
 
construe the License Agreement's silence under the jurisprudence
 
established in other states. We will return to the issue of the
 
applicable jurisprudence right after we review Kutkowski's
 
contract-construction argument.
 
Kutkowski contends that the clear and unambiguous
 
language of paragraph 2 "as a whole" does not limit the Right of
 
First Refusal to the initial five-year term. While it is true
 
that there is no such limiting language in paragraph 2, the
 
intent to be gleaned from the lack of attention to this issue in
 
the wording of paragraph 2 is less immediately clear to this
 
court than it is to Kutkowski.7 Kutkowski also argues, perhaps
 
more persuasively, that a natural and logical reading of the
 Holdover Provision and the License Agreement as a whole supports
 
the conclusion that all terms and conditions of the License
 
7
 Although never arguing that the License Agreement is ambiguous,
Kutkowski includes a weak argument that, if the agreement was ambiguous, parol
evidence shows the parties' intent was to extend the Right of First Refusal to
the holdover period. However, Kutkowski points to no evidence that there was
 
ever any agreement, mutual intent, or even discussion of the issue. The mere
 fact that the "Option to Purchase" was considered by Kutkowski to be an
important part of the parties' agreement does not reasonably lead to the
conclusion that the parties reached an agreement as to the applicability of
the Right of First Refusal during a holdover tenancy.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Agreement are "applicable" to the holdover tenancy, except for
 
the ones that conflict with the expressly stated terms of the
 
Holdover Provision, in particular the five-year term and the
 
escalating monthly rent.
 
Implicit in both parties' arguments is the possibility
 
that the License Agreement might not clearly and unambiguously
 
reflect an intent to continue or discontinue the Right of First
 
Refusal into a holdover tenancy.8 Hence, both parties argue that
 
applicable case law supports their position.
 
We begin with the two Hawai' i cases cited by Kutkowski, 
who argues that "Hawai' i law provides for the extension of the 
Right of First Refusal into a holdover tenancy[.]" 
(Capitalization altered.) Pioneer Mill Co. v. Ward, 34 Haw. 686, 
687-88 (1938), involved an appeal in a partition action in which 
the petitioner, Pioneer Mill Company, Limited (Pioneer) claimed 
an undivided 716/896 interest in six ' âpanas in the ' ili of 
Waihele, located in the valley of Honokowai on Maui. Pioneer 
contended, inter alia, that it had made extensive improvements to 
the land, including the construction of buildings, railroads, 
ditches, tunnels, and pipelines based on its honest belief that 
it or its predecessor-in-interest had acquired title or a right 
to acquire title and prayed for a partition in kind awarding 
Pioneer the lands that it had improved. Id. at 689. The circuit 
court, in large part, adopted Pioneer's position and decreed, 
inter alia, that all of the structures and improvements were the 
sole property of Pioneer. Id. at 690. Upon review of the 
circuit court's final decree of partition, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court observed that, in 1896, Pioneer had leased the land (all 
but one ' âpana of the subject land) for a term of twenty years 
8
 We also infer, from the lack of cogent argument and evidence on
the point, that parol evidence on the issue of parties' intent as to the
continuation or discontinuation of the Right of First Refusal would not be
enlightening, i.e., it was simply not addressed by the parties, even outside
of the written agreement. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the then owners, including the respondents' predecessors-in­
interest, and, at the end of the lease, had continued to occupy
 
said lands and to pay rent to the owners. Id. at 700. The lease
 
included a term wherein Pioneer agreed "at the end or earlier
 determination of this term to peacefully quit and surrender the
 
demised premises with the improvements to the said Lessors[.]" 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). The supreme court
 
concluded that, contrary to Pioneer's contention, Pioneer's
 
holding over after the term of the lease rendered Pioneer to be
 
"a tenant from year to year subject to the tenancy being
 
determined by proper notice." Id. (citations omitted). The
 
court further concluded:
 
The tenancy from year to year, which resulted from the
holding over by petitioner after the expiration of the 1896
lease, was subject to the same covenants and agreements
contained in that lease. . . . One of the covenants was, as
we have seen, to surrender the demised premises with
improvements to the lessors[.]
 
Id. at 701 (citations omitted). As the subject improvements were
 
placed upon the land during the time that Pioneer was in
 
possession as a holdover tenant, the issue of ownership of the
 
improvements was held to be determined by the terms of the lease
 
and the judgment of the circuit court awarding sole ownership to
 
Pioneer was vacated. Id. at 704, 707.
 
In Schimmelfennig v. Grove Farm Co., 41 Haw. 124, 126 
(1955), the Hawai' i Supreme Court reviewed the dismissal of an 
action for the breach of a covenant to restore leased premises to substantially the same condition as existed at the inception of 
the lease. The lessor's suit was dismissed, inter alia, because 
the action was barred by the applicable statute of limitations. 
Id. at 129. The supreme court reiterated the principle 
enunciated in Pioneer Mill, "that a tenancy from year to year 
which results from a holdover beyond the termination date of a 
lease for a term of years becomes subject to the identical 
covenants and agreements contained in the expired lease." Id. at 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
132 (citation omitted). The court concluded, however, that the
 
lessor's suit was barred because the cause of action for a breach
 
of the covenant to restore the leased premises to the condition
 
at the beginning of the lease accrued at the expiration of that
 
lease, and having failed to sue within the statutory period
 
thereafter, the lessor's suit was forever barred. Id. at 135.9
 
Later in the supreme court's opinion (in conjunction with the
 review of whether a transferee of a reversion can recover for a
 
breach of a covenant to repair in the absence of an assignment of
 
the cause of action), the court stated the holdover ruling a bit
 
more narrowly:
 
In the absence of a different rule, created by statute or by
express contract, where a tenant holds over after the
expiration of a written lease, the law implies that he holds
over subject to the terms of the lease as far as the same
are applicable to a monthly letting.
 
Id. at 139 (emphasis added; citation omitted).
 
In sum, Hawai' i case law provides a general rule that, 
in the absence of an agreement (or statute) to the contrary, the 
covenants and agreements in a written lease carry over into a 
holdover tenancy. The Schimmelfennig decision, however, suggests 
that some kinds of covenants and agreements might not be 
applicable to a "monthly letting" or month-to-month tenancy. We 
are also mindful that in Pioneer Mill and Schimmelfennig, the 
supreme court was not squarely faced with the issue of whether an 
option to purchase the leased premises would carry over into a 
holdover tenancy in the same way as the covenants at issue in 
those cases. Thus, we will consider the decisions of and 
distinctions made by courts in other jurisdictions, as the 
parties have urged us to do. 
9
 The evidence showed that the subject improvements, a house and
stone wall, were "nonexistent" at the beginning of the holdover period
following the initial twenty-year lease. Schimmelfennig, 41 Haw. at 133.
Therefore, those improvements were not the subject of covenants that continued
into the holdover tenancy. Id. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, we consider the authorities that Princeville LLC
 
cites for the proposition that a right of first refusal does not
 
carry over to a holdover tenancy, four cases and a treatise on
 
landlord-tenant law.
 
In Power Test Petroleum Distributors v. Baker-Tripi
 
Realty Corp., 481 N.Y.S.2d 619 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1984), a holdover
 
tenant sought to enforce a right of first refusal set forth in a
 
lease agreement. After the lease terminated, the property was
 
sold and the holding-over tenant was asked to vacate the
 
premises. Id. at 620. The tenant instead attempted to exercise
 
the right of first refusal. Id. The lease included the
 
following terms:
 
31. If, at any time, during the term of this lease or any
extension or renewal thereof, lessor, receives a bonafide
offer to lease the demised premises . . . or a bonafide
 offer for the purchase of said premises, and lessor desires
to accept such offer, lessor shall immediately submit to
lessee a written copy of such offer . . . and lessee shall
have thirty (30) days after receipt thereof in which to
elect to lease or purchase said premises upon the sale terms
and conditions contained in such offer.
 
32. If, at the expiration or termination of the lease, or
any extension thereof, lessee shall holdover for any reason,
the tenancy of lessee thereafter shall be from
month-to-month only and be subject to all other terms and
conditions of the lease, in the absence of a written
agreement to the contrary.
 
Id. at 621 (emphasis added). 
Based on these lease provisions and prior cases in that
 
jurisdiction, the New York court concluded:
 
The court finds that under the express provisions of the
lease that the option was valid only during the term of the
lease and therefore expired with the expiration of the lease
on December 11, 1983, the option did not carry over into the
month-to-month tenancy.
 
Id. (citations omitted; emphasis added). Thus, based on the time
 
limit set in the right of first refusal – "during the term of
 
this lease or any extension or renewal thereof" – the Power Test
 
court concluded that the right of first refusal did not carry
 
over into the holdover tenancy, notwithstanding the agreement
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that a holdover tenancy would be subject to the terms and
 
conditions of the lease.
 
The Supreme Court of New Hampshire reviewed, in Carroll
 
v. Daigle, 463 A.2d 885 (N.H. 1983), the rights of holdover
 
tenants with respect to an option to purchase contained in a
 
written lease with no renewal provision. The option provision in
 
the subject lease provided, in relevant part: "At any time
 
during the term of this lease, . . . Lessee . . . may purchase
 
the demised premises. . . ." Id. at 886. The lease expired, the
 
tenants continued to live in the house, and later attempted to
 exercise the option. Id. The New Hampshire court declared that
 
the holdover tenancy "continues upon the same terms, as far as
 they are applicable, of the previous lease." Id. at 887
 
(citations, internal quotation marks, ellipses, and brackets
 omitted). Nevertheless, the court concluded that the option to
 
purchase was not exercisable during the holdover tenancy. Id. at
 
888. The court explained its rejection of the tenants' claim:
 
A holdover tenancy on the same terms as in the
original lease is generally recognized as a new landlord-
tenant relationship, which is distinct from the continuation
of a tenancy based upon exercise of a renewal term of the
lease or upon a subsequent express agreement between the
parties. . . . Treating a holdover tenancy as a new tenancy
is consistent with the fact that, at the outset of the
holdover tenancy, the landlord may elect to treat the tenant
as a trespasser, evict him or hold him as a tenant. . . . 
. . . .
 More persuasive, however, are the decisions of other
jurisdictions which hold that a purchase option which may be
exercised only during the term of the lease does not carry
over into the holdover tenancy. 
These decisions are based on
the fact that a provision which is expressly limited to the
effective period of the lease cannot be considered to be
applicable to the new holdover tenancy. . . . Additionally,
other courts have reached the same conclusion, that a
purchase option expires with the written lease, by reasoning
that the option provision was an independent covenant which
does not become one of the terms of the holdover
 tenancy. . . .
Despite the plaintiffs' claim that the parties
intended the repurchase option to continue as a term of the
holdover tenancy, a plain reading of the option clause
militates against such an interpretation. The option was
expressly made applicable 'during the term of this lease';
it was also, by its terms, supported by 'separate
consideration.' These factors, combined with the fact that
 
20
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the right to exercise the repurchase option was conditioned
upon 'all rental obligations . . . [being] current, . . .
lead us to the conclusion that the option could not
reasonably be considered to be a term of the holdover
tenancy.
The reference in another clause of the lease to the
 
landlord's reasonable rights of entry and inspection 'during
the term of this lease and any renewal thereof' does not
compel the conclusion either that the parties intended or
anticipated a renewal of the original lease upon all its
terms, or that the holdover tenancy could be construed as
such a renewal.
 
Id. at 887-88 (citations and some internal quotation marks
 
omitted; some emphasis added).
 
Thus, the New Hampshire Supreme Court was most
 
persuaded by the reasoning that a provision which is 
expressly
 
limited to the effective period of a lease cannot be considered
 
to be applicable to a holdover tenancy.
 
The third case relied upon by Princeville LLC is Nevala
 
v.
 McKay, 583 P.2d 1065, 1068 (Mont. 1978), a Montana Supreme
 
Court decision holding, inter alia, that a right of first refusal
 
does not carry over into a holdover tenancy. The basis for the
 
Montana court's decision was as follows:
 
We recognize that a few jurisdictions have allowed
holdover tenants to exercise an option to purchase or right
of first refusal during the holdover period, but by far the
greater weight of authority is that such option or right
cannot be exercised by a lessee holding over after the
expiration of the lease. . . .
 
One of the grounds often advanced for a decision that
a purchase option may not be exercised during a holdover
period is articulated as follows:
The option is a covenant which is separate from
and independent of the lease, and, not being one
of the terms of tenancy, is not extended into
the holdover period and cannot be exercised
during such period.
 
It was this rationale that we adopted in arriving at
our decision in Miller v. Meredith, . . ., the case we hold
controlling here. In Miller, the lease provided: 'It is
further agreed that Raymond Miller shall have the right of
option should the lands be for sale.' The question before
the Court was whether a tenant holding over can exercise
such an option. We held that an option to purchase does not
carry over into a holdover tenancy because the lease and the
option are distinct agreements. . . . We apply the same
reasoning here.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. (citations, some internal quotation marks, and ellipses
 
omitted). Thus, Montana is one of the jurisdictions that views
 
the option to purchase as a separate, independent covenant
 
because it is not a term of tenancy, i.e., not a necessary
 
condition of a landlord-tenant relationship and, therefore, not
 
applicable to a holdover tenancy.
 
The fourth case noted by Princeville LLC is Ebrecht v.
 
Ponchatoula Farm Bureau Ass'n, 498 So. 2d 55 (La. App. 1987). In
 
Ebrecht, the Louisiana appellate court rejected the lessee's
 
contention that he was entitled to specific performance of a
 
right of first refusal in an expired lease agreement. Id. at 57. 
Although it appears from the context of the case that the lessee
 may have been a holdover tenant of the leased dock and loading
 
area adjacent to a building that he owned, that circumstance was
 
not discussed or even mentioned by the court in reaching its
 
decision. Id. Instead, the court observed that the lease did
 
not include an option to renew, the lessee's failure to attempt
 to negotiate a new lease indicated that the parties intended for
 
the "option" to expire at the end of the lease term, and "[w]hen
 
the lease terminated by its own terms, the right of first refusal
 
also terminated." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). It
 
appears to this court that the Louisiana court based its
 conclusion on its reading of the subject lease agreement, rather
 
than on a broader proposition of law.
 
Finally, Princeville LLC cites "Robert S. Schoshinski,
 
10
American Law of Landlord and Tenant (1980)"  for the "prevailing
view" that in the absence of a renewal provision, or if a lessee
 fails to timely exercise a right of renewal, a right of first
 
10
 While noting our appreciation for Professor Schoshinski's
comprehensive treatment of landlord-tenant law in this treatise, we also note
that this scholarly work is 910 pages long, even without consideration of the941-page (most recent) cumulative supplement (which includes an additional339-page table of cases). Thus, the inclusion of a page number (or sectionnumber) would not only have satisfied the requirements of Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(1), it would have been helpful to this court. 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
refusal in a lease does not carry over to a holdover tenancy. 
This treatise reports, inter alia:
 
If the duration of an option to purchase is not
specified, it must be exercised during the existence of the
tenancy. Although the decisions are not entirely in accord,
it is generally held that when a tenancy is extended
pursuant to an option to renew, a purchase option in the
original lease is exercisable during the renewal term. This
 is usually not the result when the tenant's continued
possession is pursuant to a new lease. Unless the new
 agreement refers to and extends the terms of the original
lease, the option to purchase expires with the original
tenancy. Similarly, when a new tenancy is created by the
landlord's consent to his tenant's holding over at the
expiration of a lease, the prevailing view is that an option
to purchase is not extended, although there is some
authority to the contrary.
 
ROBERT S.  SCHOSHINSKI ,  AMERICAN LAW OF LANDLORD AND TENANT § 9:11, at  624­
26  (1980  &  Supp.  2011)  (footnotes, including citations, omitted). 
In a footnote, S CHOSHINSKI  adds:
 
Although it is often stated that the holdover tenancy
is on the same conditions and terms as the original tenancy,
the courts in excluding the option to purchase from the new
tenancy, have limited the carryover of the original terms to
those covenants that are necessary to give effect to the new
holding.
 
SCHOSHINSKI , supra, at 626 n.26 (citing Wanous v. Balaco, 107
 
N.E.2d 791 (Ill. 1952)). The Illinois Supreme Court in Wanous
 
explained its reasoning:
 
We believe, however, that even though a purchase
option is held to be an integral part of a lease and,
therefore, renewed when the lease is renewed, it is not such
a provision as will be incorporated in a year to year
tenancy created by operation of law. Not every provision in
a written lease is made a part of a holdover tenancy – only
those terms applicable to the new condition of things are so
treated. . . . We believe that the option to purchase for a
certain sum 'during the term of this lease' is no such a
provision as is applicable to the new tenancy and the new
condition of things.
 
Wanous, 107 N.E.2d at 793 (citation omitted; emphasis added).
 
While variations in rationale exist, a distinct
 
jurisprudential theme emerges from these authorities. Yes, they
 
support the proposition that an option to purchase or a right of
 
first refusal generally does not carry over into a holdover
 
period. However, in most instances, the courts have reached this
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusion based on their interpretation of the particular lease
 
terms presented. See also, e.g., Wright v. Barclay, 36 N.W.2d
 
645, 648 (Neb. 1949) ("[O]ptions should be strictly construed and
 not extended beyond the express provision thereof. If the
 
parties to a lease desire that an option contained therein should
 
extend beyond the term thereof, to a tenant holding over, they
 
can easily use apt language to express that purpose but the law
 
should not, by implication, enlarge the legal rights of a tenant
 
holding over beyond the terms and conditions necessary to
 
continue the landlord tenant relationship."); Vernon v. Kennedy,
 
273 S.E.2d 31, 32 (N.C. App. 1981) (option term cannot be
 
construed as applicable to the holdover tenancy because by its
 
own terms, it is limited to "the term of the lease or the
 
extended period thereof"); Ahmed v. Scott, 418 N.E.2d 406, 411
 
(Ohio App. 1979) (by holding over and not renewing lease for an
 
additional term, lessees impliedly accepted modifications of the
 
lease terms, including the option to purchase the leased premises
 
at the price stated in the original lease); Grisham v. Lowery,
 
621 S.W.2d 745, 749 (Tenn. App. 1981) ("an option to purchase
 
contained in a lease which is exercisable during the term of the
 
lease is not extended by a holdover tenancy and, therefore,
 
cannot be exercised by a lessee holding over after the expiration
 
of a lease"); Blaschke v. Wiede, 649 S.W.2d 749, 750 (Tex. App.
 
1983) ("a holding over under a lease without renewing it does not
 
extend a purchase option beyond the lease term unless a contrary
 
intent appears from the lease as a whole") (citations omitted).
 
We turn next to the case law cited by Kutkowski,
 
principally Sisco v. Rotenberg, 104 So. 2d 365 (Fla. 1958). In
 
Sisco, the appellant succinctly stated both the material facts
 
and legal question presented, as follows:
 
'When a lease of realty for a specified term of five
years also provides that the lessor agrees 'during the
tenure of the lease' to sell to the lessee the leased
 property for a named cash price and also provides that the
lessee has the option to renew the lease for a period of
five years 'on the same terms and conditions,' does the
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exercise of the option to renew also extend into the
extended term the right of the lessee to purchase the leased
premises for the price specified?'
 
Id. at 366. 
In disposing of this issue, the Florida Supreme Court
 
adopted the "general rule," which answered appellant's question
 
in the affirmative. Simply stated, "where the original lease, or
 
agreement to lease, provides for an extension of the term, at the
 
tenant's election, an option therein contained to purchase during
 
the term is likewise extended." Id. at 369 (citation omitted). 
In doing so, the Florida court specifically noted that the facts
 of the case before it rendered unnecessary any consideration of
 
another general rule, i.e., that "[a]n option to purchase during
 
the term cannot be exercised after its expiration by a tenant
 
holding over[.]" Id. (citation omitted).
11 Indeed, later
 
Florida decisions confirm that the Sisco rule applies only to
 renewed or extended lease terms, and reject its application to
 
holdover tenancies. See, e.g., Gower–Goheen Realty, Inc. v.
 
Braun, 215 So. 2d 499, 500 (Fla. App. 1968); Douglass v. Jones,
 422 So. 2d 352, 355 (Fla. App. 1982); Gross v. Bartlett, 547 So.
 
2d 661, 662, 663-64 (Fla. App. 1989).
 
The other cases cited by Kutkowski also support the
 
general proposition that, if a lease agreement includes (1) a
 
right for the tenant to extend or renew the term of the lease and
 
(2) an option to purchase during the term of the lease, and the
 
tenant timely exercises the right to extend or renew the term of
 
the lease, then the option to purchase remains effective during
 
the extended lease term, unless otherwise agreed. See Ardito v.
 
Howell, 51 A.2d 859, 861-62 (Del. Ch. 1947) (where the word
 "term" referred to original term and extended term, option to
 
purchase effective during the term of the lease can be exercised
 
11
 The Sisco opinion includes a useful compendium of cases and other
 
authorities on this topic, which we will not repeat here. Sisco, 104 So. 2d
 
at 369-74.
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
during the extended term); Chosewood v. Byars, 41 S.E.2d 530,
 
531-32 (Ga. 1947) (upholding verdict that lease agreement giving
 
the tenant a right to extend the lease at same terms and price
 
included the option to purchase set forth in the lease); Hindu
 
Incense Mfg. Co. v. MacKenzie, 86 N.E.2d 214, 216-17 (Ill. 1949)
 
(option to purchase "any time during lease" was valid and binding
 
during extended term where tenant had exercised option to renew
 
"under same terms and conditions" as in the lease); Schaeffer v.
 
Bilger, 45 A.2d 775, 779 (Md. 1946) (if a lease with a right of
 
renewal or extension contains an option to purchase, the option
 
to purchase goes along with the extended term, unless clear
 
intent to the contrary appears);12 Starr v. Holck, 28 N.W.2d 289,
 
294 (Mich. 1947) (where lease provided that all terms applied to
 extensions, which were exercised at tenant's option, option to
 
purchase was valid during extended term); Balsham v. Koffler, 73
 
A.2d 272, 274 (N.J. Super. 1950) (option to purchase was
 
continued where tenants continued to pay separate monthly charge
 
specifically for the option); First-Citizens Bank & Trust Co. v.
 
Frazelle, 40 S.E.2d 367, 370 (N.C. 1946) (lease construed to be
 
in force where tenant had option to renew and no formal notice of
 
renewal required; option to purchase was enforceable); Moore v.
 
Maes, 52 S.E.2d 204, 206-07 (S.C. 1949) (lessee's option to 
12
 In later cases, the Maryland courts abandoned the distinction
between leases that were extended by right or agreement and holdover
tenancies. See, e.g., Gressitt v. Anderson, 51 A.2d 159 (Md. 1947); Caplan v.
Goldstein, 194 A.2d 622 (Md. 1963). It appears, however, that few
jurisdictions have followed Maryland's lead in this regard. See, e.g., Wright
v. Barclay, 36 N.W.2d 645, 648 (Neb. 1949) (rejecting Gressitt rule and
holding that "the law should not, by implication, enlarge the legal rights of
a tenant holding over beyond the terms and conditions necessary to continue
the landlord tenant relationship"); Carroll v. Daigle, 463 A.2d 885, 887 (N.H.
1983); (rejecting Gressitt); Ahmed v. Scott, 418 N.E.2d 406, 411-12 (Ohio App.
1979) (declining to follow Gressitt); but see Peter-Michael, Inc. v. Sea Shell
Assocs., 709 A.2d 558, 563 (Conn. 1998) (while not deciding issue of whether
right of first refusal was limited to lease term, concluding that plaintiff's
claim was legally sufficient to survive a motion to strike).
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purchase may be exercised during period of renewal or extension
 
where lease gives lessee right of renewal).13
 
In accordance with the prevailing legal authorities in 
other jurisdictions, and consistent with existing Hawai' i law, we 
adopt the following principles: 
1. When a lease for a specified term provides
 
for an extension or renewal of that term, exercisable
 by the lessee, the lessee's timely exercise of the
 
option to extend or renew also extends an option to
 
purchase or right of first refusal, unless otherwise
 
stated in the lease agreement.
 
2. When a lease for a specified term is not
 
extended or renewed, and the lessee holds over after
 
the expiration of the lease, unless otherwise agreed,
 
the law implies that the parties' rights and
 
obligations with respect to that holdover tenancy
 
continue as set forth in the expired lease agreement.
 
3. Although a holdover tenancy continues subject
 
to the conditions of that tenancy determined by the
 
original lease, the law will not imply a continued
 
obligation to sell the leased property, absent an
 
expression of the lessor's agreement to continue such
 
obligation during a holdover tenancy.
 
The first principle is directly supported by Sisco and
 
the cases brought to the court's attention by Kutkowski and upon
 
our further research and review. This principle is not undercut
 
by the weight of authorities cited by Princeville LLC, which
 
13
 Kutkowski also cites to O'Brien v. Hurley, 90 N.E.2d 335 (Mass.
 
1950), which does not support Kutkowski's position. In O'Brien, the
Massachusetts Supreme Court held that an option to purchase the property could
not be validly exercised during an additional "term" where there was no formal
renewal or extension of the lease, as was possible if the term had been
renewed under a renewal clause in the lease. Id. at 336-37. 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authorities (and like jurisprudence) contrast the circumstances
 
of an expressly extended or renewed lease term versus a tenancy
 
by holdover, particularly when the covenant creating the option
 
to purchase or right of first refusal limits the exercise of the
 
option to the period of the lease.
 
The second principle states the common law followed in 
Hawai'i and most every other jurisdiction surveyed, and sets 
forth the common understanding and rules applicable to the dealings of landlord and tenant after the termination of their 
express agreement, but effectuates, as the law must, the parties' 
right to agree to the contrary. 
The third principle embraces a clear majority view,
 
declining to impose on a lessor an extracontractual obligation to
 
part with his or her property by operation of law, as opposed to
 
his or her own expression of assent to such parting.
 
We now turn to the application of these principles to 
the case before us. As the License Agreement does not include a 
right, exercisable by Kutkowski, to extend or renew the term of 
the License Agreement, the first principle stated above is 
inapplicable. We reject Kutkowski's argument that the License 
Agreement was "extended or renewed" simply by virtue of 
Kutkowski's holding over. The second principle clearly applies, 
pursuant to the Holdover Provision in the License Agreement and 
as a matter of Hawai' i law. The third principle is determinative 
of the issue raised in Princeville LLC's appeal. 
Courts have carefully scrutinized the terms of the
 
leases before them to determine whether the parties intended that
 an option to purchase or right of first refusal expire with the
 
term of the lease. Thus, our analysis brings us back to the key
 
provisions of the License Agreement. Unlike the lease provisions
 
in Power Test and Carroll, for example, the Right of First
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Refusal does not expressly limit the lessee's rights to the five-
year term of the License Agreement. In addition, we need not
 
resort to common law to imply the application of the terms and
 
conditions of the License Agreement to the holdover tenancy. The
 
Holdover Provision expressly subjects the holdover tenancy to the
 
terms and conditions specified in the License Agreement, so far
 
as applicable. There is nothing in the Right of First Refusal,
 
the Holdover Provision, or any other part of the License
 
Agreement that renders the Right of First Refusal inapplicable. 
The authorities relied upon by Princeville LLC, reflected in the
 
third principle stated above, refuse to impose a continued
 
obligation to sell a leased property during a holdover tenancy in
 
the face of an express limitation of that right to the term of
 
the lease, but do not state that an option to sell or right of
 
first refusal is inapplicable as a matter of law. Thus, we
 
conclude that the Right of First Refusal in the License Agreement
 
is applicable during the holdover tenancy.
 
B. Specific Performance
 Having determined that the Right of First Refusal
 
remains applicable during a holdover tenancy, we return to
 Kutkowski's point of error, which contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred when it denied his request for specific performance on the
 
grounds that the sale of the Master Parcel did not constitute a
 
decision to sell the Premises. Kutkowski relies not on the
 
intent and scope of the parties' agreement, but on the view
 
adopted in a minority of other jurisdictions, which Kutkowski
 
urges this court to adopt.
 
Under Hawai' i law: 
Leases are essentially contractual in nature and are
reviewed under principles of contract law. . . . Absent an
ambiguity, contract terms should be interpreted according totheir plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech. . . . Moreover, the construction and the legal effect to be 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
given a contract is a question of law freely reviewable by an
appellate court.
 
HI Kai Inv., Ltd. v. Aloha Futons Beds & Waterbeds, Inc., 84 
Hawai'i 75, 78, 929 P.2d 88, 91 (1996) (citations and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
It is undisputed, and by its own terms, the License
 
Agreement applies only to the Premises and not to the Master
 Parcel. The language of the Right of First Refusal only
 
manifests agreement concerning a circumstance in which the lessor
 
decided to sell the Premises that are subject to the License
 
Agreement: "[i]n the event Licensor decides to sell the
 
premises, it shall be first offered to Licensee on terms and
 
conditions provided by the Licensor[.]" (Emphasis added.) There
 
is no express or implied agreement in the Right of First Refusal,
 
or elsewhere in the License Agreement, concerning a circumstance
 
in which the lessor decides to sell the Master Parcel as a whole. 
There is no express or implied agreement requiring the lessor to
 
subdivide the Master Parcel prior to or upon its sale in order to
 
offer the Premises for sale to the lessee, or allocating the
 
costs of such subdivision to one party or the other. 
We cannot detect any ambiguity in the License Agreement
 
that would warrant consideration of parol evidence that the
 
parties intended such obligations. Even if we were to consider
 
parol evidence, Kutkowski offered not a scintilla of evidence in
 
support of such intent. Indeed, the only parol evidence in the
 
record relevant to the parties' intent would be Kutkowski's March
 
1998 letter recognizing that the Premises was an undivided part
 
of the larger Master Parcel and further recognizing that the
 
Premises might not be "dividable from the large amount of
 
property Princeville owns" and the lessor's managing agent's memo
 
stating "[t]he tenant will be provided a first right of refusal
 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in case of subdivision and sale of the property he occupies." 
(Emphasis added.) 
Kutkowski requests that this court conclude that the
 
Right of First Refusal must be construed as a matter of law to be
 
triggered by the sale of the Master Parcel, notwithstanding the
 
absence of any evidence of an agreement to that effect. 
Kutkowski then asks that the court order specific performance of
 
the "contractual" Right of First Refusal. And, finally,
 
Kutkowski's argument for specific performance of the Right of
 
First Refusal includes a request that this court remand to the
 
Circuit Court for a determination of the fair market value of the
 
property, and even posits that "there is no reason why
 
Princeville LLC should not be required to seek such a variation
 
[from subdivision and zoning ordinances] in order to satisfy its
 
obligations under the right of first refusal." 
We digress briefly to note that, even if we conclude
 
that the Right of First Refusal is triggered by a sale of the
 
Master Parcel, we need not address whether such a variance is
 
feasible, as there is clearly no obligation for the lessor to
 
undertake such actions. On the contrary, under the plain and
 
unambiguous language of paragraph 2 of the License Agreement, the
 
lessor has the right to determine the terms and conditions of any
 
sale, including the purchase price and the satisfaction of any
 
conditions; although the lessee is free to make a counteroffer,
 
the lessee has no right to demand particular terms and
 
conditions. Under the express terms of the License Agreement, a
 
failure to reach mutually-acceptable terms within the specified
 
period ends the period of purchase preemption, freeing the lessor
 
to offer the Premises for sale to the general public.
 
Returning to Kutkowski's point of error, we consider
 
the cases cited by the parties. Kutkowski points to Wilber Lime
 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Products, Inc. v. Ahrndt, 673 N.W.2d 339 (Wis. App. 2003), as
 
being instructive. While we agree that Wilber Lime aptly
 
summarizes the minority view, we decline to apply its reasoning
 
here. Wilber Lime began its analysis with a discussion of
 
another case concluding that "the sale of a large parcel of land
 triggers a right of first refusal on a smaller portion within the
 
large parcel." Id. at 341 (citing Brenner v. Duncan, 27 N.W.2d
 
320, 322 (Mich. 1947)). Wilber Lime adopted what it recognized
 
as a minority view because to "conclude otherwise would permit an
 
owner and prospective purchaser to, in effect, destroy a
 
bargained-for purchase preemption before [its] expiration[.]" 
Id. at 342 (quoting Berry-Iverson Co. v. Johnson, 242 N.W.2d 126,
 
134 (N.D. 1976)) (internal quotation marks omitted). As
 
discussed below, courts holding the majority view have rejected
 
this logic, refusing to enlarge one party's rights over or at the
 
expense of those of the other party, where a right of first
 
refusal was not triggered under the terms of the parties'
 
agreement. 
The Wilber Lime court struggled, however, with the
 
remedy imposed in Brenner, which was to attribute a per-acre
 
"ratio" of the value of the larger parcel to the smaller parcel
 
and permit the tenant-right holder to purchase the smaller parcel
 
for that amount. Wilber Lime, 673 N.W.2d at 342-43. Wilber Lime
 
recognized the inherent unfairness of such a judicial mandate,
 noting that "[i]t would bear no relation to its worth and the
 
holder of the right of first refusal would have acquired the
 
property at an absurdly low price and on terms never really
 
agreed to between the parties." Id. (citation, internal
 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). The inequity of this
 remedy has the potential to be particularly great in a case such
 
as the one at bar, where the Master Parcel is quite large and
 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
apparently encompasses a wide range of conditions and uses,
 
including highly-developed resort and golf course areas, and
 
leased agricultural and residential areas.
 
Instead of a pro rata allocation of value, the Wilber
 
Lime court remanded the case for a determination of the "fair
 
market value" of the smaller parcel. Id. at 343 (adopting a
 
"middle road" from Pantry Pride Enters. v. Stop & Shop Cos., 806
 F.2d 1227 (4th Cir. 1986)). While perhaps better than the
 
Brenner remedy, the remedy imposed in Wilber Lime is also
 
problematic and, in the present case, would constitute a complete
 
reformation of the parties' agreement. As noted above, the Right
 
of First Refusal here does not determine a price or an agreed-
upon method for establishing a price, as is sometimes the case. 
By comparison, many rights of first refusal require that the
 
right-holder match the price and terms offered by a bona fide
 
third-party purchaser. See, e.g., Wilber Lime, 673 N.W.2d at
 
341; Berry-Iverson, 242 N.W.2d at 129. In this case, however,
 
the Right of First Refusal gives the lessor the right to provide
 
the "terms and conditions" of sale, with a period of time in
 
which the lessee may accept or make a counteroffer. We note that
 
the rationale given by the Wilber Lime court for the adoption of
 
its remedy in that case, in fact, supports our rejection of it
 
here. The court stated: "This approach best fulfills the
 
intentions of the parties when they entered into the agreement
 
granting [the lessee] the right of first refusal." Wilber Lime,
 
673 N.W.2d at 343. We reject Kutkowski's request to specifically
 enforce a sale at a price and on conditions that, by the plain
 
and unambiguous terms of the License Agreement, Princeville LLC
 
had no obligation to accept. 
The majority view relied upon by Princeville LLC has
 
been summarized as follows:
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As indicated in the better reasoned cases collected in
 
an annotation at 170 A.L.R. 1068 (1947), the holder of the
option of first refusal on a portion only of a larger tract
may not obtain specific performance of his option so as to
require conveyance to him of the whole property the owner
desires to sell[.] Nor may the property owner, by an
acceptance of an offer to sell the whole, be compelled by
judicial decree to dispose of the optioned part separately
from the property as a whole. An attempt to sell the whole
may not be taken as a manifestation of an intention or
desire on the part of the owner to sell the smaller optioned
part so as to give the optionee the right to purchase the
same[.]
 
Aden v. Estate of Hathaway, 427 P.2d 333, 334 (Colo. 1967) (en
 
banc) (quoting Guaclides v. Kruse, 170 A.2d 488, 493 (N.J. App.
 
1961)) (ellipses and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis
 
added).14
 
While uniform in their rejection of the view that an
 
attempt to sell a larger parcel triggers a right of first refusal
 
on its smaller part, the actions taken by the majority courts
 
have varied, depending on the specific circumstances before them. 
The application of the majority view has not, as the Wilber Lime
 
court feared, destroyed the bargained-for right of the lessees. 
For example, in Guaclides, the New Jersey court concluded:
 
We hold that an option of first refusal as to a portion only
of a tract may be exercised only if the owner determines to
sell that portion for a separate consideration; and the
attempted sale of the whole tract for a single price is no
indication of an intention or desire to sell the portion
alone. Therefore, [the lessor] may not be compelled by [the
lessee] to sell to it the [leased] part, merely because he 
14
 In his opening brief, Kutkowski ignores the Colorado Supreme
Court's decision in Aden and instead urges the court to follow a Colorado
Intermediate Court of Appeals decision in Thomas & Son Transfer Line, Inc. v.
Kenyon, Inc., 574 P.2d 107 (Colo. App. 1977). However, the Thomas court
explained that, unlike in Aden where the preemption-burdened parcel was a
portion only of a larger tract, the bundled properties in Thomas were
separate, non-contiguous tracts, separated from one another by two lots owned
by a third party, and therefore the case was factually distinct. Id. at 112.
 
The case before us is much more akin to Aden, as the ½-acre Premises leased by
Kutkowski are an undivided part of the 1000-acre Master Parcel owned by
Princeville LLC.
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
has determined to sell all his property including that part for a
unit price.
 
170 A.2d at 494.
 
The court, nevertheless, was cognizant of and careful
 
to preserve the lessee's right until the termination of the
 
lease, stating:
 
[T]he above cases which deny the optionee specific
performance as to the whole or part hold that the owner of
the whole may not impair or destroy the preemptive right to
purchase the part by a sale or agreement to sell the whole
to some third person. The courts have enjoined the
conveyance of the portion covered by the option; or where
title has already passed to a transferee, with actual or
constructive notice of the option, a reconveyance of the
optioned portion has been ordered. . . . We concur in the
generally accepted view as to the optionee's right to an
injunction to restrain a vitiating of its option by the
inclusion, in the owner's prospective sale, of property in
excess of that covered by the option. To allow the owner of
 the whole to by-pass the optionee merely by attaching
additional land to the part under option would render
nugatory a substantial right which the optionee had
bargained for and obtained.
 
170 A.2d 494-95 (citations omitted).
 
Accordingly, the Guaclides court refused the lessee's
 
request for specific performance but concluded that the lessor
 
should be restrained until the termination of the lease – which
 
also terminated the right of first refusal – from selling the
 
portion of his property covered by the right of first refusal to
 
anyone but the right-holder lessee, without giving the lessee the
 
first opportunity to purchase at the bona fide offer price
 
acceptable to the lessor. Id. at 497; see also Chapman v. Mut.
 
Life Ins., Co., 800 P.2d 1147, 1150, 1152 (Wyo. 1990) (rejecting
 claim for specific performance of right of first refusal because
 
consideration of offer on large tract did not constitute intent
 
to sell smaller tract, as would be necessary to provide grounds
 
for specific performance; remanding for injunction of any sale
 
including the smaller parcel, until owner receives an acceptable
 
offer for it and the right of first refusal is thereby
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transformed into an option);15 Ollie v. Rainbolt, 669 P.2d 275,
 
279, 282 (Okla. 1983) (conditions of right of first refusal not
 
presented and thus specific performance of preemptive right
 
denied; case remanded to grant right-holder's requested temporary
 
injunction of sale including preemption-encumbered part until
 
such time as a sale is conducted with full regard for the right
 
of first refusal); Gyurkey v. Babler, 651 P.2d 928, 933 (Idaho
 
1982) (adopting majority rule rejecting claim for specific
 
performance and enjoining sale of larger parcel pending bona fide
 
offer for smaller lot only).
 
In Aden, the lessees argued that a proposed sale of a
 
large tract of land, which included a smaller tract that they
 
leased, triggered the right of first refusal in their lease
 
agreement. Aden, 427 P.2d at 334. The sale fell through,
 
however, when lessees refused to waive their right of first
 refusal. Id. The lessees nevertheless filed suit, seeking to
 
compel a sale at a pro rata price based on the agreed-upon price
 for the larger tract. Id. The en banc Colorado Supreme Court
 
affirmed the trial court's refusal to order specific performance
 of a sale of the smaller tract, in effect leaving the parties in
 
15
 The right of first refusal in Chapman was not part of a lease
 
agreement and was instead contained in a contract for deed for an adjoining
parcel. 800 P.2d at 1148. Thus, when the landowner sold the first parcel, it
gave its buyers a right of first refusal on the adjoining 20-acre parcel. Id. 
Unlike the preemptive rights generally contained in lease agreements, this one
apparently had no termination date. See id. When the landowner later
 
entertained an offer for a 273-acre tract including the 20-acre parcel, the
preemptive-right-holding buyers sought specific performance of the right of
first refusal on the 20-acre parcel. Id. at 1149. The court's rejection of
the requested specific performance and its adoption of an injunctive remedy
avoided an "undesirable" reformation of the parties' contract, and instead
returned the parties to the "positions they occupied before [the] attempted
sale of the larger parcel" and provided an opportunity for the performance of
the parties' agreement "without judicial intrusion into establishment of the
price term of any desired sale." Id. at 1152. Unlike a lease provision that
terminates with the period of the lease, the preemptive right in Chapman did
not have a termination date, thus remained exercisable until a bona fide offer
for the subject parcel transformed it into an option that could then be
exercised or waived. Id. at 1150, 1152.
 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the same position as before the lessor entertained the offer on
 
the larger tract. Id.; see also Atlantic Ref. Co. v. Wyom. Nat.
 
Bank of Wilke-Barre, 51 A.2d 719, 729 (Penn. 1947) (rejecting
 lessee's argument that offer of larger parcel triggered first­
option-to-purchase clause in lease; denying specific performance
 
to both lessee and prospective buyer; noting that "title will
 
continue where it has been, viz., in the defendant [lessor]").
 
In C&B Wholesale Stationary v. S. De Bella Dresses,
 
Inc., 349 N.Y.S.2d 751, 753-54 (N.Y. App. Div. 1973) (citations
 
omitted), a New York appellate court concluded that the sale of
 
certain leased premises as part of a larger parcel did not
 
entitle the lessee to specific performance because "the lessor
 
had no intention to sell only the leased premises." The court,
 
however, granted the plaintiff-lessor's request for rescission of
 
the sale of the larger parcel because "[t]he right which
 
plaintiff enjoyed by virtue of the first refusal clause cannot be
 
rendered nugatory by the device of attaching additional land to
 
the leased premises and finding a buyer for the entire parcel. 
Id. (citation omitted); Saab Enters. v. Wladislaw Wunderbar, 554
 
N.Y.S.2d 657, 658 (N.Y. App. Div. 1990) (same).
 
This sort of remedy has been rejected in some cases
 
adopting the majority rule. For example, in Crow-Spieker No. 23
 v. Helms Constr. & Dev. Co., 731 P.2d 348, 349 (Nev. 1987), in
 
conjunction with a sale of Tract A, the sellers agreed that "if
 
and when we decide to sell" Tract B, the buyer would have the
 
first opportunity to purchase Tract B for the same price and
 
subject to the same terms as offered by a bona fide third party
 
purchaser, if the terms were to be acceptable to the sellers. 
Years later, the sellers decided that it would be advantageous to
 
sell Tract B as part of a much larger parcel. Id. The Nevada
 
Supreme Court determined that the right of first refusal was not
 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
implicated because the right of first refusal clearly applied
 
only to offers for Tract B. Id. at 350. The court explained
 
that it "would not condone an attempt to evade [buyer's]
 contractual rights by engineering the sale of a larger parcel,
 
. . . but in this case there was no evidence of any wrongful
 
intent." Rather, the record reflected a "good faith decision" by
 
the seller to sell the entire tract. Id. Accordingly,
 
alternative claims for specific performance or money damages were
 both rejected. Id.; cf. Martinesi v. Tidmore, 760 P.2d 1102,
 
1103-04 (Ariz. App. 1988) (held that owner may convey property
 subject to a lease, including option to purchase; initial owner,
 
however, is not relieved of liability for subsequent breach of
 
option agreement exercised prior to termination of lease).
 
Some jurisdictions adopting the majority rule have
 
recognized the remedies available to maintain the status quo
 
until the right of first refusal expires, such as injunctive
 
relief or rescission of the sale, but declined to apply them
 
because of the particular facts of the case. For example, in
 
Straley v. Osborne, 278 A.2d 64, 69-70 (Md. 1971), the Maryland
 
Court of Appeals held that a right of first refusal did not give
 
the lessee a right to compel the sale of the smaller (leased)
 
portion based on lessor's acceptance of an offer for the larger
 
parcel including leased premises. Although recognizing that
 
lessor "cannot act in derogation of the lessee's 'first option'
 
rights in the leased premises," the court refused to set aside
 
the sale to a third party or to order specific performance
 
because lessee had actual notice of the impending sale, over a
 
period of many months, and took no steps to attempt a purchase,
 
enjoin the proposed sale, or otherwise protect his right until
 
after the third party sale closed. Id. at 70-71. In Advanced
 
Recycling Sytems, LLC v. Southeast Properties Limited
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Partnership, 787 N.W.2d 778, 784-85 (S.D. 2010) (citing, inter
 
alia, Chapman), the Supreme Court of South Dakota held that the
 
landlord did not violate the tenant's right of first refusal by
 
selling the development that included the leased property because
 
there was no evidence of an offer to purchase the leased premises
 
apart from the development. Although noting the remedies of
 
enjoining the conveyance or ordering reconveyance of the property
 
including the leased premises, the court declined to grant any
 
equitable relief because the lessee did not pursue its right of
 
first refusal until after the lease expired. Id. at 786 n.5; see
 
also Myers v. Lovetinsky, 189 N.W.2d 571, 576, 577 (Iowa 1971)
 (holding that "to grant specific performance of the demised
 
premises for their market value is to rewrite the tenant's
 
preferential right" and thus "in these situations the tenant's
 
relief is limited to maintaining the status quo ante with respect
 
to the demised premises for the rest of the term of the lease";
 
denying any relief to tenant who failed to act prior to
 
expiration of the lease term).
 
We adopt the majority view and conclude that the sale 
of the Master Parcel may not be taken as a manifestation of 
Princeville Corp.'s intention or desire to sell the Premises so 
as to entitle Kutkowski to specific performance of the Right of 
First Refusal, as to grant Kutkowski's requested relief would 
require a wholesale reformation of the parties' agreement and, 
inter alia, require judicial establishment of a price term, which 
would directly contradict the bargained-for rights of the 
parties. That said, Hawai' i courts will not allow an owner, such 
as Princeville Corp., and a prospective purchaser or actual purchaser, such as Princeville LLC, to, in effect, destroy a 
bargained-for right of first refusal before its expiration. In 
many circumstances, that conclusion would lead to an injunction 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of a prospective sale or the rescission and/or reconveyance of a
 
completed sale, in order to maintain the status quo, preserving
 
the lessee's right of first refusal, until its exercise, waiver,
 
or termination at the expiration of the lease.
 
Here, Kutkowski initially filed this suit prior to
 
Princeville Corp.'s sale of the Master Parcel to Princeville
 
LLC.16 Kutkowski did not seek to enjoin the sale prior to its
 
March 17, 2005 closing; nor has he requested the rescission of
 the sale of the Master Parcel. In the Assumption Agreement,
 
Princeville LLC expressly assumed and in effect acknowledged that
 
Kutkowski's rights under the License Agreement survived the sale
 
of the Master Parcel. As discussed above, Kutkowski's rights as
 
a month-to-month holdover tenant include the Right of First
 
Refusal, but that right terminates if and when the holdover
 
tenancy is terminated. 
Also, the record in this case shows that Kutkowski,
 
Princeville Corp., and Princeville LLC entered into the
 
Stipulation, substituting Princeville LLC as the proper party
 
defendant in this suit. In the Stipulation, Kutkowski agreed to
 
seek relief only from Princeville LLC and agreed to the dismissal
 
with prejudice of Princeville Corp., including the dismissal and
 
release of all claims, known or unknown, against Princeville
 
Corp. Princeville LLC agreed that any claims that could have
 
been made against Princeville Corp. may instead be made against
 
it and that Princeville LLC will pay such claims or render such
 
performance as would have been due from Princeville Corp.
 
In the absence of any request for such relief and under
 
the circumstances of this case, neither an injunction maintaining
 
Princeville Corp.'s ownership of the Premises nor rescission
 
16
 Kutkowski later filed a First Amended Complaint reflecting that
the sale had been completed after the suit was filed.
 
40
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and/or reconveyance of the Master Parcel are warranted. 
Moreover, contrary to Kutkowski's assertion on appeal, his rights
 
under the Right of First Refusal remain intact and enforceable
 
against Princeville LLC so long as the holdover tenancy
 
continues, to the same extent it would have been enforceable
 
against Princeville Corp. if the Master Parcel had not been sold. 
Thus, if Princeville LLC were to decide to sell the Premises, it
 
must first be offered to Kutkowski on terms and conditions
 
offered by Princeville LLC, in accordance with the Right of First
 
Refusal. We recognize that Kutkowski is dissatisfied with this
 
outcome because he has no right to continue the holding over
 
without his lessor's consent and, upon proper notice, the
 
holdover tenancy may be terminated, along with the right of first
 
refusal. However, that is the extent of the parties' bargain,
 
which we will neither expand nor abridge.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's October
 
2, 2007 Judgment is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Margery S. Bronster
Rex Y. Fujichaku
(Bronster Hoshibata)
and
 
Joe P. Moss
 for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Plaintiff-Cross-Appellee
 
David W. Proudfoot
 
Dawn N. Murata
 (Belles Graham Proudfoot
Wilson & Chun, LLP)
and
 
Colleen Hanabusa
 for Defendant-Appellee/
Defendant-Cross-Appellant
 
41
 