NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29309
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KELLY A. ARQUILLA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 07-1-2207)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This memorandum opinion addresses two points of alleged
 
error regarding communications between the court and a
 
deliberating jury. 
Specifically, we determine whether it was
 
erroneous for the trial court to: (1) deny a jury's request to
 review a significant portion of witness testimony transcripts,
 and (2) answer a question from the jury by referring them back to
 a portion of the jury instructions. In addition, we determine
 whether layperson eyewitness testimonies were insufficient to
 establish "bodily injury" under section 707-700, Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (1993), in part because an examining physician found no
 injuries on the infant victim. 
For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that the
 
trial court's responses to the jury were not erroneous, and that
 the eyewitness testimony was sufficient to establish bodily
 injury. Consequently, we affirm the judgment of the Family Court
 of the First Circuit (family court).
1/
 
Defendant-Appellant Kelly A. Arquilla (Arquilla) 
appeals from the July 15, 2008 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence finding her guilty of Abuse of Family or Household Members in violation of section 709-906 (1), Hawaii Revised Statutes (Supp. 2009). Arquilla was sentenced to twenty-two days in prison, with credit for time served, and two years of probation in the Hawai
'i Opportunity Probation with Enforcement 
program. She was also ordered to pay a crime victims 
1/
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compensation fee of $55.00 and a probation services fee of
 
$150.00.
 
On appeal, Arquilla argues that: (1) the family court
 
reversibly erred by denying the jury's request for transcripts of
 the testimony of the four principal percipient witnesses, (2)
 there was insufficient evidence for the jury to find Arquilla
 guilty under the statute, and (3) the family court reversibly
 erred by responding to a jury inquiry by referring the jury back
 to a specific section of the jury instructions. We resolve
 Arquilla's points of error as follows:
 
I.	 The Family Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion By Refusing To
Provide The Jury With The Requested Transcripts
 
Arquilla was charged with one count of Abuse of Family
 
or Household Members, under which the State contended that
 
Arquilla intentionally, knowingly or recklessly dropped her
 twenty-four-day-old daughter from approximately waist-height onto
 the floor of her apartment in the aftermath of an argument with
 the Ben Teixiera (Ben), her boyfriend and the infant's father. 
The charge was based largely on the eye-witness
 
testimony of Sharon Teixiera (Sharon) and her boyfriend, Jesse
 Grinker (Jesse). Sharon is Ben's sister, and was present at
 Arquilla's apartment to help Ben get gas for his car. 
After closing arguments in the case and after
 
deliberating for a few hours, the jury sent the following written
 communication to the court: "The jurors do not all agree as to
 what the witnesses said and which witness said what. So, we
 request a transcript of the testimonies of: Sharon[,] Jesse[,]
 Ben[, and Arquilla]."
 
The family court responded, in writing: "You must rely
 
upon your memory of the evidence in your deliberations. There
 are no transcripts of the witness[es]' testimony." 
This court has previously held that "[b]ecause the 
circuit court's response to a jury communication is the functional equivalent of an instruction, the standard of review for jury instructions also applies to reviewing a trial court's answers to jury communications." State v. Miyashiro, 90 Hawai
'i 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
489, 492, 979 P.2d 85, 88 (App. 1999) (trial court's failure to
 
provide unanimity instruction in response to jury's request for
 information on charged offense was misleading). 
When jury instructions are at issue on appeal, "the 
standard of review is whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Gonsalves, 108 
Hawai
'i 289, 292, 119 P.3d 597, 600 (2005) (quoting State v. 
Kinnane, 79 Hawai 'i 46, 49 897 P.2d 973, 976 (1995)) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
In determining whether the family court's response to 
the jury's request is prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent or misleading, we observe that trial courts are typically afforded significant deference with regard to jury requests for transcripts. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has referred 
approvingly to the Illinois Supreme Court's explanation that: 
The trial court will have . . . full knowledge of the case.
It will know the charges against the accused, the witnesses
and their supporting or defeating testimony and other
evidence which may have been presented. It will be in a
 position to assess the request and judge whether a review of
testimony, considering the circumstances, will be helpful or
hurtful to the jury's proper deliberations. This question
of review, like so many others which appear in the course of
trial, is best entrusted to the trial court's sound
discretion.
 
State v. Minn, 79 Hawai 'i 461, 466, 903 P.2d 1282, 1287 (1995) 
(quoting People v. Pierce, 308 N.E.2d 577, 578 (Ill. 1974) 
(affirming trial court's denial of jury's request for testimony of the victim and arresting officer). 
As a result, the decision whether to allow a read back 
of testimony to a jury during deliberations is a matter "entirely in the sound discretion of the [trial] court." Medeiros v. 
Udell, 34 Haw. 632, 638 (Haw. Terr. 1938). The majority of jurisdictions that have considered the question follow this approach. Minn, 79 Hawai
'i at 465-66, 903 P.2d at 1286-87; see, 
e.g., United States v. Holmes, 863 F.2d 4, 5 (2d Cir. 1988); United States v. De Palma, 414 F.2d 394, 396-97 (9th Cir. 1969); People v. Coleman, 534 N.E.2d 583, 610 (Ill. App. Ct. 1989); Commonwealth v. Richenburg, 518 N.E.2d 1143, 1150 (Mass. 1988); 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Lang, 272 S.E.2d 123, 124 (N.C. 1980); People v. Howe,
 
221 N.W.2d 350, 351-52 (Mich. 1974). 
Nevertheless, there are limits to the trial court's
 
discretion. In Minn, for instance, the supreme court observed
 that "an arbitrary denial of a jury's request for a 'read back'
 of a witness's testimony during deliberations constitutes an
 abuse of discretion." Id. at 465, 903 P.2d at 1286 (citing State
 
v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 228-29, 738 P.2d 812, 828 (1987) (where two witnesses' testimonies contradicted each other, the unexplained exclusion of the testimony of one witness, despite a jury request for both, may have improperly influenced the jurors into believing that the testimony of the other witness was more important, and was therefore an abuse of discretion)). Furthermore, "[t]he trial court's reasons for granting or denying the jury's request should be clearly set forth in the record." Minn, 79 Hawai
'i at 466, n.9, 903 P.2d at 1287, n.9. 
We reiterate the supreme court's admonition that the
 
trial court should state on the record its reasons for granting
 or denying a jury's request for a "read-back" or for testimony
 transcripts. Id. We decline, however, to find an abuse of
 
discretion here because this case revolves around the relatively
 straightforward issue of whether the jury believed that Arquilla
 intentionally, knowingly or recklessly dropped her infant
 daughter on the floor outside the apartment bathroom, and whether
 as a consequence, the infant suffered physical pain, illness, or
 any impairment of physical condition. The jurors had not been
 deliberating long before they requested transcripts of the
 testimony of four of the six trial witnesses. After receiving
 the court's response, the jurors did not renew or narrow their
 request, nor did they advise the court that they were deadlocked. 
Rather, by the next morning, the jury announced its decision. 
We do not conclude that the family court's failure to
 
say any more than that "there are no transcripts of the
 witness[es]' testimony" amounts to a failure to state its
 reasons, or an "arbitrary denial" of the jury's request. Under
 the circumstances of this case, the family court's failure to set
 out in detail its rationale for denying the jury's request or to
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
immediately explore options which might have accommodated the
 
jury, standing alone, did not adversely affect Arquilla's
 substantial rights. Thus, we conclude that there was no abuse of
 discretion here. 
Indeed, in Minn, the supreme court applied the abuse of 
discretion standard and held that the trial court's observation that: "(1) the issue before the jury was a simple one; (2) the evidence was presented to the jury in just one full day; and (3) the jury had been deliberating for a full day and a half[,]" was a sufficient basis for the trial court to conclude that the jury was hopelessly deadlocked, and upon which to refuse to conduct a requested read back of witness testimony. Minn, 79 Hawai
'i at 
466, 903 P.2d at 1287. In a similar context here, no instructional error has been demonstrated. Consequently, we conclude that the family court did not abuse its discretion by refusing to provide the jury with the transcripts it requested. See State v. Smith, 582 N.W.2d 894, 895-96 (Minn. 1998) (denial of jury's request for re-reading was not plainly erroneous; court stated that jurors should rely on their memory and that no transcripts were available). 
II.	 There Was Sufficient Evidence To Convict Arquilla Of Abuse
Of Family Or Household Members
 
Arquilla claims that there was insufficient evidence to
 
convict her of Abuse of Family or Household Members because the
 
State failed to prove that she intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly caused bodily injury to her infant daughter.
2/  We
 
2/
 Although framed as the State's failure to establish the requisite
state of mind, Arquilla's argument is directed toward establishing that error
arises from the State's alleged failure to prove bodily injury. To the extent that Arquilla argues that the State failed to establish intent, the supremecourt has "consistently held that proof by circumstantial evidence andreasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant'sconduct is sufficient. Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may be read fromhis acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances."
State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai' i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (quoting State 
v. Sadino, 64 Haw. 427, 430, 642 P.2d 534, 536-37 (1982)) (internal quotation
marks, ellipses, and brackets omitted). Arquilla concedes that two witnesses,
Sharon and Jesse, testified that they observed Arquilla intentionally drop the
infant from waist-high onto a hard linoleum floor outside the bathroom door.
Sharon further testified that she heard a "tunk" sound when the infant hit the
 floor, and that Arquilla, when confronted about having dropped the infant,
said, "So, I don't care . . . . Your brother's going to get arrested because
 
5
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disagree, and conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
 
convict Arquilla of the charge.
 
The law provides that "[i]t shall be unlawful for any 
person, singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or household member[.]" H
AW. REV. STAT. § 709-906(1). "Physical 
abuse" has been defined to mean causing "bodily injury" to another person. State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai
'i 413, 416, 903 P.2d 
718, 721 (App. 1995). Meanwhile, "bodily injury" includes "physical pain." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 707-700. 
When considering whether there was substantial evidence 
to support a conviction under the sufficiency of the evidence standard, the evidence adduced at trial must be considered "in the strongest light for the prosecution." State v. Richie, 88 
Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). 
Even the testimony of a single percipient witness can 
provide sufficient evidence to support a conviction. State v. 
Pulse, 83 Hawai 'i 229, 244, 925 P.2d 797, 812 (1996). 
Furthermore, the trial court is entitled to draw all reasonable inferences and deductions from the evidence adduced at trial. State v. Hoang, 94 Hawai
'i 271, 281, 12 P.3d 371, 381 (App. 2000) 
(reasonable for the trial court to infer that the victim felt pain, "even though there was no evidence adduced at trial to that specific effect"). 
In particular, a court may infer that a defendant
 
caused a victim to feel pain based on: (a) lay witness testimony
 regarding his or her observation of physical contact between the
 defendant and victim, or (b) lay witness testimony regarding his
 or her observation of the victim's physical appearance. Id.;
 
Cozine v. Hawaiian Catamaran, Ltd., 49 Haw. 77, 113-14, 412 P.2d
 669, 691 (1966). Such an inference will stand even though it is
 not supported by medical opinion provided that it is rational and
 based upon proven facts. See Fukuoka v. Dodo, 43 Haw. 337, 340
 
(Haw. Terr. 1959). 
he threw the f'ing lock at me." Sharon and Jesse's testimonies present a
reasonable basis from which the jury might have inferred the requisite intent.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record in this case discloses substantial evidence
 
to support the conviction. Sharon and Jesse both testified that
 
they saw Arquilla drop the infant. Sharon testified that she
 heard a "tunk" sound when the infant hit the floor and the sound
 of the baby's breath as "huuuh" followed by crying that was
 louder than it was prior to the infant being dropped. Jesse
 testified that the baby screamed upon being dropped. Officer
 Silva testified that when he observed the infant within hours of
 the time that she had reportedly been dropped, she appeared to be
 distressed, not breathing well, her color was off, and she was
 foaming at the mouth. It was the jury's prerogative to credit
 this testimony over testimony from Arquilla, who denied that the
 infant had been dropped, or Ben, whose testimony challenged
 Sharon and Jesse's credibility.
 
Furthermore, this finding is not inconsistent, as
 
Arquilla suggests, with the opinions of the emergency medical
 service personnel, the medical doctor, or the other evidence to
 the effect that the infant did not have any visible injuries. 
That evidence did not establish, and did not purport to
 establish, that the infant did not experience physical pain hours
 earlier. 
The jury was entitled to infer based on the lay witness
 
testimony in this case that the infant felt pain after being
 dropped from waist-height onto a linoleum floor. Thus, there was
 substantial evidence to support the jury's decision.
 
III. The Family Court's Response To The Jury's Second
Communication Was Not Prejudicially Insufficient, Erroneous
Or Misleading
 
At the close of the evidence, the family court
 
instructed the jury that "[a] person commits the offense of Abuse
 
of Family and Household Member if she intentionally, knowingly,
 or recklessly physically abuses a family or household member." 
The court explained that "'[p]hysical abuse' means causing bodily
 injury to another person[,]" and that "'[b]odily injury' means
 physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical condition." 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Approximately twenty-four hours later, the jury sent
 
its second communication to the court: "Does fear on the baby's
 
part constitute 'pain' . . . is 'pain' defined as only physical,
 or can it include psychological pain/distress [](from fear) [?]" 
Arquilla recommended that the family court explicitly instruct
 the jurors that "no,'pain' is defined as only physical." The
 family court, however, referred the jury back to the part of the
 jury instructions explaining that "bodily injury" means physical
 pain, illness or any impairment of physical condition: 
I don't think that improvisation on my part is appropriate if the
instruction itself answers the question. It is common experience
that despite the fact that we are familiar with the instructions,
because we've been over them a number of times, but that doesn't
mean that they're - that they are commonplace to the jurors. They
are still dealing with sets of instructions, which while, plain on
their face are - are new to them. So, over defense objection, I'm
simply going to have the instruction that harks them back to page
9, lines 5 through 7.
 
The family court's decision to refer the jury back to 
the original instructions was consistent with Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court's reference to section 5.3 of the American Bar Association, 
Standards Relating to Trial by Jury, which provides that: "If the jury, after retiring for deliberation, desires to be informed on any point of law . . . [t]he court shall give appropriate additional instructions in response to the jury's request unless . . . the jury may be adequately informed by directing their attention to some portion of the original instructions[.]" State 
v. Laurie, 56 Haw. 664, 672, n.4, 548 P.2d 271, 277, n.4 (1976); see also State v. Mark, 120 Hawai
'i 499, 528-29, 210 P.3d 22, 51­
52 (App. 2009) (trial court did not err in referring jury back to the instructions given at trial since they covered the same law as proposed by defendant and they were not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading). 
In the instant case, the definition of "bodily injury"
 
included in the initial instructions unambiguously provided that
 the type of pain that satisfied the bodily injury requirement was
 physical pain. Directing the jurors to that section of the
 instructions, therefore, succinctly and correctly answered their
 question. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Arquilla's contention that the question itself
 
suggested that the jury did not understand that portion of the
 
instructions is speculative and not supported by the record. 
Furthermore, as in Laurie, the record does not show that the
 court's reference back to a portion of the original instruction
 had confused or left an erroneous impression in the minds of the
 jurors. Thus, there is no basis for vacating Arquilla's
 conviction on this ground.
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the July 15, 2008
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the Family Court
 
of the First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 21, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Craig W. Jerome,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Loren J. Thomas,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 