NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29642
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
RHETT BRYANT, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
PLEASANT TRAVEL SERVICE, a California Corporation,
doing business as ROYAL KONA RESORT, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-144K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Rhett Bryant (Bryant) appeals from
 
the February 6, 2009 Final Judgment in favor of Defendant-
Appellee Pleasant Travel Service, doing business as Royal Kona
 
Resort (Pleasant Travel), entered by the Circuit Court of the
 
Third Circuit (circuit court).1 Bryant was injured while working
 
as an employee of an independent contractor repairing an air
 conditioning unit on Pleasant Travel's premises. 
We affirm the judgment to the extent that summary
 
judgment was granted for Pleasant Travel on Bryant's theory of
 
liability that Pleasant Travel retained control over the job site
 
and as based on Michel v. Valdastri, Ltd., 59 Haw. 53, 575 P.2d
 
1299 (1978). However, we vacate the judgment to the extent that
 
summary judgment was granted for Pleasant Travel on Bryant's
 
theory of liability under the peculiar risk doctrine.
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. Background
 
A. Factual Background
 
On September 27, 2004, Bryant was injured when debris
 
2
, one
 flew from an air conditioning unit atop the Beach Building 
of three buildings at the Royal Kona Resort Hotel (Hotel), and
 
hit him, injuring him and causing him to fall roughly eight feet
 
from a ladder. Bryant, then 25, was employed by PRO Service, a
 
staffing agency, and was lent to Air Conditioning Services (ACS)
 
with whom Pleasant Travel contracted to service and repair the
 
commercial air conditioners at the Hotel.3 ACS and Pro Service
 
are not parties to this lawsuit. At the time of the incident,
 the Hotel was owned, as it is now, by Pleasant Travel.
 
The air conditioning units on the Beach Building had
 
been in service since 1967, when the Hotel first opened as the
 
Kona Hilton. The air conditioning system in the building was
 
comprised of two main parts: a chiller in the basement of the
 
building, and two cooling towers on the roof. These cooling
 
towers were made of plywood, although many cooling towers are
 
constructed from metal. A cooling tower is essentially a large
 
box, which encloses a fan and device similar to a car's radiator
 
that circulates water over small wooden boards and allows the air
 
to cool the water. The fan at the top of the unit pulls air into
 
the cooling tower, cooling the water flowing over the boards
 
inside. The cooled water is pumped to the chiller, located in
 
the Hotel's basement and individual room air-conditioning units.
 
The uncontested evidence showed that, on the day of the
 
incident, the cooling tower was in poor shape. A letter on ACS
 
4
letterhead,  dated March 4, 2004, and addressed to Roy Lewi, Sr.
2
 After a renovation in 2005, the Hotel renamed the Beach Building
to the Lagoon Building. For the sake of consistency we refer to it as the
Beach Building.
 
3
 The evidence presented indicated that this contract was maintained
for approximately seventeen years, however, the record does not contain a
written contract between ACS and Pleasant Travel.
 
4
 The final page of the letter is not in the record, so it is
unclear who wrote the letter.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Lewi), the foreman of the Hotel's engineering department,
 
informed him that
 
•	 Both cooling towers [sic] tops need to be rebuilt at least
for now so we can safely service the motor and fan
assembly[;] existing tower condition is a safety hazard.
Towers are at the end of their service life.
 
•	 North is electrically and mechanically failed at this time.
 
•	 Both fan shrouds need to be removed and new shrouds
 fabricated. 
On the day of the incident, the north cooling tower on the Beach
 
Building was missing a lid and shroud. The shroud was necessary
 
for the air conditioning system to work efficiently, because
 
without it, the heated air pushed out of the cooling tower would
 
be drawn back into the cooling tower and recycled without
 
dissipating the heat.
 
In July 15, 2004, Matthew J. Briley (Briley), the
 
president of ACS, sent a letter to "Royal Kona Resort," which
 
read:
 
It has been well documented that the service lives of
 
the central plant equipment has been exceeded for quite some
time. ACS has kept them operating more or less for the past
few years in anticipation of complete replacement. We have
 provided various quotations and written narratives on the
state of your central plant equipment and recommended
courses of action. Communication received from Resort
 Management has at times indicated imminent availability of
replacement funds and at other times directed the patching
and mending of existing systems. Time quantification of
additional life for these degraded components is precarious
at best. There are limited repair options available to the
specific components and catastrophic unit failure cannot be
ruled out. It is our opinion that the vagaries of
mechanical fortune have been on our side so far, but without
a comprehensive plan to deal with the obsolescence of the
equipment, these fortunes must run out eventually.
 
ACS will provide a reduced cost limited repair
proposal as requested, however this proposal must be
submitted with limited expectations as well. . . .
 
The letter then presented a "limited repair proposal [with
 
limited expectations]" (brackets in original) that recommended
 
that the cooling towers at the Beach Building be repaired
 
immediately and replaced within 18 months.
 
It was not just the north tower on the Beach Building,
 
which Bryant worked on, that was in disrepair. The south cooling
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tower on the Beach Building, in fact, was in worse condition and 
had been shut down and removed from service, as only one cooling
 
tower was needed to run the air conditioning. Pleasant Travel
 
agreed to repair the north tower, after receiving a quote5 to
 
rebuild the top. Lewi testified that no one from the hotel
 "assess[ed] whether these cooling towers were safe to work on"
 
because "that's why I had [Briley] to come in and see what he
 
could do."
 
On the morning of the incident, Bryant and his co­
worker Michael Glickstein (Glickstein) met at ACS's shop with
 
Donny Andrade, the head of ACS's service division, who instructed
 
them on what to do. According to Glickstein, the instructions
 
were to "try to screw together the rotted portions of the unit
 
that was falling apart and get this fan shroud on the top." He
 
said:
 
We were just trying to shore it up because the whole thing
kind of shimmied and shook because everything was wet, the
wood was wet, so it was kind of springy. And the whole
 thing kind of shook there, so we were trying to pull it
together a little bit. . . . We were going to put a top on
it and try to shore it up a little bit. 
Glickstein and Bryant removed the deteriorated plywood,
 
added wood 2x4s to the side walls of the cooling tower, and
 
attached hinges to the 2x4s, which connected to a new lid. The
 
lid consisted of a one-half inch thick piece of plywood, which
 
Glickstein and Bryant purchased that morning from Home Depot. 
Glickstein cut out of the plywood a circular hole, approximately
 
54 inches in diameter, with a jigsaw. He and Bryant centered the
 
hole in the lid over the fan, which was already shut off when
 
they arrived on the roof, and placed a metal shroud that had been
 
fabricated by ACS, also centering it over the hole. Glickstein
 
said there was "half an inch, three-quarter of an inch from the
 
5
 There are several references to cost proposals and invoices for
the project in the depositions of Lewi and Briley. In one proposal, dated
"7/14," Briley gave a quote of "Beach building, two cooling towers, repair
cost 14,500, and then revised cost of 7250 each." We presume this proposal
was made in 2004, at roughly the same time Briley was advising that the
cooling towers be replaced.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
tip of the fan blade to the front top corner of the shroud, about
 
an inch, half an inch to an inch in there all the way around." 
Bryant and Glickstein then secured the shroud to the plywood lid
 
using between eight and sixteen screws.
 
After installing the lid and shroud, Glickstein and
 
Bryant cleaned up their materials and Glickstein flipped a switch
 
to turn the fan on. According to Glickstein, the fan made a
 
noise, but "[n]o more funny than a fan spinning like that would
 
normally make. I mean it made noise, a little commotion going on 
there, but it wasn't like vibrating like strange vibrations or it
 
wasn't shaking apart or anything like that." He said, "[N]othing 
. . . made [me really] nervous at the time. The whole thing,
 
it's flexible plywood, it's moving a little bit, but it didn't -­
I think -- I wasn't scared or anything like that, didn't expect
 
what happened to happen." Glickstein and Bryant climbed back on
 
ladders, about six or eight feet tall, standing roughly chest-
high next to the unit. The ladders had not been removed "in case
 
we had to still do something. . . . [W]e were only going up to
 
look, make sure -- I don't even know what we were looking for, to
 
tell you the truth." Glickstein said the screws "looked fine"
 
and the fan "seemed like it was rotating on the center, on an
 
axis, steady." Glickstein and Bryant were there for no longer
 
than 20 seconds when, according to Glickstein, "[a]ll of a sudden
 
there was a bang and a flash, and it was that fast, boom, and
 
[Bryant] was gone."
 
When Glickstein climbed down from his ladder, he saw
 
Bryant lying on the ground curled in a ball, bleeding profusely
 
from the neck, and his eye was swollen. The shroud was in
 
pieces, "flung all about the roof," although some of the metal
 
was still screwed to the plywood lid. Glickstein observed:
 
[T]he pieces of the shroud were all over the place, maybe
tore the metal into four or five pieces, shredded it like
 paper. You could see the fan blade was actually -- there
was a mark where the fan caught the shroud and chopped into
it. And I guess that's where it caught on it and ripped it
loose.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In a deposition, Glickstein testified that he thought
 
the cooling tower "needed more than just what we were doing" and
 
had he directed the repairs, he "would have tried to stiffen up
 
the original plywood, maybe put like a two-foot band around the
 
outside of it or something just to strengthen it a little bit." 
He said:
 
I would have been happier putting a little more on the
outside because the way we screwed the 2x4s on, we were
screwing it onto the rotted wood.
 
So basically, if you would have yanked on it, it
probably would have just pulled the screws right through the
rotted wood. But if I had put a band on the outside of it,
it would have tied it all together, hold that piece in
there.
 
When asked whether the fan could have sucked the metal
 
shroud in, Glickstein agreed it was possible and explained:
 
[The fan] is creating low pressure. I didn't see it suck
 the shroud in or anything, but it could have also -- the top
could have moved down.
 
[PLEASANT TRAVEL'S ATTORNEY]: The top that you installed,
is that what you're talking about?
 
[GLICKSTEIN]: Yeah, it's only half-inch plywood, and with
your pressure differential the outside air being more
pressure that [sic] inside where the fan is flowing air out,
the outside air is pushing every direction, five directions
on it.
 
I didn't see it move or anything, but it wouldn't have
to be visible. Obviously, something moved because it caught
the fan shroud.
 
. . . .
 
[BRYANT'S ATTORNEY]: So how could the fan then suck in?
 
[GLICKSTEIN]: Well, if the top of the unit it's sitting on
is bouncing up and down and the shroud is moving up and down
this way, if it goes -- theoretically, if it went below the
fan, it's in a low pressure now. Instead of being blown
out, it's going to come back in.
 
[BRYANT'S ATTORNEY]: I see.
 
[GLICKSTEIN]: 
I would think that would take a lot of
 
movement. I don't think it had that much movement, eight or
ten inches. It may have had a half-inch worth of movement,
something like that. The whole thing is vibrating. It's a
 30-pound fan.
 
Others speculated that the design and manufacture of
 
the shroud contributed to the accident. Lewi testified the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
shroud was made of 18 or 20 gauge steel, thinner than the
 
fiberglass used on the other cooling tower on the Beach Building,
 
and "real flimsy compared to the old style of fiberglass." Lewi
 
said in his experience, he believed shrouds were typically made
 
of fiberglass. Michael Loando, ACS's supervisor at the Hotel,
 
testified that he did not think the metal shroud was "the right
 
fix" because "[i]t looked flimsy." He opined that the sheet
 
metal shroud "would wave compared to this fiberglass" which,
 
although thicker than the sheet metal, was light and "more
 
rigid."
 
Lewi testified that ACS did not consult with him about
 
what type of fan shroud to use, that he did not direct ACS to
 
fabricate the shroud nor instruct ACS on whether to install a new
 
plywood top. He said: "I left it up to ACS."
 
B. Procedural history
 
Bryant's complaint, filed on September 21, 2006, 
alleged that Pleasant Travel violated its duty to "maintain,
 
inspect, and keep the air conditioning unit and cooling tower in
 
a reasonably safe condition" and was negligent in designing and
 
constructing the cooling tower's components.
 
Bryant's complaint alleged that he sustained a number
 
of injuries, including a nine-centimeter long laceration to his
 
neck, spine injury, brain injuries, a broken nose and other
 
facial fractures, permanent hearing loss in his left ear, and
 
damage to his left eye. When being deposed, Bryant could not
 
remember many of the details of the day, before and after the
 
incident.
 
Pleasant Travel moved for summary judgment, arguing
 
that Bryant was an employee of ACS, and ACS "exercised complete
 
direction or control over the work performed[.]" Pleasant Travel
 
further argued that although there was an exception to the non­
liability rule for employers of independent contractors where
 
there was a "peculiar risk" of harm or a "special danger," such
 
an exception did not apply in this case.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bryant responded that Pleasant Travel controlled the
 
work site, according to deposition testimony from Lewi who said
 
he "oversaw" the ACS employees at the Hotel. However, the
 
deposition attached to Bryant's memorandum in opposition to
 
summary judgment also included the following questioning:
 
Q [BRYANT'S ATTORNEY]: Would you ever go up on the roof
when the contractor was there? . . . So would you ever go
up there and observe what they were doing?
 
A [LEWI]: When they're working on something?
 Q. Yes.
 A. No.
 Q. Why is that?
 A. I don't want to interfere with their expertise. I don't
 
want to see something that -­
Q. You might question?
 A. Yeah. So I'll leave it up to them and they'll call me
when they're done, then I'll do a check.
 
Q. And by a check, you would go up and you'd look at the end
of the day what work had been done?
 
A. Yeah, whatever they had written down, if they needed a
2x10, so many 2x10s, that's what I'm getting charged for, so
much plywood, metal, anything and everything. They can
always make mistake. I was getting to the point where they
was charging me for every nut, wire nuts and everything, so
I didn't bother with that. I was about to open up the box
and look at that as all that big stuff.
 
Q. I see. So if you're getting charged for 2x4s you want
to see that they're used?
 A. They used the amount they said they used.
 
Q. 
Right.
 
On the issue of peculiar risk, Bryant argued that the peculiar
 
risk was caused by the "unusually poor condition of the cooling
 
tower."
 
The circuit court entered an order granting Pleasant
 
Travel's summary judgment motion on January 16, 2009 and this
 
timely appeal followed. 
II. Discussion
 
Bryant challenges the circuit court's entry of summary
 
judgment because a jury should have determined genuine issues of
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material fact as to "whether the Peculiar Risk Doctrine applied 
to the facts of the present case"; "whether [Pleasant Travel] 
exercised sufficient control over the job[]site"; and whether 
Bryant "was injured by a dangerous condition arising from or 
intimately connected to the work [he] was hired to perform." 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant or denial 
of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawaif i 
48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005). 
Bryant's initial complaint against Pleasant Travel was
 
for negligence. It is well-established that the elements of a
 negligence claim are: 
1. A duty, or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring
the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct,
for the protection of others against unreasonable risks;
 
2. A failure on the defendant's part to conform to the
standard required: a breach of the duty . . . ;
 
3. A reasonably close causal connection between the conduct
and the resulting injury. . . .; and
 
4. Actual loss or damage resulting to the interests of
another. . . .
 
Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc. 69 Haw. 376, 384-85, 742
 
P.2d 377, 383 (1987) (quoting W.P. Keeton, Prosser and Keeton on
 
the Law of Torts § 30, at 164-65 (5th ed. 1984)) (brackets
 
omitted) (alterations in original).
 
Whether a defendant owes a duty to the plaintiff is a
 
question of law. Wagatsuma v. Patch, 10 Haw. App. 547, 569, 879
 
P.2d 572, 585 (1994); Hayes v. Nagata, 68 Haw. 662, 666, 730 P.2d
 914, 916 (1986). However, "whether or not the defendant's
 
actions violate the required duty . . . is a question of fact." 
Jones v. Chevron U.S.A., Inc., 718 P.2d 890, 897 (Wyo. 1986). 
See also Wagatsuma, 10 Haw. App at 574, 879 P.2d at 587 ("The
 
issue of breach of duty . . . is ordinarily one for the jury.").
 
Bryant based his claim against Pleasant Travel on two
 
theories: Pleasant Travel as the employer of an independent
 
contractor and as owner of the premises where the injury
 
occurred.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A.	 Pleasant Travel's duty as employer of an independent
contractor.
 
As a general rule, "the employer of an independent 
contractor is not liable for physical harm caused to another by 
an act or omission of the contractor or his servants." 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 409 (1965) (Restatement). 
Hawaifi applies the general rule. See, e.g., Taira v. Oahu Sugar 
Co., Ltd., 1 Haw. App. 208, 211-12, 616 P.2d 1026, 1029-30 (1980). See also Fraser v. Morrison, 39 Haw. 370, 376, 1952 WL 
7360 at *4 (Haw. Terr. 1952) ("A collection agency is an independent contractor for whose act the creditor is not 
responsible."), abrogated on other grounds by, Hac v. Univ. of 
Hawaii, 105 Hawaif i 92, 92, 73 P.3d 46, 46 (2003). Bryant relies 
on two of the many exceptions to the rule: the "peculiar risk" exception and the "retained control" exception. 
1. "Peculiar Risk" Exception
 
Hawaifi's courts have adopted the peculiar risk 
exception as explained in the Restatement §§ 416 and 427. 
Makaneole v. Gampon, 70 Haw. 501, 504, 777 P.2d 1183, 1185 (1989) 
(Makaneole II). These sections provide: 
§ 416. Work Dangerous In Absence Of Special Precautions
 
One who employs an independent contractor to do work
which the employer should recognize as likely to create
during its progress a peculiar risk of physical harm to
others unless special precautions are taken, is subject to
liability for physical harm caused to them by the failure of
the contractor to exercise reasonable care to take such
 precautions, even though the employer has provided for such
precautions in the contract or otherwise.
 
§ 427. Negligence As To Danger Inherent In The Work
 
One who employs an independent contractor to do work
involving a special danger to others which the employer
knows or has reason to know to be inherent in or normal to
 the work, or which he contemplates or has reason to
contemplate when making the contract, is subject to
liability for physical harm caused to such others by the
contractor's failure to take reasonable precautions against
such danger.
 
Restatement §§ 416 and 427. Both sections are applicable to this
 
case. Also applicable is Restatement § 413, which other
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
jurisdictions have cited to define the doctrine. See, e.g., Am.
 
States Ins. Co. v. Progressive Cas. Ins. Co., 102 Cal. Rptr. 3d
 
591, 599 (Cal. Ct. App. 2009). Restatement § 413 reads:
 413. Duty To Provide For Taking Of Precautions Against
Dangers Involved In Work Entrusted To Contractor
 
One who employs an independent contractor to do work
which the employer should recognize as likely to create,
during its progress, a peculiar unreasonable risk of
physical harm to others unless special precautions are
taken, is subject to liability for physical harm caused to
them by the absence of such precautions if the employer
 
(a) fails to provide in the contract that the
contractor shall take such precautions, or
 
(b) fails to exercise reasonable care to provide in
some other manner for the taking of such precautions.
 
Restatement § 413.6 Section 416 is more commonly applied when an
 
employer "should anticipate the need for some specific
 
precaution," whereas the rule in Section 427 applies where "the
 
danger involved in the work calls for a number of precautions, or
 
involves a number of possible hazards[.]" Restatement § 416
 
cmt. a.
 
The commentary to Restatement § 413 explains the
 
meaning of "peculiar risk" as a
 
special risk[], peculiar to the work to be done, and arising
out of its character, or out of the place where it is to be
done, against which a reasonable man would recognize the
necessity of taking special precautions. The situation is
 one in which a risk is created which is not a normal,
routine matter of customary human activity, such as driving
an automobile, but is rather a special danger to those in
the vicinity, arising out of the particular situation
created, and calling for special precautions. "Peculiar"
 does not mean that the risk must be one which is abnormal to
 the type of work done, or that it must be an abnormally
great risk. It has reference only to a special,
recognizable danger arising out of the work itself.
 
Restatement § 413 cmt. b. In order for the exception to apply,
 
the contractor's work does not have to be "an extra-hazardous or
 
6
 Restatement Section 413 differs from Section 416 in that in the
 
former no precautionary measures have been provided for under the contract and
in the latter the precautionary measures have been accounted for by contract
but the contractor did not follow them, in which instance the contractor would
have a duty to indemnify the employer for liability caused by his negligence.
See Restatement § 416 cmt. c. The terms of the contract between Pleasant
 Travel and ACS are not in the record.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
abnormally dangerous activity[.]" Restatement § 416 cmt. d. The
 
peculiar risk exception requires that there is "some special
 
hazard resulting from the nature of the work done, which calls
 
for special precautions[,]" id., and "the contractor fail[s] to
 
exercise reasonable care to take [those] adequate precautions." 
Restatement § 416 cmt. f. The commentary further explains that
 
the peculiar risk doctrine
 
is not concerned with the taking of routine precautions, of
a kind which any careful contractor could reasonably be
expected to take, against all of the ordinary and customary
dangers which may arise in the course of the contemplated
work. Such precautions are the responsibility of the
contractor; and if the employer has exercised reasonable
care to employ a contractor who is competent and careful, he
is not required to provide, in the contract or otherwise,
that the contractor shall take them.
 
Restatement § 413 cmt. b.
 
a. Peculiarity of risk is a question of fact.
 
The peculiar risk doctrine is "unequivocally applicable
 
to third persons who are not employees of a contractor[.]"
 
Lindler v. District of Columbia, 502 F.2d 495, 498 (D.C. Cir.
 
1974). However, an "overwhelming majority of jurisdictions" have
 
held that the peculiar risk doctrine could not apply in cases
 
such as this, where the injured employee of an independent
 
contractor sues his employer's employer. See Tauscher v. Puget
 
Sound Power & Light Co., 635 P.2d 426, 429 & n.2 (Wash. 1981). 
See also Monk v. V.I. Water & Power Auth., 53 F.3d 1381, 1391
 
n.28 (3d Cir. 1995) (listing fourteen states that reject the
 
doctrine and two that approve); Fleck v. ANG Coal Gasification
 
Co., 522 N.W.2d 445, 450-51 (N.D. 1994) (collecting cases
 
approving and disapproving of the doctrine); Clausen v. R.W.
 
Gilbert Constr. Co., Inc., 309 N.W.2d 462, 466 n.1 (Iowa 1981)
 
(same).
 
Nevertheless, in Makaneole II, the Hawaif i Supreme 
Court held that Restatement §§ 416 and 427 could be applied 
against a landowner that hired an independent contractor and the 
injured plaintiff was an employee of the contractor. Makaneole 
II, 70 Haw. at 507, 777 P.2d at 1187. The court relied on the 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legislative history behind the "contractor clause" in Hawaif i's 
worker's compensation laws to conclude that "the owner of the 
premises was no longer a statutory employer exempted from suits 
for negligence under [HRS] § 386-5 [(the exclusive remedy 
provision)]." 70 Haw. at 507, 77 P.2d at 1187. Thus, we must 
determine whether the peculiar risk doctrine works to impose 
liability in this case. 
In Hawaif i's most recent case on the peculiar risk 
doctrine, this court treated the question of whether a risk is 
"peculiar" as a question of fact. In Shaner, we rejected summary 
judgment in favor of defendant homeowners on the basis that the 
plaintiff, the personal representative of a deceased employee of 
a tree-removal company hired by the defendant homeowners, put 
forth evidence that raised a genuine issue of material fact as to 
whether the homeowners owed a duty to decedent. Shaner v. Kraus, 
122 Hawaif i 351, 226 P.3d 521, No. 29379, 2010 WL 1056870 at *4 
(App. Mar. 19, 2010) (mem. op.). Therefore, we must consider 
whether the record before us contains evidence sufficient to 
raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether there was a 
peculiar risk inherent in Bryant's work. See Ek v. Herrington, 
939 F.2d 839, 843 (9th Cir. 1991). 
b.	 Evidence was sufficient for trial on the peculiar
risk issue.
 
In Shaner, we addressed whether evidence regarding the
 
employee's work was sufficient for a jury to consider whether a
 
peculiar risk existed. Shaner, 2010 WL 1056870 at *4.7 Shaner
 
is distinguishable from this case because the decedent's work was
 near high-voltage electric lines, which has been recognized as
 
"inherently dangerous." See, e.g., Paull v. Park County, 218
 
7
 In Shaner, 2010 WL 1056870 at *2-4, we held that the plaintiff,
 
the personal representative of an employee of a tree-removal company who was
electrocuted when part of the crane he was riding in hit a live high-voltage
wire, raised a triable issue of fact as to whether a peculiar risk existed
where the plaintiff produced evidence that the homeowners had hired the
contractor after a previous company refused to remove the trees because they
were too close to high-voltage electrical lines and that decedent's company
admitted it violated safety directives as specified in the crane manual.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.3d 1198, 1208 (Mont. 2009) (listing some "inherently dangerous"
 
activities, including blasting, pile driving, crop dusting,
 
demolition, emission of noxious gases or fumes). Bryant does not
 
cite, nor could we find, any case finding air-conditioning repair
 
work in general or repairs made near a fan in particular to be
 
inherently dangerous.
 
Bryant argues that the peculiar risk that he was
 
exposed to was "the extremely poor and dilapidated condition of
 
the wooden cooling tower," yet he does not suggest what
 
precautions were necessary to ameliorate the risk posed by such
 
conditions. However, Pleasant Travel's argument to the contrary
 
is equally unpersuasive. Pleasant Travel relies on Glickstein's
 
testimony that the work was "pretty simple" and there was
 
"nothing unusual" about the work. The fact that the work was
 
"pretty simple" is irrelevant, because the peculiar risk doctrine
 
does not require that the work entail any "special skill" or
 
care, rather "[i]t is sufficient that work of any kind involves a
 
risk, recognizable in advance, of physical harm to others which
 
is inherent in the work itself[.]" Restatement § 427 cmt. b
 
(emphasis added).
 
i. "Unusual" nature of Bryant's work
 
Hawaifi cases appear to leave it to a jury to decide 
whether the circumstances of a work site are unusual or 
extraordinary. For example, in Shaner, we remanded the case to 
consider the peculiar risk question, where there was evidence 
that the electrocution risk was a routine one for the deceased 
plaintiff's company, which specialized in removing trees near 
power lines, while another company had refused the project 
because of the location. 2010 WL 1056870 at *4. 
In the case before us, the evidence was that the
 
cooling tower was made of a different material from other cooling
 
towers (wood, rather than metal), and that the wood was in
 
particularly bad condition because the wood comprising it was
 
"soggy and brittle at the same time, kind of squishy in some
 
places and dry and crumbly in other places." Here, the evidence
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was sufficient to raise a genuine question as to whether Bryant's
 
work on the day of his injuries "involve[d] circumstances that
 
are substantially out-of-the-ordinary ." Ortiz v. Ra-El Dev.
 
Corp., 528 A.2d 1355, 1358 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1987). 
ii.	 "Collateral negligence" in the "manner in
which the work was done"
 
As noted above, the peculiar risk exception requires
 
that the cause of the harm be the absence of "special
 precautions." See Restatement §§ 413, 416. Bryant's own brief
 
suggests, under a different theory of liability, that the
 precaution which was missing but necessary here was a "lock-out,
 
tag-out" procedure for re-starting the fan once repairs were
 
complete and that this procedure should have required personnel
 
to keep a safe distance from the air conditioning unit. 
Bryant's expert explained in a written report that Hawaii
 
Occupational Safety and Health Law regulations provided a
 
standard for "typical minimal lockout procedures," that Pleasant
 
Travel did not have such procedures, and that such procedures
 
would have prevented Bryant's injuries. This leads us to ask
 
whether the failure to observe a standard safety procedure can
 
serve as the basis of a peculiar risk claim.
 
Pleasant Travel's Answering Brief relies on cases that
 
find, as a matter of law, no duty was owed to a independent
 
contractor's employee who failed to follow recognized safety
 
procedures. See Warnick v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 516 F. Supp.
 
2d 459, 470 (E.D. Pa. 2007) (plaintiff failed to use a safety
 harness and fell through a ceiling); Hernandez v. Midwest Gas
 
Co., 523 N.W.2d 300, 304-05 (Iowa Ct. App. 1994) (plaintiff
 
failed to follow safety handbook, omitted "ordinary safety
 
precautions," and was asphyxiated by natural gas); Sievers v.
 
McClure, 746 P.2d 885, 886 (Alaska 1987) (plaintiff's decedent
 
failed to use fall-prevention devices on an icy roof and fell to
 
his death).
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
These cases and others discussing the "special
 
precautions" requirement of the Restatement generally apply two
 
arguments. The first is that where the safety precautions are
 
well-recognized in the industry, the precautions are "routine"
 
and cannot be "special" precautions within the meaning of the
 
Restatement. See, e.g., PSI Energy, Inc. v. Roberts, 829 N.E.2d
 
943, 955-56 (Ind. 2005) (industry standards are applicable
 measures of the "routine precautions" that are the responsibility
 
of the contractor), abrogated on other grounds by Helms v. Carmel
 
High School Vocational Bldg. Trades Corp., 854 N.E.2d 345 (Ind.
 
2006). But see Beckman v. Butte-Silver Bow Cnty., 1 P.3d 348,
 
353 (Mont. 2000) (overruling prior decisions that "misinterpreted
 the interplay of 'ordinary' or standard and 'special
 
precautions'" and holding that precautions that "although
 
arguably standard with regard to the risk posed, are special in
 
that they are designed to protect workers from the unreasonable,
 
extraordinary, and unusual risks associated with [their work].") 
The second concludes that a party's failure to follow
 
recognizable safety procedures constitutes "collateral" or
 
"causal negligence" and therefore the risk did not "arise out of"
 
the independent contractor's work. See, e.g., Hernandez, 523
 
N.W.2d at 304 ("[T]he term ['peculiar risk'] means more than
 danger that arises from the collateral negligence of persons
 
engaged in the activity or danger which arises solely from the
 
method of the activities' performance.").
 
Pleasant Travel's Answering Brief emphasizes the
 
"manner in which the work was done" in its description of cases,
 
suggesting that it intended to argue that Bryant and ACS's
 
collateral negligence prohibited application of the peculiar risk
 
doctrine. Indeed, the peculiar risk doctrine does not apply
 
where the cause of the harm was an independent contractor's
 
"collateral negligence." Restatement § 427 cmt. d. (referring to
 
the definition of collateral negligence stated in Section 426). 
Section 426 defines collateral or causal negligence as that which
 
"consists solely in the improper manner in which [the contractor]
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
does the work, and . . . creates a risk of such harm which is not
 
inherent in or normal to the work, and . . . the employer had no
 
reason to contemplate the contractor's negligence when the
 
contract was made."
 
Some courts have found that violations of recognized
 
safety procedures qualify as collateral negligence. See Warnick,
 
516 F. Supp. 2d at 469-70 ("Violations of safety conditions -­whether by the employee or his employer, the contractor -- are
 
not a basis for invoking the doctrine."). See also Motter v.
 
Meadows Ltd. P'ship, 680 A.2d 887, 892 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1996)
 (finding no peculiar risk in trenching operation where danger was
 
caused by "failure to abide by the OSHA rules and regulations,
 
and not the nature of the soil"); Nagy v. Consumers Power Co.,
 
2001 WL 672171 at *2 (Mich. Ct. App. 2001) ("In cases where the
 injury results because well-recognized safety measures are not
 
taken by the workers, the risk is not inherent to the work being
 
done but rather is created by the failure to take ordinary
 
precautions.").
 
The California Supreme Court, however, has said "it is
 
often difficult to distinguish those risks that are inherent in
 
the work from those that are collateral, and the line to be drawn
 
between the two types of risks is 'shadowy.'" Toland v. Dunland
 
Hous. Grp., Inc., 955 P.2d 504, 508 (Cal. 1998) (quoting Privette
 v. Superior Court of Santa Clara Cnty., 854 P.2d 721, 726 (Cal.
 
1993)) (internal quotation marks omitted). Another court
 
explained the distinction in this way:
 
In the one case the doing of the work creates danger and
requires active care to counteract the danger. In the other
 there is no danger unless created by [collateral]
negligence. The one starts with danger and requires
preventive care to make safety, while the other starts with
safety and requires negligence to make danger.
 
Lunde v. Winnebago Indus. Inc., 299 N.W.2d 473, 476-77 (Iowa
 
1980) (quoting Carson v. Blodgett Constr. Co., 174 S.W. 447, 448
 
(Mo. Ct. App. 1915)). 
"The question of whether a contractor's negligence was
 
'collateral,' like the related issue of whether there was a
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
peculiar risk inherent in the work being performed, is generally
 
an issue for the trier of fact to resolve." Pusey v. Bator, 762
 
N.E.2d 968, 978 (Ohio 2002) (Cook, J., concurring) (citing Caudel
 v. E. Bay Muni. Util. Dist., 211 Cal. Rptr. 222, 227 (Cal. Ct.
 
App. 1985)). Based on Glickstein's testimony that he "[didn't]
 
know what [they] were looking for" when he and Bryant ascended
 
the ladders next to the cooling tower after installing the shroud
 
and from Loando's testimony that Bryant and Glickstein were
 
supposed to call him to "start it up", it can be inferred that
 
Bryant was not required to put himself in the position where he
 
was injured. However, a reasonable juror could also conclude
 
that it is not improper or unforeseeable that a worker tasked
 
with installing a piece of equipment would check the work after
 
completing the task, and that in order to do so, he would stand
 
within a zone where he would be injured if the equipment failed. 
If we were to use the test given in Lunde, there would be
 
sufficient evidence that Bryant's work "start[ed] with danger and
 
require[d] preventative care," given Briley's warning that the
 
tower posed a "safety hazard." Moreover, reasonable minds could
 
disagree whether Bryant's actions "create[d] a risk of such harm
 
which is not inherent in or normal to the work," which Pleasant
 
Travel "had no reason to contemplate . . . when the contract was
 
made." Restatement § 426. Therefore, summary judgment in
 
Pleasant Travel's favor based on its collateral negligence theory
 
was inappropriate.
 
c. Conclusion
 
Bryant has raised some genuine questions as to the
 
nature of the risk in the work Bryant was hired to perform. A
 
jury should be permitted to consider the question of whether the
 
cooling tower project posed an "ordinary and customary danger" to
 
Bryant and whether the failure of Bryant to follow safety
 
procedures when starting the cooling tower's fan constituted a
 
"collateral" risk. Summary judgment in favor of Pleasant Travel
 
on this ground was inappropriate.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. "Retained Control" Exception
 
Another recognized exception to the general rule
 
against assigning liability to the hiring employer of an
 
independent contractor for the contractor's employees' negligence
 
depends on whether the hiring employer retains control over how
 
the independent contractor performed the work. See Taira, 1 Haw.
 
App. at 211-12, 616 P.2d at 1029-30.
 
Bryant argues that "a jury should be allowed to decide
 
if Defendant . . . is subject to liability under the retained
 control exception." Indeed, we have recognized that "[t]he
 
nature and extent of control by an employer of an independent
 
contractor of the independent contractor's performance of work
 
contracted for is a question of fact, which is to be determined
 
by a consideration of all the circumstances[.]" Makaneole v.
 
Gampon, 7 Haw. App. 448, 455, 776 P.2d 402, 407 (1989) (Makaneole
 I), (citation omitted), aff'd in part and rev'd in part,
 
Makaneole II . In order for control of a job site to be
 
considered "retained,"
 
[i]t is not enough that [the hiring employer] has merely a
general right to order the work stopped or resumed, to
inspect its progress or to receive reports to make
suggestions or recommendations which need not necessarily be
followed, or to prescribe alterations and deviations. Such
 a general right is usually reserved to employers, but it
does not mean that the contractor is controlled as to his
 methods of work, or as to operative detail. There must be
 such a retention of a right of supervision that the
contractor is not entirely free to do the work in his own
 way.
 
Id. at 454-55. 776 P.2d at 407 (quoting Restatement § 414 cmt.
 
c).
 
We acknowledged that jurisdictions are split over
 
"whether the employer's liability must be based upon specific
 
control over the activity out of which the injury arose, or
 
whether proof of general control of the work premises is
 
sufficient." Id. at 457, 776 P.2d at 408. Bryant here argues
 
for the broader scope, requiring only control over the work site,
 i.e., the Hotel property as a whole. Makaneole I did not decide
 
whether the premises owner's control needed to extend to the
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
independent contractor's specific activity or the premises
 
generally, but instead adopted the rule, stated in Jones, that
 
an owner of a work site who retains the right to direct the
manner of an independent contractor's performance or assumes
affirmative duties with respect to safety owes a duty of
reasonable care to an employee of the independent contractor
even if the employee is injured doing the very work the
contractor was hired to perform.
 
Id. at 458, 776 P.2d at 409 (citing Jones, 718 P.2d at 896).
 
Bryant argues that the following facts demonstrate
 
Pleasant Travel's control over the work site: (1) Pleasant
 
Travel's foreman, Roy Lewi, says he "oversaw" ACS workers when
 
they worked at the Hotel; (2) Lewi and Pleasant Travel's
 
engineering and maintenance staff did "trouble-shooting" of the
 
air conditioning system; (3) Lewi approached ACS's president
 
about giving the Hotel workers classes on air conditioning; and
 
(4) a Hotel worker "shadowed" an ACS worker to learn more about
 
the air conditioning system. Even when construed in the light
 
most favorable to Bryant, these facts are insufficient to
 
establish that Pleasant Travel "retain[ed] the right to direct
 
the manner of an independent contractor's performance or
 
assume[d] affirmative duties with respect to safety." Id. In
 
fact, Lewi stated in the deposition submitted by Bryant that when
 it came to how air conditioning repairs were made, he "left it up
 
to ACS."
 
Bryant's Opening Brief cites three cases relevant to
 
the control issue: Taira, Messier, and Makaneole I. In Taira,
 
this court concluded that the defendant property owner had not
 retained control because the contract between the defendant and
 
the independent contractor gave the contractor "complete
 
responsibility for making the necessary repairs and for
 
determining how to make those repairs" and the independent
 
contractor directed his employee on how to complete the task that
 
ultimately injured the employee. Taira, 1 Haw. App. at 212, 616
 
P.2d at 1029. In Messier, a product defect case, this court
 reversed a summary judgment ruling in favor of a defendant
 
property owner where there was evidence that the defendant
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required a particular material during construction, approved the
 
design of the allegedly defective building element that injured
 
the plaintiff, and had an employee on the job site daily to
 
oversee construction. Messier v. Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Mt.
 
Terrace, 6 Haw. App. 525, 537, 735 P.2d 939, 948 (1987). In
 Makaneole I, we reversed a summary judgment ruling in favor of
 
the defendant because the plaintiff established that the
 
defendant's representative maintained an office at the project
 
site, inspected the progress, and took on a number of
 
responsibilities, including reporting subcontractors' substandard
 
work to the independent contractor. 7 Haw. App. at 456-57, 775
 
P.2d at 408. The facts of this case are clearly closer to Taira
 
than Messier or Makaneole I.
 
Here, the undisputed evidence is that not one of
 
Pleasant Travel's employees came to the roof that day to
 
supervise the work, that Bryant and Glickstein spoke only to one
 
of Pleasant Travel's employees that day prior to the accident to
 
get the key to the roof, and that Donny Andrade, an ACS
 
supervisor and not an agent of the Pleasant Travel, instructed
 
Bryant and Glickstein on how to make the repairs. Moreover, Lewi
 
indicated that ACS chose what material and what design was used
 
on the replacement shroud and top. Lewi testified that he did
 
not generally observe what ACS contractors did, other than
 
checking at the end of the day to ensure that the work used the
 
materials Pleasant Travel was billed for. In conclusion, even
 
when viewed in the light most favorable to Bryant, the evidence
 
is insufficient to support a finding that Pleasant Travel
 
retained control over Bryant's work.
 
Bryant points to two facts in arguing that Pleasant
 
Travel was negligent in controlling the job site: (1) "its
 
admitted failure to assess whether the equipment was safe to be
 
worked on at all" after ACS notified it that the cooling tower
 
posed a safety hazard and (2) repeated violations of workplace
 
safety rules regarding the "'lock-out, tag-out' of energized
 
equipment such as the A/C cooling tower's fan." Although
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"violations of pertinent provisions of . . . the Occupational
 
Safety and Health Law (OSHL), HRS Chapter 396 . . . [are]
 
admissible as evidence of negligence," Michel v. Valdastri, Ltd.,
 
59 Haw. 53, 55, 575 P.2d 1299, 1301 (1978), the issue of
 
negligence would only arise after Bryant makes a prima facie
 
showing that Pleasant Travel retained control over job site. See
 
Makaneole I, 7 Haw. App. at 459, 775 P.2d at 409. Where there is
 no evidence that Pleasant Travel retained control over the work
 
contracted to ACS such that Pleasant Travel had a duty to Bryant,
 
these facts regarding Pleasant Travel's alleged negligence in
 
performing that duty are not relevant.
 
B. Pleasant Travel's liability as premise owner
 
HRS § 396-6(a) (1993) codifies the duty of every
 
employer to "furnish to each of the employer's employees
 
employment and a place of employment which are safe as well as
 
free from recognized hazards." This "duty of the employer to
 
provide a safe place to work runs to whomever he requires or
 
permits to perform work on his premises" and does not depend on
 
an employer-employee relationship. Michel, 59 Haw. at 57, 575
 
P.2d at 1301-02. However, "the employer-owner of the premises is
 nevertheless under no duty to protect the employee from dangerous
 
conditions arising from or intimately connected with the
 
particular defect in the premises or in the machinery which he
 
has been hired to abate or repair." Id. at 57, 575 P.2d at 1302. 
See HRS § 396-6(a) (exception to "safe place of employment rule"
 made where employee sent to place for the "specific purpose of
 
abating said hazard").
 
A contractor is presumed to have assumed the risks
 
involved in making repairs. Hammond v. City of El Dorado
 
Springs, 242 S.W.2d 479, 483 (Mo. 1951). See Hines v. Martel
 
Tel. Co., 255 N.W. 233, 235 (Neb. 1934) ("[A] person who
 
contracts to perform labor or services for another is presumed to
 
have so contracted in view of the risks ordinarily incident to or
 
connected with the employment. He assumes all such risks.")
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); E.H. Schopler,
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Annotation, Duty of owner of premises to furnish independent
 
contractor or his employee a safe place of work, where contract
 
is for repairs, 31 A.L.R.2d 1382 (1953) ("the owner is not liable
 
for . . . injury of an independent contractor or one of his
 
employees resulting from dangers which the contractor, as an
 
expert, has known, or as to which he and his employees 'assumed
 
the risk.'"). Thus, "the owner or occupier [of premises] is
 
under no duty to protect [an independent contractor's employees]
 
against risks arising from or intimately connected with defects
 
of the premises, or of machinery or appliances located thereon,
 
which the contractor has undertaken to repair." 31 A.L.R.2d
 
1381-82 (1953).
 
Bryant argues that the jury should have been allowed to
 
consider whether he "was injured by the exact instrumentality
 
that ACS was called to repair." Bryant argues that he was
 
"simply tasked to replace the rotted wood on the top of the large
 
cooling tower, and to replace the old shroud around the fan" but
 
"not called to work on the fan itself or on the cooling tower as
 
a whole." If the case were to proceed to trial, he "would have
 
argued that the cause of the accident was the unexpected lateral
 
movement of the fan due to the overall instability of the rotted
 
cooling tower." Bryant theorizes on appeal that "[b]ecause of
 
the unusually poor condition of the wooden cooling tower, the
 
vertical shaft of the fan moved enough . . . to come in contact
 
with the new shroud[.]"
 
Bryant's argument fails for a number of reasons. 
First, it is clear that the fan is not a separate instrumentality
 
from that which he was called to repair. On this point, Bryant
 
attempts to draw the analogy to Michel v. Valdastri. In Michel,
 
the plaintiff was hired to repair a trolley mechanism on a crane
 
and was allegedly injured when the crane's braking system, which
 
the plaintiff was not hired to repair, failed. 59 Haw. at 55,
 
575 P.2d at 1301. In Michel, it could be inferred that the brake
 
and the trolley, although attached to the same crane, operated
 
independently of each other; that is, if one was inoperable it
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
had no effect on the other. See id. at 54-55, 575 P.2d at 1300­
01. To the contrary here, the record establishes that the shroud
 
was necessary to make the fan work efficiently. Thus, it can be
 
said that by replacing the missing shroud, Bryant and Glickstein
 
8
were repairing  the fan as well.  Furthermore, although Bryant
 "maintains that the defective condition that caused the accident
 
was the fan and the overall instability of the large wooden
 
cooling tower," he offers no explanation how this "instability"
 
existed after he removed rotted wood from the tower's top and
 
added 2x4s for stability. 
Accordingly, we cannot agree the fan
 
was not "intimately connected" to the repairs Bryant made.
 
Second, even if we were to assume that the fan and
 
shroud were not "intimately connected," Bryant puts forth no
 evidence that a defect in the fan alone caused the incident. 
Glickstein's testimony supports the theory that the shroud was
 
"sucked into" the fan, and the fan "chopped it," but there is no
 
credible evidence in the record to support the alternate theory
 
that the fan shaft moved or that the fan itself was otherwise
 
defective so as to catch and shred the shroud. "A party opposing
 
a motion for summary judgment cannot discharge his or her burden
 
by alleging conclusions, 'nor is [the party] entitled to a trial
 
on the basis of a hope that [the party] can produce some evidence
 
at that time.'" Henderson v. Prof'l Coatings Corp.
, 72 Haw. 387,
 
401, 819 P.2d 84, 92 (1991) (quoting 10A Charles Alan Wright,
 Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure
 
§ 2727 (2d ed. 1983)).
 
Even assuming the fan was not connected to the
 
instrumentality he was hired to repair, without evidence that
 
movement of the fan alone caused the accident, Bryant failed to
 
"set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue
 
8
 "Repair is restoration by renewal or replacement of subsidiary
parts of a whole. . . . The word repair contemplates an existing structure or
thing which has become imperfect by reason of the elements or otherwise, and
to repair we restore or supply in the original structure that which is lost,
destroyed or missing." Hammond, 242 S.W.2d at 482 (internal quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for trial" regarding whether the cause of his injuries were 
caused by something other than the instrumentality he was hired 
to repair. Hawaif i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e). 
Therefore, summary judgment in favor of Pleasant Travel on this basis was not erroneous. 
III. Conclusion 
For the reasons given in Part II.A.1 above related to
 
the peculiar risk exception, summary judgment in Pleasant
 
Travel's favor was inappropriate. Therefore, the February 6,
 
2009 Final Judgment of the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
 
vacated and this case is remanded for further proceedings
 
consistent with this memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, May 30, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Ian L. Mattoch and 
Daniel P. Kirley,for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
J. Patrick Gallagher andJeffrey Y. Higashi,(Henderson Gallagher & Kane),for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
25
 