NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28292
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
McCANDLESS LAND AND CATTLE COMPANY, a Hawai' i limited 
partnership; ELIZABETH M. STACK; NOHEA M. SANTIMER, MOANI M.
ZABLAN and NOENOE M. LINDSEY as Trustees of the Les Marks 
Revocable Living Trust acting in their fiduciary and not in their
individual capacities, Plaintiffs/Counter-Defendants/Appellees,
v. 
D. KEALOHAPAUOLE, et al., Defendants,
and 
CLARENCE A. MEDEIROS, JR., Defendant/Counter-Claimant/Appellant,
and 
PANSY MEDEIROS, et al., Defendants/Counter-Claimants/Appellants,
and 
ROSE ELAINE ABBOTT, CURTIS AHU, EUGENE AHU, JOHN R. AHU, ROBERT
AHU, DEBORAH H. LEE, LORRAINE YAHNEL, HENRY APIO, MARY APIO,
ELAINE LEINAALA DAILEY, KIMELA KUKANE KALUA, HATTIE IWALANI KAUHI
and LOUISE APIO LEOPOLDO, Defendants/Appellants,
and 
JOSEPH KANAI KALAMA, through his successor in interest, KALAMA
HUI, LLC, Defendant/Appellant,
and
 
GENEVIEVE ILIMA ALANI SHITO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 92-0185K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
This case involves a long and complicated action
 
brought by Plaintiffs-Appellees McCandless Land and Cattle
 
Company, a Hawai
'i limited partnership; Elizabeth M. Stack; and 
Nohea M. Santimer, Moani M. Zablan, and Noenoe M. Lindsey, as
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trustees of the Les Marks Revocable Living Trust acting in their 
fiduciary and not in their individual capacities (collectively, "McCandless") to quiet title to 7,149 acres of the Ahupua' a of 
Honokua located in South Kona on the Island of Hawai' i (Subject 
Property) and kuleana within the Subject Property. In 1992, McCandless filed a quiet title complaint in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court) against numerous defendants. A large number of defendants answered and some asserted counterclaims and cross-claims. 
In 1997, the Circuit Court held a jury trial on a
 
portion of the litigation, and the jury returned answers to six
 special verdict forms and two supplemental special verdict forms. 
The Circuit Court thereafter issued a partial judgment and orders
 that gradually resolved many of the outstanding issues in the
 case. In 1999, the Circuit Court appointed a Commissioner to
 recommend a plan to partition the Subject Property. Through the
 Commissioner's assistance, a plan for partitioning the Subject
 Property was developed and approved by the Circuit Court. In
 2006, the Commissioner filed final, an amendment to the final,
 and supplemental reports. The Circuit Court filed an order and
 judgment allocating costs with respect to the partition (Order
 and Judgment Allocating Costs) on October 30, 2006. The Circuit
 Court filed a final judgment and decree quieting title (Final
 Judgment) on November 22, 2006, and an amended final judgment and
 decree quieting title (Amended Final Judgment) on March 19, 2007.
 
In this Memorandum Opinion, we address three separate
 
appeals brought by: 
1. Defendant-Appellant Joseph Kanai Kalama (Kalama), 
through his successor in interest, Kalama Hui, LLC (Kalama Hui);
1
 
1
 The record reflects that Joseph Kanai Kalama irrevocably assigned all
of his beneficial interest in this case, including any rights of appeal, to
the law firm of Hu and Tsuji, who had been representing Kalama. The law firm
 of Hu and Tsuji, a limited liability law company, subsequently assigned all of
its beneficial interest in this case to Kalama Hui LLC.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Defendants-Appellants Pansy Medeiros, Clarence A.

Medeiros, Jr., Lorna Takizawa, Violet Mamac, Roland Medeiros,

David Medeiros, Jim Medeiros, Albert Medeiros, Alfred Pogtis,

William Puou, II, William Puou, III, Rodney J. Puou, Michael

Puou, Aaron Puou, Henry Hua, Jr., Yvonne Leslie, Julia

Kohltfaber, Nancy Durmas, Solomon Lazaro, Roberta Lazaro-Johnson,

Isaac Kamauu Griffin, Maunalei Jeanette Griffin, Nathanial James

Makai Griffin, George Hua, Connie Hua, Edward Hua, Alicia Hua,

Richard Hua, Charles T. Hua, Kathleen Yamamoto, Harry Yamamoto,

Edith Armstrong, Adeline Neil, Joan Shaw, Rosabel Camacho,

Herbert Elderts, Jr., and Rachel Elderts (collectively, the

"Medeiros Appellants");
2

3. Defendant-Appellant Clarence A. Medeiros, Jr.

(Clarence Junior), who is also one of the Medeiros Appellants.3

Because each appeal involves discrete issues, we will

separately discuss each appeal and the facts relevant to that

2 The Medeiros Appellants are generally part of a larger group referred
to herein as the "Medeiros Defendants." Clarence A. Medeiros, Sr., who passed
away during the Circuit Court proceedings, was one of the Medeiros Defendants
but is not one of the Medeiros Appellants. In addition, certain individuals
who disclaimed any interest in the Subject Property are part of the Medeiros
Defendants, but are not included in the Medeiros Appellants. The Medeiros

Defendants are: Clarence A. Medeiros, Sr., Pansy Medeiros, Lisa Hua, Henry
Hua, Jr., Olive Hua, Evonne Hua, aka Yvonne Leslie, George Hua, Sr., Clarence
A. Medeiros, Jr., Albert Medeiros, Alfred Pogtis, Jr., Charles Hua, Jr.,
Bernard Alani, Jr., Aaron Puou, Albert Mamac, Janet Alani, Kathy Medeiros,
Koichi Takizawa, Lorna Takizawa, Melae Hua, Michael Puou, Nellie Medeiros,
Rodney J. Puou, Roland Medeiros, Violet Mamac, William Lazaro, William Puou,
Jr., Carmen Pogtis, Carol Medeiros, Darlene Puou, David Medeiros, Gwen Puou,
Jeana Medeiros, Jim Medeiros, Lavaina Puou, Lorraine Medeiros, Weston Leslie,
William Puou, III, Alicia Hua, Richard Hua, Connie Hua, Edward Hua, Kathleen
Yamamoto, Norman Yamamoto, Joan Shaw, Herbert Elderts, Sr. (deceased), Herbert
Elderts, Jr., Katherine Mapuana Elderts, Rosabella Hua, aka Rosabella Yamamoto
deceased), Julie Hua, aka Julian Hua, aka Julia Kohltfaber, The Estate of
Annie Ah Sing Weeks, aka Annie Hua, Estate of Mary Rivera, Richard Allen
Gomes, and Flora Gomes.
 Appeals were also filed by: (1) Defendants-Appellants Rose Elaine
Abbott, Curtis Ahu, Eugene Ahu, John R. Ahu, Robert Ahu, Deborah H. Lee,
Lorraine Yahnel, Henry Apio, Mary Apio, Elaine Leinaala Dailey, Kimela Kukane
Kalua, Hattie Iwalani Kauhi, and Louise Apio Leopoldo (collectively, the
"Abbott Defendants") and (2) Defendant-Appellant Genevieve Ilima Alani Shito
(Shito). However, stipulations to dismiss the appeals by the Abbott
Defendants and Shito were subsequently filed, and those appeals were
dismissed. 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal.4 As set forth in greater detail below, we hold against 
Kalama Hui in its appeal, in favor of the Medeiros Appellants in
 
their appeal, and in favor of Clarence Junior in his appeal. 
I. The Kalama Hui Appeal
 
The jury returned a special verdict which found that
 
Kalama, Annie Tai See, and Albert Pi (collectively, the "Kaikaina
 Defendants") owned 2 acres of the Subject Property by paper title
 and 16.9 acres by adverse possession. The jury's special verdict
 also described the location of the acreage held collectively by
 the Kaikaina Defendants through adverse possession. McCandless
 moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, challenging the
 jury's special verdict that the Kaikaina Defendants had acquired
 the 16.9 acres, as described, by adverse possession. The Circuit
 Court granted McCandless's motion and awarded the property in
 dispute to McCandless.
 
On appeal, Kalama Hui argues that the Circuit Court
 
erred in (1) granting McCandless's motion for judgment
 notwithstanding the verdict; and (2) ruling that judgments
 entered in two prior lawsuits barred Kalama's claim for adverse
 possession.
5 We affirm the Circuit Court's decision to grant
 
McCandless's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict and
 to award the property in dispute to McCandless.
 
A. Background Facts
 
1.
 
Victoria Kamamalu was granted title to the Subject
 
Property in the Great Mahele. Title thereafter passed to Bernice
 Pauahi Bishop, and the executors of her will conveyed title to
 J.W.L. Lapauila Kahuna' aina. In 1890, Mr. Kahuna' aina conveyed 
title to the Subject Property to a 20-member hui that included Kaikaina, who received a 1/20 share in the Subject Property. At the time of this conveyance, it was believed that the Subject 
4 The Honorable Riki May Amano presided over the proceedings relevant to
the appeals by Kalama Hui and Clarence Junior. The Honorable Glenn S. Hara
 
presided over the proceedings relevant to the Medeiros Appellants' appeal.
 
5
 Annie Tai See and Albert Pi did not appeal .
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Property, the Ahupua' a called Honokua, consisted of approximately 
6,579 acres, with a 1/20 share consisting of approximately 328.9 
acres. Thus, the deed from Mr. Kahuna' aina to Kaikaina referred 
to the Subject Property as containing an area of "6,579 acres more or less" and the 1/20 share as consisting of 328 9/20 acres "more or less." However, a modern survey of the Subject Property revealed that it encompasses 7,129.22 acres, resulting in 357.46 acres per 1/20 share. 
Kaikaina made a number of conveyances of his 1/20 share
 
as follows:
 
1. By deed dated October 9, 1890, Kaikaina conveyed
 
10 acres to D. Kealohapauole, who in turn conveyed the ten acres
 to J. Apio. J. Apio died intestate, and a number of his heirs
 subsequently conveyed their interest in the 10 acres to L.L.
 McCandless, the predecessor in interest of McCandless.
 
2. By deed dated March 1, 1899, Kaikaina conveyed 
340 acres of his 1/20 share in the Subject Property to Mrs.
 Elizabeth K. Amalu (1899 Amalu Deed). The 1899 Amalu Deed refers
 to the 340 acres as 40 acres of farm land above the Old
 Government Road and the remaining 300 acres as being Kaikaina's
 undivided interests in the Subject Property. The property
 conveyed by the 1899 Amalu Deed was eventually conveyed to
 Clarence A. Mederios, Sr., in 1989.
 
3. By deed dated February 13, 1911, Kaikaina conveyed 
2 acres of his 1/20 share in the Subject Property to Beni
 Paauhau.
 
4. By deed dated December 3, 1923 (1923 Deed),
 
Kaikaina conveyed his "entire interest" in the Subject Property
 as well as "other interests to which I am entitled here in the
 Territory of Hawaii" to his daughter, Monika Kalahikiola Paauhau
 (Monika Paauhau). Monika Paauhau was married to J.K. Paauhau. 
By deed dated August 26, 1930 (1930 Deed), Monika Paauhau and
 J.K. Paauhau deeded all of their "right, title and interest" in
 and to the Subject Property and any kuleana therein to L.L.
 McCandless, reserving, however, a life estate for Monika Paauhau
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and J.K. Paauhau in approximately 4 acres of the Subject
 
Property.
 
After the 1923 Deed, Monika Paauhau, J.K. Paauhau, and
 
their family resided on and used a portion of the Subject
 Property. J.K. Paauhau died in 1939. In 1940, Monika Paauhau
 filed an action against L.L. McCandless for cancellation of the
 1930 Deed in Paauhau v. McCandless, Equity No. 102 (hereinafter,
 "Equity No. 102"), alleging that the 1930 Deed was obtained
 through fraud. In her petition, Monika Paauhau, asked the court
 to order L.L. McCandless "to produce and deliver up said deed of
 conveyance to be cancelled and . . . to re-convey the interest in
 said premises of [Monika Paauhau] to [Monika Paauhau]." L.L.
 McCandless filed an answer to the petition in which he denied
 that the 1930 Deed had been obtained by fraud and asked that the
 petition be dismissed. Monika Paauhau died on March 1, 1947,
 while Equity No. 102 was still pending. On August 19, 1949,
 Equity No. 102 was dismissed with prejudice for "want of
 prosecution."
 
After Monika Paauhau's death, certain children of
 
Monika Paauhau and J.K. Paauhau and other Paauhau family
 relatives continued to reside on and occupy structures on a
 portion of the Subject Property until 1955. On August 1, 1955,
 L.L. McCandless's successors in interest filed a complaint to
 evict the Paauhau family members as trespassers in Marks v.
 Generalao, C.A. No. 103 (hereinafter, "Civil No. 103"). The
 Paauhau family members did not appear in the case and default
 judgment was entered against them on October 3, 1955. 
Subsequently, a writ of possession was issued on October 14,
 1955, and the Paauhau family members were evicted.
 
2. 
Prior to trial in this case, the Medeiros Defendants
 
filed a motion for partial summary judgment with respect to the
 1/20 share in the Subject Property initially conveyed to
 Kaikaina. The Medeiros Defendants sought summary judgment
 quieting title in the name of Clarence A. Medeiros, Sr., to all
 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the original 1/20 Kaikaina share, except for the 10 acres 
conveyed by Kaikaina to D. Kealohapauole in 1890, kuleana interests, and the State of Hawai' i's reservations of rights. 
The Medeiros Defendants' motion was based on the 1899 Amalu Deed. The Medeiros Defendants argued that by virtue of the 1899 Amalu Deed, Kaikaina had conveyed all of his 1/20 share in the Subject Property that remained after the 10 acre conveyance to D. Kealohapauole. This left Kaikaina with no interest in the Subject Property to convey to his daughter, Monika Paauhau, through the 1923 Deed, except for his kuleana holdings. The Medeiros Defendants asserted that the property conveyed by Kaikaina in the 1899 Amalu Deed was eventually conveyed to Clarence A. Mederios, Sr. 
McCandless opposed the Medeiros Defendants' motion. 
McCandless argued, among other things, that because it was
 believed at the time of the 1899 Amalu Deed that a 1/20 share
 only consisted of 329.9 acres, Kaikaina could not have
 transferred 340 acres of his 1/20 share to Elizabeth K. Amalu. 
After his previous conveyance of 10 acres to D. Kealohapauole,
 Kaikaina only had approximately 320 shares to convey to Elizabeth
 K. Amalu. McCandless argued that because of this discrepancy,
 the 1899 Amalu Deed was ambiguous and it was reasonable to
 construe the 1899 Amalu Deed as only conveying 300 acres of
 Kaikaina's interest.
6 McCandless contended that there were
 
triable issues of fact, including what interest Kaikaina had to
 convey to his daughter through the 1923 Deed, that precluded the
 grant of summary judgment in favor of the Medeiros Defendants.
7
 
6
 As previously noted, the 1899 Amalu Deed refers to the 340 acres as 40
acres of farm land above the Old Government Road and the remaining 300 acres
of Kaikaina's undivided interests in the Subject Property.
 
7
 In a trial position statement, McCandless subsequently argued that
because Kaikaina conveyed his interest in the Subject Property to his daughter
in 1923, there must have been an unrecorded conveyance of the Amalu interest
back to Kaikaina after the 1899 Amalu Deed and before the 1923 Deed.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Annie Tai See and Albert Pi, who along with Kalama were
 
descendants of Monika Paauhau, also opposed the Medeiros
 
Defendants' motion for partial summary judgment regarding the
 1/20 Kaikaina share. The Circuit Court entered an order
 partially denying and partially granting the Medeiros Defendants'
 motion. The Circuit Court's order denied the motion, except that
 it granted the motion as to Annie Tai See, Albert Pi, and Lovey
 Scott and as to all parties who did not appear at the hearing on
 the motion or at a conference the Circuit Court had scheduled. 
Kalama was among the parties against whom the Medeiros
 Defendants' motion was granted by default. The Circuit Court,
 however, subsequently granted Kalama's motion to set aside the
 default.
8
 
3. 
The case proceeded to trial on the question of title
 
regarding a number of the original 1/20 shares, including
 Kaikaina's 1/20 share. At the conclusion of the trial, the jury
 made numerous findings through special verdicts. The jury found
 that it had not been proven that McCandless or the Medeiros
 Defendants, or their predecessors, had acquired title to any
 portion of the Subject Property by adverse possession. The jury
 further found that it had been proven that the Kaikaina
 Defendants or their ancestors adversely possessed a portion of
 the Subject Property (16.9 acres) before 1956. 
With respect to the Kaikaina share, which the
 
supplemental special verdict form referred to as consisting of
 328.9 acres, the jury found as follows:
 
8
 We note that although the Circuit Court's order purports to grant the
Medeiros Defendants' Motion for partial summary judgment as to Annie Tai See
and Albert Pi, the Circuit Court permitted them to participate in the trial
along with Kalama. The Circuit Court also submitted special verdicts to the
jury requesting that the jury determine the interests held by Kalama, Annie
Tai See, and Albert Pi, or their predecessors, with respect to the original
1/20 Kaikaina share. The parties do not explain this discrepancy. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 9Henry Apio was a heir of J. Apio to whom D. Kealohapauole had conveyed
the 10 acres that he had received from Kaikaina in 1890.  McCandless had
apparently established that it had acquired the interests of all of J. Apio's
heirs except Henry Apio.  
 10The jury's special verdicts were based on the original measurement of
the Subject Property from an ancient survey which resulted in the calculation
of Kaikaina's 1/20 share as 328.9 acres.  A modern survey revealed that a 1/20
share was actually 357.46 acres, about a 9% increase.  The Partial Judgment
increased the acreage found by the jury by this percentage. 
9State the number of acres (totaling 328.9) that each of the
following parties now own in Honokua:
Defendant Henry Apio's heirs[9] 1 acres
[Medeiros Defendants] 300 acres
[Kaikaina Defendants], collectively:
by paper title 2   
acres
by adverse possession 16.9 acres
[McCandless] 9
acres
The jury described the location of the property that the Kaikaina
Defendants had acquired collectively through adverse possession
as "House Lots (2) and land N. of stone wall and S. of Public
Trail and Makai of Government rd. as shown on Map # 382-2 --
(South Kona Belt rd.)."  The jury also found that the claims of
the Kaikaina Defendants or their predecessors to the Kaikaina
share had been disposed of in Equity No. 102 and Civil No. 103,
but that this did not mean that the Kaikaina Defendants have no
present interest in the Subject Property.
Based on the jury's verdicts, the Circuit Court entered
a "Judgment Concerning A Portion of the Ahupua
#a of Honokua"
(Partial Judgment), which stated in pertinent part in paragraphs
12 through 14 as follows:
12.[The Kaikaina Defendants] collectively own an
undivided 2.18 acres in the share of Kaikaina.
13.
The Kaikaina Defendants also collectively own a
portion of the [Subject Property] that consists of two house
lots and all of the land located north of the stone wall,
south of the public trail, and makai of the Government Road,
as shown on Exhibit No. 382-2.
14.[McCandless] own an undivided 9.81 acres in the
share of Kaikaina.
[10]NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4.
 
McCandless filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding
 
the verdict (JNOV Motion). In its JNOV Motion, McCandless argued
 
that (1) the 1930 Deed together with the judgments in Equity No.
 102 and Civil No. 103 established that the Kaikaina Defendants
 had no interest in the Subject Property through Monika Paauhau
 and (2) the Kaikaina Defendants had no valid adverse possession
 claim as a matter of law. McCandless had made similar arguments
 in motions for directed verdict filed before the case was
 submitted to the jury, which the Circuit Court had denied. 
During the trial, McCandless and the Medeiros
 
Defendants entered into a settlement agreement. Pursuant to that
 agreement, the Medeiros Defendants agreed to quitclaim all of
 their right, title, and interest in and to the Subject Property,
 except for certain land which McCandless agreed to convey to the
 Medeiros Defendants. It appears that the property that the jury
 had found that the Kaikaina Defendants owned by adverse
 possession was part of the Subject Property that the Medeiros
 Defendants had agreed to quitclaim to McCandless. As a result of
 the settlement agreement, McCandless would be entitled to this
 disputed property if the jury should properly have found that it
 was owned by either McCandless or the Medeiros Defendants. 
The Circuit Court granted McCandless's JNOV Motion and
 
entered an order, which provided in relevant part:
 
1. The jury's response to the special verdict and
supplemental verdict that Defendants Joseph Kanai Kalama,
Annie K. Tai See and Albert K. Pi, Jr. acquired title to an
interest in the ahupua'a of Honokua by adverse possession is
not supported by the credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support such a conclusion.
 
2. Monika Paauhau v. L.L. McCandless (Equity No.
102, Third Circuit Court) and A. Lester Marks, et al. v.
Agnes Generalao (Civil No. 103, Third Circuit Court) were
cases in which decisions on the merits were entered. A
 dismissal with prejudice for failure to prosecute is an
adjudication on the merits. Lundburg v. Stinson, 5 Haw.
App. 394, 400, 695 P.2d 329, 334 (1984), recon denied, 5
Haw. App. 682, 753, P.2d 253, (1984), cert. denied, 67 Haw.
686, 744 P.2d 781 (1985). The claims in the Equity No. 102
and Civil No. 103 included the issue of the validity of a
deed dated August 26, 1930 from Monika and J.K. Paauhau to
L.L. McCandless (Exh. 286). The parties to Equity No. 102
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Civil No. 103 were in privity with the parties in the
instant case. The result of the decisions in Equity No. 102
and Civil No. 103 was that the deed from Monika and J.K.
 Paauhau to L.L. McCandless (Plaintiffs' Exh. 286) was valid
and enforceable.
 
3. The jury's finding that Defendants Joseph Kanai
Kalama, Annie K. Tai See and Albert K. Pi, Jr. or theirpredecessors adversely possessed a portion of the ahupua' a 
of Honokua before 1956 is not supported by clear andpositive proof that the elements of adverse possession hadbeen proven. Morinoue v. Roy, 86 Haw. 76, 81-84, 949, P.2d
944, 949-52 (1997). Neither Defendants Joseph Kanai Kalama,Annie K. Tai See and Albert K. Pi, Jr. nor theirpredecessors were in adverse possession of any portion ofthe ahupua'a of Honokua for a period of ten (10) yearsbefore 1956. Neither Defendants Joseph Kanai Kalama, AnnieK. Tai See and Albert K. Pi, Jr., nor their predecessors
provided notice of their intent to claim title by adverse
possession as required by City and County of Honolulu v.
Bennett, 57 Haw. 195, 209-11, 552 P.2d. 1380, 1390-91
(1976).
 
4. The Supplemental Special Verdict Form Question
(Kaikaina Share) No. 15 asked the jury "Does your answer toquestion number 14 mean that Defendants Joseph Kanai Kalama,Annie K. Tai See and Albert K. Pi, Jr. have no presentinterest in Honokua?" The jury's response was "No". The jury's answer to Question 15, if and to the extent itimplies that those named defendants acquired an interest inthe ahupua' a as successors in interest to the paper title
held by Monika and J.K. Paauhau, is inconsistent with theresult of the decisions in Equity No. 102 and Civil No. 103,which are binding upon those named defendants under thedoctrine of res judicata. 
IT IS THEREFORE the decision and order of this Court
 
that the Judgment Concerning a Portion of the Title to the
Ahupua'a of Honokua is directed to be amended. Specifically
paragraphs 13 and 14 are set aside. The Amended Judgment
shall omit paragraph 13 and shall state that [McCandless]
own an undivided 27.19 acres in the share of Kaikaina. The
 paragraphs of the Judgment Concerning a Portion of the Title
to the Ahupua'a of Honokua, other than paragraph 13 and
paragraph 14 as amended shall be incorporated into the
Amended Judgment.
 
The effect of the Circuit Court's order was to award to
 
McCandless the property that the jury had found the Kaikaina
 Defendants had acquired through adverse possession.
 
B. Discussion
 
1.
 
Kalama Hui argues that the Circuit Court erred in (1)
 
granting McCandless's JNOV Motion; and (2) ruling that the
 judgments entered in two prior lawsuits barred Kalama's claim for
 
11
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adverse possession.11 We conclude that the Circuit Court was
 
correct in granting McCandless's JNOV motion.
 
We review the Circuit Court's ruling on McCandless's
 
JNOV Motion under the following standards:12
 
It is well settled that a trial court's rulings on
directed verdict or JNOV motions are reviewed de novo. 
Verdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be set aside
where there is substantial evidence to support the jury's
findings. We have defined "substantial evidence" as
 credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion.
 
In deciding a motion for directed verdict or JNOV, the
evidence and the inferences which may be fairly drawn
therefrom must be considered in the light most favorable to
the nonmoving party and either motion may be granted only
where there can be but one reasonable conclusion as to the
 proper judgment.
 
Nelson v. Univ. of Hawaii, 97 Hawai' i 376, 393, 38 P.3d 95, 112 
11 We note that the Circuit Court's specific ruling was that the
judgments entered in the two prior lawsuits established that the 1930 Deed was
valid and enforceable, and not that they barred the Kaikaina Defendants' claim
of adverse possession.
 
12
 At the time that McCandless filed its JNOV Motion, Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 50(b) (1972) provided: 
(b) Motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. 
Whenever a motion for a directed verdict made at the close of all
 the evidence is denied or for any reason is not granted, the court
is deemed to have submitted the action to the jury subject to a
later determination of the legal questions raised by the motion.
Not later than 10 days after entry of judgment, a party who has
moved for a directed verdict may move to have the verdict and any
judgment entered thereon set aside and to have judgment entered in
accordance with his motion for a directed verdict; or if a verdict
was not returned such party, within 10 days after the jury has
been discharged, may move for judgment in accordance with his
motion for a directed verdict. A motion for a new trial may be
joined with this motion, or a new trial may be prayed for in the
alternative. If a verdict was returned the court may allow the
judgment to stand or may reopen the judgment and either order a
new trial or direct the entry of judgment as if the requested
verdict had been directed. If no verdict was returned the court
 may direct the entry of judgment as if the requested verdict had
been directed or may order a new trial.
 
HRCP Rule 50 was subsequently amended to refer to "motion for judgment
as a matter of law" and "renewed motion for judgment as a mater of law"
instead of "motion for directed verdict" and "motion for judgmentnotwithstanding the verdict," but the change in terminology was not intendedto result in a substantive change of existing Hawai' i law. Nelson v. Univ. of 
Hawai'i, 97 Hawai' i 376, 392 n.14, 38 P.3d 95, 111 n.14 (2001). 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2001) (brackets and citations omitted; block quote format
 
changed).
 
2.
 
It is not clear from the jury's special verdicts
 
whether the jury found that the paper title holder against whom
 the Kaikaina Defendants had acquired the 16.9 acres by adverse
 possession was the Medeiros Defendants or McCandless. As noted,
 the 1899 Amalu Deed purported to convey 340 acres from Kaikaina
 to Elizabeth K. Amalu, the Medeiros Defendants' predecessor in
 interest. If the jury construed the 1899 Amalu Deed as conveying
 a full 340 acres, Kaikaina would have conveyed the remainder of
 his entire 1/20 share, because at the time of the conveyance, it
 was believed that a 1/20 share consisted of 328.9 acres. 
However, Kaikaina subsequently conveyed 2 acres in 1911 to Beni
 Paauhau, the Kaikaina Defendants' predecessor in interest, and
 Kaikaina thereafter in 1923 deeded his "entire interest" in the
 Subject Property to his daughter Monika Paauhau, who was
 McCandless's predecessor in interest.
 
The jury found that the Medeiros Defendants had
 
acquired 300 acres by paper title or inheritance, and that the
 Kaikaina Defendants had acquired 2 acres by paper title,
 presumably based on the 1911 conveyance to Beni Paauhau, and 16.9
 acres by adverse possession. The special verdicts, however, did 
not establish whether the jury found: (1) that the 1899 Amalu
 Deed conveyed all of Kaikaina's remaining interest to Elizabeth
 K. Amalu, in which case the Kaikaina Defendants would have
 adversely possessed against the Medeiros Defendants; or (2) the
 1899 Amalu Deed only effectively conveyed 300 acres, an argument
 McCandless had previously made, leaving McCandless as the title
 holder of the 16.9 acres by virtue of the 1923 Deed and 1930
 Deed, in which case the Kaikaina Defendants would have adversely
 possessed against McCandless. 
We conclude that under either scenario, the Kaikaina
 
Defendants, as a matter of law, could not assert a valid claim of 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adverse possession. Accordingly, the Circuit Court properly
 
granted McCandless's JNOV Motion.
 
In granting McCandless's JNOV Motion, the Circuit Court
 
found that there was insufficient evidence to support the jury's
 verdict that the Kaikaina Defendants had acquired title to the
 16.9 acres by adverse possession and also relied on the
 preclusive effect of the judgments in Equity No. 102 and Civil
 No. 103. In Smallwood v. City and County of Honolulu, 118
 Hawai'i 139, 185 P.3d 887 (App. 2008), this court discussed the 
requirements for the preclusive doctrines of res judicata and
 collateral estoppel:
 
Res judicata prohibits a party from relitigating a
previously adjudicated claim or cause of action. Res judicata is applicable when: (1) the claim or cause ofaction in the present action is identical to the one decidedin the prior adjudication; (2) there was a final judgment onthe merits in the prior adjudication; and (3) the parties tothe present action are the same or in privity with theparties in the prior action. See, e.g., Bremer v. Weeks, 
104 Hawai' i 43, 53-54, 85 P.3d 150, 160-61 (2004). Res 
judicata prohibits the relitigation of all grounds anddefenses which might have been properly litigated in theprior action, even if the issues were not litigated ordecided in the earlier adjudication of the subject claim orcause of action. Id. at 53, 85 P.3d at 160 (citations 
omitted). 
Collateral estoppel may preclude the relitigation of a
fact or issue that was previously determined in a prior
action on a different claim or cause of action between the
 same parties or their privies. Collateral estoppel only
applies, however, if the particular issue in question was
actually litigated, finally decided, and essential to the
earlier valid and final judgment. See Omerod v. Heirs of
 
Kaheananui, 116 Hawai' i 239, 264, 172 P.3d 983, 1008 (2007),
citing Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai' i 143, 149, 976 P.2d 904,
910 (1999). Thus the test for collateral estoppel has four
elements: (1) the fact or issue in the present action is
identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication; (2)
there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior
adjudication; (3) the parties to the present action are the
same or in privity with the parties in the prior action; and
(4) the fact or issue decided in the prior action was
actually litigated, finally decided, and essential to the
earlier valid and final judgment. Id.
 
Id. at 146-47, 185 P.3d at 894-95 (footnote and emphasis in
 
original omitted). Collateral estoppel can also be raised
 defensively by one who was not a party to a prior suit against
 one who was a party. Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai' i 143, 148, 976 
P.2d 904, 909 (1999).
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. 
We first address whether the Kaikaina Defendants
 
established a valid claim of adverse possession, assuming that
 
McCandless was the title holder of the 16.9 acres in question. 
We conclude that the Kaikaina Defendants did not establish a
 valid claim of adverse possession against McCandless. 
In 1940, Monika Paauhau filed a petition against L.L.
 
McCandless to set aside the 1930 Deed in Equity No. 102. In the
 petition, Monika Paauhau, who was represented by counsel, alleged
 that the 1930 Deed was obtained through fraud and sought to have
 the 1930 Deed canceled and the property conveyed back to her. 
L.L. McCandless filed an answer denying the allegations of fraud. 
Monika Paauhau died on March 1, 1947, and on August 19, 1949,
 Equity No. 102 was dismissed with prejudice for want of
 prosecution.
 
On August 1, 1955, McCandless's predecessors in
 
interest sued to evict members of the Paauhau family, who had
 remained on the property after Monika Paauhau's death, as
 trespassers in Civil No. 103. The Paauhau family members did not
 appear in the case and default judgment was entered against them
 on October 3, 1955. Subsequently, a writ of possession was
 issued on October 14, 1955, and the Paauhau family members were
 evicted. Kalama Hui does not dispute that the Kaikaina
 Defendants were in privity with Monika Paauhau in Equity No. 102
 and with the defaulting defendants in Civil No. 103.
 
Under Hawai' i law, a dismissal with prejudice "is an 
adjudication on the merits of all issues that were raised or could have been raised in the pleadings." Pedrina v. Chun, 906 
F. Supp. 1377, 1401 (D. Haw. 1995). A dismissal with prejudice 
for failure to prosecute is a decision on the merits that has res
 judicata effect. Lundburg v. Stinson, 5 Haw. App. 394, 400, 695
 
P.2d 328, 334 (1985). A judgment by default constitutes "a
 binding adjudication of all the rights of the parties embraced in
 the prayer for relief which arise from the facts alleged in the 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint." Matsushima v. Rego, 67 Haw. 556, 599, 696 P.2d 843,
 
845 (1985).
 
In Equity No. 102, Monika Paauhau claimed that the 1930
 
Deed, which conveyed all of her and her husband's interest in the
 
Subject Property to L.L. McCandless, was invalid. In Civil No.
 103, the plaintiffs, who were McCandless's predecessors in
 interest, alleged in the complaint that pursuant to the 1930
 Deed, L.L. McCandless had acquired all of Monika Paauhau and J.K.
 Paauhau's interest in the Subject Property; that the defendants,
 Monika Paauhau's children and heirs, entered upon the premises
 and took possession without authorization; and that plaintiffs
 hold legal title and were entitled to immediate possession of the
 premises. In their prayer for relief, the plaintiffs asked for a
 judgment granting them the right to immediate possession of the
 Subject Property, a writ of possession, and damages for the loss
 of rents and profits. The default judgment entered by the court
 granted plaintiffs the requested relief.
 
We conclude that the judgments entered in Equity No. 
102 and Civil No. 103 have preclusive effect and bar the Kaikaina Defendants from contesting that the 1930 Deed was validly made and enforceable and that McCandless's predecessors in interest had a superior right to possession of the disputed premises than the Kaikaina Defendants' predecessors in interest. From 1898 to 1973, the period for adverse possession in Hawai' i was ten years. 
See Morinoue v. Roy, 86 Hawai' i 76, 81 n.6, 947 P.2d 944, 949 n.6 
(1997). To acquire title by adverse possession, a party was required to establish, by clear and positive proof, actual, open, notorious, hostile, continuous, and exclusive possession for the ten-year period. Id. at 81, 947 P.2d at 949; Matsuo v. Texeira, 
34 Haw. 679, 681 (Hawai' i Terr. 1938); Albertina v. Kapiolani 
Estate, Ltd., 14 Haw. 321, 325 (Hawai' i Terr. 1902). In 
addition, 
a tenant in common claiming by adverse possession must prove
that he acted in good faith towards the cotenants during the
statutory period. In most circumstances, this requirement
of good faith will in turn mandate that the tenant claiming
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
adversely must actually notify his cotenants that he is
claiming against them. In the following exceptional
circumstances, however, good faith is satisfied by less than
actual notice: where the tenant in possession has no reason
to suspect that a cotenancy exists; or where the tenant in
possession makes a good faith, reasonable effort to notify
the cotenants but is unable to locate them; or where the
tenants out of possession already have actual knowledge that
the tenant in possession is claiming adversely to their
interests. In these limited circumstances, the notice
requirement will be satisfied by constructive notice and
"open and notorious possession".
 
City and County of Honolulu v. Bennett, 57 Haw. 195, 209-10, 552
 
P.2d 1380, 1390 (1976).
 
Because Monika Paauhau and J.K. Paauhau were the
 
grantors and reserved a life estate in conveying their interest
 in the 1930 Deed, their continued presence on the Subject
 Property was not adverse or hostile to L.L. McCandless, at least
 until Monika Paauhau filed suit in 1940 to cancel the 1930 Deed. 
See Wiedrich v. Howard, 131 N.E.2d 508, 510-11 (Ill. 1956);
 Jackson v. Genecov, 471 S.W.2d 589, 593-94 (Tex. Civ. App. 1971);
 James Harvey Ramsey Estate, Inc. v. Pace, 467 So.2d 1202, 1208
 (La. Ct. App. 1985). However, Monika Paauhau's filing of her
 suit and L.L. McCandless's denial of its allegations tolled the
 running of any period of adverse possession until the final
 judgment was entered. See Taylor v. W.C. Belcher Loan & Mortg.
 
Co., 265 S.W. 403, 405 (Tex. Civ. App. 1924); Rosencrantz v.
 Shields, Inc., 346 A.2d 237, 245 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1975). 
The judgment dismissing Equity No. 102 with prejudice
 
was entered on August 19, 1949. The period from 1949 until the
 Kaikaina Defendants' predecessors in interest were evicted in
 1955 as a result of Civil No. 103 was 6 years, less than the
 required statutory period. Thus, if McCandless was the title
 holder of the 16.9 acres in question, the Kaikaina Defendants
 could not establish a valid claim of adverse possession against
 McCandless.
 
Kalama Hui argues that we should not give preclusive
 
effect to the prior judgments because the Kaikaina Defendants'
 predecessors in interest did not have a full and fair opportunity
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to litigate the relevant issues in Equity No. 102 and Civil No.
 
103. See Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 600, 837 P.2d
 
1247, 1261 (1992). We disagree. Whether the 1930 Deed was
 validly made and enforceable was the central issue in Equity No.
 102, and the right to possession of the disputed premises was the
 dispositive issue in Civil No. 103. Monika Paauhau was
 represented by counsel when she filed her petition in Equity No.
 102, and the case lasted nine years before it was dismissed for
 failure to prosecute. The judgment in Civil No. 103 reflects
 that the defendants were duly served with process but failed to
 make any appearance. The record does not support Kalama Hui's
 claim that the Kaikaina Defendants' predecessors in interest
 lacked a full and fair opportunity to litigate the relevant
 issues in Equity No. 102 or Civil No. 103. 
4. 
We now address whether the Kaikaina Defendants had a
 
valid claim of adverse possession, assuming that the Medeiros
 Defendants or their predecessors in interest were the title
 holder of the 16.9 acres in question. Because the Medeiros
 Defendants or their predecessors in interest were not parties to
 Equity No. 102 and Civil No. 103, the Medeiros Defendants were
 not bound by those decisions. However, the Kaikaina Defendants
 remained bound by the judgments in those cases and were precluded
 from contesting that the 1930 Deed was validly made and
 enforceable. 
Under the 1930 Deed, Monika Paauhau and J. K. Paauhau 
transferred all of their right, title, and interest in and to the Subject Property to L.L. McCandless, subject to the reservation of a life estate. By virtue of the 1930 Deed, any right to adverse possession acquired by Monika Paauhau, J.K. Paauhau, and their successors in interest would inure to the benefit of McCandless. See Kainea v. Kreuger, 31 Haw. 108, 115 (Hawai' i 
Terr. 1929) (stating that "the privity required to constitute continuous adverse possession may be effected by any conveyance, agreement, or understanding which has for its object a transfer 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the rights of the original entry"); Ryan v. Tanabe Corp., 97 
Hawai'i 305, 312, 37 P.3d 554, 561 (App. 2002) ("[T]he possession 
of a tenant [(including a tenant for life)] inures to the benefit of his or her landlord and constitutes the possession of the landlord for the purpose of securing to the latter the benefits of adverse possession . . . ." (brackets omitted)). Accordingly, if the Kaikaina Defendants had acquired title through adverse possession as against the Medeiros Defendants, such title would belong to McCandless as a result of the 1930 Deed. In any event, we further conclude that the evidence adduced at trial was insufficient to show that the Kaikaina Defendants had satisfied the requirements for acquiring title through adverse possession against the Medeiros Defendants or their predecessors in interest. 
5.
 
Therefore, regardless of whether McCandless or the
 
Medeiros Defendants had paper title to the 16.9 acres in
 question, the Kaikaina Defendants, as a matter of law, did not
 establish a valid claim for adverse possession. Accordingly, the
 Circuit Court did not err in granting McCandless's JNOV Motion.
13
 
II. The Medeiros Appellants' Appeal
 
After the trial to quiet title on the undivided shares
 
in the Subject Property was completed, the Circuit Court
 appointed a commissioner to assist the parties in partitioning
 the Subject Property. The Commissioner filed several reports and
 recommended a partition of the Subject Property, which the
 Circuit Court approved. Among the costs incurred were the costs 
13
 After granting McCandless's JNOV Motion, the Circuit Court awarded
the 16.9 acres, apparently with some adjustment based on the modern survey, to
McCandless. The Medeiros Defendants do not appeal the grant of this property
to McCandless, presumably because they agreed, pursuant to their settlement
agreement with McCandless, to quitclaim any interest they had in such property
to McCandless. In any event, having concluded that the Circuit Court properly
determined that the Kaikaina Defendants, as a matter of law, were not entitled
to the 16.9 acres by adverse possession, the separate question of whether the
Circuit Court properly granted the 16.9 acres, as adjusted, to McCandless is
not before us. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of surveying the parcels that were partitioned within the Subject
 
Property. 
Based on the modern survey, the total acreage of the
 
Subject Property involved in McCandless's quiet title action was
 7,149.22 acres. The Subject Property was apportioned among the
 various parties into lots. According to the Medeiros Appellants, 
McCandless received about 98 percent of the partitioned area of
 the Subject Property.
 
The costs of the surveys for the lots partitioned to
 
the Medeiros Defendants totaled $82,646.42. In its Order and
 Judgment Allocating Costs, the Circuit Court ordered that the
 Medeiros Defendants and McCandless each pay one-half of these
 survey costs or $41,323.21. In support of its decision, the
 Circuit Court found that "the 50-50 split of the survey costs
 reasonably approximate[d] the actual benefit received by
 [McCandless] and the [Medeiros Defendants] based on an allocation
 of costs based on the lengths of the boundaries surveyed that are
 common to [McCandless] and the [Medeiros Defendants]."
 
On appeal, the Medeiros Appellants argue that the
 
Circuit Court erred in ordering the Medeiros Defendants to pay
 50% of the survey costs for their partitioned lots, instead of
 requiring the payment of costs in proportion to the parties'
 respective percentage interest in the Subject Property. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in allocating the survey
 costs.
 
HRS ยง 668-17 (1993) provides:
 
All costs of the proceedings in partition shall be
paid by the plaintiff in the first instance, but eventually
by all of the parties in proportion to their interests,
except such costs which may be occasioned by contests as to
particular shares or interests, which shall be charged
against the particular shares or interests involved and be
paid as determined by the result of the trial of the
particular issue.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
McCandless argues that the Circuit Court had the
 
discretion to equitably apportion costs among the parties by
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defining the term "interests" as used in HRS ยง 668-17 to mean 
"the lengths of the common boundaries and the value and benefit of each party's share." We disagree. HRS ยง 668-17 falls under Chapter 668, which governs partitions of real estate. See HRS 
Chapter 668. In the context of partition, the term "interests" as used in HRS ยง 668-17 is most naturally and reasonably construed to mean the parties' proportionate interests in the partitioned property. Hawai' i case law supports this 
construction of "interests." See Lalakea v. Laupahoehoe Sugar 
Co., 35 Haw. 262, 296-98 (Hawai' i Terr. 1939) (stating that 
ordinarily costs are apportioned according to the parties' respective interests in the subject property because "all parties to the suit are presumed to be proportionately benefited [sic] by all of the steps in which costs are incurred."); Pioneer Mill Co. v. Ward, 34 Haw. 854, 856-59 (Hawai' i Terr. 1939)(allocating 
costs in a partition action to the parties "in proportion to their several interests in the property to be partitioned"). 
Even assuming arguendo that a court could allocate
 
costs based on a factor other than the parties' proportionate
 interests in the partitioned property, the record in this case
 does not indicate any circumstances that would warrant deviating
 from allocating the survey costs at issue based on the parties'
 proportionate interests in the Subject Property. McCandless
 received the vast majority of the Subject Property and benefitted
 greatly from the partition. The partition enabled McCandless to
 divide the Subject Property between McCandless and the other
 parties, thereby extinguishing the undivided interests of the
 other parties, including the Medeiros Defendants, to the lion's
 share of the Subject Property that was allocated to McCandless. 
Under the circumstances of this case, the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in ordering the Medeiros Defendants to pay 50 % of
 the survey costs for their partitioned lots. 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Order and Judgment
 
Allocating Costs to the extent that it ordered the Medeiros
 Defendants to pay 50% of the survey costs for their partitioned
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lots. On remand, the Circuit Court shall allocate the survey
 
costs in proportion to the parties' respective interests. 
III. Clarence Junior's Appeal
 
Clarence Junior appeals from the Amended Final Judgment
 
with respect to its vesting of title to seven kuleana properties. 
Clarence Junior contends that the Circuit Court's orders and the
 Amended Final Judgment "that vested the final ownership of [the
 seven] kuleana in the names of certain individuals are
 inconsistent with the trial court's own findings and/or the
 record, and accordingly, are factually clearly erroneous and
 legally wrong." Clarence Junior requests that the case be
 remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings as to the
 seven kuleana for clarification as to the vesting of the title to
 these properties.
 
Clarence Junior is the son of Clarence A. Medeiros, Sr.
 
(Clarence Senior). Clarence Junior is a member of the Medeiros
 Defendants. The Medeiros Defendants were represented by Mark Van
 Pernis, Esq. (Van Pernis) during the trial proceedings and are
 represented by Van Pernis on appeal. The record reflects that
 Clarence Senior, who was also a member of the Medeiros
 Defendants, died during the trial proceedings and that after his
 death, disputes arose among various members of the Medeiros
 Defendants. This prompted Van Pernis to file motions to
 withdraw, which were denied by the Circuit Court. Although
 Clarence Junior apparently remained part of the Medeiros
 Defendants represented by Van Pernis, Clarence Junior also
 separately retained his own lawyer, Michael J. Matsukawa, Esq.
 (Matsukawa), who filed pleadings on Clarence Junior's behalf in
 the Circuit Court and represents Clarence Junior on appeal. 
Clarence Junior identifies two groups related to the
 
Medeiros Defendants that were recognized by the Circuit Court as
 follows: (1) the Parker-Medeiros Heirs, a subset of the Medeiros
 Defendants; and (2) the Medeiros Titleholders Defendants, which 
includes members of the Medeiros Defendants but also excludes
 certain members of the Medeiros Defendants who disclaimed their
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest in the Subject Property during the litigation. The
 
Amended Final Judgment vests ownership of certain kuleana
 properties in a group of individuals identified therein as the
 "Medeiros Titleholder Defendants," who are the same individuals
 referred to in this Memorandum Opinion as the "Medeiros
 Appellants." 
The Circuit Court bifurcated the trial to separate
 
claims involving undivided interests in the Subject Property from
 claims involving distinct kuleana parcels within the Subject
 Property. The trial of the claims related to the undivided
 interests was held first. During that trial, McCandless and the
 Medeiros Defendants reached a settlement, which provided for
 McCandless to convey designated properties, and kuleana therein,
 to the Medeiros Defendants and for the Medeiros Defendants to
 quitclaim their interest in all other portions of the Subject
 Property to McCandless. The seven kuleana at issue in Clarence
 Junior's appeal were in Settlement Area "A", and the settlement
 agreement provided that McCandless agreed "to convey and
 quitclaim to [the Medeiros Defendants] or [the Medeiros
 Defendants'] designee(s)" the kuleana within Settlement Area "A". 
Pursuant to the settlement agreement, McCandless and
 
the Medeiros Defendants filed a joint motion for summary
 judgment. The Circuit Court granted the motion, and Van Pernis,
 on behalf of the Medeiros Defendants, drafted the orders
 concerning title to the seven kuleana properties that Clarence
 Junior challenges on appeal. 
Clarence Junior contends that during the trial on the
 
claims involving undivided interests in the Subject Property,
 deeds executed in 1988, in which Clarence Senior conveyed to
 Clarence Junior all of Clarence Senior's interest in kuleana
 within the Subject Property, including the seven at issue in this
 appeal, were admitted into evidence. Clarence Junior argues that
 the Circuit Court's orders and the Amended Final Judgment vesting
 ownership in the seven kuleana properties are erroneous as
 follows:
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. As to Land Commission Awards 9453-B and 9501
 
(Point 1), the trial court erroneously failed to discuss and
apply the two 1988 deeds that convey Clarence A. Medeiros,
SR.'s interest in the kuleana.
 
2. As to Land Commission Awards 7005 and 9568
 
(Point 2), the trial court erroneously vested title in
14
Clarence A. Medeiros, SR. and Pansy Medeiros[ ]  even though
the trial court found that the larger Medeiros 
Group [(the
Medeiros Defendants)] and Clarence A. Medeiros, SR. and
Pansy Medeiros as a whole owned the kuleana together.
 
3. As to Land Commission Award 9457-C and 9500-C
 
(Point 3), the trial court erroneously vested title in the
larger Medeiros Group [(the Medeiros Defendants)] even
though the trial court found that the smaller subset Parker-
Medeiros Heirs and the Medeiros Group [(the Medeiros
Defendants)] as a whole owned the kuleana together,
erroneously eliminated Clarence A. Medeiros, SR. as a "Title
Holder Defendant" and failed to discuss and apply the two
1988 deeds that convey Clarence A. Medeiros, SR.'s interest
in the kuleana.
 
4. As to Land Commission Award 9569 (Point 4), the
trial court erroneously eliminated Clarence A. Medeiros, SR.
as a "Title Holder Defendant" and failed to discuss and
 apply the two 1988 deeds that convey Clarence A. Medeiros,
SR.'s interest in the kuleana.
 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
In response to Clarence Junior's opening brief, Van
 
Pernis filed a declaration in which he states that he is the
 
attorney of record for "the Medeiros Defendants, including the
 Medeiros Titleholder Defendants." Van Pernis further states in
 his declaration as follows:
 
2. One of my clients, being "Defendant/
Counterclaimant/Appellant Clarence Medeiros, Jr.", has
separately and individually filed an appeal in this case
through his own separate attorney Michael J. Matsukawa,
Esquire, who has been known as a "sub-attorney" for Mr.
Clarence Medeiros, Jr. in this case after appearing after
the verdicts and judgments quieting title to subject
properties and during the partition portion of the case
thereafter.
 
3. Mr. Clarence Medeiros, Jr. has recently filed
before this Honorable Court Defendant/Counterclaimant/
Appellant Clarence Medeiros, Jr.'s Opening Brief.
 
4. The positions advocated by Mr. Clarence
Medeiros, Jr. in has [sic] above referred to individual
appeal may be adverse to other Medeiros Defendants or
Medeiros Titleholder Defendants.
 
14 Clarence A. Medeiros, Sr., and Pansy Medeiros were husband and wife.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. Due to obvious conflicts of interest, I cannot
appear or advocate any position for my clients in respect to
the position my client Mr. Clarence Medeiros, Jr. may be
taking in his said appeal.
 
6. I have previously informed all my clients in
writing of this situation, the separate appeal of Mr.
Clarence Medeiros, Jr., that I am unable to represent them
or take any position as to that appeal due to conflict of
interest, and advised them to seek separate counsel in that
regard. I am also providing a copy of this Declaration to
each of them.
 
No opposition to Clarence Junior's opening brief was filed in
 
this appeal by any member of the Medeiros Defendants or the
 Medeiros Appellants, or any other party. 
Our review of the record substantiates the existence of
 
the discrepancy between, and the ambiguity created by, the
 Circuit Court's findings and its orders and the Final Amended
 Judgment which Clarence Junior identifies in his points of error
 and argument. In addition, we have not been directed to, and
 have not located, any portion of the record in which the parties
 or the Circuit Court address the validity of the 1988 deeds
 between Clarence Senior and Clarence Junior or their effect on
 the vesting of title in the seven kuleana properties. In light
 of these circumstances and the absence of any opposition to
 Clarence Junior's appeal, we vacate the Amended Final Judgment to
 the extent that it vests title in the seven kuleana properties,
 and we remand the case for a clarification by the Circuit Court
 of its basis for determining the titleholders for these
 properties and, if necessary, a redetermination of the
 appropriate titleholders. On remand, the Circuit Court may wish
 to revisit the question of whether Van Pernis has a conflict of
 interest that affects his ability to properly represent his
 clients.
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Order and
 
Judgment Allocating Costs to the extent that it ordered the
 Medeiros Defendants to pay one-half of the survey costs or
 $41,323.21. We also vacate the Amended Final Judgment to the
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extent that it vests title in the seven kuleana properties
 
challenged by Clarence Junior on appeal. We affirm the Amended
 Final Judgment in all other respects. We remand the case for
 further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 9, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Mark Van Pernis
 
(Van Pernis - Vancil) Chief Judge
for Defendants/Counter-Claimants/
Appellants Pansy Medeiros, et al.
 
Michael J. Matsukawa
 
for Defendant/Counter-Claimant/ 
Associate Judge
Appellant Clarence A. Medeiros, Jr.
 
Michael W. Gibson
 
Michael R. Vieira
 for Plaintiffs/Counter-Defendants/ 
Associate Judge
Appellees McCandless Land
and Cattle Company and
Elizabeth M. Stack
 
Kevin P.H. Sumida
 Anthony L. Wong
(Sumida & Tsuchiyama, LLLC)
for Defendant/Appellant
Genevieve Ilima Alani Shito
 
Joseph S.Y. Hu
for Defendant-Appellant Joseph Kanai
Kalama, through his successor in
interest Kalama Hui, LLC
 
26
 