NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28945
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
a municipal corporation of the State of Hawai» i,
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
JAMES M. SHERMAN, aka James Malcolm Sherman
and AKIKO S. SHERMAN, aka Akiko Sakiyama Sherman
as Trustee under that certain unrecorded James M. Sherman
 
and Akiko S. Sherman Revocable Trust dated May 2, 1989, et al.,
Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and
 
FIRST UNITED METHODIST CHURCH, a Hawai» i non-profit corporation,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOE 1-200, et al., Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-0963)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees Sherman et al.
 
(Lessees)1 appeal from the Final Judgment entered on December 11,
 
1
 Lessees are: James M. Sherman and Akiko S. Sherman; Jan Camille
Bellinger; Clarence K. Lee; Myrna P. Chun-Hoon; George B. Garis; Karen Wilson
Rosa; Elizabeth W. Takahashi; Stuart Edwin Gross and Marcia Kurzweil Gross;
Kenneth Graham Patterson and Lillian Papacolas Paterson; Moses Masai Lo and
Sheila Dickenson Lo; Frank K. Min and Elaine N. Min; Arthur R. King, Jr. and
Ruth Mildred King; Ramez Bassir; Paul John Casey and Janice Yoko Casey; George
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2007 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).2
 
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant First United Methodist Church
 
(Church) cross-appeals from the Final Judgment.
 
This is the second appeal in this case, which is a
 
condemnation action initiated by Plaintiff/Cross-Appellee City
 
and County of Honolulu (City) under its eminent domain powers
 
pursuant to Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) Chapter 38
 
(1990) seeking lease-to-fee conversion of certain units in the
 
Admiral Thomas condominium. Lessees own leasehold interests in
 
units at the Admiral Thomas. The Church owns the fee interest.
 
On remand after the first appeal, the Circuit Court
 
ruled on the Church's "Motion For Partial Summary Judgment On The
 
Issue of Lessee Qualifications" and held that certain lessees
 
were not qualified under ROH Chapter 38 to participate in the
 
lease-to-fee conversion. Combined with stipulations to dismiss
 
other lessees, the Circuit Court thus concluded that there were
 
an insufficient number of qualified lessees for the minimum
 
required twenty-five units. The Circuit Court dismissed the
 
City's action.
 
In this appeal, the Lessees contend that the Circuit
 
Court erred in granting the Church's summary judgment motion and
 
dismissing the action because: (1) the Circuit Court erroneously
 
concluded that the Third Amendment to the Original Designation
 
(Third Amendment) could not be considered when determining
 
whether there were a sufficient number of qualified units under
 
ROH Chapter 38; (2) the Circuit Court erred in concluding that
 
1(...continued)
Henry Lumsden and Joanne Chun Lumsden; Ann Takako Yamamoto; Frances M.
Watanabe; Meredith Kwock Leong Pang; Neil Simms Bellinger; Wallace Lee Young
and Ernestine Ching Young; Joyce A. Hagin and Lawrence Reich; David Patrick
Kelly and Keiko Kelly; Patricia Carleen Brown; Randy Neil Yeager and Susan
Kaycie Yeager; Gail Suzanne Koglman
 
2
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wallace Lee Young and Ernestine Ching Young (the Youngs),
 
Clarence Lee (Lee), and Ann Yamamoto (Yamamoto) did not qualify
 
under ROH Chapter 38; and (3) the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion by failing to use its equitable powers to consider the
 
Third Amendment and to consider Ernestine Young s medical
 
condition when deciding whether she was eligible under Chapter
 
38.
 
On cross-appeal, the Church raises two points of error:
 
(1) that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that Lawrence Reich
 
(Reich) and Joyce Hagin (Hagin) and their unit were qualified
 
under ROH Chapter 38, despite the fact that they each owned
 
disqualifying real estate which they transferred to Limited
 
Liability Companies (LLCs) solely owned and controlled by Reich
 
and Hagin, respectively; and (2) that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying the Church's request for attorneys' fees incurred in the
 
first appeal, which had been made pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statute (HRS) ÿÿ 101-27 (1993 Repl.).
 
For the reasons expressed below, we hold that the
 
Circuit Court: (1) correctly did not consider the Third Amendment
 
in determining the qualified number of units; (2) correctly
 
concluded that the Youngs and Lee did not qualify; (3) did not
 
abuse its discretion in not exercising equitable powers; (4) but
 
did abuse its discretion in denying the Church's request for
 
attorneys' fees on the basis that the Circuit Court was not in a
 
position to determine fees incurred in the first appeal.
 
We need not, and therefore do not, reach the issues of
 
whether the Circuit Court erred: in determining Yamamoto to be
 
disqualified; and in determining Reich and Hagin to be qualified.
 
I. Background
 
The City brought this action under ROH Chapter 38,
 
which authorized the condemnation action provided inter alia
 
that: "[a]t least 25 of all the condominium owners within the
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
development or at least owners of 50 percent of the condominium 
units, whichever number is less" apply to the City's Department 
of Community Services (DCS)3 to purchase the leased fee interest 
"pursuant to Section 38-2.4"4 and file an application with DCS. 
ROH ÿÿ 38-2.2. Further, "as long as the minimum number of twenty-
five units is continuously maintained, the condemnation retains 
its public purpose and need not be terminated." City and County 
of Honolulu v. Sherman, 110 Hawai» i 39, 66, 129 P.3d 542, 569 
(2006) (Sherman I ); cf., Housing Finance and Development Corp. v. 
Takabuki, 82 Hawai» i 172, 183, 921 P.2d 92, 103 (1996) (analyzing 
analogous statute for lease-to-fee conversion of residential 
houselots). 
After initial proceedings and rulings by the Circuit 
Court, cross-appeals were taken by the Lessees and the Church in 
the first appeal. In its opinion, the Hawai» i Supreme Court 
ruled on certain challenges to the City's authority under ROH 
Chapter 38 and determined that the City had the authority to 
bring the action,5 but held that there were genuine issues of 
3 ROH Chapter 38 refers to the Department of Housing and Community
Development, which was later reorganized into the Department of Community
Services.
 
4 ROH § 38-2.4(a) includes the lessee qualifications for purchase of
the leased fee interest.
 
5 The Hawai »i Supreme Court held: 
(1) that ROH ch. 38 does not provide an exception to
lease-to-fee conversion of "mixed-use" buildings, (2) that
[the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Person Act of
2000] does not provide a defense to condemnation of the
Admiral Thomas condominium units owned in fee simple by the
Church, (3) that the City Council did not impermissibly
delegate the power of eminent domain to the DCS, (4) that
there are genuine issues of material fact as to whether the
requisite number of applicant units exists to acquire the
fee pursuant to ROH ch. 38, and (5) that [Administrator of
the City's Leasehold Conversion Program] Cravalho's
affidavits do not run afoul of HRCP Rule 56(e).
 
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material fact "as to whether the requisite number of applicant 
units exists to acquire the fee pursuant to ROH ch. 38[.]" 
Sherman I , 110 Hawai» i at 44, 149 P.3d at 547. The supreme court 
therefore remanded the case for further proceedings, "including a 
determination as to whether there are the requisite number of 
qualified applicants, their qualifications to be determined from 
the date that their applications were filed with the City[.]" 
Id. at 77, 129 P.3d at 580. 
Effective February 9, 2005, while the first appeal was 
pending, ROH Chapter 38 was repealed by the Honolulu City Council 
(City Council). 
Ordinance 05-001 (2005) (Ordinance 05-001). 
However, this eminent domain action fell within the scope of an exception to the repeal. Sherman I , 110 Hawai» i at 42 n.1, 129 
P.3d at 545 n.1 ("the repeal of ROH Ch. 38 does not affect the present matter, inasmuch as the City Council had already 
authorized the eminent domain proceeding at issue."). 
On remand to the Circuit Court, the Church filed its
 
partial summary judgment motion seeking a ruling that there were
 
not qualified lessees for at least twenty-five units and that the
 
condemnation action must therefore be dismissed. As noted by the
 
Circuit Court, between January 2004 and September 2006, there
 
were stipulations filed dismissing various lessees and a total of
 
eight units from the case.
6 The Circuit Court also made the
 
following findings of fact (FOF) and conclusions of law (COL)
 pertinent to this appeal:
 
5(...continued)
Sherman I , 110 Hawai »i at 44, 129 P.3d at 547. 
6
 One unit was dismissed by stipulation prior to the first appeal and
seven units were dismissed by stipulation after remand to the Circuit Court. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. There are no genuine issues of material fact.
 
2. The Defendant Lessees are, or were, the lessees
of the units at the Admiral Thomas condominium which are, or
were, the subject of this condemnation action.
 
. . . 
7. The Court finds that the following Defendant
Lessees and their units are not qualified:
 
(a) Defendant WALLACE LEE YOUNG and ERNESTINE
 
CHING YOUNG (Unit 503) rented Unit 503 to Dr. Lynn Ashby
from August 1, 2001, to the end of August, 2002, and did not
have possession of Unit 503 for the twelve-month period
preceding the date of the filing of their application with
the Department of Community Services to acquire the leased
fee.
 
(b) The spouse of Defendant CLARENCE K. LEE
(Unit 704), Elsa Lee, acquired an interest in fee simple
residential real property in the City and County of Honolulu
after the date that Mr. Lee filed his Chapter 38
application.
 
(c) On the date that her Chapter 38
Application was received by the City, Defendant ANN TAKAKO
YAMAMOTO (Unit 2905) owned an interest in fee simple
residential real property in the City and County of
Honolulu.
 
8. Defendants LAWRENCE REICH and JOYCE A. HAGIN
 
(Unit 2001) each owned a fee simple residential property in
the City and County of Honolulu, but transferred those
properties to single-member, single-purpose limited
liability companies owned and controlled by them prior to
the date they filed their Chapter 38 Application.
 
9. On April 20, 2004 the Director of the DCS
designated the leased fee interests appurtenant to an
additional five units at the Admiral Thomas for acquisition
by the City ("Third Amendment to Designation"). The City
Council did not approve condemnation of the five additional
units prior to the repeal of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu
(1990) Chapter 38 ("Chapter 38").
 
10. Subtracting the three disqualified units
described in paragraph 7 above from the remaining units
leaves a total of 22 units in this condemnation action.
 
11. The Court finds that there have not continuously
been qualified lessees for at least 25 units.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
12. If any of the above Findings of Fact shall be
deemed to be Conclusions of Law, the Court intends that
every such Finding of Fact shall be construed as a
Conclusion of Law.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. Under Housing Finance and Development
Corporation v. Takabuki, 82 Hawai »i 172, 921 P.2d 92 (1962),
Coon v. City and County of Honolulu, 98 Hawai »i 233, 47 P.3d
348 (2002), City and County of Honolulu v. Ing, 100 Hawai »i 
182, 58 P.3d 1229 (2002), City and County of Honolulu v.
Hsiung, 109 Hawai »i 159, 124 P.3d 434 (2005), and City and
County of Honolulu v. Sherman, 110 Hawai »i 39, 129 P.3d 542
(2006), there must be qualified lessees for at least 25units continuously throughout the legal proceedings to
acquire the fee. If the class of qualified lessee
applicants whose units have been designated falls below thestatutory minimum number of 25 units, for whatever reason,the proceedings must be terminated. 
2. Because the Third Amendment to Designation was
not approved by the City Council prior to the repeal of
Chapter 38, it does not constitute a valid designation for
purposes of evaluating whether the numerosity requirements
of Chapter 38 have been satisfied. Section 3.(a), Ordinance
05-001.
 
3. Defendants WALLACE LEE YOUNG, and ERNESTINE
CHING are not qualified because they do not meet the
definition of "owner-occupant" set forth in Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu (1990) ("R.O.H.") ÿÿ 38-1.2.
 
4. Defendant CLARENCE K. LEE (Unit 704) is not
qualified because he does not meet the requirements of
R.O.H. ÿÿ 38-2.4(a)(4).
 
5. Defendant ANN TAKAKO YAMAMOTO (Unit 2905) is not
qualified because she does not meet the requirements of
R.O.H. ÿÿ 38-2.4(a)(4).
 
6. Defendants LAWRENCE REICH and JOYCE A. HAGIN
 
(Unit 2001) are qualified.
 
7. As there are not qualified lessees for at least
25 units, this condemnation action must be dismissed.
 
8. If any of the above Conclusions of Law shall be
deemed to be Findings of Fact, the Court intends that every
such Conclusions of Law shall be construed as a Finding of
Fact.
 
On December 11, 2007, the Circuit Court entered, inter
 
alia, final judgment in favor of the Church and against the City
 
and Lessees as to all claims alleged in the First Amended
 
Complaint, which sought condemnation. The Circuit Court also
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8awarded the Church a part of the attorneys' fees and costs it had
requested, but which did not include the Church's request for
attorneys' fees incurred in the first appeal.
II.Standards of Review
A.Summary Judgment
The standard of review for grants or denials of summary
judgment is de novo  review. Sherman I, 110 Hawai #i at 48, 129
P.3d at 551 (citing Haw. Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94
Hawai#i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000)). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.  The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.  In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Sherman I, 110 Hawai #i at 48-49, 129 P.3d at 551-52 (citations
and internal quotation marks omitted). 
B.Statutory Interpretation
The standard of review for the circuit court’s
interpretation of a statute is de novo.  Sherman I, 110 Hawai #i
at 49, 129 P.3d at 552; City and County of Honolulu v. Hsiung,
109 Hawai# i 159, 170, 124 P.3d 434, 445 (2005) (citations
omitted).  "[W]hen interpreting municipal ordinances, we apply
the same rules of construction that we apply to statutes." 
Hsiung, 109 Hawai #i at 172, 124 P.3d at 477 (quoting Coon v.
County of Honolulu, 98 Hawai #i 233, 245, 47 P.3d 348, 360
(2002)).  The court’s statutory construction is guided by
established rules:  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. And we must read
 
statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose. 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used in a
statute, an ambiguity exists. . . . 
Sherman I , 110 Hawai» i at 51, 129 P.3d at 554 (citing Coon 98 
Hawai» i at 245, 47 P.3d at 360). 
C. Inherent Powers
 
Both a trial court s exercise of its inherent powers 
and its failure or refusal to exercise its inherent powers is 
reviewed under an abuse of discretion standard. Richardson v. 
Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai» i 494, 508, 880 P.2d 169, 
183 (1994) (citing Kukui Nuts of Haw., Inc. v. R. Baird & Co. , 6 
Haw. App. 431, 438, 726 P.2d 268, 272 (1986)). 
D. Conclusions of Law
 
A trial court s conclusions of law are reviewed de novo
 
under the right/wrong standard: 
Under this standard, [we] examine the facts and answer the
question without being required to give any weight to the
trial court s answer to it. Thus, a conclusion of law is
not binding upon the appellate court and is freely
reviewable for its correctness. 
State v. Ortiz , 91 Hawai » i 181, 189, 981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999) 
(internal citations, quotation marks, brackets, and block 
quotation format omitted). 
E. Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 
The award of attorneys' fees and costs are reviewed
 
under the abuse of discretion standard.
 
This court reviews the trial court's grant or denial
of attorneys' fees and costs under the abuse of discretion
standard. Price [v. AIG Hawaii Ins. Co.] , 107 Hawai »i [106,]
110, 111 P.3d [1,] 5 [2005] (citations omitted). 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The trial court abuses its discretion if it
 
bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law
or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the
evidence. Stated differently, an abuse of
discretion occurs where the trial court has
 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
disregarded rules or principles of law or
practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant.
 
Id. (citations omitted).
 
Enoka v. AIG Hawaii Ins., Co. , 109 Hawai» i 537, 544, 128 P.3d 
850, 857 (2006) (materials in brackets added).
 
III. Discussion7
 
A. Third Amendment
 
Lessees argue that, given the framework set out in
 
Sherman I for considering the numerosity requirement, the Circuit
 
Court erred in concluding, as a matter of law, that the Third
 
Amendment could not be considered in determining whether the
 
minimum of twenty-five units was maintained throughout the
 
litigation. It is uncontested that on April 20, 2004, DCS
 
designated the leased fee interests for five additional units at
 
the Admiral Thomas for acquisition by the City, but that the City
 
Council never approved condemnation of the five additional units.
 
Ordinance 05-001, promulgated while the first appeal
 
was pending, expressly states:
 
This ordinance shall not affect any eminent domain
proceeding for the acquisition of units validly designated
in projects, the condemnation of which units was approved by
the council by resolution before the effective date of this
ordinance. Such an eminent domain proceeding may be
 
7 The points of error raised in Lessees' opening brief do not meet the
requirements of Hawai »i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP), Rule 28(b)(4)
because they fail to state "where in the record the alleged error occurred"and "where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the manner inwhich the alleged error was brought to the attention of the court[.]" We maytherefore disregard the points raised by Lessees. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4); In re
Contested Case Hearing on Water Use Permit Application Filed by Kukui(Molokai), Inc., 116 Hawai
»i 481, 506, 174 P.3d 320, 345 (2007). Even 
considering the points raised, we conclude that Lessees do not prevail in
their appeal. Counsel for Lessees is cautioned to comply with HRAP Rule28(b)(4) in the future. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
instituted or, if already instituted, continued after the
effective date of this ordinance in accordance with Chapter
38, ROH, as existing on the day before the effective date of
this ordinance. . . "Valid designation" means a designation
of specific units in a development for leasehold conversion
and subsequent approval for condemnation by the council that
 
complied with Chapter 38, ROH, as existing on the day before
the effective date of this ordinance and construed by the
Hawaii Supreme Court in Coon v. City and County of Honolulu ,
98 Haw. 233, 47 P.3d 348 (2002).
 
(Emphasis added). Under the plain language of this ordinance,
 
the exception to the repeal of ROH Chapter 38 only applies to
 
those units which were approved for condemnation by the City
 
Council prior to the effective date of Ordinance 05-001. It is
 
undisputed that the five units designated in the Third Amendment
 
were not so approved for condemnation by the City Council.
 
This eminent domain proceeding continued because the
 
City Council had already authorized condemnation of the units
 
involved in the first appeal prior to the effective date of
 
Ordinance 05-001. Sherman I , 110 Hawai» i at 42 n.1, 129 P.3d at 
545 n.1. 
Notwithstanding the explicit requirement in Ordinance
 
05-001 for City Council approval to avoid the repeal of ROH
 
Chapter 38, the Lessees argue it is the DCS designation in the
 
Third Amendment, not City Council approval, that determines
 
whether to count the five units in the Third Amendment toward the
 
minimum requirement of twenty-five units. They base their
 
argument on the following discussion in Sherman I :
 
[I]f the numerosity requirement was met when first
 
designated, then any properly added applicant-units may
count toward the continuous maintenance of the minimum
 
twenty-five units. In other words, if the lessees
maintained at least twenty-five qualified units up to the
date of an amended designation, then the number from the
initial designation is added to the number of the amended
designation for a total number of qualified units. If,
thereafter, a unit drops out of the condemnation process or
the lessee of another unit passes away, as long as the
minimum number of twenty-five units is continuously
maintained, the condemnation retains its public purpose and
need not be terminated. Conversely, if there are not a
 
minimum of twenty-five qualified units initially, then the
addition of units with an amended designation is moot,
inasmuch as the added units cannot cure the initial
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
numerosity deficiency and the condemnation process must be
terminated. As we have indicated, this conclusion is
supported by the foregoing case law and we likewise find no
language in ROH ch. 38 that would preclude (1) the addition
of qualified units by amended designation or (2) the
enumeration of those added units toward the requirement that
twenty-five qualified units must be continuously maintained.
 
Therefore, the City's amended designation adding six
units could not serve to increase a previously insufficient
number of qualified applicant-units to the minimum
twenty-five applicant-units necessary to initiate ROH ch. 38
proceedings. Conversely, the amendment of the original
designation would allow added qualified applicant-units to
count toward the previously existing minimum qualified
twenty-five units continuously necessary for ROH ch. 38
proceedings.
 
Sherman I , 110 Hawai» i at 66-67, 129 P.3d at 569-70. This 
discussion in Sherman I was necessary to address and reject the 
Lessees' position that "they can make up for any deficiency in 
the initial requirement of twenty-five units at the outset if 
they properly add more qualifying units later." 110 Hawai» i at 
65, 129 P.3d at 568. This part of Sherman I does not dispense 
with the requirement of City Council approval, nor does it 
require that the Third Amendment be considered for the numerosity 
requirement. 
The Third Amendment was not considered in Sherman I . 
Rather, Sherman I specifically addressed only the originally
 
designated twenty-eight units and the additional six units that
 were added for conversion in this action. Id.  at 43, 129 P.3d at
 
546. Before the lessees for these thirty-four units were made
 
parties to this condemnation proceeding, the City Council had
 
previously authorized such action for these units.
8 In short,
 
there was no question that City Council approval had already been
 
8 For the originally designated twenty-eight units, the City Council
authorized the initiation of this eminent domain action for those units by
Resolution 02-301, effective December 19, 2002, and the complaint was
thereafter filed on May 8, 2003. For the additional six units, the lessees
for those units were added as parties to this case by way of an amended
complaint after the City Council had approved condemnation of those units.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
obtained for these units, and it was in this context that Sherman
 
I discussed the numerosity requirement.
 
Additionally, Sherman I clearly recognized the 
necessity of City Council approval for condemnation under ROH 
Chapter 38. In addressing an issue raised by the Church, the 
court held that the City Council had not improperly delegated the 
power of eminent domain to the DCS, reiterating its prior holding 
that ROH § 38-2.2 "empower[s] the DCS to designate land for 
acquisition by the City, which 'merely facilitates the City's 
acquisition of the land subject to the decision of the City, 
through its City Council, actually to exercise the power of 
eminent domain.'" Id. at 70, 129 P.3d at 573 (quoting 
Richardson, 76 Hawai» i at 58, 868 P.2d at 1205); see also 
ROH § 2.2(a). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court was correct, as a
 
matter of law, that the Third Amendment could not be considered
 
when determining whether there were a sufficient number of
 
qualified units under ROH Chapter 38. The units listed in the
 
Third Amendment have never been approved for condemnation by the
 
City Council.
 
B. Qualifications of the Youngs, Lee, and Yamamoto
 
Lessees argue in their second point of error that the
 
Circuit Court incorrectly held that Wallace Lee Young and
 
Ernestine Ching Young, Clarence Lee, and Ann Yamamoto were not
 
qualified lessees under ROH Chapter 38.
 
1. Wallace Lee Young and Ernestine Ching Young
 
One of the requirements to qualify under ROH § 38­
2.4(a) is that a lessee must be an "owner-occupant" of his or her
 
condominium unit. In turn, "owner-occupant" is defined as
 
follows:
 
[A]ny individual in whose name sole or joint legal title is
held in a residential condominium unit . . . which,
simultaneous to the individual s ownership, serves as the
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
individual s principal place of residence for a period of
not less than one year immediately prior to application for
conversion, as well as during the period pending legal
proceedings to acquire the fee; provided, that the
individual shall retain complete possessory control  of the
 
premises of the residential unit during these periods. An
 
individual shall not be deemed to have complete possessory
control of the premises if the individual rents, leases, or
assigns the premises for any period of time to any other
person in whose name legal title is not held. Proof of
 
residency and possessory control shall be as established by
rules adopted by the department.
 
ROH ÿÿ 38-1.2 (emphasis added).
 
Lessees acknowledge that Wallace Lee Young and
 
Ernestine Ching Young filed their application with DCS on
 
December 26, 2002. It is not disputed that they rented their
 
unit to another person from August 1, 2001 to the end of August
 
2002 and that they did not have possession of the unit for the
 
twelve months immediately prior to filing their application with
 
DCS. Although Ms. Young's illness was an unfortunate
 
circumstance that allegedly led to the Youngs' decision to rent
 
their unit, and DCS asserts it could have advised Mrs. Young to
 
file the application after she had resumed living in the unit for
 
a year, the Youngs did not disclose the rental of their unit to
 
DCS.
 
Given these undisputed facts, the Circuit Court did not
 
err in concluding that the Youngs did not qualify under ROH § 38­
2.4(a) because they did not meet the definition of "owner­
occupant" set forth in ROH § 38-1.2.
 
2. Clarence Lee
 
Under ROH ÿÿ 38-2.4(a)(4), lessees are not qualified to
 
purchase the leased fee interest of their condominium unit if
 
they:
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
own property in fee simple lands suitable for residential
purposes within the City and County of Honolulu . . . . A
person is deemed to own lands, for the purpose of this
paragraph, if the person, the person's spouse , or both the
person and the person's spouse . . . own lands, including
any interest, in a land trust in the City and County of
Honolulu.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Elsa Carl Lee is the wife of Clarence Lee. It is
 
undisputed that after Mr. Lee filed his application with DCS,
 
Mrs. Lee assisted her daughter in purchasing a fee simple
 
residential property in Kailua, and that for a time she held
 
title in the Kailua property as a joint tenant with her daughter.
 
Lessees initially point out that Mrs. Lee is not an 
applicant or lessee under ROH Chapter 38, and that the leasehold 
interest in the subject unit is held by Clarence K. Lee, as 
Trustee of and for the Clarence K. Lee Revocable Living Trust. 
Neither of these points undermine the Circuit Court's ruling 
disqualifying Clarence Lee. In Coon , the supreme court held that 
"condominium owner-occupants are not barred from purchasing their 
leased fee interests pursuant to ROH ch. 38 simply because legal 
title to their condominium units is held in trust for their 
benefit, so long as they otherwise qualify for lease-to-fee 
conversion." 98 Hawai» i at 260, 47 P.3d at 375 (emphasis added). 
Thus, Clarence Lee must meet the qualifications of ROH Chapter 
38. Under ROH ÿÿ 38-2.4(a)(4), his spouse's ownership of fee
 
simple residential property in Honolulu affects his
 qualification.
 
Lessees argue that Clarence Lee should not have been
 
disqualified because his wife never: lived in, resided in, or
 
occupied the Kailua property; intended to live in, reside in, or
 
occupy the Kailua property; considered the Kailua property
 
suitable for residential purposes; exercised physical control or
 
possession of the Kailua property; or claimed the Kailua property
 
as her own. Lessees also argue that the Kailua property was not
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
suitable for the Lee's residential purposes because it contained
 
a six-hundred square foot home.
 
Similar arguments were rejected in Hsiung, where it was 
asserted that lessee Poag should not have been disqualified for 
owning fee simple residential property because he owned it for 
business purposes and the structure on the property was not 
habitable while he owned it. The supreme court focused on the 
plain language of ROH § 38-2.4 and thus the reason Poag owned the 
fee simple residential property was of no consequence, so long as 
the record established that he owned such property within 
the City and County of Honolulu. 109 Hawai» i at 171-72, 124 P.3d 
at 446-47. 
Moreover, as to Poag's argument that the structure on 
the property was not habitable, the Hsiung  court ruled that: 
"[T]he relevant inquiry under ROH § 38-2.4 centers around the 
character of the land itself  whether the property can be used 
for residential purposes or dwelling unit purposes. Under the 
plain language of the ordinance, the habitability of any 
structures atop land suitable for residential purposes is not 
relevant." 109 Hawai» i at 171, 124 P.3d at 446. Here, it is 
undisputed that the Kailua property was fee simple residential 
property. Further, although the structure on the Kailua property 
was six-hundred square feet, the land was over five-thousand 
square feet. 
The Circuit Court did not err in holding that Clarence
 
Lee did not meet the requirements of ROH § 38-2.4(a)(4) because
 
his wife acquired an interest in fee simple residential property
 
in the City and County of Honolulu.
 
3. Ann Yamamoto
 
Based on our rulings above, that the Circuit Court
 
properly did not consider the units in the Third Amendment for
 
the numerosity requirement and properly determined that the
 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Youngs and Lee did not qualify under ROH Chapter 38, there would
 
be twenty-three units remaining in this condemnation action. 
Whether Yamamoto qualifies or not, Lessees are thus not able to
 
establish the required continuing minimum number of twenty-five
 
units to maintain this action. We therefore need not reach the
 
issues raised as to Yamamoto.
 
C. Equitable Powers
 
The Lessees  third point of error on appeal is that the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion in failing to exercise its
 
equitable powers to consider the Third Amendment and Ernestine
 
Young s medical condition. Given the provisions of ROH Chapter
 
38, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion. Matter of
 
Spencer's Estate, 60 Haw. 497, 499, 591 P.2d 611, 613 (1997) ("We
 
have said that this court is bound by the plain, clear and
 
unambiguous language of a statute unless the literal construction
 
would produce an absurd and unjust result and would be clearly
 
inconsistent with the purposes and policies of the statute.")
 
(citation omitted).
 
Lessees cite no authority for the proposition that a 
court can use its equitable power to rewrite a statute. Cases 
construing ROH Chapter 38 have consistently looked to the plain 
language of its provisions in determining parties' rights 
thereunder. See Sherman I, 110 Hawai» i at 52, 68, 129 P.3d at 
555, 571; Hsiung, 109 Hawai» i at 171-73, 124 P.3d at 446-448; 
Richardson , 76 Hawai» i at 58, 868 P.2d at 1205; Coon, 98 Hawai» i 
at 247-48, 47 P.3d at 362-63. As noted above, the plain 
language of ROH § 38-2.4(a) and the definition of "owner­
occupant" in ROH § 38-1.2 precluded Wallace and Ernestine Young 
from qualifying. Additionally, the Youngs's application to DCS 
did not disclose the rental of their unit in the year prior, and 
applying equitable principles would not in any event be 
appropriate in such circumstances. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to Lessees' argument that the Circuit Court should
 
have exercised its equitable powers in light of the procedural
 
history of this case, we do not agree. Lessees speculate that
 
but for the Circuit Court's dismissal of the case in June 2004,
 
the units designated in the Third Amendment would have been added
 
to this action before the repeal of ROH Chapter 38. They do not
 
point to any evidence in the record to support this claim. More
 
importantly, as discussed previously, Ordinance 05-001 clearly
 
provides an exemption from the repeal of ROH Chapter 38 only for
 
units approved for condemnation by the City Council before the
 
effective date of that ordinance. This was a legislative
 
decision made by the City Council while the first appeal was
 
pending.
 
Similarly, the plain language of ROH Chapter 38 
provides that to be qualified, a lessee must be an "owner­
occupant" not less than one year prior to application "as well as 
during the period pending legal proceedings to acquire the 
fee[.]" As stated in Sherman I , "as long as the minimum number 
of twenty-five units is continuously maintained, the condemnation retains its public purpose and need not be terminated." 110 
Hawai» i at 66, 129 P.3d at 569. The provisions of ROH Chapter 38 
thus require that the minimum number of qualified lessees be 
maintained throughout the litigation. The Circuit Court did not 
abuse its discretion by applying the legal criteria set forth in 
ROH Chapter 38 and as interpreted by prevailing case law. 
D.	 Church's Cross-Appeal Regarding Lawrence Reich and
Joyce Hagin
 
Lawrence Reich and Joyce Hagin are Lessees for one
 
unit. In its cross-appeal, the Church contends that the Circuit
 
Court erroneously concluded that Reich and Hagin, and their unit,
 
qualified under ROH Chapter 38, despite the fact that they had
 
owned fee simple residential property in the City and County of
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Honolulu which they transferred to LLCs, owned and controlled by
 
them, prior to filing their application with DCS.
 
As explained with regard to Yamamoto, because of our
 
rulings above regarding the Third Amendment and the
 
disqualification of the Youngs and Lee, Lessees are not able to
 
establish the required continuing minimum number of twenty-five
 
units to maintain this action. Even if we were to agree with the
 
Church as to Reich and Hagin, it would only further reduce the
 
number of qualified units. We therefore need not reach the
 
issues as to Reich and Hagin raised on appeal by the Church.
 
E.	 Church's Request for Attorneys' Fees for the First
Appeal
 
After the Circuit Court ruled that the condemnation
 
action would be dismissed because there were insufficient
 
qualified Lessees to meet the twenty-five unit requirement, the
 
Church filed a motion to determine damages incurred pursuant to
 
HRS § 101-27. The Circuit Court ultimately awarded part of the
 
Church's request, but denied the attorneys' fees that the Church
 
claimed to have incurred during the first appeal. The Circuit
 
Court explained that: "This trial court is not in a position to
 
determine the reasonableness of fees incurred in an appeal  that
 
is for the appellate courts. Therefore, this court denies the
 
fees that [the Church] claims were incurred on appeal in the
 
amount of $69,114.50."
 
In this appeal, the Church urges that the Circuit Court
 
was in error and that it properly should have decided the request
 
for fees incurred by the Church in the first appeal. Given the
 
procedural history of this case and the statute authorizing the
 
damages, HRS § 101-27, we agree.
 
The Church requested the attorneys  fees as damages
 
sustained due to the condemnation action. HRS Chapter 101, Part
 
I, deals with the condemnation of private property. 
19
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS ÿÿ 101-27, which is contained in Part I of HRS Chapter 101,
 
provides in relevant part:
 
Whenever any proceedings instituted under this part are
abandoned or discontinued before reaching a final judgment,
or if, for any cause, the property concerned is not finally
taken for public use, a defendant who would have been
entitled to compensation or damages had the property been
finally taken, shall be entitled, in such proceedings, to
recover from the plaintiff all such damage as may have been
sustained by the defendant by reason of the bringing of the
proceedings and the possession by the plaintiff of the
property concerned if the possession has been awarded
including the defendant's costs of court, a reasonable
amount to cover attorney's fees paid by the defendant in
connection therewith, and other reasonable expenses[.]
 
(Emphasis added). The dispute in this appeal focuses on whether 
the Circuit Court properly should have decided the attorneys' 
fees request related to the first appeal.9 The City argues that: 
the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to award the Church's 
attorneys' fee incurred on appeal; the Church failed to make a 
timely (or any) request for the fees to the Hawai» i Supreme Court 
as required by HRAP Rule 39; and at any rate, the Church was a non-prevailing party in the first appeal and thus not entitled to 
fees under HRAP Rule 39. 
In County of Hawai» i v. C&J Coupe Family Ltd. P ship , 
120 Hawai» i 400, 208 P.3d 713 (2009),
10 the Hawai» i Supreme Court 
considered a landowner's request pursuant to HRS § 101-27 for 
statutory damages, including attorneys' fees and costs, incurred 
on appeal. In that case, two separate condemnation actions had 
been consolidated and decided together. In Condemnation 1, it 
had been determined that the landowner was entitled to statutory 
damages under HRS § 101-27 because the property at issue was "not 
9
 There is no appeal challenging that part of the Circuit Court's
judgment that did award attorneys' fees, costs, and expenses.
 
10 C&J Coupe Family  was decided after the appeals and the briefings
were filed in this case.
 
20
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finally taken" in Condemnation 1.11 Id. at 403, 208 P.3d at 716. 
The supreme court ruled that damages under HRS § 101-27 included
 
fees and costs incurred 
on appeal in Condemnation 1, and further,
 
that the procedure set forth in HRAP 39 would be followed vis-a­
vis
 the Condemnation 1 appellate fees and costs. Id. at 405-06,
 
208 P.3d at 718-19. 
In that context, the court noted that "if
 
HRS § 101-27 and HRAP Rule 39 can be read in pari materia without
 
conflict, then this court must give effect to both." Id. at 405,
 
208 P.3d at 718 (underline emphasis added).
 
Important for the instant case, however, the supreme
 
court in C&J Coupe Family  noted a significant distinction with
 
respect to the landowner's attorneys' fees incurred on appeal in
 
Condemnation 2, in which it was still to be determined whether
 
the land would be taken.
 
Appellant apparently has not requested costs under Hawai »i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 39 for the appeal
of Condemnation 2. As for attorneys' fees, Appellant has
properly recognized that, at least at this point, there is
no basis for recovery of fees in Condemnation 2. HRS§ 101 27 allows recovery only where the land is "not finallytaken." Considering that Condemnation 2 has been remandedfor a determination of whether the land was condemned pursuant to a proper public purpose, it is yet to bedetermined whether the land in that case will be "finally
taken." HRAP Rule 39 only provides for recovery of costs on 
appeal and, therefore, offers no authority in and of itselffor the recovery of attorney's fees, although it governs theprocedure by which to move for those fees in this courtwhere they can be claimed on a separate basis. 
Id. at 404 n.3, 208 P.3d at 717 n.3 (emphasis added). The
 
supreme court thus recognized that the landowner could not seek
 
attorneys' fees as damages under HRS § 101-27 until it was
 
ultimately determined that "the property concerned is not finally
 
taken for public use." HRS § 101-27.
 
11 This issue and substantive challenges to Condemnation 2 were
addressed in a prior opinion by the Hawai »i Supreme Court in County of Hawai »i 
v. C&J Coupe Family Ltd. P ship , 119 Hawai »i 352, 198 P.3d 615 (2008). 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The first appeal in this case is akin to the
 
Condemnation 2 appeal in C&J Coupe Family. In both, the supreme
 
court had decided certain issues on appeal and remanded the case
 
for further proceedings to ultimately determine whether the
 
condemnation actions would succeed. After the initial appeals in
 
both cases, it was uncertain whether the property at issue would
 
be taken and thus it was not possible to yet determine the
 
landowner's right to damages as allowed under HRS § 101-27.
 
The question in this appeal and not addressed in C&J
 
Coupe Family is, if on remand the property ultimately is not
 
taken and the landowner is entitled to damages under HRS § 101­
27, whether the Circuit Court may determine the damages incurred
 
during the initial appeal. We answer in the affirmative. In
 
that situation, there would be a conflict between HRS § 101-27
 
and HRAP 39 and requiring the request for fees to be made to the
 
appellate court in the initial appeal would be fruitless, because
 
it would be uncertain at that point whether such fees were
 
authorized under HRS § 101-27.
 
Although dealing with a different authorizing statute, 
Nelson v. University of Hawai» i, 99 Hawai» i 262, 54 P.3d 433 
(2002) is instructive. There, after an initial appeal vacated the trial court's judgment in favor of the defendant and the case 
was remanded for a new trial on employment discrimination claims, 
the plaintiff requested attorneys' fees incurred in the appeal 
pursuant to HRS § 378-5(c) (1993 Repl.). The supreme court held 
that the plaintiff was not yet entitled to such fees given the 
requirements of the fee-shifting statute. For plaintiff to 
obtain fees under HRS § 378-5(c), there needed to be a 
favorable relief or damages that follow as a result of a
finding that the defendant engaged in a discriminatory
practice. Consequently, a judgment on appeal that merely
vacates a trial court judgment unfavorable to the plaintiff
and places the plaintiff back where the plaintiff started
does not, in itself, provide any grounds for an award of
fees to the plaintiff.
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
99 Hawai» i at 266, 54 P.3d at 437. Although the plaintiff sought 
to have the supreme court determine the reasonableness of the
 
fees incurred on appeal, the supreme court ruled that if the
 
plaintiff should ultimately win on some or all of her claims, the
 
trial court should determine her entitlement to the fees incurred
 
during the initial appeal.
 
[B]ecause this court will no longer have jurisdiction over
the case in such an instance, the trial court will then have
 
to determine the reasonableness of fees incurred during the
present appeal.
 
. . .
 
We agree with Nelson that, as a general rule, it would
be preferable for this court to determine the reasonableness
of attorneys' fees incurred for work performed in this
appeal, rather than leaving the task to a future trial court
should the hypothetical situation she poses arise. . . .
However, we do not believe that the foregoing consideration
merits adopting an interpretation of HRS § 378-5(c) that
would require this court to award fees in circumstances,
such as those here, where the plaintiff ultimately may not
prevail and would therefore not be entitled to such fees.
Although, as previously stated, it would be preferable for
this court to determine the reasonableness of fees incurred
 for appellate work, such a consideration does not warrant
perverting the intent of HRS § 378-5(c) in the first
place. . . . Accordingly, should Nelson succeed on some or
all of her claims on remand, and this court does not again
acquire jurisdiction over the case, the trial court can
assess the reasonableness of attorneys' fees for work done
in the instant appeal. Nothing in the language of HRS §
378-5(c) suggests to the contrary.
 
99 Hawai» i at 268-69, 54 P.3d at 439-40. 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court abused
 
its discretion in denying the Church's request for attorneys'
 
fees incurred in the first appeal on grounds that it was "not in
 
a position to determine the reasonableness of fees incurred in an
 
appeal." Under C&J Coupe Family  and Nelson, and given the
 
procedural history of this case, the Circuit Court should address
 
the merits and decide the Church's request for attorneys' fees
 
incurred in the first appeal.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate that part of the
 
December 11, 2007 Final Judgment and the Circuit Court's
 
March 28, 2007 Order that denied the Church's request for
 
attorneys' fees as damages incurred in the first appeal. We
 
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion to
 
determine damages incurred in the first appeal pursuant to
 
HRS ÿÿ 101-27.
 
We decline to reach the Lessees' point of error
 
pertaining to Yamamoto and the Church's point of error pertaining
 
to Reich and Hagin.
 
Except as set forth above, we affirm the Final 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, December 27, 2011. 
David A. Nakashima
 
J. Blaine Rogers
(Lerisa L. Heroldt with
David A. Nakashima
 on the briefs)
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Defendants-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees Chief Judge 
James K. Mee 
(Rosemary T. Fazio and
Kevin W. Herring with
him on the briefs)
(Ashford & Wriston, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
Winston K. Q. Wong,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
City and County of Honolulu
and Lex R. Smith,Jesse W. Schiel 
(Kobayashi, Sugita & Goda)
on the brief for Plaintiff-Appellee/
Cross-Appellee 
24
 