NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29649
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DANIEL K. KANAHELE, WARREN S. BLUM, LISA BUCHANAN, JAMES L.
CONNIFF, and CAMBRIA MOSS, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v. MAUI COUNTY
COUNCIL and COUNTY OF MAUI, Defendants-Appellees, and HONUA' ULA
 
PARTNERS LLC, Defendant-Intervenor-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(Civil No. 08-1-0115(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J. and Fujise, J.,
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
 
In an action arising from allegations that the Maui 
County Council (MCC) violated Hawai' i's Sunshine Law, Plaintiffs-
Appellants Daniel K. Kanahele, Warren S. Blum, Lisa Buchanan, 
James L. Conniff, and Cambria Moss (Appellants) appeal from the 
January 22, 2009 Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the 
1
Second Circuit (circuit court)  in favor of Defendant-Appellees
MCC, the County of Maui, and Defendant-Intervenor/Appellee 
Honua'ula Partners LLC. 
Appellants filed a complaint alleging violations of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 92, which includes 
Hawai'i's Sunshine Law. Appellants sought summary judgment 
against the MCC and the County of Maui voiding actions taken at 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the November 29, 2007 and February 8, 2008 meetings of the Land
 
Use Committee of the MCC (LUC) and the MCC, respectively,
 
concerning a project referred to as the Honoa' ula/Wailea 670 
Residential Development (Project). 
Appellants allege that the circuit court erred in
 
determining that the MCC's actions were legal. Specifically,
 
2
Appellants present the following four points  of error:
1.	 The trial court erred in concluding that the Land Use
Committee (LUC) of the MCC did not violate HRS Chapter
92, Part I when it recessed and reconvened its October
18, 2007 meeting twelve times without additional notice
and opportunity to testify.
 
2.	 The trial court erred in concluding that the County
Council did not violate HRS Chapter 92, Part I when it
twice recessed and reconvened its February 8, 2008
meeting without providing additional notice and
opportunity to testify.
 
3.	 The trial court erred in concluding that the
circulation of memoranda among County Council members
outside of a duly noticed meeting did not violate HRS
Chapter 92, Part I.
 
4.	 The trial court erred in concluding that votes to
reconsider and the reconsideration of matters at County
Council meetings did not violate HRS Chapter 92, Part
I.
 
Appellate courts review conclusions of law de novo. 
See Metcalf v. Voluntary Employees' Ben. Ass'n of Hawaii, 99
 
Hawai'i 53, 57, 52 P.3d 823, 827 (2002). A conclusion of law 
supported by the trial court's factual findings and applying the
 
2
 All of Appellants' points of error are in violation of Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as they do not quote
the challenged conclusions of law nor do they provide record referencesdocumenting where these alleged errors occurred and were objected to orotherwise brought to the attention of the circuit court. Thus, these pointscould be disregarded by this court. Id. However, as the appellate courts of
this jurisdiction have "consistently adhered to the policy of affordinglitigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, wherepossible," Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558
(1995) (internal quotations marks omitted), we will address Appellants' appealon the merits. 
Counsel is warned that future violations may result in sanctions.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
correct rule of law will not be overturned. Nani Koolau Co. v. K
 
& M Const., Inc., 5 Haw. App. 137, 141, 681 P.2d 580, 585 (1984). 
Appellants' first and second points of error allege
 
that the lower court incorrectly concluded that the recessing and
 
reconvening of the October 18, 2007 LUC meeting and the
 
February 8, 2008 MCC meeting comported with Sunshine Law
 
requirements. They argue that the LUC and MCC violated HRS § 92­
3
7  by failing to post new agendas for the twelve continuations of
the October 18, 2007 LUC meeting and the two continuations of the
 
February 8, 2008 MCC meeting. Additionally, Appellants argue
 
4
that the LUC and MCC violated HRS § 92-3,  which requires boards
to "afford all interested persons an opportunity to present oral
 
testimony on any agenda item," by not allowing public oral
 
3 HRS § 92-7 provides, in relevant part: 
§ 92-7 Notice.  (a) The board shall give written
public notice of any regular, special, or rescheduled
meeting, or any executive meeting when anticipated in
advance. The notice shall include an agenda which
lists all of the items to be considered at the
 forthcoming meeting, the date, time, and place of the
meeting, and in the case of an executive meeting the
purpose shall be stated.
 
. . . .
 (d) No board shall change the agenda, once filed, by
adding items thereto without a two-thirds recorded
vote of all members to which the board is entitled;
provided that no item shall be added to the agenda if
it is of reasonably major importance and action
thereon by the board will affect a significant number
of persons. Items of reasonably major importance not
decided at a scheduled meeting shall be considered
only at a meeting continued to a reasonable day and
time.
 
HRS § 92-3 provides, in relevant part:
 
§92-3 Open meetings.  Every meeting of all boards shall be
open to the public and all persons shall be permitted to
attend any meeting unless otherwise provided in the
constitution or as closed pursuant to sections 92-4 and
92-5[.] . . . The boards shall afford all interested persons
an opportunity to submit data, views, or arguments, in
writing, on any agenda item. The boards shall also afford
 all interested persons an opportunity to present oral
testimony on any agenda item. The boards may provide for
reasonable administration of oral testimony by rule.
 
3
 4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testimony in each of the continued sessions of the October 18,
 
2007 LUC meeting and February 8, 2008 MCC meeting.5
 
It is undisputed that valid notices of the October 18,
 
2007 LUC meeting and February 8, 2008 MCC meeting were posted.
 
Thus, these arguments -- that the agenda and testimony
 
requirements of HRS ch. 92, Part I were violated -- rest on
 
Appellants' contention that the recessed LUC and MCC meetings did
 
not constitute proper continuations under the Sunshine Law. 
Specifically, Appellants claim that a meeting may only be
 
continued once beyond the agenda date of the original meeting. 
Because the LUC and MCC meetings each involved more than one
 
continuation, Appellants contend they were invalid as
 
continuations and were thus subject to the requirements for new
 
meetings, i.e., requiring the acceptance of additional testimony
 
and the posting of a new agenda. 
HRS § 92-7(d) specifically allows for the continuation
 
of meetings by a public "board."6 It states that agenda items of
 
5 While it is true that the LUC and MCC at some point "closed" the
taking of testimony during their respective proceedings, the circuit court
found that both the LUC and the MCC heard testimony at the first session of
the meeting commenced by the LUC on October 18, 2007, and by the MCC on
February 8, 2008, both the LUC and MCC closed testimony only after all persons
who had signed up had presented their testimony, there was no evidence that
the LUC or MCC refused to accept written testimony at any time during the
continued proceedings, and "each of the Plaintiffs had the opportunity to
submit written testimony or emails regarding the subject matter of the
meeting, or as to any matter raised in deliberations at the reconvened
meetings." Moreover, some of the Plaintiffs did submit emails to the LUC, the
MCC or both. The circuit court's findings are not challenged on appeal.
 
6 For purposes of Hawai' i's Sunshine Law, HRS § 92-2 provides the
following definitions of "board" and "meeting": 
(1) "Board" means any agency, board, commission, authority,
or committee of the State or its political subdivisions
which is created by constitution, statute, rule, or
executive order, to have supervision, control, jurisdiction
or advisory power over specific matters and which is
required to conduct meetings and to take official actions.
 
. . . .
 (3) "Meeting" means the convening of a board for which a
quorum is required in order to make a decision or to
deliberate toward a decision upon a matter over which the
board has supervision, control, jurisdiction, or advisory
 power.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"reasonably major importance not decided at a scheduled meeting
 
shall be considered only at a meeting continued to a reasonable
 
time and day." HRS § 92-7(d). Appellants' argument that this
 
language limits boards to one continuance is not supported by
 
authority. See HRS § 1-17 (explaining that "singular or plural
 
number signify both the singular and plural") and Nobriqa v.
 Raybestos-Manhattan, Inc., 67 Haw. 157, 163, 683 P.2d 389, 394
 
(1984) ("The use of words in a statute signifying the singular is
 
. . . not conclusive.").
 
Even assuming arguendo, some ambiguity in this
 
language, legislative history does not support Appellants'
 position. The House Standing Committee on Judiciary expressly
 
rejected a proposal to prevent a continued hearing on important
 
matters after considering the possibility of situations where a
 
board would be unable to complete a meeting in a single day.
7
 
See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 889, in 1985 House Journal, at 1424­25. The circuit court did not err in concluding the continued 
meetings did not violate Hawai' i's Sunshine Law. 
As their third point of error, Appellants allege the 
circuit court erred in finding that the distribution of memoranda authored by individual MCC members to other MCC members regarding 
proposed amendments to, and reconsideration of, portions of the 
bills pertaining to the Project did not violate Hawai' i's 
Sunshine Law. Individual MCC members sent memoranda, which set forth proposed amendments or motions related to the Project 
bills, during the pendency of the February 8, 2008 MCC meeting, 
7
 The committee wrote:
 
Your committee further believes that it is unreasonable to
 
require that items of "reasonably major importance" must be
acted upon at a meeting. There are situations that arise
 which require a meeting to be continued such as when
additional information is required, many people wish to
testify on an agenda item, a board lacks a majority vote on
a decision and it would be better to recess and consider the
 matter at a later date, or an unresolved item could delay
ending [] a meeting." 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 889, in 1985 House Journal, at 1425.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
held over February 8, 11, and 14, 2008, considering the Project
 
bills on First Reading. 
Each memorandum was addressed to the other members of
 
the MCC. Each memorandum contained a description of the proposed
 
action, the intent and reasoning behind the proposed action, and,
 
where a motion to amend a bill was proposed, the language sought
 
to be deleted or added. Although each memorandum closed with a
 
request for "favorable consideration" of its contents and stated
 
that questions could be directed to the writer or committee
 
staff, the circuit court found, and Appellants do not challenge
 
the finding, that there was no evidence of any discussion or
 
interaction between the members, outside of a public meeting,
 
regarding the memoranda. None of the memoranda solicited a vote
 
or a commitment on the subject matters in the memoranda. All
 
memoranda indicated that a copy had been provided to the County
 
Clerk, Director of Counsel Services, the Planning Director, and
 
8 9
the Corporation Counsel.   Finally, a review of the "minutes"  of
 
the February 8, 2008 meeting, reveals that the various authors of
 
the memoranda referred, sometimes extensively, to the same in
 
their deliberations at the public meeting. At a minimum, the
 
motions proposed in the memoranda were repeated in the public
 
hearing.
 
Appellants claim that the distribution of these
 
memoranda exceeded the Sunshine Law's allowance for interaction
 
between board members. 
While we are mindful that the policy
 
behind Chapter 92 is that the "formation and conduct of public
 
8 The County Clerk is authorized by the Maui County Charter to,
inter alia, "Take charge of, safely keep and dispose of all books, papers and
records which may properly be filed in the clerks office and keep in separate
files all bills, ordinances, resolutions and rules and cumulative indices of
the same." Charter of the County of Maui Charter § 5-3.2 (2003). By Maui
Council Rule, the County Clerk is also responsible for "all records of the
Council, including the journal and be responsible for the same; the journal of
the Council shall consist of the minutes of the Council, communications, and
other business matters transmitted to the Council." Maui Rules of the Council
 Rule 6(B)7 (2011).
 
9
 Although entitled "Minutes of the Council of the County of Maui",
it appears that the document is a verbatim transcript of the proceedings
conducted on February 8, 11 and 14, 2008.
 
6
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
policy - the discussions, deliberations, decisions, and action of
 
governmental agencies - shall be conducted as openly as possible"
 
and to that end, provisions requiring open meetings shall be
 
liberally construed and provisions for exceptions to open
 
meetings shall be strictly construed, HRS § 92-1 (1993), we
 
conclude that the provisions of the Sunshine Law do not prohibit
 
the distribution of memoranda challenged here. HRS § 92-2.5
 
allows two board members to privately discuss official board
 
matters in two-way, face-to-face communications, as long as the
 
members do not seek voting commitments.10 Such discussions and
 
interactions are not considered meetings11 for Sunshine Law
 
purposes. See HRS § 92-2.5(f). As this type of two-way
 
communication is permitted under the statute, one-way
 communication that also does not involve securing commitments or
 
votes of other members and is treated and disclosed to the public
 
as was done here appears likewise to be within the scope of
 
permissible communications.
 
Appellants interpret HRS § 92-2.5 to mean that
 
"communications, interactions, discussions, investigations and
 
presentations not described in section 2.5 are meetings for
 
purposes of the statute." Neither the statute's plain language
 
nor the authority cited by Appellants support their
 
interpretation.
 
10 In relevant part, HRS § 92-2.5 states:
 
§92-2.5 Permitted interactions of members.  (a) Two members
 
of a board may discuss between themselves matters relating
to official board business to enable them to perform their
duties faithfully, as long as no commitment to vote is made
or sought and the two members do not constitute a quorum of
their board.
 
. . . . 
(f) Communications, interactions, discussions,
 
investigations, and presentations described in this section
are not meetings for purposes of this part.
 
11
 We also note that no party claims that the provision governing
"Exceptions," governing when meetings may be closed to the public, HRS § 92-5
(1993 and Supp. 2011), applies.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A "meeting" is defined as "the convening of a board for 
which a quorum is required in order to make a decision or to 
deliberate toward a decision upon a matter over which the board 
has supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power." HRS § 
92-2(3) (1993). Appellants do not argue that these memoranda 
were distributed for the purpose of evading the Sunshine Law nor 
do they contest the circuit court's finding that no "discussions 
or interactions of any sort" regarding these memoranda occurred 
between members of the MCC outside of the public meeting. The 
memoranda were distributed before and during the relatively short 
periods of recess between the sessions conducted on February 8, 
11, and 14, 2008, were provided to, inter alia, the County Clerk, 
and were openly referred to during the Council sessions. 
Plaintiffs do not allege they were prevented from viewing or 
commenting upon these memoranda either at the public hearing or 
by way of the County Clerk's Office. On this record, we cannot 
say the circuit court erred in concluding that these 
informational memoranda "were not 'discussions, communications or 
interactions' between Council members" prohibited under Hawai' i's 
Sunshine Law and we are convinced, based on a review of this record, that the distribution of these memoranda did not violate 
the purpose or the spirit of the Sunshine Law. 
As their fourth point on appeal, Appellants contend
 
that the MCC violated the Sunshine Law when, on February 14,
 
2008, it voted to reconsider matters considered on February 11,
 
2008. They allege this violated the public notice requirements
 
of HRS § 92-7(a). That provision 
requires that an agenda list each item the public body
intends to consider with sufficient detail and specificity
to allow a member of the public to understand what the board
intends to consider at the meeting and to decide whether to
attend and to participate through oral or written testimony.
 
However, the continued meetings of February 11 through
 
14, 2008 were for the purpose of discussing the same proposals. 
Once the testimony had been presented on February 8, and the
 
taking of oral testimony had been closed and deliberations began,
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the MCC was not required to take additional testimony from the
 
public. See, Office of Information Practices Opinion Letter. No.
 
01-06, 2001 WL 1876821, at *8 (Dec. 31, 2001). 
Moreover, the public had the opportunity to testify on
 
these matters at the second reading of the Wailea 670 bills held
 on March 18, 2008. Notably, while three Appellants appeared to
 
testify at the March 18, 2008 second reading, they raised no
 
concerns regarding changed conditions resulting from reconsidered
 
matters between the February 11 and 14, 2008 continued
 
deliberations. The circuit court did not err in concluding the
 
MCC did not violate the Sunshine Law by reconsidering Project
 
proposals during the February 8-14, 2008 meeting.
 
Therefore, the January 22, 2009 Judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Lance D. Collins,
for Plantiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Mary Blaine Johnston,Deputy Corporation Counsel,County of Maui,for Defendants-Appellees MauiCounty Council and County ofMaui. 
Associate Judge 
William C. McCorriston and Jonathan Steiner (McCorriston Miller MukaiMacKinnon),for Defendant-Intervenor/Appellee Honua' ula 
Partners LLC. 
9
 