NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29435 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MELANIO G. FERNANDO, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JUDY K. FERNANDO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-1084)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Judy Fernando (Judy) purportedly 
appeals from the October 1, 2008 order of the Family Court of the 
First Circuit (Family Court) denying her Motion To Set Aside 
Divorce Decree brought pursuant to Rule 60(b) of the Hawai
'i 
Family Court Rules (HFCR).1 
On appeal, Judy argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion by (1) denying her motion for a continuance on her
 Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree, and (2) refusing to hold an
 
evidentiary hearing on the same motion.
 
1
 The Honorable Karen M. Radius presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Case Background 
The Decree Granting Absolute Divorce (divorce decree)
 
in this case was entered on June 26, 2007.
 
Judy filed her Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree on
 
June 25, 2008. Attached to the motion were declarations by Dirk
 
Von Guenthner (Guenthner), a forensic accountant, and Judy's
 
counsel, Edward J.S.F. Smith (Smith). According to Smith's
 
declaration, "there are several questionable transactions
 
regarding the disposition of the marital estate" and, although
 
acknowledging there had been a trial in the case, Smith asserted
 
that "a fresh analysis of the finances has uncovered the traces
 
of what may lead to New Evidence that could not have been
 
previously presented to the court." The Motion to Set Aside
 
Divorce Decree was set for hearing on October 1, 2008.
 
On September 16, 2008, Judy filed a motion to continue
 
the hearing on her Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree, asserting
 
that based on the declaration of Guenthner, "additional time is
 
required for a proper analysis of the voluminous financial
 
transactions in this case." Guenthner's attached declaration
 
asserted that, additional time was needed to serve discovery
 
requests and, after receipt of responses to the discovery
 
requests, to subpoena various entities. Guenthner requested at
 
least five months to complete his work. In an order issued on
 
September 30, 2008, the Family Court denied Judy’s motion for a
 
continuance.
 
On October 1, 2008, the Family Court heard two separate
 
motions: (a) Judy’s Motion To Set Aside Divorce Decree pursuant
 
to HFCR Rule 60(b); and (b) Plaintiff-Appellee Melanio Fernando’s
 
(Melanio) motion to enforce paragraphs 6 and 16 of the divorce
 
decree. The Family Court denied Judy's motion and granted
 
Melanio's motion. Separate orders, both dated October 1, 2008,
 
were issued by the Family Court on the two motions.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On October 22, 2008, Judy filed a Notice of Appeal,
 
stating she was appealing "from the Order issued 10/1/08." 
Attached to this Notice of Appeal was the October 1, 2008 order
 
granting Melanio's motion to enforce paragraphs 6 and 16 of the
 
divorce decree. However, at the bottom of the Certificate of
 
Service was the following notation: "JUDY FERNANDO'S MOTION TO
 
CONTINUE MOTION TO SET ASIDE DIVORCE DECREE; DECLARATION OF
 
EDWARD J.S.F. SMITH IN SUPPORT OF MOTION; AFFIDAVIT OF DIRK VON
 
GUENTHNER; NOTICE OF MOTION; CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE."
 
On December 15, 2008, Melanio's counsel sent a letter
 
to Smith advising inter alia that, because the order regarding
 
Melanio's motion was attached to Judy's Notice of Appeal,
 
Melanio's position was that Judy could no longer appeal the order
 
denying her Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree.
 
Two days later, on December 17, 2008, Judy filed an
 
Amended Notice of Appeal, to which was attached the October 1,
 
2008 order denying her Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree and a
 
declaration by Smith stating "[t]his Amended Notice of Appeal
 
corrects the error made in the previous notice regarding the
 
attached exhibit."
 
II. Jurisdiction
 
A threshold issue is whether this court has
 
jurisdiction as to Judy's appeal from the order denying her
 
Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree, and thus ultimately, her
 
challenges to the order denying her motion for a continuance and
 
the lack of an evidentiary hearing regarding the Motion to Set
 
Aside Divorce Decree.2
 
2
 Judy does not raise any issues in her opening brief related to the
order granting Melanio's motion to enforce paragraphs 6 and 16 of the divorce
decree.
 
Judy also does not raise any point of error as to the actual denial of
her Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree. Instead, she challenges the denial of
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although Judy appended the wrong order to her Notice of 
Appeal filed on October 22, 2008, under the standard articulated 
in State v. Bohannon, "a mistake in designating the judgment . . 
. should not result in loss of the appeal as long as the intent 
to appeal from a specific judgment can be fairly inferred from the notice and the appellee is not misled by the mistake." 102 
Hawai'i 228, 235, 74 P.3d 980, 987 (2003) (quoting City & Cnty. 
of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275-76, 554 P.2d 233, 235 
(1976)). 
Judy's intent to appeal from the order denying her 
Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree can be fairly inferred from 
the reference in the Notice of Appeal to an October 1, 2008 
order, coupled with the notation at the bottom of her Certificate 
of Service. In addition, Melanio was not misled by Judy's 
mistake in attaching the wrong order to the initial Notice of 
Appeal. Two days after Melanio's counsel sent a letter to Judy's 
counsel on this issue, Judy filed the Amended Notice of Appeal 
correcting the mistake. Moreover, Melanio did not file a 
statement contesting jurisdiction as allowed by Rule 12.1(a) of 
the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP). Rather, Melanio 
filed an answering brief addressing the merits of the appeal, and he raises the question of jurisdiction only in a footnote 
therein. 
We conclude that we have jurisdiction to hear this
 
appeal.
 
2
 (...continued)
her motion for continuance and the lack of an evidentiary hearing related to
the Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree. 
If Judy properly appealed from the
order denying her Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree, we would havejurisdiction to address the points she raises on appeal. Cf. Ueoka v. 
Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 396, 114 P.3d 892, 902 (2005) ("[a]n appeal from a
final judgment brings up for review all interlocutory orders not appealabledirectly as of right which deal with issues in the case.") (internal quotationmarks and citation omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III. Denial of Motion For Continuance3
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying Judy’s motion for a continuance of the hearing on her
 
Motion to Set Aside Divorce Decree.
 
"A court has the discretion to grant or refuse a
 
continuance of a proceeding in the orderly administration of
 
justice. This discretion is a judicial one and is subject to
 
review for abuse." Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 41, 609 P.2d 137,
 
142 (1980). 
Judy relies on the holding in Sapp and contends that
 
the evidence she wished to present in this case was indispensable
 thus warranting a continuance. We do not agree. Unlike in Sapp,
 
the parties in this case do not agree that the evidence Judy
 
sought to obtain during the requested continuance was
 
indispensable to the case. Although Judy filed her Motion to Set
 
Aside Divorce Decree under HFCR Rule 60(b), her motion did not
 
articulate the specific basis under which she was seeking to set
 
aside the divorce decree. Rather, although there had been a
 
trial in the case, her motion was vaguely based on her belief
 
that there were "questionable transactions" by Melanio and,
 
having retained an expert, that there was the possibility of new
 
evidence forthcoming.
 
3 Judy's opening brief fails to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) in that
the section on points of error does not: state where in the record the alleged
errors occurred; or where in the record the alleged errors were objected to orthe manner in which the alleged errors were brought to the attention of theFamily Court. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). We may therefore choose to disregard
these alleged points of error. See In re Contested Case Hearing on the Water
Use Permit Application Filed by Kukui (Molokai), Inc., 116 Hawai' i 481, 506,
174 P.3d 320, 345 (2007). Judy's counsel is cautioned that future violationof HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) may result in sanctions. Even if we do not disregardJudy's points of error, we do not find merit in her appeal. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Judy now alleges the basis for her Motion to
 
Set Aside Divorce Decree was fraud, which would be pursuant to
 
HFCR Rule 60(b)(3). Still, she is unable to articulate any
 
actual showing of fraud, instead arguing that: "This matter is
 
not about whether the facts uncovered to present constitute
 
grounds for a Rule 60(b) motion. It [is] about whether
 
sufficient time is to be permitted to Wife to properly
 
investigate whether malfeasance occurred."
 
As required under HFCR Rule 60(b), a motion brought on 
the basis of fraud shall be brought "not more than one year after 
the judgment, order, or proceedings was entered or taken." HFCR 
Rule 60(b). Here, Judy filed her Motion to Set Aside Divorce 
Decree one year after the entry of the divorce decree. In 
bringing her motion, she was required to "prove by clear and 
convincing evidence that the [decree] was obtained through fraud 
. . . [and] establish that the conduct complained of prevented 
the losing party from fully and fairly presenting [her] case." 
Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai' i 214, 255, 
948 P.2d 1055, 1096 (1997); see also Moyle v. Y&Y Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawai' i 385, 403, 191 P.3d 1062, 1080 (2008) (movant 
under Rule 60(b)(3) of the Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
failed to show how any alleged misrepresentation affected the 
outcome of the case). By her own submissions to the Family 
Court, it was apparent that Judy was unable to make a showing of 
fraud and therefore requested more time to do discovery and to 
investigate potential fraud. 
Under these circumstances, it was not an abuse of
 
discretion for the Family Court to deny the continuance.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. Lack of an Evidentiary Hearing
 
Although Judy raises lack of an evidentiary hearing as
 
a point of error in her opening brief, she fails to present
 
argument on this point. Under HRAP Rule 28(b)(7), this point of
 
error is deemed waived.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the order denying Defendant's
 
Motion To Set Aside Divorce Decree filed on October 1, 2008 in
 the Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 31, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Edward J.S.F. Smith 
(Law Offices of
Edward J.S.F. Smith)
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Joyce J. Ueharafor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7
 