NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29692
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE TRUST ESTATE
 
OF
 
GEORGE H. HOLT, DECEASED.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 91-0011)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Beneficiary-Appellant Charles H.K. Holt (Holt) filed 
two notices of appeal from three Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 54(b) certified judgments that were entered In the 
Matter of the Trust Estate of George H. Holt (Trust Estate). 
In the first notice of appeal, Holt appealed from (1)
 
the "Judgment re: Order Granting Remainder of the Petition for
 
Approval of Interim Accounts Covering the Period from November 1,
 
1968 through September 30, 2007, Filed Herein on August 6, 2008"
 
and (2) the "Judgment Pursuant to Order Granting Petition to
 
Approve Interim Accounts Covering the Period from October 1, 2007
 
1
through August 31, 2008,"  both filed on February 6, 2009 in the
1
 Holt also appealed from the "Order Granting Petition to Approve
Interim Accounts Covering the Period from October 1, 2007 through August 31,
2008" filed on February 6, 2009. Because "[a]n appeal from a final judgment
brings up for review all interlocutory orders not appealable directly as of
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  Both
 
judgments were entered pursuant to orders granting a petition for
 
approval of interim accounts filed by Trustee-Appellee Bank of
 
Hawaii (Trustee).
 
In the second notice of appeal, Holt appealed from the
 
"Judgment Pursuant to Order Granting Petition to Approve Sale of
 
Hau Street Properties to Wattie Char-Olson, Filed on June 28,
 
2007," filed on April 22, 2009 in the circuit court.3 The
 
circuit court entered the judgment pursuant to the June 28, 2007
 "Order Granting Petition to Approve Sale of Hau Street Properties
 
to Wattie Char-Olson" (Char-Olson).
 
On appeal, Holt contends:
 (1) The circuit court erred when it approved the sale
 
4
of the properties located at 1927, 1935, and 2005 Hau Street ;
2015 Hau Street (second property); and 2021 Hau Street (third
 
property) (collectively, Hau Street properties) because the
 Trustee abused its discretion when it accepted Trust Estate
 
beneficiary Char-Olson's offer to purchase those properties. The
 
circuit court's "Order Granting Petition to Approve Sale of Hau
 
Street Properties to [Char-Olson]" should be reversed because
 
(a)
 the Trustee had no power to accept Char-Olson's bid sheets at
 
the time of the sale, (b) Char-Olson's offer did not comply with
 
the bidding procedure because she failed to include qualified bid
 
sheets, (c) Char-Olson's bid sheets were illusory and fraudulent,
 
and (d) the acceptance of Char-Olson's offer and the approval of
 
1(...continued)
right which deal with issues in the case," 
Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 
386, 396, 114 P.3d 892, 902 (2005) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted), this order is addressed in the discussion of the related "JudgmentPursuant to Order Granting Petition to Approve Interim Accounts Covering thePeriod from October 1, 2007 through August 31, 2008," filed on February 6,2009. 
2The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presided. 
3The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presided. 
4 The properties located at 1927, 1935, and 2005 Hau Street were
treated as a single parcel for purposes of the bidding procedure.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the sale of the Hau Street properties violated the Trust Estate
 
beneficiaries' due process and equal protection rights.
 
(2) The circuit court erred when it approved the sale
 
of the Hau Street properties because the first bid submitted by
 
the George Holt Family, LLC (LLC) to purchase the Hau Street
 
properties was the only legitimate bid submitted in compliance
 
with the bidding procedure and the Trustee abused its discretion
 
when it did not accept LLC's first bid. In the alternative, the
 
Trustee should have accepted LLC's second bid and the court erred
 
when it concluded that LLC's second bid did not comply with the
 
bidding procedure.
 
(3) The circuit court erred by prematurely releasing
 
the Trustee from liability when it approved the Trustee's
 
accounting.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
Holt's appeal is without merit.
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err when it approved the
sale of the Hau Street properties.
 
Holt contends the circuit court erred when it approved
 
the sale of the Hau Street properties to Char-Olson because the
 
Trustee abused its discretion by accepting Char-Olson's bid for
 
the properties.
 
The Trustee is "entitled to the benefit of the
 
presumption of regularity and good faith." In re Estate of
 
Campbell, 42 Haw. 586, 607 (Haw. Terr. 1958). Holt, as the
 person questioning the Trustee's actions, has the burden of
 
producing evidence to overcome that presumption. Id. In the
 
present case, the Trustee derives its authority from the 1914
 Last Will and Testament of George H. Holt (1914 Will) to sell any
 
of the Trust Estate real property. Id. at 589 ("The trustees
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
derive their authority, whatever it may be, from the will of [the
 
testator].") 
The 1914 Will provided in the 4th paragraph:
 
It is my desire and I hereby request my said executors and
trustees that none of my real estate be sold, save with the
approval of the First Circuit Court of the Territory of
Hawaii; and then only in case, in the opinion of my said
executors or trustees, as the case may be, it would be for
the best interests of the said estate that such sale should
 take place[.]
 
Pursuant to the 1914 Will, the Trustee could sell real
 
property if it determined, in its discretion, that it was in the
 
best interests of the Trust Estate to do so. And where
 
discretionary power is given to the trustee, "the court will not
 
interfere unless the trustee in exercising or failing to exercise
 
the power acts dishonestly, or with an improper even though not a
 
dishonest motive, or fails to use his judgment, or acts beyond
 
the bounds of a reasonable judgment." Dowsett v. Hawaiian Trust
 
Co., 47 Haw. 577, 581, 393 P.2d 89, 93 (1964) (quoting
 Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 187, cmt. e (1959)).
 
The 1914 Will gave the Trustee the discretion to sell
 
real property if the Trustee determined it was in the best
 
interests of the beneficiaries and if the circuit court gave its
 
approval. Holt's March 3, 2006 Supplemental Report re Proposed
 
Distribution Plan did not change the Master's belief that it was
 
in the best interests of the Trust Estate to sell the properties,
 
whether to individual beneficiaries, to the beneficiary LLC, or
 
on the open market. Regardless of Holt's survey results, the
 
Trustee was authorized, pursuant to the 1914 Will, to sell the
 
real property if the Trustee determined it was in the best
 
interests of the Trust Estate. In an effort to "accommodate the
 
desire of those who desire a direct distribution of real property
 
and those wishing a cash distribution," the Master proposed the
 
closed bidding process that was subsequently ordered by the
 
circuit court.
 
Based on the record, Holt does not overcome the
 
presumption that the Trustee acted with regularity and good faith
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on behalf of the Trust Estate when it petitioned the circuit
 
court to sell all the Trust Estate real properties.
 
Holt next contends that Char-Olson did not comply with
 
the requirements of the closed bidding process. The court-
ordered process required the bidder to provide the following:
 
a) a term sheet from a financial institution other than
Trustee Bank of Hawaii showing the proposed terms of
financing, and b) verification of the Beneficiary's assets
(e.g. copies of bank and brokerage statements) that show to
the Trustee's satisfaction that the Beneficiary has the
requisite assets to pay for the down payment and close the
transaction, including all normal and customary costs. The
 Trustee shall also require a firm commitment letter from the
Beneficiary’s lender within a reasonable period of time in
advance of the estimated sale/distribution date.
 
Holt contends that if Char-Olson had submitted the term
 
sheet or verification of her assets as required, it would have
 
become apparent that the International Brotherhood of Electrical
 
Workers (IBEW) was the true source of the funding and Char-Olson
 
was merely the straw-buyer. He also contends that the court-
ordered bidding process mandated the submission of a term sheet
 
and verification of assets and therefore the Trustee violated the
 
process by accepting Char-Olson's bid.
 
It is clear from the steps outlined in the bidding
 
process that the purpose of requiring the term sheet and
 
verification of assets was to confirm in the Trustee's mind that
 
a bidder was financially qualified to bid on a property. The
 
process specifically stated that the term sheet and verification
 
were to "show to the Trustee's satisfaction that the Beneficiary
 
has the requisite assets to pay for the down payment and close
 
the transaction." Central Pacific Bank's letters confirmed that
 
it would provide 100% of the financing Char-Olson needed to
 
complete the real estate purchases. 
LLC's first bid on the properties at 1927, 1935, and
 
2005 Hau Street was based on the beneficial interests of LLC
 
members. The first bids on the second and third properties were
 
based on the hope of a loan from a yet-to-be-identified financial
 
institution. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Trustee had the discretion to select the bid that
 
appeared most likely to be in the best interests of the Trust
 
Estate. The Trustee selected the bid that came with a 100%
 
financing guarantee; included a higher bid on the properties at
 
1927, 1935, and 2005 Hau Street; and required acceptance of the 
bid on the properties at 1927, 1935, and 2005 Hau Street to
 
activate the bids on the second and third properties. In light
 
of the facts, the Trustee did not abuse its discretion and the
 
circuit court did not err when it approved the petition for the
 
sale of the Hau Street properties to Char-Olson.
 
Furthermore, Holt's contention that Char-Olson's bid
 
was fraudulent is without merit. He argues that IBEW was the
 
true source of Char-Olson's funding and IBEW "conspired with
 
Char-Olson to defraud the Beneficiaries of the Estate property by
 
using Char-Olson as a straw bidder."
 
A "straw bidder" or "straw man" is "a third party used
 
in some transactions as a temporary transferee to allow the
 
principal parties to accomplish something that is otherwise
 
impermissible." Black's Law Dictionary 1557 (9th ed. 2009). 
Holt alleges that Char-Olson was the temporary transferee,
 enabling IBEW to bid on the property during the time the sale was
 
open only to Trust Estate beneficiaries. Holt points to the
 
evidence that Char-Olson transferred the Hau Street properties to
 
IBEW on the same day the properties were transferred to her as
 
proof of the alleged fraud.
 
The Master responded to the allegation of fraud in his
 
July 7, 2008 memorandum to the circuit court. He noted that the
 
July 25, 2006 order granting the Trustee's petition to sell all
 
the real property did not prohibit the re-sale of a property
 
after a successful bid. Moreover, according to the Master,
 
whether the successful bidder entered into an agreement with a
 
third party before or after the successful bid was "of no legal
 
significance in so far as being in compliance" with the court
 
order regarding the bidding process. The Master noted that the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
financial commitment made by Central Pacific Bank to provide 100%
 
financing was made only to Char-Olson; there was no evidence that
 
IBEW played any role in obtaining the financing. Based on the
 
facts, Holt's allegation of fraud is without merit.
 
Finally, Holt contends the circuit court violated the 
Trust Estate beneficiaries' due process and equal protection 
rights by unequally applying the bidding procedure requirements. 
Holt failed to raise these constitutional claims below, and we 
therefore do not consider them on appeal. Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4). 
The circuit court should not substitute its own
 
judgment for the Trustee's discretionary judgment that it was in
 the best interests of the beneficiaries to accept Char-Olson's
 
bids over LLC's bids. In re Estate of Campbell, 42 Haw. at 603­
04. The Trustee is "entitled to the benefit of the presumption
 
of regularity and good faith," id. at 607, and we find nothing in
 
the record or in Holt's argument to overcome that presumption. 
The circuit court did not err when it approved the sale of the
 
Hau Street properties to Char-Olson.
 
B.	 The circuit court did not err when it concluded
 
that LLC's second bid did not comply with the
bidding process.
 
Holt contends, in the alternative, that the Trustee
 
should have accepted LLC's second bid and the circuit court erred
 
when it concluded that LLC's second bid did not comply with the
 
bidding procedure.
 
The Trustee petitioned the circuit court on April 19,
 
2007 to approve the sale of the Hau Street properties to Char-
Olson, and the circuit court set a hearing for June 15, 2007.
 
On June 14, 2007, LLC filed a response to the petition
 
and submitted a second bid of $6.2 million cash (approximately $1
 
million more than its initial bid) for the properties at 1927,
 
1935, and 2005 Hau Street. LLC's second bid was higher than the
 
winning bid of Char-Olson. LLC's bid proposed to pay 100% cash
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the properties at 1927, 1935, and 2005 Hau Street, so there
 
was no need for a term sheet showing terms of financing. 
However, there was still a need for verification of assets. LLC
 
provided a "letter of support" from Andrew Friedlander
 
(Friedlander). Attached to Friedlander's letter was a letter
 
from Morgan Stanley confirming that Friedlander and his wife had
 
more than $6.2 million in personal assets on deposit that could
 
be used "to collateralize any financing they may be considering." 
The "letter of support" did not include any paperwork to indicate
 
a legally binding commitment between Friedlander and LLC.
 
At the June 15, 2007 hearing, the circuit court stated
 
that it had reviewed all the documents filed and noted the
 
untimely filing of LLC's response and the lack of any previous
 
inquiry by LLC to clear up any alleged misunderstanding regarding
 
the bidding process. The circuit court concluded that LLC's bid
 
filed on June 14, 2007 did not comply with the bidding procedure
 
set out in the July 25, 2006 court order and granted the
 
Trustee's petition to sell the Hau Street properties to Char-
Olson.
 
The Trustee did not abuse its discretion when it
 
confirmed the sale of the Hau Street properties to Char-Olson,
 
and the circuit court did not err in concluding that LLC's second
 
bid did not conform with the bidding process.
 
C.	 The circuit court did not err when it released the
 
Trustee from liability
 
Holt contends the circuit court had no legal authority
 
to release the Trustee from liability when the court approved the
 
Trustee's interim accounts. Holt bases his contention on his
 
belief that the sale of the Hau Street properties to Char-Olson
 
was fraudulent and the circuit court's release gave the Trustee
 
blanket immunity from any retroactive or subsequent liability for
 
the alleged fraudulent transaction.
 
Contrary to Holt's contention that the circuit court
 
lacked authority to release the Trustee from liability, Hawaii
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 560:7-201(a)(3) (2006 Repl.) gives the
 
circuit court jurisdiction "to determine the existence or
 
nonexistence of any immunity, power, privilege, duty or right"
 
arising from a trust or the administration thereof. The circuit
 
court's jurisdiction includes the power to "review and settle
 
interim or final accounts." HRS § 560:7-201(a)(2). 
That is not to say, however, that a court may protect a
 
Trustee from fraudulent accounting. "In general, the judicial
 
settlement of a trustee's account renders res judicata all
 
matters in dispute and determined by the court in settling the
 
account[.]" 4 Austin Wakeman Scott, William Franklin Fratcher, &
 
Mark L. Ascher, Scott and Ascher on Trusts § 24.25, at 1789 (4th
 
ed. 2007). However, an "account may be reopened if the trustee
 
is guilty of fraudulent concealment or misrepresentation in
 
presenting the account or in obtaining the court's approval." 
Id. at 1790.
 
The 1914 Will granted the Trustee the discretion to
 
sell the real property. The Trustee, after conducting a bidding
 
process in accordance with a court order, sold the Hau Street
 
properties after receiving court approval in accordance with the
 
1914 Will. The circuit court also approved the accounting for
 
the periods that included the sale of the said property. The
 
circuit court will not interfere with the Trustee's exercise of
 
its discretion unless the Trustee "acts dishonestly, or with an
 
improper even though not a dishonest motive, or fails to use his
 
judgment, or acts beyond the bounds of a reasonable judgment." 
In re Estate of Campbell, 42 Haw. at 604.
 
The circuit court's approval of the Trustee's
 
accounting reflects the fact that Holt had an opportunity in a
 
judicial proceeding to contest the sale of the Hau Street
 
properties as fraudulent. Unless Holt can successfully argue a
 
fraud not already addressed, the circuit court's order approving
 
the accounting is res judicata as to the accounting and the sale
 
of the Hau Street properties. In re Bernice P. Bishop Estate, 36
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Haw. 403, 421 (Haw. Terr. 1943) (holding that "an order or decree
 
approving an annual trust account does not become res adjudicata
 
as to matters not actually adjudicated by the court"). The
 
circuit court did not err when it released the Trustee from
 
liability.
 
Therefore,
 The "Judgment re: Order Granting Remainder of the
 
Petition for Approval of Interim Accounts Covering the Period
 from November 1, 1968 through September 30, 2007, Filed Herein on
 
August 6, 2008," filed on February 6, 2009; the "Judgment
 
Pursuant to Order Granting Petition to Approve Interim Accounts
 
Covering the Period from October 1, 2007 through August 31,
 
2008," filed on February 6, 2009; and the "Judgment Pursuant to
 
Order Granting Petition to Approve Sale of Hau Street Properties
 
to Wattie Char-Olson, Filed on June 28, 2007," filed on April 22,
 
2009, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 20, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Long H. VuFrederick J. Arensmeyer(Dubin Law Offices)for Beneficiary-AppellantCharles H.K. Holt. 
Chief Judge 
David C. Larsen Rhonda L. Griswold Michael C. Schwartz (Cades Schutte)for Trustee Bank of Hawaii. 
Associate Judge 
Lyle S. HosodaRaina P.B. Gushiken (Lyle S. Hosoda &Associates, LLC)for Beneficiary-AppelleeWattie Char-Olson. 
Associate Judge 
10
 