FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
IN THE MATTER OF UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS,
AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO, UNION, Petitioner-Appellant,
and NEIL ABERCROMBIE, Governor, State of Hawai' i, HAWAI' I
 
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, AFSCME, LOCAL 152,
AFL-CIO, and KIRK CALDWELL, Mayor, City and County of Honolulu,
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI' I PROFESSIONAL ASSEMBLY, and
COUNTY OF HAWAI' I (2007-003), Intervenors-Appellees
and HAWAI' I LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, Appellee-Appellee
 
NO. 29382
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1265)
 
OCTOBER 30, 2013
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Petitioner-Appellant United Public Workers, AFSCME,
 
Local 646, AFL-CIO, Union (
UPW) appeals from the Final Judgment
 
(Judgment) entered on September 29, 2008, by the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court), and also challenges the
 
Circuit Court's Order Reversing Hawaii Labor Relations Board
 
Decision No. 470, Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Declaratory Order (Circuit Court Order).
1
   
1/
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this secondary appeal, UPW argues that the Circuit
 
Court erred in reversing the declaratory ruling of the Hawaii
 
Labor Relations Board (Board or HLRB) on the basis that the
 
ruling exceeded the Board's jurisdiction. Because the Circuit
 
Court ruled, in effect, that the Board had no jurisdiction to
 enter its Decision No. 470, Findings of Facts, Conclusions of
 Law, and Declaratory Order (Decision No. 470), the Circuit Court
 
did not otherwise address the merits of Decision No. 470. 
Therefore, the central issue on this appeal is whether the
 Circuit Court erred when it concluded that the Board lacked
 jurisdiction to enter a ruling on the UPW petition underlying
 Decision No. 470, which sought a declaratory ruling concerning
 whether certain conduct by public employers constituted
 "prohibited practices" under Hawaii's public sector collective
 bargaining law. We conclude that the HLRB had jurisdiction over
 UPW's petition and therefore vacate the Circuit Court Order and
 Judgment.
 I. STATUTORY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
 
Hawaii's public sector collective bargaining law is
 
codified at Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 89. This
 
chapter, inter alia, provides public employees with the right of
 
self-organization; the right to collectively bargain on wages,
 hours, and other terms and conditions of employment; and the
 right to a grievance procedure. HRS §§ 89-3 (2012); 89-10.8
 (2012). It also sets forth a number of "prohibited practices,"
 making it unlawful, inter alia, for public employers to wilfully
 "[i]nterfere, restrain, or coerce any employee in the exercise of
 any right guaranteed under this chapter." HRS § 89-13(a)(1)
 (2012). 
With the enactment of Chapter 89, the Hawai' i 
Legislature tasked the HLRB with the administration of the public sector collective bargaining law. See generally HRS 89-5(i) 
(2012). In addition to its other powers and functions, the HLRB has exclusive original jurisdiction over any controversy concerning prohibited practices. More specifically, HRS § 89-14 (2012) provides: 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§ 89-14 Prevention of prohibited practices.  Any
controversy concerning prohibited practices may be submitted
to the [HLRB] in the same manner and with the same effect as
provided in section 377-9; provided that the [HLRB] shall
have exclusive original jurisdiction over such a controversy
except that nothing herein shall preclude (1) the
institution of appropriate proceedings in circuit court
pursuant to section 89-12(c) or (2) the judicial review of
decisions or orders of the [HLRB] in prohibited practice
controversies in accordance with section 377-9 and chapter
91. 
All references in section 377-9 to 'labor organization'
shall include employee organization.
 
As stated, controversies concerning prohibited
 
practices are to be submitted to the HLRB "in the same manner and
 
with the same effect" as an unfair labor practice controversy,
 the procedures for which are set forth in HRS § 377-9 as follows:
 
b) (
written complaint, on a form provided by the board, charging
any person with having engaged in any specific unfair labor
Any party in interest may file with the board a
practice.  The board shall serve a copy of the complaint
upon the person charged, hereinafter referred to as the
respondent. If the board has reasonable cause to believe
 that the respondent is a member of or represented by a labor
union, then service upon an officer of the union shall be
deemed to be service upon the respondent. . . . Any other
person claiming interest in the dispute or controversy, as
an employer, an employee or their representative, shall be
made a party upon proof of the interest. The board may
bring in additional parties by service of a copy of the
complaint. Only one complaint shall issue against a person
with respect to a single controversy, but any complaint may
be amended in the discretion of the board at any time prior
to the issuance of a final order based thereon.  The
 
respondent may file an answer to the original or amended
complaint but the board may find to be true any allegation
in the complaint in the event either no answer is filed or
the answer neither specifically denies nor explains the
allegation nor states that the respondent is without
knowledge concerning the allegation. The respondent shall
have the right to appear in person or otherwise give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the notice of
hearing. The hearing on the complaint shall be before
either the board or a hearings officer of the board, as the
board may determine.
 
. . . .
 
(d) After the final hearing, the board shall promptly
make and file an order or decision, incorporating findings
of fact upon all the issues involved in the controversy and
the determination of the rights of the parties. 
Pending the
final determination of the controversy the board may, after
hearing, make interlocutory orders which may be enforced in
the same manner as final orders. Final orders may dismiss
the complaint or require the person complained of to cease
and desist from the unfair labor practices found to have
been committed, suspend the person's rights, immunities,
privileges, or remedies granted or afforded by this chapter
for not more than one year, and require the person to take
affirmative action, including reinstatement of employees and
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
make orders in favor of employees making them whole,
 
including back pay with interest, costs, and attorneys'
 fees. Any order may further require the person to make
reports from time to time showing the extent to which the
person has complied with the order. Furthermore, an
 employer or employee who wilfully or repeatedly commits
 
unfair or prohibited practices that interfere with the
 statutory rights of an employer or employees or
 discriminates against an employer or employees for the
 exercise of protected conduct shall be subject to a civil
 penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each violation. In
 determining the amount of any penalty under this section,
 the board shall consider the gravity of the unfair or
 prohibited practice and the impact of the practice on the
 charging party, on other persons seeking to exercise rights
 guaranteed by this section, or on public interest.
 
. . . .
 
(f) Any person aggrieved by the decision or order of
the board may obtain a review thereof as provided in chapter
91 by instituting proceedings in the circuit court of the
judicial circuit in which the person or any party resides or
transacts business [.] . . . The petition shall state the
grounds upon which a review is sought and copies thereof
shall be served upon the other parties and the board. . . .
Upon the hearing, the court may confirm, modify, or set
aside the decision or order of the board and enter an
 appropriate decree. No objection that has not been urged
before the board shall be considered by the court unless the
failure or neglect to urge the objection shall be excused
because of extraordinary circumstances.
 
(g) In any proceedings for review of a decision or
order of the board, the judge shall disregard any
irregularity or error unless it is made to appear
affirmatively that the complaining party was prejudiced
thereby.
 
(h) Commencement of proceedings under subsection (f)
of this section shall not stay enforcement of the board
decisions or order; but the board, or the reviewing court
may order a stay upon such terms as it deems proper.
. . . .
 
(j) Any party may appeal from the judgment of a
circuit court entered under this chapter, subject to chapter
 
602, in the manner provided for civil appeals from the
 
circuit courts.
 
(k) A substantial compliance with the procedure of
this chapter shall be sufficient to give effect to the
decisions and orders of the board, and they shall not be
declared inoperative, illegal, or void for any
nonprejudicial irregularity in respect thereof.
 
(l) No complaints of any specific unfair labor
practice shall be considered unless filed within ninety days
of its occurrence.
 
HRS § 377-9 (2012) (emphasis added with bolded and underlined
 
text; italicized text indicates modifications and/or additions to
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the statute subsequent to the proceedings at issue in this case;
 
these amendments are not relevant to this appeal).
 
Another key statutory provision is found in Hawai' i's 
Administrative Procedures Act, specifically HRS § 91-8 (2012),
 which provides:
 
§ 91-8 Declaratory rulings by agencies.  Any
interested person may petition an agency for a declaratory
order as to the applicability of any statutory provision or
of any rule or order of the agency. Each agency shall adopt
rules prescribing the form of the petitions and the
procedures for their submission, consideration, and prompt
disposition. Orders disposing of petitions in such cases
shall have the same status as other agency orders.
 
Administrative rules promulgated to govern the
 
proceedings before the HRLB include:
 
§ 12-42-9 Declaratory rulings by the board. (a) Any
public employee, employee organization, public employer, or
interested person or organization may petition the board for
a declaratory order as to the applicability of any statutory
provision or of any rule or order of the board.
 
(b) The petition shall be prepared on a form
furnished by the board, and the original and five copies
shall be filed with the board.
 
(c) 	The petition shall contain the following:
(1)	 The name, address, and telephone number of the
petitioner.
(2) 	A statement of the nature of the petitioner’s
interest, including reasons for submission of
the petition.
(3) 	A designation of the specific provision, rule,
or order in question.
(4) 	A clear and concise statement of the position or
contention of the petitioner.
(5) 	A memorandum of authorities, containing a full
discussion of the reasons, including legal
authorities, in support of such position or
contention.
 
(6) 	The signature of each petitioner.
 
(d) Any petition which does not conform to the
foregoing requirements may be rejected.
 
(e) Any party may intervene subject to the
provisions of section 12-42-8(g)(14) insofar as they are
applicable.
 
(f) The board may, for good cause, refuse to issue a
declaratory order. 
Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the board may so refuse where:
(1)	 The question is speculative or purely
hypothetical and does not involve existing facts
or facts which can reasonably be expected to
exist in the near future.
 
(2) 	The petitioner’s interest is not of the type
which would give the petitioner standing to 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
maintain an action if such petitioner were
to seek judicial relief.
(3) 	The issuance of the declaratory order may
adversely affect the interests of the board or
any of its officers or employees in a litigation
which is pending or may reasonably be expected
to arise.
 
(4) 	The matter is not within the jurisdiction of the
board.
 
(g) The board shall consider each petition submitted
and, within a reasonable time after the submission thereof,
either deny the petition in writing, stating its reason for
such denial, or issue a declaratory order on the matters
contained in the petition.
 
(h) 
Hearing:
. . . . 
 
(i) An order disposing of a petition shall be
applicable only to the factual situation alleged in the
petition or set forth in the order. The order shall not be
applicable to different factual situations or where
additional facts not considered in the order exist.  Such
 
order shall have the same force and effect as other
 orders
 
issued by the board. [Eff. Feb. 6, 1981] (Auth: HRS §89-5)
(Imp: HRS §§89-5, 91-8)
 
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-42-9 (emphasis added).
 
It is within this statutory and regulatory framework
 
that we analyze the Circuit Court Order reversing Decision No.
 
470 "because the Board exceeded its authority."
 II.	 RELEVANT BACKGROUND FACTS
 
A.	 HLRB Proceedings
 UPW filed an HRLB-12 Petition for a Declaratory Ruling
 
(Petition), in the format required by HAR § 12-42-9(b) & (c), on
 
January 23, 2007. Various parties intervened, including
 
Intervenors-Appellees Neil Abercrombie, Governor, State of
 Hawai'i (State), and Kirk Caldwell, Mayor, City and County of 
2
Honolulu (City) (collectively, Employers).  This initial
 
Petition sought an order regarding the "[s]ubpoena duces tecums
 issued by public employers," which UPW alleged to have a
 "chilling effect on the rights of public employees in violation
 of Section 89-3, HRS."  At a hearing held on February 21, 2007,
 
the HLRB expressed concern regarding its jurisdiction in the
 
2/ Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
43(c), current officeholders have been automatically substituted for former
public officials who are no longer in office. 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
matter and invited UPW to file an amended petition to clarify the
 
focus and scope of the Petition. On February 28, 2007, the State
 filed a Motion to Dismiss Petition for Declaratory Ruling,
 arguing that the HLRB lacked jurisdiction to decide the matter
 because (1) the Petition essentially sought a ruling on subpoenas
 issued by arbitrators and courts, over which the HLRB had no
 authority; and (2) the factual basis for the Petition was
 speculative and involved facts which could not reasonably be
 expected to exist in the near future.
 
A First Amended HLRB-12 Petition was filed on March 12,
 
2007 (Amended Petition). The factual premise upon which the
 
Amended Petition was based, captioned in the HLRB-provided form
 
as "the nature of Petitioner's interest, including the reasons
 for the submission of the Petition", alleged:
 
Petitioner is the exclusive representative of blue-collar
non-supervisory employees in bargaining unit 1, and
institutional health and correctional workers in bargaining
unit 10. The petition is being submitted because petitioner
has been served with a number of subpoena duces tecums from
public employers which seek records of union grievances,
investigations of union grievances, union membership and
union activities, and other concerted activities by
employees for the purpose of collective bargaining and other
mutual aid and protection. See Attachments 1 through 5.
3
 
The Amended Petition stated its contentions and request
 
for declaratory relief as follows:
 
Public employers may not seek or obtain records of union
grievances, investigations of union grievances, union
membership and union activities, and concerted activities by
employees for the purpose of collective bargaining and other
mutual aid and protection because such conduct has a
chilling effect on the rights of public employees in
violation of Section 89-3, HRS. Under Section 89-3, HRS,
public employees should be free to join and assist any
employee organization, and to engage in lawful concerted
activities for the purpose of collective bargaining and
mutual aid and protection without interference, restraint,
or coercion from public employers.
 
Accordingly, petitioner seeks a declaratory order as to the
applicability of Section 89-3, HRS, and Section 89-13(a)(1),
HRS, to the aforementioned public employer conduct which
interferes, restrains, and coerces employees engaged in
protected activities guaranteed under Chapter 89.
 
3/
 The referenced attachments consisted of subpoenas duces tecum that
had been served on UPW in conjunction with various arbitration and litigation
matters.
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
See Decision and Order by Arbitrator Mario Ramil in United
Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. State of
Hawaii Department of Public Safety (Case No. LK-04-34) dated
July 3, 2005 (Attachment 6); and Order by Arbitrator Paul
Aoki in United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v.
State of Hawaii, Department of Public Safety (Case No. CU­04-19 to CU-04-45) dated August 18, 2005 (Attachment 7).
 
At a hearing held on March 20, 2007, the HLRB orally
 
denied the State's motion to dismiss. A majority of the Board
 
concluded that the Petition concerned the interpretation of
 employees' rights under HRS § 89-3 and was thus within the
 Board's jurisdiction. It resolved to proceed on the "almost pure
 legal question about [public employees'] rights under 89-3." 
In opposing the merits of the Amended Petition, the
 
Employers again argued that the HLRB lacked jurisdiction because
 (1) the Amended Petition effectively sought to limit the
 Employers' discovery rights in various forums over which the
 Board had no authority; and (2) it sought a "blanket rule"
 requiring the creation of a union work product privilege. UPW
 
maintained that the HLRB had a jurisdictional mandate to
 
interpret and apply the scope of prohibited practices under HRS
 §§ 89-3 and 89-13.
 
The HLRB issued Decision No. 470 on June 29, 2007. In
 
Decision No. 470, the HLRB entered Findings of Fact regarding
 various specific instances in which the Employers had issued
 subpoenas duces tecum to UPW in the course of certain grievance
 arbitrations. The HLRB then promulgated a "Discussion" of the
 "almost axiomatic tautological question" presented by UPW's
 Amended Petition. In this Discussion, which we need not recount
 in detail in this review of the HLRB's jurisdiction, the Board
 majority examined the rationale applied in the grievance
 arbitrations reviewed in its Findings of Fact, as well as earlier
 Board rulings brought to its attention by the Employers. The
 Discussion ended, however, with a broadly-worded summary that
 appears to be ungrounded in factual circumstances at hand:
 
[I]n response to the UPW's inquiry regarding the
compelled disclosure of union information, the Board
majority reaches three conclusions: 1) Employer demands
which infringe upon rights protected by Chapter 89 will
constitute prohibited practices, 2) pretrial discovery and
disclosure must be evaluated pursuant to the provisions of
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRCP Rule 26 and, 3) any conclusion of a prohibited practice
resulting from an employer information demand will be made
pursuant to fact specific showings thereof.
 
Decision No. 470 then sets forth nine Conclusions of
 
Law, including:
 
1.	 The Board has jurisdiction over this petition pursuant
to HRS §§ 89-5(b)(5) and 91-8 and HAR § 12-42-9.
 
2.	 HRS § 89-13(a)(13) provides as follows:
(a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a
public employer or its designated representative
wilfully to:
(1)	 Interfere, restrain, or coerce any
employee in the exercise of any right
guaranteed under this chapter; . . . .
 
3.	 HRS § 89-3 provides as follows:
Employees shall have the right of self-organization
and the right to form, join, or assist any employee
organization for the purpose of bargaining
collectively through representatives of their own
choosing on questions of wages, hours, and other terms
and conditions of employment, including retiree health
benefit contributions, and to engage[] in lawful,
concerted activities for the purpose of collective
bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, free
from interference, restraint, or coercion. An
 employee shall have the right to refrain from any or
all of such activities, except for having a payroll
deduction equivalent to regular dues remitted to an
exclusive representative.
 
4.	 Employer conduct that interferes with, restrains, or
coerces employees in the exercise of the rights set
forth in HRS § 89-3 violates HRS § 89-13(a)(1). The
 test is whether the employer engaged in conduct
reasonably tending to interfere with the free exercise
of employee rights. . . .
. . . .
 
8.	 The Board has held that [an] employee's right to
pursue and correct a grievance has been held to
constitute lawful protected activity. . . .
 
9.	 When an employer seeks to obtain records of union
grievances, investigations of employee discipline, or
notes of union stewards' and business agents'
conversations with employees in the course of union
representation, these actions may unduly interfere,
restrain or coerce employees in the free exercise of
their statutory rights. Similarly, subpoenas for
records of union membership likewise may interfere
with the employee's right to engage in concerted
activity.
 
Finally, Decision No. 470 concludes with the following
 
Declaratory Order:
 
Public employer efforts to obtain records of union
grievances, investigations o[f] union grievances, union
membership records, and other concerted activities of
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bargaining unit employees have a tendency to interfere,
restrain and coerce employees in the free exercise of rights
under HRS § 89-3 and in the proper case may constitute a
prohibited practice violative of HRS § 89-13(a)(1).
 
B. The Circuit Court Proceedings 
The State timely filed a notice of appeal to the
 
Circuit Court. The City filed a Joinder in the State's appeal
 (and its briefs).
4 In the Circuit Court proceedings, the
 
Employers contended that the Board's Decision No. 470 should be
 reversed and/or vacated based on the following contentions: (1)
 the Board failed to issue a written order denying the State's
 motion to dismiss the Petition, and failed to file separate
 findings of fact and conclusions of law as to why the motion to
 dismiss was denied, in violation of HAR § 12-42-8(g); (2) the
 Board exceeded its statutory authority or jurisdiction by issuing
 a ruling that usurped the jurisdiction of arbitrators and courts
 in issuing subpoenas, and regulating discovery, and the Board
 does not have jurisdiction to rule upon the applicability of a
 privilege or the scope of discovery allowed in arbitrations or
 court proceedings; (3) the Board exceeded its authority by
 instituting a blanket prohibition to prevent a party from seeking
 and obtaining certain records in the context of arbitration or
 civil proceedings, and would thus usurp the authority of the
 arbitrators or courts, which is beyond the Board's jurisdiction;
 and (4) the Board erred in failing to grant the State's motion to
 dismiss the Petition for the reasons set forth therein, including
 that the matter was not within the jurisdiction of the Board.
 
After further briefing by all parties, including
 
answering briefs by UPW and others, the Circuit Court held oral
 argument, and thereafter issued the Circuit Court Order, which
 simply stated:
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Hawai' i Labor Relations 
Board Decision No. 470, Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
Law, and Declaratory Order, dated June 29, 2007, is reversedbecause the Board exceeded its authority. 
4/
 The County of Hawaii also filed a joinder in the appeal and in the
State's opening brief.
 
10
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After an initial notice of appeal was dismissed for
 
lack of appellate jurisdiction, the Judgment was entered on
 
September 29, 2008, and a notice of appeal was timely filed.
 III. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal to this court, UPW raises four points of
 
error, contending that the Circuit Court: (1) exceeded the
 permissible scope of judicial review by refusing to defer to the
 Board's discretionary determination and to afford persuasive
 weight to its construction of the relevant statutes; (2) erred by
 reversing an agency decision which was not "palpably erroneous"
 or inconsistent with the underlying purposes of HRS §§ 89-3 and
 89-13(a)(1); (3) erred when it determined that the HLRB exceeded
 its authority by applying Decision No. 470 beyond factual
 circumstances presented in the Amended Petition; and (4) erred
 when it determined that the HLRB lacked exclusive original
 jurisdiction to determine a controversy over prohibited practices
 by employers.
 IV.	 APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
This court's review of a circuit court decision 
reviewing an agency determination is a secondary appeal. Citizens Against Reckless Dev. v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of the City & Cnty. of Honolulu (CARD), 114 Hawai' i 184, 193, 159 P.3d 
143, 152 (2007). For secondary appeals, 
[t]he standard of review is one in which [the appellate]
court must determine whether the circuit court was right or
wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in
HRS § 91-14(g) [(1993)] to the agency's decision.
 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested cases,"
provides in relevant part:
 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse or
modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are:
 (1) 	In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) 	In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction
of the agency; or
(3) 	Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) 	Affected by other error of law; or
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
 
11
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
[U]nder HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact
under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion
under subsection (6).
 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted; some
 
brackets in original and some added).
 
Courts apply a deferential standard of review to agency
 
decisions in the following situation:
 
[W]hen reviewing a determination of an administrative
agency, we first decide whether the legislature granted the
agency discretion to make the determination being reviewed. 
If the legislature has granted the agency discretion over a
particular matter, then we review the agency's action
pursuant to the deferential abuse of discretion standard
(bearing in mind the legislature determines the boundaries
of that discretion). If the legislature has not granted the
agency discretion over a particular matter, then the
agency's conclusions are subject to de novo review.
 
Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai' i 412, 419-20, 91 
P.3d 494, 501-02 (2004). 
However, we reject UPW's argument that the issue of the 
HLRB's jurisdiction is subject to the "palpably erroneous," 
clearly erroneous, or other deferential standard of review. An 
administrative agency may only "wield powers expressly or 
implicitly granted to it by statute." TIG Ins. Co. v. Kauhane
, 
101 Hawai' i 311, 327, 67 P.3d 810, 826 (App. 2003). Thus an 
agency's conclusions of law "are freely reviewable to determine if the agency's decision was in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions, in excess of statutory authority or jurisdiction of [the] agency, or affected by other error of law." 
Poe v. Hawai' i Labor Relations Bd.,  87 Hawai' i 191, 195, 953 P.2d 
569, 573 (1998) (emphasis added). "If an agency determination is not within its realm of discretion (as defined by the legislature), then the agency's determination is not entitled to the deferential 'abuse of discretion' standard of review." 
Paul's Elec. Serv.
, 104 Hawai' i at 417, 91 P.3d at 499. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, UPW's second point of error is without merit; the
 
Circuit Court did not err when it reviewed, as a matter of law,
 whether the HLRB's Decision No. 470 was in excess of the HLRB's
 statutory authority or jurisdiction.
 
UPW's first point of error must be similarly addressed. 
To the extent that UPW argues that the Circuit Court "exceeded
 the permissible scope of judicial review" by reviewing whether
 the HLRB exceeded its statutory authority or jurisdiction, UPW's
 point is without merit. We note, however, in light of the fact
 that the Circuit Court concluded that the HLRB had no
 jurisdiction over the matters raised in the Amended Petition, the
 Circuit Court simply did not conduct a substantive review of the
 HLRB's determinations and neither afforded nor denied "persuasive
 weight to its construction of the relevant statutes."
 V. DISCUSSION
 
Having disposed of UPW's first two points of error in
 
conjunction with our analysis of the applicable standard of
 review, we turn to its remaining two contentions – albeit
 reordered: (1) that the Circuit Court erred when it determined
 that the HLRB lacked exclusive original jurisdiction to determine
 a controversy over prohibited practices by employers; and (2)
 that the Circuit Court erred when it determined that the HLRB
 exceeded its authority by applying Decision No. 470 beyond the
 factual circumstances presented in the Amended Petition. We
 agree with the first of these two contentions, but we do not
 reach the merits of the second one.
 
A. The HLRB's Exclusive Jurisdiction
 HRS § 89-14 expressly provides that the HLRB has
 
"exclusive original jurisdiction" over "[a]ny controversy
 concerning prohibited practices."
5 HRS § 91-8 establishes the
 
5/
 When originally enacted, HRS § 89-14 did not expressly provide for
the Board's exclusive original jurisdiction. In Winslow v. State, 2 Haw. App.
50, 56, 625 P.2d 1046, 1051 (App. 1981), this court examined the text of the
statute and concluded that the legislature did not intend that the Board's
(continued...)
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HLRB's authority to issue declaratory rulings "as to the
 
applicability of any statutory provision." The administrative
 rules adopted by the HLRB give further context to the statutory
 framework:
 
An order disposing of a petition [for a declaratory ruling]
shall be applicable only to the factual situation alleged in
the petition or set forth in the order. The order shall not
 be applicable to different factual situations or where
additional facts not considered in the order exist. . . .
 
HAR § 12-42-9(i).
 
The HRLB's jurisdiction clearly extends to determining
 
whether, in a particular instance, specified employer conduct
 
constitutes a "prohibited practice" under HRS § 89-13. See Fasi
 
v. State Pub. Emp't Relations Bd., 60 Haw. 436, 444-45, 591 P.2d 113, 118 (1979). In Fasi, the Hawai' i Supreme Court examined the 
Board's jurisdiction to make a declaratory ruling on whether a seniority clause in a collective bargaining agreement would constitute a violation of HRS § 89-9(d). Id. at 438, 591 P.2d at 
114. It had been stipulated by parties that, prior to the
 
employer's filing of a petition for declaratory ruling, a
 grievance had been initiated concerning whether the employer (the
 City) had violated the collective bargaining agreement. Id. 
Arbitration had been demanded by the union. Id. at 438-39, 591
 
P.2d at 114-15. The Board nevertheless entered a decision
 accepting jurisdiction over the matter and ruled that the
 seniority provision in the collective bargaining agreement was
 not in violation of HRS § 89-9(d). Id. at 438-39, 591 P.2d at
 
114-15. On appeal, the circuit court concluded that the parties
 were bound to submit the dispute to arbitration, and the court
 
(...continued)
jurisdiction over prohibited practice controversies would be exclusive. In
 
1982, the legislature amended the statute to supersede Winslow and clarify
that the Board's original jurisdiction is exclusive. 1982 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 27, § 1 at 38; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 134-82, in 1982 House Journal, at 943
("By making the jurisdiction of [the Board] exclusive in controversies
 
concerning prohibited practices, this bill legislatively rectifies or
overrules the juridical conclusion or statutory construction enunciated in
Winslow v. State of Hawaii
.") (emphasis in original).
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reversed the ruling of the Board on the ground that the Board
 
lacked jurisdiction because the matter was pending a
 determination in the arbitration. 
Id. at 440, 591 P.2d at 116. 
On the secondary appeal, the supreme court considered,
 
inter alia, whether the City's petition for a declaratory ruling
 fell within the scope of HRS § 91-8. It answered that query
 affirmatively by reference to the Board's authority over
 prohibited practices:
 
We think it is fairly implied, from the provision of § 91-8
giving orders disposing of petitions for declaratory orders
the same status as other orders of the Board, that the
question presented by the petition had to be one which would
be relevant to some action which the Board might take in the
exercise of the powers granted by Chapter 89. The
 applicability of § 89-9(d) to the collective bargaining
agreement between [the City] and UPW was thus before the
Board in the context of the possible actions which the Board
might take with reference to the disputed provision of the
agreement.
 
The wilful failure of an employer to observe the terms
of a collective bargaining agreement is defined by
§ 89-13(a)(8) as a prohibited practice, with respect to
which § 89-5(b)(4) empowers the Board, upon complaints by
employers, employees and employee organizations, to 'take
such actions with respect thereto as it deems necessary and
proper.' Since the meaning and effect of a provision of a
collective bargaining agreement must be determined by the
Board in the course of determining whether an employer is in
violation of the agreement and is engaging in a prohibited
practice, the meaning and effect of the agreement between
[the City] and UPW was a question which related to an action
which the Board might take in the exercise of its powers.
The applicability of § 89-9(d) to the collective bargaining
agreement is therefore a question which was properly placed
before the Board by the petition pursuant to § 91-8.
 
Id. at 443, 593 P.2d at 117-18.
 
Moreover, the supreme court held that the circuit court
 
erred in holding that the Board was without jurisdiction to rule
 
on the petition, even if the parties were required to submit the
 question to arbitration. 
Id. at 444, 593 P.2d at 118. The
 
supreme court explained its reasoning by reference to the limited
 applicability of the Board's declaratory ruling:
 
[A]lthough § 91-8 may in a proper case provide a means
of resolving interparty disputes, the statute is designed to
provide a means for securing from an agency its
interpretation of relevant statutes, rules and orders. The
 only parties necessary to a proceeding under § 91-8 are the
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
petitioner and the agency. The declaratory ruling so
obtained has effect only as an order of the agency. With
 respect to parties not before the agency in the proceeding
upon the petition, the ruling does not adjudicate rights and
interests to any greater extent than is possible by an ex
parte interpretative order of the agency. These conclusions,
we think, require no more validation than is provided by the
face of the statute.
 
The declaratory ruling granted upon [the City's]
petition, therefore, expressed the Board's opinion that a
violation of the seniority clause of the agreement by [the
City] would constitute a prohibited practice under § 89-13.
We think it is not arguable that any collective bargaining
agreement could deprive the Board of its statutory authority
to take action with respect to prohibited practices,
although the terms of existing agreements might well be
relevant to the determination whether a prohibited practice
existed. If the Board had jurisdiction to take action with
respect to a prohibited practice, it had jurisdiction to
declare what would constitute a prohibited practice. The
 arguments advanced with respect to the effect of the
arbitration provision, therefore, were for the consideration
of the Board in arriving at its ruling and were not relevant
to the question whether the Board had jurisdiction of [the
City's] petition.
 
Id. at 444-45, 593 P.2d at 118. 
The supreme court thus determined that the Board had
 
jurisdiction to declare whether the particular action presented
 
in the petition might constitute a prohibited practice, because
 the Board has the authority to take action with respect to
 prohibited practices. 
While noting the limited effect of such a
 
ruling, the supreme court viewed this action as being within the
 jurisdiction of the Board, regardless of whether the same
 question was or was not subject to arbitration, and regardless of
 whether the Board's ruling might or might not have been
 significant to the outcome of the arbitration. Id. at 445, 593
 
P.2d at 118. 
A more recent case further illuminates the HLRB's
 
exclusive original jurisdiction over controversies concerning
 prohibited practices. Hawaii Gov't Emps. Ass'n, Local 152 v.
 
Lingle, 124 Hawai' i 197, 239 P.3d 1 (2010) (hereinafter "
 HGEA v. 
Lingle"). There, the union filed a complaint in circuit court
 alleging that the State's unilateral imposition of furloughs
 violated the Hawai' i Constitution. Id. at 200, 239 P.3d at 4. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State maintained that the union's assertions amounted to
 
prohibited practice complaints that fell within the HLRB's
 exclusive original jurisdiction. Id. at 201, 239 P.3d at 5. The
 
supreme court agreed that because the complaints essentially
 asserted prohibited practice allegations, "original jurisdiction
 in this case properly resided with the HLRB and not the circuit
 court." Id. at 202, 239 P.3d at 6.
 
The legislature has thus delegated to the HLRB 
exclusive original jurisdiction over controversies surrounding prohibited practices. Fasi, 60 Haw. at 444-45, 591 P.2d at 118. 
This includes "those powers which are reasonably necessary" to make its jurisdiction effective. In re Hawai' i Gov't Emps. 
Ass'n, Local 152, 116 Hawai' i 73, 97, 170 P.3d 324, 348 (2007) 
(hereinafter "In re HGEA") (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). The HLRB has jurisdiction to interpret and apply HRS § 89-13(a)(1) through a declaratory ruling to determine what constitutes a prohibited practice. Fasi, 60 Haw. at 444-45, 591 
P.2d at 118; see also Lepere v. United Public Workers, Local 646, 77 Hawai' i 471, 475, 887 P.2d 1029, 1033 (1995) (affirming that 
original jurisdiction over union member's complaint against public employer resided in HLRB, not circuit court); United Public Workers, Local 646 v. Watada, No. 29410, at 4-5 (App. June 24, 2010) (holding that HLRB's original jurisdiction over prohibited practice claims is mandatory). 
Here, UPW's Amended Petition sought, at least in part,
 
a declaratory ruling that the Employers' service of the
 particular subpoenas duces tecum referenced in and attached to
 the Amended Petition interfered with, restrained, and otherwise
 violated the specified employees' rights under HRS § 89-3, and
 therefore constituted prohibited practices pursuant to HRS § 89­13(a)(1). Without question, based on such allegations, the Board
 would have had jurisdiction to take action with respect to a
 prohibited practices complaint filed in accordance with HRS
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§§ 89-14 and 377-9.6 Accordingly, as the supreme court concluded
 
in Fasi, we conclude that the HRLB had jurisdiction to declare
 
whether the factual circumstances presented to it on the UPW's
 Amended Petition would constitute a prohibited practice. As the
 supreme court observed in Fasi, any effect of such a ruling is
 necessarily limited to those particular factual circumstances,
 and the HLRB's jurisdiction to decide whether a particular action
 constitutes a prohibited practice is not affected by the fact
 that the propriety of the same underlying action might also be
 decided in an arbitration or other forum. Fasi, 60 Haw. at 445,
 
591 P.2d at 118. Given that the Circuit Court reversed Decision
 No. 470 in its entirety based on the ground that the HRLB
 exceeded its authority, it is apparent that the Circuit Court
 concluded that the HLRB had no jurisdiction over the Amended
 Petition. The Circuit Court erred in concluding that the HLRB
 was without jurisdiction over UPW's Amended Petition for a
 declaratory ruling.
 
B. Remaining Point of Error on this Appeal
 UPW also contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
determined that the HRLB exceeded its authority by applying
 Decision No. 470 beyond the factual circumstances presented in
 the Amended Petition. However, we do not reach this issue
 because, having determined erroneously that the HLRB did not have
 jurisdiction over UPW's Amended Petition, the Circuit Court did
 not address the merits of the State's other challenges to
 Decision No. 470. Upon remand, the Circuit Court shall consider
 the issues, other than the issue of the HLRB's jurisdiction to
 entertain UPW's Amended Petition, which were brought before it by
 the appeal instituted by the State. See Fasi, 60 Haw. at 445-46,
 
591 P.2d at 118. 
6/
 To be clear, recognition of the Board's jurisdiction over the
matter is not intended to as a comment on the merits of the allegations.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
VI. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's September 29,
 
2008 Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded for further
 
proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
 On the briefs:
 
Herbert R. Takahashi
 
Danny J. Vasconcellos
Rebecca L. Covert
 (Takahashi, Vasconcellos
& Covert)
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
James E. Halvorson 
Jeffrey A. KeatingDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Intervenor-AppelleeNEIL ABERCROMBIE, Governor,State of Hawai' i 
Diane A. Noda Joseph K. KamelamelaDeputies Corporation CounselCounty of Hawai' i 
for Intervenor-AppelleeCOUNTY OF HAWAI' I 
John S. Mukai
 Deputy Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
for Intervenor-Appellee
KIRK CALDWELL, Mayor,
City and County of Honolulu
 
19
 