FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
JEFFREY SCOTT MURPHY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ROBERT E. LOVIN, dba LOVIN CONSTRUCTION, Defendant-Appellee
and
 
PROSERVICE HAWAII BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION,
MIKE JUAREZ, Defendants.
 
NO. 29452
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-170K)
 
OCTOBER 28, 2011
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE, and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Jeffrey Scott Murphy (Murphy)
 
appeals from the Amended Final Judgment filed on October 21, 2008
 
in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court).1 In
 
this tort action, Plaintiff Murphy brought claims against
 Defendant Mike Juarez (Juarez) and Defendant-Appellee Robert E.
 Lovin, dba Lovin Construction (Lovin). On Plaintiff Murphy's
 claims against Juarez, judgment was entered in favor of Murphy
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and against Juarez in the total amount of $74,000. However, as 
to Plaintiff Murphy's claims against Lovin, judgment was entered against Murphy and in favor of Defendant Lovin. Pursuant to Rules 25 and 26 of the Hawai' i Arbitration Rules (HAR), the 
circuit court awarded Defendant Lovin attorneys' fees in the amount of $15,000 and costs in the amount of $4,100.75, for a total of $19,100.75, against Plaintiff Murphy. 
On appeal, Murphy challenges the circuit court's award
 
of attorneys' fees and costs to Lovin. Murphy also contends that
 the circuit court erred in giving two jury instructions at trial.
 
We conclude that in multi-party lawsuits, under HAR
 
Rules 25 and 26 governing the Court Annexed Arbitration Program
 (CAAP), a party whose appeal from an arbitration award results in
 a trial de novo can be a "prevailing party" with regard to one
 party while being a "non-prevailing party" as to another party
 for purposes of awarding attorneys' fees and costs. The circuit
 court was therefore authorized to award attorneys' fees and costs
 to Lovin and against Murphy even though Murphy was a prevailing
 party as to Juarez.
 
We also conclude that the circuit court did not err in
 
its instructions to the jury.
 
The Amended Judgment entered by the circuit court is
 
therefore affirmed.
 
I. CASE BACKGROUND
 
A. Proceedings in the Circuit Court
 
Plaintiff Murphy claims in this case that, on or about
 
August 5, 2005, while he was working for Lovin at a construction
 
site, he was assaulted and battered by Juarez without provocation
 or warning, and that Juarez was also employed by Lovin at that
 time. On October 19, 2006, Murphy filed this tort action
 
2
against, inter alia,  Juarez and Lovin, claiming that Juarez
acted wantonly or oppressively in assaulting him and that Lovin
 
2
 Another defendant, ProService Hawaii Business Development
Corporation, was dismissed by stipulation from the case.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was negligent and/or reckless in hiring, training, and
 
supervising Juarez.
 
On December 11, 2007, after publication of summons
 
against Juarez, the circuit court entered an order granting entry
 of default against Juarez.
 
The case was assigned to the CAAP and Murphy's claims
 
were submitted to arbitration. On May 7, 2008, the arbitrator
 entered an award finding "defendant is not liable" and awarding
 no damages against "defendant."
3 On May 27, 2008, Murphy filed a
 
"Notice of Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo" pursuant to HAR
 Rule 22.
 
On July 22, 2008, a jury trial commenced in the circuit
 
court on the issues of whether Lovin was negligent; if Lovin was
 negligent, the percentage of responsibility between Juarez and
 Lovin; and damages. The record reflects that both Murphy and
 Lovin submitted proposed jury instructions. Murphy contends on
 appeal that he objected to Lovin's proposed Special Jury
 Instruction No. 1 (which became Final Jury Instruction 24) and to
 Lovin's Proposed Jury Instruction No. 6.5 (which became Final
 Jury Instruction 26), but there is nothing in the record on
 appeal documenting Murphy's objections.
4
 
3 Where both Juarez and Lovin were defendants in the case, it is
unclear why the arbitration award refers only to "defendant." Nonetheless,
there is nothing in the record to suggest that Murphy or any other party
sought to have the arbitrator correct the award, see HAR Rule 20(b), and the
effect of the arbitration award was that zero damages were awarded to
plaintiff Murphy. Murphy thus appealed and a trial de novo was held with
 
regard to both defendants. As to Juarez, the jury only addressed the question
of damages, apparently because default had been entered against him.
4 In his opening brief, Murphy asserts that he objected to the
challenged jury instructions, but "due to an error in ordering the transcript,the transcript was not transcribed or prepared." Murphy's failure to providethis court with the trial transcript documenting his objections to theinstructions he now challenges on appeal is a violation of Rule 28(b)(4) ofthe Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP). HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(B) states
that when a point of error "involves a jury instruction, a quotation of theinstruction, given, refused, or modified, together with the objection urged atthe trial" should be provided by the appellant. (Emphasis added). HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) further provides that "[p]oints not presented in accordance with thissection will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option,may notice a plain error not presented." 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The jury returned a special verdict on July 31, 2008
 
finding that Lovin was not negligent. The jury also determined
 
damages, finding that Murphy had sustained $34,000 in special
 damages and $20,000 in general damages, and awarding $20,000 in
 punitive damages against Juarez.
 
On August 28, 2008, Lovin filed a motion requesting an
 
award of attorneys' fees and costs under HAR Rules 25 and 26. 
The circuit court granted Lovin's motion and issued an order on
 October 21, 2008, awarding attorneys' fees in the amount of
 $15,000 and costs in the amount of $4,100.75, for a total of
 $19,100.75 against Murphy.
 
The Amended Final Judgment was entered on October 21,
 
2008, which: awarded $74,000 in favor of Murphy and against
 Juarez; entered judgment against Murphy and in favor of Lovin;
 and awarded attorneys' fees and costs in the total amount of
 $19,100.75 for Lovin against Murphy.
B. Points on Appeal
 
Murphy raises three points of error in this appeal. 
First, Murphy contends that the circuit court erred in granting
 
Lovin's motion for attorneys' fees and costs against Murphy under
 HAR Rules 25 and 26. Murphy asserts that the circuit court did
 not have authority to assess attorneys' fees and costs against
 him under HAR Rules 25 and 26 because he improved upon the
 arbitration award by thirty percent or more vis-a-vis Juarez and
 he was therefore the "prevailing party" under the rules. Murphy
 also contends it was inequitable for the circuit court to award
 such fees and costs.
 
Second, Murphy contends that the circuit court 
committed plain error by giving Final Jury Instruction 24, regarding Murphy's claim of negligent hiring, because it was an erroneous statement of the law in Hawai' i. 
Third, and similarly, Murphy contends that the circuit
 
court committed plain error by giving Final Jury Instruction 26,
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also regarding Murphy's claim of negligent hiring, because it was 
an erroneous statement of the law in Hawai' i. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 A. Award of Fees and Costs Under HAR Rules 25 and 26
 
The circuit court's authority to award Lovin costs and 
attorneys' fees under HAR Rules 25 and 26 is a question of law 
which we review de novo. As stated by the Hawai' i Supreme Court: 
[A] determination of who is the prevailing party involves
interpretation of the HAR . . . which are rules promulgated
by the court. When interpreting rules promulgated by the
court, principles of statutory construction apply.
Interpretation of a statute is a question of law which we
review de novo. Consequently, we interpret the HAR . . . de
 
novo.
 
Molinar v. Schweizer, 95 Hawai' i 331, 334-35, 22 P.3d 978, 981-82 
(2001) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). See 
also Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai' i 494, 
510, 880 P.2d 169, 185 (1994) ("circuit court's interpretation of 
HAR 26 constituted a conclusion of law" which should be reviewed under the "right/wrong standard."); Kealoha v. County of Hawai' i, 
74 Haw. 308, 324, 844 P.2d 670, 678 (1993). 
We review the question of whether an award of costs and 
attorneys' fees under HAR Rules 25 and 26 was "inequitable" under an abuse of discretion standard. See Richardson, 76 Hawai' i at 
511, 880 P.2d at 186. An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki 
Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
B. Jury Instructions and Plain Error Review
 
In reviewing a trial court's issuance or refusal of a 
jury instruction, we review "whether, when read and considered as 
a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." Nelson v. Univ. of 
Hawai'i, 97 Hawai' i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 (2001) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted); see also Moyle v. Y & Y 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawai' i 385, 391, 191 P.3d 1062, 1068 
(2008). 
For plain error review, if it is determined that a jury
 
instruction is erroneous, the criteria for recognizing plain
 
error is summarized as follows:
 
In civil cases, the plain error rule is only invoked when
"justice so requires." We have taken three factors into
 account in deciding whether our discretionary power to
notice plain error ought to be exercised in civil cases:
(1) whether consideration of the issue not raised at trial
requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will
affect the integrity of the trial court's findings of fact;
and (3) whether the issue is of great public import.
 
Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282, 290, 884 P.2d 345, 353 (1994) 
(quoting State v. Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 56 n.2, 760 P.2d 670, 676 n.2 
(1988)).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Attorneys' Fees and Costs Under HAR Rules 25 and 26
1. Circuit court's authority to award fees and costs
 
The CAAP is a "mandatory, non-binding arbitration 
program . . . for certain civil cases in the State of Hawai' i." 
HAR Rule 1.5 As set forth in HAR Rule 2(A), "[t]he purpose of 
the Program is to provide a simplified procedure for obtaining a prompt and equitable resolution of certain civil matters[.]" 
Within twenty days after a CAAP arbitration award is
 
served, any party may file a notice of appeal and request a trial
 de novo of the action. HAR Rule 22(A). After the trial de novo,
 HAR Rule 25 defines who is the "prevailing party" and sets forth
 provisions as to payment of certain costs. HAR Rule 26, in turn,
 sets forth the requirements for when sanctions, including
 attorneys' fees, may be assessed "against the non-prevailing
 party whose appeal resulted in the trial de novo." 
5
 The matters subject to CAAP arbitration are set forth in HAR Rule 6,
and generally include "tort cases having a probable jury award value, not
reduced by the issue of liability and not in excess of One Hundred Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($150,000.00), exclusive of interest and costs[.]" Further,
"[a]ny other civil case, regardless of the monetary value or the amount in
controversy, may be submitted to the Program upon the agreement of all parties
and the approval of the Arbitration Judge."
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HAR Rule 25 provides:
 
RULE 25. THE PREVAILING PARTY IN THE TRIAL DE NOVO; COSTS
(A) The "Prevailing Party" in a trial de novo is the
party who (1) appealed and improved upon the arbitration
award by 30% or more, or (2) did not appeal and the
appealing party failed to improve upon the arbitration award
by 30% or more. For the purpose of this rule, "improve" or
"improved" means to increase the award for a plaintiff or to
decrease the award for the defendant.
 
(B) The "Prevailing Party" under these rules, as
defined above, is deemed the prevailing party under any
statute or rule of court. As such, the prevailing party is
entitled to costs of trial and all other remedies as
 provided by law, unless the Court otherwise directs.
 
HAR Rule 26 provides:
 
RULE 26. SANCTIONS FOR FAILING TO PREVAIL IN THE TRIAL DE
 NOVO
 
(A) After the verdict is received and filed, or the
court's decision rendered in a trial de novo, the trial
court may, in its discretion, impose sanctions, as set forth
below, against the non-prevailing party whose appeal
resulted in the trial de novo.
 
(B) The sanctions available to the court are as
 
follows:
 
(1) Reasonable costs and fees (other than attorneys'
fees) actually incurred by the party but not otherwise
taxable under the law, including, but not limited to, expert
witness fees, travel costs, and deposition costs;
(2) Costs of jurors;
(3) Attorneys' fees not to exceed $15,000;
(C) Sanctions imposed against a plaintiff will be
deducted from any judgment rendered at trial. If the
 plaintiff does not receive a judgment in his or her favor or
the judgment is insufficient to pay the sanctions, the
plaintiff will pay the amount of the deficiency. Sanctions
 imposed against a defendant will be added to any judgment
rendered at trial.
 
(D) In determining sanctions, if any, the Court shall
consider all the facts and circumstances of the case and the intent and purpose of the Program in the State of Hawai' i. 
HAR Rules 25 and 26 "establish the possible
 
consequences to which each party may be subject for failing to
 
prevail" following a trial de novo. Molinar, 95 Hawai' i at 338, 
22 P.3d at 985. Under HAR Rule 25, certain costs may be taxed
 against either the party who appealed from the arbitration award
 or the non-appealing party, depending on who is the "prevailing
 party" as defined in that rule. HAR Rule 25. However, under HAR
 Rule 26, sanctions such as attorneys' fees can only be imposed
 against a party whose appeal resulted in the trial de novo and
 who is the non-prevailing party. HAR Rule 26. In other words,
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"an appealing party who fails to prevail is subject to 
potentially greater 'penalties' than a non-appealing party who fails to prevail" because in addition to possibly being ordered to pay the other parties' costs pursuant to HAR Rule 25, such an appealing party may also be ordered to pay sanctions such as attorneys' fees and additional types of costs. Molinar, 95 
Hawai'i at 338-39, 22 P.3d at 985; see HAR Rules 25 and 26. 
In the arbitration in this case, Murphy was not awarded
 
damages from either Juarez or Lovin. However, following Murphy's
 appeal of the arbitration award and the subsequent trial de novo,
 the jury awarded Murphy damages in the amount of $74,000 and
 judgment was entered in this amount against Juarez. The same
 jury also determined that Lovin was not negligent, and therefore
 judgment was entered in favor of Lovin.
 
Under these circumstances, the circuit court awarded
 
attorneys' fees and costs to Lovin and against Murphy pursuant to
 HAR Rules 25 and 26. Murphy challenges the circuit court's
 authority to award fees and costs, contending that after he
 appealed from the CAAP arbitration award, he improved upon the
 arbitration award against Juarez by thirty percent or more and
 should therefore be considered the "prevailing party" for
 purposes of HAR Rules 25 and 26, even though he did not improve
 upon the arbitration award with regard to Lovin. The language of
 the rules do not expressly address this point. 
Murphy's appeal thus raises the question of whether, in
 
a multi-party lawsuit, a party who appeals from a CAAP
 arbitration award for a trial de novo can be a prevailing party
 as to one party and a non-prevailing party as to a different
 party. We answer in the affirmative.
 
The purpose and policy goals embodied in the CAAP
 
support such a conclusion. The CAAP was established in 1986
 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 601-20 (1993 Repl.),
 which states in part:
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[§601-20] Court annexed arbitration program.  (a)
There is established within the judiciary a court annexed
arbitration program which shall be a mandatory and
nonbinding arbitration program to provide for a procedure to
obtain prompt and equitable resolution of certain civil
actions in tort through arbitration. The supreme court
shall adopt rules for the implementation and administration
of the program[.]
 
HRS § 601-20(a) (emphasis added). As noted by the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court:
 
the legislature statutorily codified the CAAP as a means to
reduce the delay and costs involved in protracted litigation
by "provid[ing] for a procedure to obtain prompt and
equitable resolution of certain civil actions in tort
through arbitration." HRS § 601–20(a) (Supp. 1992);
HAR 2(A); Spec.Comm.Rep. No. S5–86, in 1986 Senate Journal
Special Session, at 29. At the same time, the supreme court
was delegated the authority to adopt rules to implement the
CAAP. HRS § 601–20(a).
 
Richardson, 76 Hawai' i at 510-11, 880 P.2d at 185-86. In 
particular, HAR Rule 26 encourages every party to undertake a
 
reasonable and frank post-arbitration evaluation of the merits of
 their respective case. See id. at 511, 514, 880 P.2d at 186,
 
189. In Richardson, the Hawai' i Supreme Court explained: 
Indisputably, baseless or frivolous appeals from an
arbitration decision subvert the purposes of the CAAP
because they prevent prompt and equitable resolutions of
actions and, as such, must be discouraged. The goals of the
CAAP would be jeopardized without a mechanism to ensure
meaningful participation in the program and to encourage
participants to seriously evaluate the merits of their case
following the arbitration before expending the additional
time and expense of a trial de novo. In other words, the
vital objectives of the CAAP cannot be met if participants
invariably treat arbitration as a routine or pro forma step
along the path to trial de novo by rejecting reasonable
arbitration decisions or reasonable post-arbitration
settlement offers, even though the decision to appeal is not
technically "frivolous."
 
Id. at 510-11, 880 P.2d at 185-86 (internal quotation marks,
 
brackets and citation omitted) (emphasis added).
 
Murphy's argument, that the circuit court lacked
 
authority to assess attorneys' fees and costs against him under
 HAR Rules 25 and 26 because he improved upon the arbitration
 award by thirty percent or more vis-a-vis Juarez, ignores the
 fact that he failed to improve upon the arbitration award by
 thirty percent as to Lovin. Following Murphy's logic, in a
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
multi-party lawsuit, a party could pursue appeals through trial
 
de novo with impunity to sanctions and costs under HAR Rules 25
 and 26 as long as this party improved on the arbitration award by
 thirty percent as to at least one other party. In this
 circumstance, an appealing party would have no incentive to
 candidly assess the merits of its case against each adverse party
 prior to seeking a trial de novo as to multiple parties. A non-
appealing party in such circumstances, such as Lovin, would have
 no mechanism under the rules to seek recovery for costs and
 attorneys' fees incurred as a result of being hauled to defend
 itself through a trial de novo. When considered in light of the
 important interests the CAAP serves to "reduce delay and costs,"
 the rationale argued by Murphy is clearly contrary to the purpose
 and intent of the CAAP. See Spec. Comm. Rep. No. S5-86, in 1986
 
Senate Journal Special Session, at 29. 
Further, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has been reluctant 
to limit the applicability of HAR Rule 26 to narrowly defined circumstances beyond the language of the rule itself. In Richardson, the Hawai' i Supreme Court declined to limit sanctions 
under HAR Rule 26 to frivolous or bad faith appeals from arbitration awards and only to offset an affirmative recovery by the sanctioned party. See 76 Hawai' i at 509-12, 880 P.2d at 184­
87. In that case, Renee Richardson and her husband, Thaddeus
 
Richardson (the Richardsons), filed suit against the owner and
 operator of the Queen Kapiolani Hotel, Sport Shinko, alleging
 negligent maintenance of the hotel premises after Mrs. Richardson
 sustained injuries while at the hotel. Id. at 497-98, 880 P.2d
 
at 172-73. The case proceeded under the CAAP, where Sport Shinko
 was found liable and the Richardsons were awarded a total of
 $60,441.80 in damages. Id. at 498, 880 P.2d at 173. Pursuant to
 
HAR Rule 22, the Richardsons appealed the award for a trial de
 novo. Id. Prior to trial, the Richardsons did not accept Sport
 
Shinko's offer to settle for $70,000 as to Mrs. Richardson and
 $5,000 as to Mr. Richardson. Id. A jury trial commenced and the
 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
jury found that Sport Shinko was not negligent. Id. at 499, 880
 
P.2d at 174. Following entry of judgment in its favor, Sport
 
Shinko brought a motion for sanctions pursuant to HAR Rule 26. 
Id. The circuit court granted the motion in the amount of
 
$5,234.41. Id. 
On appeal, the Richardsons argued, inter alia, that the
 
circuit court erred in awarding sanctions to Sport Shinko. Id.
 
at 497, 880 P.2d at 172. The Richardsons argued for a narrow
 construction of HAR Rule 26, asserting that sanctions under that
 rule may be imposed on a non-prevailing party only when the
 appeal of the arbitration award was frivolous or in bad faith. 
Id. The Richardsons also argued that the rule did not allow
 
sanctions to be paid by a party out of pocket, but rather only to
 offset an affirmative recovery by a plaintiff being sanctioned. 
Id.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court disagreed. Id. at 509-12, 
880 P.2d at 184-87. The court pointed out that the Richardsons’ interpretation of HAR Rule 26 was not supported by the language of the rule and was inconsistent with the CAAP's overall purpose. Id. at 510-11, 880 P.2d at 185-86. Although the court acknowledged that a purpose of the rule is to discourage baseless appeals, the court held that "based on the plain language and purpose of HAR [Rule] 26, limiting the application of the rule to frivolous or baseless appeals from the arbitration award would be unduly restrictive." Id. at 510, 880 P.2d at 185 (emphasis 
added). Further, the court pointed out that "the only explicit limit on the circuit court's discretion to impose HAR [Rule] 26 sanctions is that the party who has appealed the arbitration award must have failed to 'improve' upon the award by [the percentage required by the rule]."
6 Id. The court declined to 
6
 For the time period relevant in Richardson, HAR Rule 25 required an
 
improvement of fifteen percent or more from the arbitration award to be a
"prevailing party." Since then, HAR Rule 25 was amended and now requires an
improvement of thirty percent or more on an arbitration award for a party to
be considered the "prevailing party." See HAR Rule 25.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adopt the Richardsons' narrow interpretation of HAR Rule 26 and
 
held that "HAR 26 sanctions may be imposed to penalize a non-
prevailing party whose decision to appeal the arbitration award
 and pursue a trial de novo was unreasonable under the
 circumstances of the particular case, albeit grounded to some
 degree in law or fact." Id. at 511, 880 P.2d at 186. By
 
refusing to limit the availability of sanctions only to cases
 involving frivolous appeals or to cases in which a plaintiff has
 an affirmative recovery, the court preserved the discretion of
 trial courts to order sanctions and effectuated the policy
 underlying these rules to "reduce the delay and costs involved in
 protracted litigation." Id. at 510, 880 P.2d at 185. 
In other circumstances addressing awards of attorneys'
 
fees and costs, this court has acknowledged that in multiple
 party cases, "a party may be a loser as to one party and a winner
 as to another." Rosa v. Johnston, 3 Haw. App. 420, 431, 651 P.2d
 
1228, 1236 (App. 1982); see also Cuerva & Assocs. v. Wong, 1 Haw.
 App. 194, 616 P.2d 1017 (1980).
 
In Rosa, Hiram and Myrna L. Rosa (the Rosas) brought
 
suit against CWJ Corporation (CWJ) and CWJ's president, Charles
 W. Johnston (Johnston), alleging inter alia breach of contract and unfair and deceptive trade practices. 3 Haw. App. at 421, 651 P.2d at 1231. The circuit court dismissed the complaint as to Johnston, but denied Johnston's request for attorneys' fees and costs. Id. Johnston appealed and argued that the circuit 
court erred in denying his motion for attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14 (1985 Repl.) and costs under Rule 54 of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) and HRS § 607-9 (1976 Repl.). Id. Johnston argued that he was entitled to attorneys' fees and 
costs because he prevailed over the Rosas. Id. at 430, 651 P.2d 
at 1236. The Rosas countered that they were not the "losing parties" because they prevailed over CWJ. Id. at 431, 651 P.2d 
at 1236. This court reversed the circuit court's order denying Johnston's request for attorneys' fees and costs. Id. at 431, 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
651 P.2d at 1237. In reaching this decision, the court
 
recognized that HRS § 607-14 did not preclude the Rosas from
 being the prevailing parties with regard to CWJ and also the
 losers as to Johnston for purposes of taxation of attorneys'
 fees, and that Johnston was entitled to seek costs under HRCP
 Rule 54 and HRS § 607-9 "as a prevailing party vis-a-vis [the]
 Rosas." Id. at 431, 651 P.2d at 1236-37.
 
Application of the principles articulated in Rosa to 
HAR Rules 25 and 26 is consistent with the policy underlying the CAAP. Therefore, we hold that in multi-party lawsuits, under HAR Rules 25 and 26, a party whose appeal results in a trial de novo can be a "prevailing party" with regard to one party and can also be a "non-prevailing party" with regard to another party for purposes of awarding attorneys' fees and costs. To hold otherwise would fail to effectuate the policy aims of the CAAP to "reduce the delay and costs involved in protracted litigation" and a key purpose of HAR Rule 26 to encourage litigants to candidly assess the merits of their case against all parties in the suit prior to appealing for a trial de novo. Richardson, 76 
Hawai'i at 510-11, 880 P.2d at 185-86; Spec. Comm. Rep. No. S5­
86, in 1986 Senate Journal Special Session, at 29. 
Here, Murphy is the prevailing party as to Juarez, but
 
he is the non-prevailing party as to Lovin. The circuit court
 was therefore authorized to award attorneys' fees and costs
 against Murphy and to Lovin pursuant to HAR Rules 25 and 26.
2.	 
The circuit court's award of fees and costs was
 
not inequitable 
Murphy contends that it was inequitable for the circuit 
court to award fees and costs to Lovin because the allowance of costs was not mandatory and the equities did not favor making such an award. 
We review this issue under an abuse of discretion 
standard. Richardson, 76 Hawai' i at 511, 880 P.2d at 186. An 
abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
 
litigant." Amfac, Inc., 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d at 26. 
Under HAR Rule 25, the circuit court is not mandated to
 
order payment of costs, but instead has discretion. The
 commentary to the rule states, in relevant part:
 
The July 1, 1999 amendment makes clear that the
allowance of costs to the prevailing party is not mandatory.
The amendment is intended to vest the trial court with
 discretion in awarding taxable costs to avoid inequitable
results. In weighing the equities, the trial court may
consider factors such as the nature of the case, the conduct
of the parties throughout the litigation, including
arbitration proceedings, the amount and timing of settlement
offers made by the parties, the amount of the judgment, and
other relevant factors.
 
HAR Rule 25 Commentary.7
 
Under HAR Rule 26, a circuit court's decision to award
 
attorneys' fees or other sanctions is also discretionary. The
 
rule states, in relevant part, "[a]fter the verdict is received
 and filed, or the court's decision rendered in a trial de novo,
 the trial court may, in its discretion, impose sanctions, as set
 forth below, against the non-prevailing party whose appeal
 resulted in the trial de novo." HAR Rule 26(A) (emphasis added). 
Murphy emphasizes the merits of his claims against 
Lovin and argues that his appeal of the arbitration award was not frivolous. However, in Richardson, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
rejected this argument as "unduly restrictive." See 76 Haw. at 
510, 880 P.2d at 185. Murphy also urges this court to reconsider the award of attorneys' fees and costs based on the nature of the case, the conduct of the parties during the litigation, the 
7 The 1999 amendment to HAR Rule 25 made the following changes to
section B of the rule (deleted material is bracketed and new material is
underlined):
 
(B) The "Prevailing Party" under these rules, as defined above, is
deemed the prevailing party under any statute or rule of court[,]. 
[and as] As such
, the prevailing party
 is entitled to costs of
trial and all other remedies as provided by law[.] , unless the
Court otherwise directs.
 
Amended Order Amending Rule 25(B) of the Hawai
'i Arbitration Rules, entered
April 20, 1999. 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
amount and timing of any settlement offers, the amount of the
 
judgment, and other relevant factors.8 In the circuit court,
 
"the losing party . . . bears the burden of showing an award of
 costs would be 'inequitable under the circumstances.'" Kikuchi
 
v. Brown, 110 Hawai' i 204, 211, 130 P.3d 1069, 1076 (App. 2006) 
(citation omitted). Murphy's arguments were carefully considered and weighed by the circuit court in deciding the motion.
9 
Murphy fails to point out specifically how the circuit
 
court "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules
 or principles of law or practice" to his substantial detriment. 
Murphy simply reiterates on appeal the arguments previously
 considered and duly rejected by the circuit court. We conclude
 that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in its award
 of attorneys' fees and costs to Lovin.
B. Jury Instructions
 
Murphy argues that the circuit court erred when it gave
 
Final Jury Instructions 24 and 26 over Murphy's objection because
 the instructions were prejudicially insufficient and erroneous. 
As admitted by Murphy, the record on appeal does not contain his
 objections to these jury instructions. He therefore cannot
 demonstrate compliance with HRCP Rule 51(f), and his opening
 brief fails to comport with the requirements of HRAP Rule 28(b).
 
8 Murphy essentially reiterates verbatim the arguments he raised in the
circuit court in his memorandum in opposition to Lovin's motion for attorneys'
fees and costs.
9 The circuit court's order read, in pertinent part: 
The Court, having considered the motion, the supporting
memorandum, declaration and exhibits, the opposition to the
motion, and the representations of counsel at the hearing, and
considering the equities in this matter, being fully advised in
the premises and finding good cause therefor,
HEREBY ORDERS, ADJUDGES AND DECREES that Defendant Robert E.
Lovin, dba Lovin Construction's Motion for an Award of Attorneys'
Fees and Costs filed on August 28, 2008 is GRANTED and Defendant
Robert E. Lovin, dba Lovin Construction is awarded attorneys' fees
in the amount of $15,000.00 and costs in the amount of $4,100.75,
for a total of $19,100.75 against Plaintiff Jeffrey Scott Murphy
based upon Rules 25 and 26 of the Hawaii Arbitration Rules.
 
15
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRCP Rule 51(f) states: 
No party may assign as error the giving or the refusal to
give, or the modification of, an instruction, whether
settled pursuant to subdivision (c) or subdivision (d), of
this rule, unless the party objects thereto before the jury
retires to consider its verdict, stating distinctly the
matter to which the party objects and the grounds of the
objection. Opportunity shall be given to make the objection
out of the hearing of the jury.
10
 
Further, HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(B) states that when a point of error
 
involves a jury instruction, an appellant must provide "a
 quotation of the instruction, given, refused, or modified,
 together with the objection urged at the trial." (Emphasis
 added). In turn, HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) states that "[p]oints not
 presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded,
 except that the appellate court, at its option, may notice a
 plain error not presented." Recognizing the problem raised by
 his failure to provide the transcripts, Murphy urges that we
 review Final Jury Instructions 24 and 26 for plain error.
 
For plain error review, we first consider whether the 
jury instructions were erroneous. In this regard, we consider if, "when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." Nelson, 97 Hawai' i at 386, 38 P.3d at 105 (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted); see also Moyle, 118 Hawai'i at 391, 191 P.3d at 1068. 
The circuit court's instructions to the jury, in
 
pertinent part, stated: 
[Final Jury Instruction 24:] To prove negligent hiring,
Plaintiff must prove that at the time of hiring the
circumstances gave the employer reason to believe that the
person, by reason of some attribute of character or prior
conduct, would create an undue risk of harm to others in
carrying out his employment responsibilities and that the
employer acted unreasonably in hiring the person.
 
10 Previously, similar language was contained in HRCP Rule 51(e).
Notwithstanding the requirements under the rule, it has been recognized that"even the complete failure to object to a jury instruction does not prevent anappellate court from taking cognizance of the trial court's error if the erroris plain and may result in a miscarriage of justice." Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 
288, 884 P.2d at 351 (citation omitted). 
16
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In determining whether an employer acted unreasonably in
hiring the person it must be established that the employee
was in fact unfit, taking into consideration the nature of
the employment and the risk posed by the employee to those
who foreseeably would come into association with him in
carrying out his duties on the job.
11
 
[Final Jury Instruction 25:] In order to prevail on a claim
for negligent hiring, Plaintiff must show: (1) Defendant
owed a duty of care to the Plaintiff; (2) Defendant breached
that duty by hiring or retaining an employee even though
Defendant knew, or should have known, of the employee's
dangerous propensities; (3) the Plaintiff suffered
monetarily compensable physical or emotional injuries; and,
(4) the breach of the duty was the proximate cause of
Plaintiff's physical or emotional injuries. 
[Final Jury Instruction 26:] The existence of a duty
depends upon foreseeability, that is, whether the risk of
harm from the employee to a person such as the plaintiff was
reasonably foreseeable as a result of the employment.
Liability under a negligent hiring theory may be found only
where an employer knew or had reason to know of the
particular unfitness, incompetence or dangerous attributes
of the employee and could reasonably have foreseen that such
qualities created a risk of harm to other persons.
12
 
[Final Jury Instruction 27:] Unless the employee's job
duties include frequent contact with the public or the
employer has a special relationship with the injured party,
such as exists where the employee is required to enter the
injured party's residence as part of his job duties, there
is no duty on the part of the employer to make an
independent investigation of the employee's background. 
First, Murphy asserts that Final Jury Instruction 24
 
"was cobbled together by copying segments from three cases, only
 
one of which is a Hawaii case."13 Second, Murphy argues that
 
Final Jury Instruction 26 "does not follow Hawaii law and adds
 more hurdles for the jury to jump over" in order to find Lovin
 liable. Because jury instructions are considered collectively
 
when reviewed for error and both instructions at issue concern
 
foreseeability in the context of a negligent hiring claim, they
 will be considered together.
 
11 This instruction is the subject of Murphy's second point on appeal.
 
12 This instruction is the subject of Murphy's third point on appeal. 
13 The three cases relied upon by Lovin to craft the jury instructions
adopted by the circuit court and that are at issue on appeal are Janssen v.
Am. Haw. Cruises, Inc., 69 Haw. 31, 731 P.2d 163 (1987), Connes v. Molalla
Transp. Sys., Inc., 831 P.2d 1316 (Colo. 1992), and Ponticas v. K.M.S. Invs.,
331 N.W.2d 907 (Minn. 1983).
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Murphy takes issue with Lovin's reliance on two cases 
from outside jurisdictions to craft the jury instructions adopted 
by the circuit court, claiming these cases are inconsistent with Hawai'i law under Janssen v. Am. Haw. Cruises, Inc., 69 Haw. 31, 
731 P.2d 163 (1987). We do not agree. 
In Janssen, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that the 
Seafarers International Union of North America (Seafarers) owed no duty of care to an employee on a cruise ship (Janssen) who was sexually attacked by another ship employee (Burkhart) after the two agreed to share a hotel room following their discharge from employment.
14 Id. The court determined that, even if it assumed 
that Seafarers participated in the hiring of Burkhart, the "sexual attack was not a reasonably foreseeable consequence of Seafarers' recommending Burkhart for employment as a chef." Id. 
at 35, 731 P.2d at 166. 
In reaching this conclusion, the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
relied on the Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213(b) and acknowledged that "[m]ost jurisdictions recognize a duty on the part of the employer to exercise reasonable care in hiring individuals who, because of the nature of their employment, may pose a threat of injury to members of the public." Id. at 34, 
731 P.2d at 166. This Restatement section recognizes the tort of negligent hiring and states, in relevant part, that "[a] person conducting an activity through servants or other agents is subject to liability for harm resulting from his conduct if he is 
14 In Janssen, plaintiff James Janssen sued his former union,
 
Seafarers, and his former employer, American Hawaii Cruises (AHC), which
operated the ship. Neither Seafarers nor AHC investigated Steven Burkhart's
criminal record prior to Burkhart's hiring by AHC. Janssen, 69 Haw. at 33,
 
731 P.2d at 165. Although one official at Seafarers was told that Burkhart
had been recently paroled from San Quentin prison, Seafarers did not inform
AHC of Burkhart's recent incarceration. Id. Janssen, the victim of the
attack, filed suit against AHC and Seafarers, alleging that both entities were
"negligent in screening Burkhart prior to his employment, and in hiring,
supervising[,] and retaining him as an employee." Id. at 31, 731 P.2d at 163.
Janssen further claimed that both entities caused the assault by hiring
Burkhart and placing him aboard the ship, where the two became acquainted.
Id. The trial court granted Seafarers's motion for summary judgment, which
Janssen challenged on appeal. Id. at 34, 731 P.2d at 165.
 
18
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
negligent or reckless . . . (b) in the employment of improper
 
persons or instrumentalities in work involving risk of harm to
 others." Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213 (1958).
15
 
The court in Janssen ruled that "[t]he existence of a
 
duty under a negligent hiring theory depends upon foreseeability,
 that is, 'whether the risk of harm from the dangerous employee to
 a person such as the plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable as a
 result of the employment.'" 69 Haw. at 34, 731 P.2d at 166
 (citing Di Cosala v. Kay, 91 N.J. 159, 174, 450 A.2d 508, 516
 (1982)). The court acknowledged that "[w]ithout a reasonable and
 proper limitation of the scope of duty of care, Seafarers would
 be confronted with an unmanageable, unbearable and totally
 unpredictable liability." Id. at 35, 731 P.2d at 166 (citation
 
omitted).
 
15 A more recent counterpart to Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213 is
set forth in Restatement (Third) of Agency § 7.05 (2006), which provides, in
relevant part:
 
(1) A principal who conducts an activity through an agent is
subject to liability for harm to a third party caused by the
agent's conduct if the harm was caused by the principal's
negligence in selecting, training, retaining, supervising, or
otherwise controlling the agent.
 
Similar to Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213, a fundamental basis for
liability under Restatement (Third) of Agency § 7.05 is a foreseeable risk of
harm.
 
d. Foreseeable risk and reasonable precaution.  Conduct
 
that results in harm to a third person is not negligent or
reckless unless there is a foreseeable likelihood that harm will
 result from the conduct. A determination that a person acted
negligently also requires consideration of the foreseeable
severity of harm to a third person. . . When a principal conducts
an activity through another person, the nature of the task to be
performed and the conduct required for performance are relevant to
whether the principal acted negligently, either in selecting the
actor or in instructing, supervising, or otherwise controlling the
actor.
 
Restatement (Third) of Agency § 7.05 cmt. d.
 
19
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In proposing Final Jury Instruction 24, Lovin cited 
Ponticas v. K.M.S. Investments, 331 N.W.2d 907 (Minn. 1983)16 and
 
Connes v. Molalla Transport System, Inc., 831 P.2d 1316 (Colo.
 
1992).17 In offering Final Jury Instruction 26, Lovin cited
 
Janssen. Importantly, all of these cases have a common thread,
 which is that they rely on Restatement (Second) of Agency
 § 213(b) in articulating an employer's duty under the negligent
 hiring theory.
 
The Ponticas court adopted and discussed this
 
Restatement section, stating that:
 
[l]iability is predicated on the negligence of an employer
in placing a person with known propensities, or propensities
which should have been discovered by reasonable
investigation, in an employment position in which, because
of the circumstances of the employment, it should have been
foreseeable that the hired individual posed a threat of
injury to others.
 
331 N.W.2d at 911.
 
Likewise, the court in Connes relied on the Restatement
 
(Second) of Agency § 213(b) and adopted the view discussed in
 
comment d of that Restatement section. The court stated:
 
liability is predicated on the employer's hiring of a person
under circumstances antecedently giving the employer reason
to believe that the person, by reason of some attribute of
character or prior conduct, would create an undue risk of
harm to others in carrying out his or her employment
responsibilities. 
831 P.2d at 1321.
 
16 In Ponticas, the Supreme Court of Minnesota recognized the claim of
 
negligent hiring and considered whether there was sufficient evidence to
support a jury verdict that an apartment complex owner and operator breached
their duties in hiring an apartment manager, who would have contact with
tenants and access to their apartments, without adequate investigation into
the manager's background. 331 N.W.2d 907, 913.
17 In Connes, the Supreme Court of Colorado recognized the tort of
 
negligent hiring and held that a trucking company, in hiring an employee as a
long-haul truck driver, had no legal duty to conduct an independent
investigation into the employee's non-vehicular criminal background in order
to protect a member of the public, such as a motel night clerk, from a sexual
assault committed by the employee in the course of making a long-haul trip
over the interstate highway system. 831 P.2d 1316. 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Importantly, comment d to the Restatement (Second) of
 
Agency § 213(b) provides in full:
 
d. Agent dangerous. The principal may be negligent
because he has reason to know that the servant or other
 
agent, because of his qualities, is likely to harm others in
view of the work or instrumentalities entrusted to him. If
 the dangerous quality of the agent causes harm, the
principal may be liable under the rule that one initiating
conduct having an undue tendency to cause harm is liable
therefor. See the Restatement of Torts, § 308.
 
The dangerous quality in the agent may consist of his
incompetence or unskillfulness due to his youth or his lack
of experience considered with reference to the act to be
performed. An agent, although otherwise competent, may be
incompetent because of his reckless or vicious disposition,
and if a principal, without exercising due care in
selection, employs a vicious person to do an act which
necessarily brings him in contact with others while in the
performance of a duty, he is subject to liability for harm
caused by the vicious propensity. The negligence may be in
entrusting an agent with instrumentalities which, in
connection with his known propensities and the qualities of
the instrumentalities, constitute an undue risk to third
 persons. These propensities may be either viciousness,
thoughtlessness, or playfulness.
 
One who employs another to act for him is not liable
under the rule stated in this Section merely because the one
employed is incompetent, vicious, or careless. If liability
results it is because, under the circumstances, the employer
has not taken the care which a prudent man would take in
selecting the person for the business in hand. What
 precautions must be taken depend upon the situation. One
 can normally assume that another who offers to perform
simple work is competent. If, however, the work is likely
to subject third persons to serious risk of great harm,
there is a special duty of investigation.
 
Liability results under the rule stated in this
Section, not because of the relation of the parties, but
because the employer antecedently had reason to believe that
an undue risk of harm would exist because of the employment.
The employer is subject to liability only for such harm as
is within the risk. If, therefore, the risk exists because
of the quality of the employee, there is liability only to
the extent that the harm is caused by the quality of the
employee which the employer had reason to suppose would be
likely to cause harm.
 
Final Jury Instructions 24 and 26 defined
 
foreseeability in the context of a negligent hiring claim in a
 
way that is consistent with Hawai' i law under Janssen, as well as 
the parameters of liability established under comment d of the
 Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213(b). These instructions
 comport with the principle articulated in Janssen that a
 
21
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defendant owes a duty of care "only to those 'who are foreseeably
 
endangered by the conduct and only with respect to those risks or
 hazards whose likelihood made the conduct unreasonably
 dangerous.'" See 69 Haw. at 34, 731 P.2d at 165-66 (quoting
 
Hulsman v. Hemmeter Dev. Corp., 65 Haw. 58, 68, 647 P.2d 713, 720
 (1982) (internal quotations omitted)). 
Final Jury Instruction 24 required circumstances
 
antecedently giving the employer reason to believe that the
 employee would "create an undue risk of harm to others in
 carrying out his or her employment responsibilities."
18 In
 
addition, the instruction required the jury to "tak[e] into
 consideration the nature of the employment and the risk posed by
 the employee to those who foreseeably would come into association
 with him in carrying out his duties on the job." This
 instruction appropriately limited the employer's duty of care to
 those who are foreseeably endangered by the conduct and only in
 regard to the risks or hazards whose likelihood made the conduct
 unreasonably dangerous. See id. at 34, 731 P.2d at 165.
 
Final Jury Instruction 24 is based in part on cases 
outside this jurisdiction and Final Jury Instruction 26 includes language beyond verbatim quotes from Janssen. However, reading the instructions as a whole, considering the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court's past reliance on Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213(b), 
18 Without much discussion, Murphy raises a concern about the phrase
"by reason of some attribute of character or prior conduct" in Final Jury
Instruction 24. This language was utilized in Connes. 831 P.2d at 1321. It
 is also similar to the language in comment d to the Restatement (Second) of
Agency § 213(b) that an employer may be negligent if he has reason to know
that a servant or agent, "because of his qualities," is likely to harm others.
Comment d goes on to discuss some types of potential dangerous "qualities,"
such as "incompetence or unskillfulness due to . . . youth," "lack of
experience considered with reference to the act to be performed," "reckless or
vicious disposition," and "known propensities" such as "viciousness,
thoughtlessness, or playfulness." Murphy does not point to any aspect of his
claims against Lovin or any evidence in the case that would indicate possible
prejudice to him because of the challenged phrase. Considering the
instructions as a whole and comment d, the phrase challenged by Murphy does
not render the jury instructions prejudicially insufficient, erroneous,
inconsistent, or misleading.
 
22
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and given the parameters of liability expressed in comment d to
 
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 213(b), we hold these
 instructions were not erroneous. That is, the instructions given
 were not prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
 misleading.
 
Because we conclude that the instructions were not
 
erroneous, we do not reach the question of whether to invoke the
 plain error rule.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Amended Final
 
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on
 October 21, 2008.
 
On the opening brief:
 
Lawrence W. Cohn
 
Robert D. S. Kim
 for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
23
 