NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29177
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS NO. 03-1-0401
 
In the Matter of the Arbitration Between,
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, LOCAL 646, AFL-CIO,
Union-Appellant,
and
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICES, COLLECTIONS SYSTEM,
Employer-Appellee.
 
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS NO. 03-1-0400
 

 In 
the Matter of the Arbitration Betw
een
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO,
Union-Appellant,
and
 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICES, COLLECTIONS SYSTEM (Griev. Of A__ P__
re: submittal to alcohol breathalyzer test; Sections 11
and 63; CA-02-25; 2002-0421),
Employer-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley, and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Union-Appellant United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local
 
646, AFL-CIO (UPW) appeals from the following judgment and orders
 
that were entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1
(circuit court)  on remand from a previous decision of this
court: 1) the April 28, 2008, "Judgment on Remand"; 2) the April

 
28, 2008, "Order Denying UPW's Motion to Enforce Judgment on Back
 
Pay Award, to Assess Interest, Costs, Attorney’s Fees & for Other
 Appropriate Relief" (Order Denying Enforcement); and 3) the May
 30, 2008, "Order Denying UPW's Motion to Remand to Arbitrator
 Paul S. Aoki for Rehearing on Remedy" (Order Denying Remand).
 For the reasons set forth below, we conclude that the case must 
be sent back to the arbitrator for the arbitrator's
 reconsideration of the back pay portion of the arbitrator's
 decision. Accordingly, we vacate the circuit court's Judgment on
 Remand, Order Denying Enforcement, and Order Denying Remand, and
 we remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Summary Disposition Order. 
I.

 
A.
 
The background facts are set forth in detail in our 
prior decision, a memorandum opinion we issued in United Public Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. City and County of Honolulu, No. 26347, 2007 WL 1174175 (Hawai
'i App. 2007) 
(hereinafter, "Memorandum Opinion"). The facts pertinent to this appeal are summarized as follows. 
Grievant Aleigh Pearson (Pearson or Grievant) was
 
employed in the position of Wastewater Collection System Helper
 (helper) in the Collection System Maintenance Division of the
 Department of Environmental Services for the City and County of
 Honolulu. To work in the helper position, Pearson was not
 required to have a commercial driver's license (CDL). Pearson
 applied for a promotion to a vacant position of Wastewater
 Collection System Repairer (repairer) which did require that the
 employee have a CDL. Pearson did not have a valid CDL license. 
In anticipation of his enrollment for CDL training, Pearson was
 sent by his employer, the City and County of Honolulu (City or 
1 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Employer) for preemployment drug and alcohol tests. Pearson's
 
test results for alcohol exceeded the acceptable limit. 
After receiving the results, the City realized that
 
subjecting Pearson to a preemployment alcohol test violated the
 terms of the applicable collective bargaining agreement (CBA).
 Therefore, the City did not implement standard disciplinary
 procedures for an alcohol testing violation. However, the City
 decided to retain the records for Pearson's test results and
 require him to undergo a substance abuse evaluation and, if
 necessary, a treatment program before permitting him to train for
 a CDL.
 
In response, UPW filed a grievance with the City on
 
behalf of Pearson, and the grievance was eventually submitted to
 arbitration, in accordance with the CBA, before Paul S. Aoki,
 Esq. (Arbitrator). Because the City conceded that it violated
 the CBA by testing Pearson for alcohol, the parties agreed that
 the sole issue for the Arbitrator's determination was what the
 appropriate remedy should be for the City's admitted violation. 
The Arbitrator issued a decision (Arbitrator's
 
Decision), in which he ordered the following remedy:
 
1. The Employer shall remove all records pertaining
to the alcohol test from Grievant's records and they shall
not be used against him in any way.
 
2. The Employer shall allow Grievant to participate
in CDL training.
 
3. The Employer shall promote Grievant to the
position of Wastewater Collection System Repairer.
 
4. Employer shall pay Grievant the difference
between the Wastewater Collection System Repairer's rate of
pay and the pay that he actually received from the date that
the four Wastewater Collection System Repairer positions
were filled in June 2003 until the date of Grievant's
 promotion to Wastewater Collection System Repairer.
 
UPW filed a motion in the circuit court to correct a
 
typographical error and to confirm the Arbitrator's Decision, and
 
the City filed a motion to vacate the Arbitrator's Decision. The
 circuit court issued an order which granted UPW's motion and
 denied the City's motion. (Order Granting UPW's Motion to
 Confirm). The City appealed. 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This court issued its Memorandum Opinion which held
 
that: 1) the Arbitrator exceeded his authority and violated
 
public policy by ordering the City to promote Pearson, who did
 not have a valid CDL, to the position of repairer; and 2) the
 Arbitrator did not exceed his authority or violate public policy
 by ordering the City a) to remove all records pertaining to
 Pearson's alcohol test from his records; and b) to allow Pearson
 to participate in CDL training. We vacated the circuit court's
 Order Granting UPW's Motion to Confirm and remanded the case for
 further proceedings consistent with the Memorandum Opinion. 
B.
 
While the case was on appeal, Pearson was terminated by
 
the City for reasons unrelated to his alcohol-testing grievance.
 UPW grieved Pearson's dismissal and eventually entered into a
 settlement with the City which provided for Pearson's
 resignation. The UPW sought back pay from the City, up to the
 date of Pearson's resignation, based on the Arbitrator's Decision
 in the alcohol-testing grievance. The amount of back pay
 requested was $19,492. The City refused to pay the requested
 back pay. 
On remand from this court's Memorandum Opinion, UPW
 
filed in the circuit court a "Motion to Enforce Judgment on Back
 Pay Award, to Assess Interest, Costs, Attorney's Fees & for Other
 Appropriate Relief" (Motion for Enforcement). In the Motion for
 
Enforcement, UPW sought to enforce the Arbitrator's back pay
 
award -- the difference between the repairer's rate of pay and
 the rate he received as helper -- computed up to the date of
 Pearson's resignation as well as interest on the back pay, costs,
 and attorney's fees. The circuit court denied UPW's Motion for
 Enforcement "without prejudice" on the issue of whether the
 matter should be remanded back to the Arbitrator for rehearing on
 the issue of back pay. The circuit court's decision was set
 forth in its Order Denying Enforcement.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UPW filed a "Motion to Remand to Arbitrator Paul S.
 
Aoki for Rehearing on Remedy" (Motion for Remand). UPW argued
 
that the case should be remanded to the Arbitrator to permit the
 Arbitrator to clarify or determine what remedy he would have
 imposed if he knew that he was precluded from ordering the City
 to promote Pearson to the repairer position. The circuit court
 denied UPW's Motion for Remand as set forth in the circuit
 court's Order Denying Remand. The circuit court entered a
 Judgment on Remand in favor of the City.
 
II.
 
On appeal, UPW argues that the circuit court erred by:
 
1) failing to grant the relief requested in UPW's Motion for
 Enforcement, namely, enforcement of the back pay component of the
 Arbitration Decision as well as interest on the back pay,
 attorney's fees, and costs; 2) denying UPW's alternative request
 that the case be remanded to the Arbitrator to determine the
 appropriate remedy in light of this court's Memorandum Opinion
 which held that the Arbitrator had exceeded his authority in
 ordering Pearson's promotion to the repairer position; and 3)
 entering Judgment on Remand in favor of the City. 
III.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court "has confined judicial review 
of arbitration awards to the strictest possible limits. This is because of the legislative policy encouraging arbitration and thereby discouraging litigation." Gepaya v. State Farm Mut. 
Auto. Ins. Co., 94 Hawai
'i 362, 365, 14 P.3d 1043, 1046 (2000) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, ellipsis points, and citations omitted). 
"[A]rbitrators . . . normally have broad discretion to 
fashion appropriate remedies." Hokama v. University of Hawai
'i, 
92 Hawai 'i 268, 273, 990 P.2d 1150, 1155 (1999). In submitting a 
dispute to arbitration, it is the judgment of the arbitrator that the parties bargained for, and not the judgment of the court. Morrison-Knudsen Co. v. Makahuena Corp., 66 Haw. 663, 670, 675 P.2d 760, 766 (1983). Accordingly, "[a] court may not substitute 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its judgment for that of the arbitrator . . . ." Kern v.
 
Krackow, 765 N.Y.S.2d 790, 791 (N.Y. App. Div. 2003); Kennecott
 
Utah Copper Corp. v. Becker, 195 F.3d 1201, 1207 (10th Cir.
 1999). 
IV.
 
In this case, the Arbitrator ordered the City to
 
promote Pearson "to the position of Wastewater Collection System
 Repairer." The Arbitrator further ordered the City to "pay
 Grievant the difference between the Wastewater Collection System
 Repairer's rate of pay and the pay that he actually received from
 the date that the four Wastewater Collection System Repairer
 positions were filled in June 2003 until the date of Grievant's
 promotion to Wastewater Collection System Repairer."
 
In our Memorandum Opinion, we held that the Arbitrator
 
exceeded his authority and violated public policy by ordering the
 City to promote Pearson to the repairer position, a position that
 required a CDL license, when Pearson did not have a CDL license. 
We did not address the effect that our ruling on the Arbitrator's
 promotion order would have on the Arbitrator's back pay award. 
In the wake of our Memorandum Opinion, the parties
 
dispute whether the Arbitrator's back pay award was directly tied
 to his decision to order the City to promote Pearson to the
 repairer position. The City argues that the back pay award "is
 premised on the promotion[.]" UPW, on the other hand, argues
 that the Arbitrator's back pay award was "separate and
 distinguished from the promotion." The short answer is that we
 cannot tell, based on the existing record, whether the
 Arbitrator's award of back pay was tied to or independent of his
 order to promote Pearson to the repairer position. In other
 words, our Memorandum Opinion has made the Arbitrator's Decision
 on back pay ambiguous. 
Since it is the judgment of the Arbitrator, and not
 
that of the court, that the parties have bargained for, we 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conclude that the case must be remanded to the Arbitrator for
 
reconsideration of the back pay portion of the Arbitrator's
 Decision in light of this court's Memorandum Opinion. If the
 Arbitrator's back pay award was tied to his promotion order, the
 Arbitrator may choose to refashion a different remedy. 
Our decision to remand the case back to the Arbitrator
 
means that UPW's Motion for Enforcement and the circuit court's
 Order Denying Enforcement were premature. We therefore vacate
 the Order Denying Enforcement. We agree with UPW that the
 circuit court erred in entering a Judgment on Remand in favor of
 the City. In our Memorandum Opinion, we upheld the portions of
 the Arbitrator's Decision that ordered the City to remove all
 records pertaining to Pearson's alcohol test from his records and
 to allow Pearson to participate in CDL training. Thus, the
 circuit court should have entered a judgment in favor of UPW
 confirming these portions of the Arbitrator's Decision.
 
V.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the circuit
 
court's Judgment on Remand, Order Denying Enforcement, and Order
 Denying Remand, and we remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. On remand, we
 direct the circuit court to enter a judgment that 1) confirms the
 portions of Arbitrator's Decision that ordered the City to remove
 all records pertaining to Pearson's alcohol test from his records
 
2
and to allow Pearson to participate in CDL training;  2) vacates
the portions of the Arbitrator's Decision that ordered Person's
 promotion to the repairer position and awarded back pay; and 3)
 remands the case to the Arbitrator for reconsideration of the 
2 Because Pearson has resigned from his employment with the
City, it appears that the City's obligation under the
Arbitrator's Decision to allow Pearson to participate in CDL
training has ended. 
7
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
back pay portion of the Arbitrator's Decision in light of our
 
Memorandum Opinion invalidating the Arbitrator's promotion order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 17, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert R. Takahashi
 
Danny J. Vasconcellos Rebecca L. Covert
 (Takahashi Vasconcellos & Covert)
Attorneys for Union-Appellant
 Chief Judge

Associate Judge

John S. Mukai
 Deputy Corporation Counsel
City and County of Honolulu
Attorney for Employer-Appellee Associate Judge
 
8

 