NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29637
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
EDGAR IBERA, BRANDY ELIZAGA, WHITNEY ELIZAGA,
AND ANGELIQUE IBERA, Individually, and as
Prochain Ami for TAYLOR IBERA, a minor,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
BERT MISHIMA, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10 AND JANE DOES 1-10, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CV. NO. 05-1-2043)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Edgar Ibera; Brandy Elizaga;
 
Whitney Elizaga; and Angelique Ibera, individually, and as
 
Prochein Ami for Taylor Ibera, minor, (collectively, the Iberas)
 appeal from the following interlocutory orders entered by the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court): (1) the
 January 12, 2009, "Order Regarding Defendant Bert Mishima's
 Petition for Order to Show Cause Why Edgar Ibera and Roy Y.
 Yempuku Should Not be Held in Contempt of Court" (January 12,
 2009, Order); (2) the October 23, 2008, "Order Granting in Part
 and Denying in Part Defendant Bert Mishima's Motion to Deposit
 Settlement Proceeds With the Court and to Enforce Settlement"
 (October 23, 2008, Order); and (3) the oral ruling entered on
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
October 17, 2008, granting fees and costs to Patrick Jaress
 
(Jaress), Edgar Ibera's attorney (Oral Order Regarding Attorney's
 Fees).
1
 
Edgar Ibera and his family and Defendant-Appellee Bert
 
Mishima (Mishima) and his family have been engaged in a long-
running personal dispute that has included multiple litigations. 
The January 12, 2009, Order and the October 23, 2008, Order
 involve the Circuit Court's enforcement of a settlement agreement
 that was placed on the record. The Oral Order Regarding
 Attorney's Fees concerns the Circuit Court's oral granting of 
Jaress's request for attorney's fees and costs and imposing the
 amount awarded as a lien against Edgar Ibera's portion of the
 settlement proceeds.
 
On appeal, the Iberas argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in: (1) enforcing the settlement agreement where (a) both
 parties had repudiated the settlement, and (b) pursuant to the
 doctrine of collateral estoppel, a decision by this court in a
 companion case had established the absence of a valid settlement
 agreement; (2) limiting the amount of attorney's fees which the
 Iberas' attorneys were entitled to charge for their services
 after the settlement agreement was placed on the record; and (3)
 awarding attorney's fees to Jaress to be paid from Edgar Ibera's
 share of the settlement proceeds. 
I.
 
We first address our jurisdiction to address the 
Iberas' appeal. The January 12, 2009, Order was an order enforcing a settlement agreement between the Iberas and Mishima and was an appealable collateral order. Cook v. Surety Life Ins. 
Co., 79 Hawai' i 403, 408, 903 P.2d 708, 713 (App. 1995) (holding 
that "an order enforcing a settlement agreement is a collateral order which is appealable"). The January 12, 2009, Order incorporated the substance of the October 23, 2008, Order, but 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also amended it in material and substantial respects, and the 
Iberas' notice of appeal was timely filed within thirty days of the January 12, 2009, Order. See Korsak v. Hawaii Permanente 
Medical Group, 94 Hawai' i 297, 304, 12 P.3d 1238, 1245 (2000) 
(concluding that where a judgment is amended in a material and substantial respect, the time for filing an appeal begins to run from the date of the amended judgment). We conclude that we have jurisdiction over the Iberas' appeal from the January 12, 2009, Order, and to address their arguments (1) and (2) above.
2 
We lack jurisdiction, however, over the Oral Order 
Regarding Attorney's Fees, which was never reduced to writing and is not an appealable order. See KNG Corp. v. Kim, 107 Hawai' i 
73, 77, 110 P.3d 396, 401 (2005) (stating that the trial court's "oral decision is not an appealable order"). Accordingly, we do not address the Iberas' argument (3) above, which challenges the Oral Order Regarding Attorney's Fees, but instead dismiss the Iberas' appeal from the Oral Order Regarding Attorney's Fees for lack of appellate jurisdiction. 
II.
 
We resolve the Iberas' arguments (1) and (2) as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
enforcing the settlement agreement. 
1.
 
We reject the Iberas' claim that the settlement
 
agreement had been repudiated by both parties. The Iberas
 acknowledge that "the parties entered into a settlement
 agreement[,]" which was placed on the record in the Circuit Court
 on May 31, 2007. After the settlement agreement was placed on
 
2
 After the settlement agreement was placed on the record, the Circuit
Court stated that it would "retain jurisdiction for purposes of enforcement of
the settlement." We reject the Iberas' claim, raised for the first time in
their reply brief, that the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to enforce the
settlement agreement. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the record, a dispute arose regarding whether Mishima's wife and
 
children would be included in the settlement release. The Iberas
 contend that this dispute, and the actions taken by Mishima and
 the Iberas regarding this dispute, resulted in a repudiation of
 the settlement agreement. We disagree.
 
"Generally, in the absence of bad faith or fraud, when 
parties enter into an agreement settling and adjusting a dispute, neither party is permitted to repudiate it." Assocs. Fin. Servs. 
Co. of Hawai' i, Inc. v. Mijo, 87 Hawai' i 19, 29, 950 P.2d 1219, 
1229 (1998) (block quote format and citation omitted). The question of whether Mishima's wife and children were to be included in the release from claims and liability under the settlement agreement is one over which reasonable people could disagree. We conclude that the actions of the Iberas and Mishima after placing the settlement agreement on the record did not constitute or result in a repudiation of the agreement. We are also unpersuaded by the Iberas' claim that Mishima had acted in bad faith and that on that basis, they were entitled to unilaterally repudiate the settlement agreement. 
2.
 
We reject the Iberas' collateral estoppel argument. 
The Iberas rely on an order issued by this court, in consolidated
 appeals filed in a related case, which denied Mishima's motion to
 continue the disposition of Edgar Ibera's request for attorney's
 fees and costs. However, when Mishima filed his continuance
 motion before this court, the decision on whether to enforce the
 settlement agreement was still pending before the Circuit Court. 
In ruling on Mishima's continuance motion, we were not required
 to decide whether the settlement agreement was valid or should be
 enforced. Rather, in denying Mishima's continuance motion, we
 focused on the fact that the parties' dispute over the settlement
 agreement was still pending, noting that Mishima had not
 "submitted evidence of a binding settlement agreement that all
 parties have signed" and that "it appears that the parties have
 not resolved their ongoing dispute." 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because the issue of whether the settlement agreement 
was valid or enforceable was not essential to our decision to 
deny Mishima's continuance motion, our decision did not collaterally estop the Circuit Court from enforcing the settlement agreement. See Dorrance v. Lee, 90 Hawai' i 143, 148­
49, 976 P.2d 904, 909-10 (1999); Exotics Hawai' i-Kona, Inc. v. 
E.I. Dupont De Nemours & Co., 104 Hawai' i 358, 365, 90 P.3d 250, 
257 (2004).
3 
B.
 
In the January 12, 2009, Order, the Circuit Court
 
imposed limits on the ability of counsel for the Iberas and
 Mishima to bill or collect for legal services. The January 12,
 2009, Order "barred and prohibited" all counsel "from billing or
 collecting any payment from their clients for any legal services
 that were performed in connection with the four related cases
 after May 31, 2007 [(the date when the settlement agreement was
 placed on the record)], except as follows:" (1) each attorney
 could charge his or her own client up to three hours for services
 performed in drafting, reviewing, or executing the settlement
 documents; (2) Mishama's counsel could charge Mishima an
 additional 1.5 hours for preparing and circulating stipulations
 for dismissal and preparing the January 12, 2009, Order; and (3)
 the parties could pay their counsel additional sums for legal
 services performed after May 31, 2007, but were under no
 obligation to do so.
 
3
 The Iberas raise new arguments in their reply brief on appeal that
were not included in their opening brief and were not in rebuttal to arguments
presented in Mishima's answering brief, including that: (1) judicial estoppelprevents Mishima from arguing that the Circuit Court's enforcement of thesettlement agreement should be affirmed; and (2) the Circuit Court'senforcement order does not accurately reflect the terms of the settlementagreement. The Iberas waived these arguments by not presenting them in theiropening brief, and we declined to address them. See In re Hawaiian Flour 
Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5 (1994) (holding that
arguments raised for the first time in the reply briefs on appeal were deemedwaived); Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(d) (2008) (providing
that "[t]he reply brief shall be confined to matters presented in theanswering brief"). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Iberas argue that the Circuit Court's limitation on 
their counsel's ability to collect payment for legal services 
performed constituted sanctions against counsel and that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in imposing such sanctions sua sponte. We agree. Without prior notice, the Circuit Court sanctioned counsel by imposing significant restrictions on their ability to collect payment for legal services performed without a specific finding of bad faith. We conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in imposing sanctions on counsel in this manner. See Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 11(c) 
(2000) (requiring a court imposing sanctions on its own initiative (1) to give attorney notice and a reasonable opportunity to respond to a show cause order and (2) to describe the violative conduct and explain the basis for the sanction imposed); Bank of Hawaii v. Kunimoto, 91 Hawai' i 372, 389, 984 
P.2d 1198, 1215 (1999) ("It is well settled that a court may not invoke its inherent powers to sanction an attorney without a specific finding of bad faith."). 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the portion of the
 
Circuit Court's January 12, 2009, Order that imposed limitations
 on the ability of the parties' counsel to bill or collect payment
 from their clients for legal services performed, and we affirm
 the January 12, 2009, Order in all other respects. We dismiss
 
//
 //
 //
 //
 //
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Iberas' appeal from the Circuit Court's Oral Order Regarding
 
Attorney's Fees for lack of appellate jurisdiction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 26, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Earl A. Partington
(Law Office of Earle A. Partington)
for Plaintiff-Appellant 
Chief Judge
EDGAR IBERA
 
Roy Y. Yempuku
(Law Offices of Roy Y. Yempuku, ALC) Afor Plaintiffs-Appellants
BRANDY ELIZAGA, WHITNEY ELIZAGA,
AND ANGELIQUE IBERA, Individually,
and as Prochain Ami for A
TAYLOR IBERA, minor
 ssociate Judge
ssociate Judge
Douglas H. Knowlton
(Law Office of Douglas H. Knowlton)
Toby M. Tonaki
(Law Office of Toby M. Tonaki, AAL, ALC)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
7
 