  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29456
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TARA THOMAS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
GRANT K. KIDANI, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOES 1-100, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0459)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In this legal malpractice case, Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Tara Thomas (Tara) appeals from the Judgment filed on November 3,
 
2008 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1
 
The Judgment was issued pursuant to the circuit court's "Order
 Granting Defendant Grant K. Kidani's Motion for Summary Judgment
 Filed on December 11, 2007" (Order Granting Kidani's MSJ), filed
 on July 14, 2008, and "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 Defendant Grant K. Kidani's Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees
 and Costs Filed on July 29, 2008," filed on October 7, 2008. The
 circuit court entered judgment in favor of Grant K. Kidani
 (Kidani) and against Tara and awarded Kidani $135,429.10 in
 attorneys' fees and costs.
 
On appeal, Tara contends the circuit court erred in
 
granting Kidani's Motion for Summary Judgment (Kidani's MSJ),
 filed on December 11, 2007, when the court erroneously found in
 the Order Granting Kidani's MSJ that 
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1) "[Kidani] did attempt to argue that the realtor
 
was [Tara's] sole agent and/or fiduciary; however, the trial
 
court2 did not accept this interpretation of the facts";
 
(2) "The DROA [Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance] 
for the transaction stated that the realtor represented the
 seller and not [Tara] for the sale and the court precluded
 [Kidani] from presenting evidence regarding the issues of
 fiduciary duty and dual representation";
 
(3) "As to the Third Cause of Action, there are no
 
genuine issues of material fact in dispute over whether [Kidani]
 engaged in fraudulent billing. No evidence was presented to show
 that [Kidani's] conduct was fraudulent and therefore, the motion
 is granted as to the Third Cause of Action"; and
 
(4) "As to the claim for punitive damages, there are
 
no genuine issues of material fact in dispute over whether
 punitive damages are warranted. No evidence has been presented
 to indicate that [Kidani's] conduct was wanton, oppressive, or
 malicious."
 
Tara also argues that the circuit court's award of
 
attorneys' fees to Kidani was improper because it was brought on
 motion before the court entered its judgment and not renewed
 afterward.
 
Tara requests that we reverse (1) the Order Granting
 
Kidani's MSJ as to (a) Kidani's "legal malpractice relating to
 his failure to request fiduciary fraud, jury instructions,
 special verdict questions and advantageous legal positions on
 statute of limitations and on burden shift"; (b) Kidani's
 fraudulent billing; and (c) Tara's request for punitive damages;
 and (2) the circuit court's award of attorneys' fees to Kidani.
 
2
 The underlying civil case wherein Tara was represented by Kidani was
Tara C. Thomas v. Ricardo Barbati, et al. (Barbati), Civil No. 00-1-0032.
This case was in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit before the Honorable
 Greg Nakamura. To distinguish between Barbati and the instant malpractice
case, we will refer to the court in the Barbati case as the "trial court."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Tara's
 points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not err in granting Kidani's 
MSJ, Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui, 116 Hawai
'i 239, 254-55, 172 
P.3d 983, 998-99 (2007), and the findings in the Order Granting Kidani's MSJ that Tara contests are not clearly erroneous. Bhakta v. County of Maui, 109 Hawai
'i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005). 
(a) In Barbati, Tara asserted that real estate 
agent Ricardo Barbati, aka Rick Barbati, (Barbati) represented her in the purchase of real property located in Hilo, Hawai
'i. 
Kidani represented Tara in the Barbati case. Prior to trial, Kidani sought to introduce particular forms of evidence showing a fiduciary relationship between Barbati and Tara, but was prohibited from doing so by the trial court. Regardless of whether the trial court did not actually preclude Kidani from asserting a fiduciary relationship, Kidani determined that based on the trial court's preclusion of the evidence and other concerns, a fiduciary fraud claim would fail. In devising his trial strategy, Kidani exercised "such skill, prudence, and diligence as lawyers of ordinary skill and capacity commonly possess and exercise in the performance of the tasks which they undertake." Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai
'i 247, 259, 21 P.3d 452, 464 
(2001). 
(b) In her memorandum in opposition to Kidani's 
MSJ, Tara failed to demonstrate the fourth element of fraud, i.e., reliance. Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai
'i 368, 386, 
14 P.3d 1049, 1067 (2000). It was undisputed below and is undisputed on appeal that Tara did not pay Kidani the $10,338.63 in costs. For this reason, the circuit court also did not improperly grant Kidani's MSJ with regard to Tara's punitive damages claim. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Tara did not argue below that Kidani's Fees/Costs 
Motion was null because Kidani filed it before a judgment was 
issued, and she has therefore waived the argument. Nevertheless, Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(d) does not state 
that a motion for attorneys' fees and costs must be filed after judgment is entered. HRCP Rule 54(d). 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
November 3, 2008 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 26, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Charles J. Ferrera
 
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Calvin E. Young
Diane W. Wong (Ayabe Chong Nishimoto Sia
& Nakamura)
for Defendant-Appellee.
 Chief Judge

Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
4
 