 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28816
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JOHN BREEDEN, an individual, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
RICHARD ACHESON, individually, and in his capacities as,
Trustee of The Pat-Wil Irrevocable Family Trust dated
December 27, 1991, aka the Pat-Wil Irrevocable Trust,
aka the Pat-Wil Trust; as an Officer and Director
of Clean Air Technology, Inc., a Delaware corporation,
as an Officer and Director of Creative Telecommunications,
Inc., a Nevada corporation, as an Officer and Director
of Emissions Testing Services, Inc., a California
corporation; and as an Officer and Director of Applied
Technology Solutions, Inc., a Nevada corporation;
THE PAT-WIL IRREVOCABLE FAMILY TRUST, aka the Pat-Wil
Irrevocable Trust, aka, the Pat-Wil Trust, a
Nevada Trust dated December 27, 1991, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-175K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant, John Breeden (Breeden), appeals
 
from the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's (Circuit Court)
 
September 27, 2007 Final Judgment (Judgment), which entered
 
judgment in favor of Defendants-Appellees Richard Acheson
 
(Acheson) and the Pat-Wil Irrevocable Family Trust (Pat-Wil
 
Trust) (collectively, Appellees).1
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Breeden raises 12 points of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it granted two
 
defense motions for partial summary judgment and entered 
judgment against Breeden on each of the four counts of the
 
Amended Complaint, which sought damages for alleged fraud,
 
misrepresentation, breach of fiduciary duty, and conversion.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Breeden's contentions as follows:
 
(1) The Circuit Court did not err when it excluded 
certain portions of the June 2006 and April 2007 declarations 
made by Breeden and his attorney, Francis Jung (Jung), on hearsay 
and/or authentication grounds pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rules 801, 802, 901, 902 and 1002. The subject declarations attested to certain statements purportedly made by 
2
an arbitrator in a related arbitration matter,  and statements by
William Simmons (Simmons) and Gary Vancil (Vancil) in the
 arbitration proceeding.
3 We reject Breeden's argument that the
 
out-of-court statements were not hearsay because they were not
 
offered for the truth of the matter asserted. The alleged
 
statements were offered as evidence of what they said regarding,
 
inter alia, "Acheson's offices" having faxed copies of two
 
secured promissory notes to Vancil, who then provided them to the
 
arbitrator. In short, Breeden sought to show that Acheson
 
provided purportedly false copies of the promissory notes, which
 
was a key underpinning of the allegations in Counts I and II. 
2
 As it was unclear whether the declarations referenced an oral
 
ruling by the arbitrator, or a written ruling, the Circuit Court excluded the
averment concerning the arbitrator's ruling, alternatively, based on the best
evidence rule. See HRE Rule 1002. On appeal, Breeden argues only that the
declaration statements were not hearsay.
 
3
 Although Breeden refers to Vancil as Acheson's counsel, Acheson
was not a party to the federal-court-ordered arbitration and there is no
evidence in the record that Vancil was Acheson's counsel.
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The statements in question were offered for the truth of the
 
matter asserted and constituted impermissible hearsay.
 
(2) The Circuit Court did not err when it concluded
 
that Breeden failed to demonstrate that there was a genuine issue
 
of material fact as to (a) his detrimental reliance on alleged
 
misrepresentations concerning information provided by Appellees
 
and (b) resulting damages. First, Counts I and II are based on
 
Breeden's assertion that Acheson gave the arbitrator a falsified
 
copy of a certain promissory note. There is no competent
 
evidence supporting that assertion. In addition, Breeden failed
 
to submit any evidence tending to show that he reasonably relied
 
on such representations, particularly given the circumstances of
 
the federal litigation and the arbitration, and failed to submit
 
any evidence of damages stemming from the alleged
 
misrepresentation, i.e., that his inability to recover on the
 
arbitration award stemmed from the purported misrepresentation
 
concerning the nature of a certain promissory note.
 
(3) Breeden argues that the Circuit Court erred when 
it applied the Delaware statute of limitations, rather than the 
Hawai'i statute of limitations, to Counts III (breach of 
fiduciary duty) and IV (conversion). Count III concerns the relationship between Acheson, as an officer and director of Clean 
Air Technology, Inc. (CATI) and its subsidiaries, and Breeden, as 
a shareholder and legal claimant/creditor of CATI, and legal 
claimant/creditor of CATI's subsidiaries.
4 With respect to the 
duty owed to Breeden as a shareholder of CATI, Breeden's breach of fiduciary claim deals with the "internal affairs" of a 
corporation, which are the "relations inter se of the 
corporation, its shareholders, directors, officers or agents[.]" 
See R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONFLICT OF LAWS ยง 302, comment a (2010). 
4
 Although the breach of fiduciary duty count refers broadly to the
CATI Group, the averments of the First Amended Complaint do not allege that
Breeden is a shareholder in any of the entities other than CATI.
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the "internal affairs
 
doctrine," which provides that "the law of the state of
 
incorporation normally determines issues relating to the internal
 
affairs of a corporation." First Nat'l City Bank v. Banco Para
 
El Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 462 U.S. 611, 621 (1983) (citations
 omitted); Edgar v. MITE Corp., 457 U.S. 624, 645 (1982); see
 
also R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONFLICT OF LAWS ยง 309 (2010). The
 
"internal affairs" of a corporation include "matters peculiar to
 
the relationships among or between the corporation and its
 
current officers, directors, and shareholders[.]" Edgar, 457
 
U.S. at 645 (citations omitted). Applying the local law of the state of incorporation "achieves the need for certainty and 
predictability of result while generally protecting the justified 
expectations of parties with interests in the corporation." 
First Nat'l City Bank, 462 U.S. at 621. This result is 
consistent with Hawai
'i conflict-of-law rules. See Mikelson v. 
United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 107 Hawai 'i 192, 198, 111 P.3d 601, 
607 (2005) (placing primary emphasis on which state has the 
strongest interest in seeing its laws applied to a particular 
case). Under the particular facts of this case, Delaware has the 
strongest interest in applying its laws to fiduciary obligations 
of the corporate officers and directors of CATI, a corporation 
organized under its laws. 
With respect to the alleged duty owed to Breeden as a 
legal claimant/creditor of CATI and CATI's subsidiaries, even if 
the Hawai 'i statute of limitations was applied, as the Circuit 
Court concluded, the record does not support a finding that Breeden "suffered any injury or resulting damages from the 
workout and a resulting settlement agreement that led to the 
foreclosure on CATI's assets in May of 1999." Breeden has failed 
to demonstrate how Acheson's conduct caused injury to Breeden in 
light of CATI's insolvency and the undisputed security interests 
in the subject corporate assets. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Count IV, Breeden alleges that Acheson and the Pat-
Wil Trust wrongfully converted CATI's assets, which Breeden had a 
superior right to as a judgment creditor. Count IV does not 
involve the "internal affairs" of CATI because it does not 
pertain to the relationship of a director of a corporation and a 
shareholder of that corporation. Delaware's interest in applying 
its laws to Breeden's conversion claim is not strong. Hawai 'i on 
the other hand, has a strong interest in protecting its citizen, Breeden, from the purported conversion of assets he claimed to 
have an interest in, at least some of which were alleged to be in 
Hawai
'i. Accordingly, we conclude that the Hawai 'i statute of 
limitations must be applied to the conversion claim in Count IV. 
(4) Under Delaware law, a three-year statute of
 
limitations applies to the breach of fiduciary claim in Count III
 arising from Breeden's status as a shareholder in CATI. See Fike
 
v. Ruger, 754 A.2d 254, 260 (Del. Ch. 1999); 10 Del. C. ยง 8106. 
On appeal, Breeden does not challenge the Circuit Court's
 
conclusion that, absent any tolling, the statute of limitations
 
began to run no later than May 4, 1999. Instead, Breeden argues
 
that, based on Acheson's alleged fraudulent concealment of
 
certain promissory notes, the statute of limitations should be
 
tolled. We cannot conclude, however, that the Circuit Court
 
erred when it concluded that Breeden failed to bring forward
 
evidence raising a genuine issue of material fact on this issue. 
(5) Although we conclude that Count IV (conversion) is 
not time-barred under Hawai
'i's six-year statute of limitations, 
the Circuit Court did not err when it granted summary judgment against Breeden on this count. As noted above, Count IV alleges 
that Appellees wrongfully converted CATI assets and thereby 
interfered with Breeden's "superior claim of right" as a 
"judgment creditor of CATI." As stated in Section 222A of the 
R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS: "Conversion is an intentional 
exercise of dominion or control over a chattel which so seriously 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
interferes with the right of another to control it that the actor
 
may justly be required to pay the other the full value of the
 
chattel." Breeden has cited no legal authority stating that 
a judgment creditor is entitled to "control" a corporation's
 
assets. Moreover, it appears that Breeden has alleged that
 
Acheson wrongfully converted CATI's assets on or about April 29,
 
1999 and May 4, 1999. However, Breeden did not perfect a
 
judgment against CATI until May 7, 2002. Therefore, even
 
assuming a judgment creditor has a right to control a judgment
 
debtor's assets, Breeden was not a judgment creditor at the time
 
of the alleged conversion.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's September 27,
 
2007 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 9, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Francis L. Jung
Usha Kilpatrick-Kotnerfor Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Robert G. Klein R. John Seibert Lisa W. Cataldo for Defendants-AppelleesRICHARD ACHESON and THE PAT-WIL IRREVOCABLE FAMILY TRUST Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 