  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28274
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
KAILUA LOCAL CAB, INC., a Hawai ri corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
AJA MOTORS CORP., Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
VAN-CON, INC., a New Jersey Corporation,
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS
1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS 2-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50;
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0522)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Kailua Local Cab, Inc. (Kailua Cab)
 
appeals from the Final Judgment filed on September 26, 2006 in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  The
 
circuit court entered judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee AJA

 
Motors Corp. (AJA Motors) and against Kailua Cab in the amount of
 
$100,000 for compensatory damages on Count V of AJA Motors'
 
July 14, 2004 Counterclaim (Counterclaim) and $50,000 in punitive
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
damages pursuant to Count VI  of the Counterclaim.  The circuit
 
court dismissed all of the claims in Kailua Cab's Complaint filed
 
on March 19, 2004 (Complaint) and the remainder of the claims

 
contained in the Counterclaim.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
In the early 2000s, Kailua Cab supplied school bus 
transportation to handicapped and other students, under a contract with the State of Hawai
ri Department of Education (DOE). 
To fulfill a contract with the DOE, Kailua Cab needed to purchase twelve additional buses. In early 2002, Kailua Cab went to 
Andrew J. Anderson (Anderson), AJA Motors' president, to purchase 
the needed buses because Kailua Cab had previously purchased 
buses from AJA Motors. 
A. PURCHASE CONTRACT
 
On March 27, 2002, Kailua Cab signed a six-page Sales
 
Proposal/Sales Order (the Contract) to purchase twelve school
 
buses from AJA Motors. Stanley Tomasa (Tomasa), Kailua Cab's
 
president, signed the Contract, which had been prepared by
 
Anderson, who also signed it as a "dealer or authorized
 
3
representative"  of AJA Motors.  At the time the parties entered
 into the Contract, AJA Motors was a franchisee of Van-Con, Inc.
 
(Van-Con), a New Jersey corporation.

 
According to the Contract, AJA Motors would supply
 
twelve buses, the chassis of which would be manufactured by

 
4
General Motors Corporation (GMC)  and the bodies of which would
be manufactured by Van-Con. The Contract listed the price of
 
each chassis as $17,956, and the price of the bus bodies as

 
2
 The Final Judgment incorrectly labels the interference with
prospective economic advantage claim as Count IV and the punitive damages
claim as Count V of the Counterclaim; they actually were Counts V and VI,
respectively.
3
 Anderson is the owner, president, and sole director of AJA Motors
Corp.
4
 The cutaway chassis supplied by GMC contains the engine,
transmission, drive chain, rear-end, six tires, windshield, front dash, and
driver's seat.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
ranging from $12,924 to $17,134, depending on passenger capacity. 
The contract also provided the following terms and conditions:
 
Standard Terms (VAN-CON/GMC SCHOOL BUS):
 
A) A ten percent (10%) deposit is required upon agreement
and acceptance. 
B) Chassis ordered and drop shipped to Van-Con, Inc.Middlesex, NJ. 
C) Chassis price due upon GMC Invoice. 
D) Balance due upon completion. 
E) All buses shall be inspected, taxed, titled,registered at additional cost to customer. 
F) Purchaser/lender shall furnish a guaranty of paymentfrom a financial institution to Dealers. 
G) 
Prices are for Model Year 2002 only.
on a per unit basis. Price as quoted 
H) Delivery is per unit and subject to change. 
I) Chassis price may accrue interest charges. . . . . 
Transfer of Title
:
 
A) Chassis MSO[5] issued upon payment of Chassis Dealer
Invoice.

 
B) Body [MCO] issued upon payment of Body Dealer Invoice.
 
C) Shipper reserves all rights and payment prior to
release of vehicles.

 
D) All prices and payments shall be valued and rendered
in U.S. Dollars.

 
Financing
:
 
A) A commitment letter and/or guaranty of payment shall
be furnished to body and chassis dealer.

 
B) Applicant approved funding payable and committed to
this [Contract].
 
On April 25, 2002, Kailua Cab paid AJA Motors a deposit
 
of $
47,038.57 by check. Before receiving the deposit, AJA Motors
 
had ordered the chassis from LaBeau Brothers, Inc. (LaBeau
 
5
 MSO stands for Manufacturer's Statement of Origin. An alternate
 
designation is Manufacturer's Certificate of Origin, or MCO. For consistency,
this opinion will use the term MCO. The MCOs in the instant case list a
 unique GMC vehicle identification number (VIN) for each chassis.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bros.), the chassis dealer in Illinois. The chassis order had to
 
be placed by April 18, 2002 -- before General Motors Corporation
 
(GMC) ended the production runs on the model and year of the
 
vehicles ordered. On June 26, 2002, LaBeau Bros. sent invoices
 
to AJA Motors.
 
Although Kailua Cab had paid AJA Motors cash for buses
 
previously purchased, Kailua Cab requested Anderson's help in
 
obtaining financing for the twelve buses. Anderson's personal
 
banker from First Hawaiian Bank (FHB) referred Kailua Cab to Joy
 
Ching (Ching), an FHB vice president. FHB did not approve the
 
loan until September 2002. Tomasa and his sister, Betty Lou Mau
 
(Mau), Kailua Cab's vice president and clerk, attributed the
 
delay in obtaining the loan to probate proceedings for the estate
 
of their father, who died March 9, 2002 and was a co-owner of
 
property to be used as collateral. Tomasa testified that Kailua
 
Cab could not pay for the chassis until his father's estate was
 
settled.
 
B. KAILUA CAB DELAYS PAYMENT
 
During July 2002, LaBeau Bros. repeatedly asked
 
Anderson when it could expect payment for the twelve chassis. 
Anderson testified that he requested payment before the July 4th
 
holiday and again on July 8. Anderson characterized Kailua Cab's
 
response as "a plethora of excuses." Anderson testified that
 
Tomasa said talk to Ching, Ching would refer Anderson back to
 
Tomasa, and so it "went on and on and on all summer long." On
 
July 29, 2002, LaBeau Bros. faxed Anderson asking when he would
 
pay for the twelve chassis. Anderson sent the fax to Mau with a
 
handwritten note, "I don't have an answer for this gentleman."
 
On October 9, 2002, FHB paid LaBeau Bros. for twelve
 
chassis plus accrued interest. Ching sent a letter to LaBeau
 
Bros. with a check for $218,552.48 and asked LaBeau Bros. to send
 
the MCOs, reflecting FHB as the lienholder and Kailua Cab as the
 
registered owner, to FHB. This letter upset Anderson, who
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6
considered it "jumping title,"  which was a violation of his
dealership license and the law. Anderson testified that the MCOs
 
pass from dealer to dealer, not to consumers, and buses are not
 
titled in the name of the customer before they are completed. He
 
testified:
 
The procedure is very simple and clear cut.
 
When I receive the titles to the chassis, title is
ownership. The titles are signed over in my name and sent
to me, the dealer. It's [a] dealer to dealer transaction
because these are incomplete vehicles. 
. . . . 
. . . [S]o what happens is the dealer would send the

title to me within the State, and then my licensing rights
are to insert, if there is a lien, to insert the lien on the
title or -- and transfer -- properly transfer it into the
State.
 
On October 14, 2002, LaBeau Bros. sent MCOs to
 
Anderson. The front page of each MCO provided the VIN and stated
 
that the "body type" of the vehicle referenced was an "incomplete
 
van." An authorized GMC representative certified that the
 
vehicle described was the property of GMC and was being
 
transferred on June 6, 2002 to LaBeau Bros. The reverse side of
 
each MCO provided: 
Each undersigned seller certifies to the best of his
knowledge, information and belief under penalty of the law
that the vehicle is new and has not been registered in this
or any state at the time of delivery and the vehicle is not
subject to any security interests other than those disclosed
herein and warrant title to the vehicle.
 
In a box marked "Distributor-Dealer Assignment Number 1," AJA
 
Motors Inc. was named as the "purchaser" and LaBeau Bros. as the
 
"dealer," and Leslie Balthazor signed as "Agent." In a box
 
marked "Distributor-Dealer Assignment Number 2," Kailua Cab is
 
listed as purchaser, but no dealer or signature appears. 
Anderson did not sign the MCOs over to Kailua Cab. In a box
 
marked "Lienholder," FHB, Kaneohe Branch, is listed as the first
 
6
 Anderson testified that the term "jumping title" is used in the
automobile dealership industry and refers to putting the name of the customer
on the title instead of the name of the dealer, which has the practical effect
of passing title without paying registration fees and taxes.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
lienholder. A box labeled "Odometer Disclosure for Retail Sale"
 
is empty.
 
Kailua Cab made the second required payment on two
 
completed buses in December 2002 and then on four more in March
 
2003. AJA Motors delivered the first bus on February 25, 2003;
 
the second on March 28, 2003; the third on April 17, 2003; the
 
fourth and fifth on May 11, 2003; and the sixth on May 15, 2003.
 
C. KAILUA CAB COMPLAINS ABOUT WORKMANSHIP
 
According to Tomasa, at the time Kailua Cab placed the
 
order for the new buses, he requested that the new buses be
 
constructed like the ones Kailua Cab had previously ordered, but
 
with two exceptions: the new buses needed to have rain gutters
 
with exits that would allow water to drain from both the front
 
and back of each bus and each "interior school bus mirror" had to
 
be in a certain location.
 
The buses delivered were not as Kailua Cab expected. 
Tomasa testified that on each bus the gutters were missing any
 
exits and the warning light control panel had been moved so the
 
"interior school bus mirror" blocked it. Tomasa claimed that
 
when the first bus arrived, he called Anderson and told him the
 
bus was not to specifications, but Anderson "didn't say
 
anything." On the day the second bus was delivered, Tomasa noted
 
the same problems. Anderson disputed Tomasa's testimony, stating
 
that he first heard of complaints regarding the buses in early
 
April.
 
Anderson sent two invoices to Ching and Kailua Cab on
 
May 6, 2003, requesting payment for buses seven and eight, which
 
were ready for delivery. When Anderson did not get a response
 
from Kailua Cab, he went to Kailua Cab's bus yard on May 8, 2003
 
with the invoices to request payment from Tomasa. Anderson
 
testified that Tomasa grabbed the invoices and said "I don't want
 
them; I don't need them; get out of here" and threw the invoices
 
in Anderson's face. Anderson further testified that on May 12,
 
2003, Tomasa told him that Kailua Cab's older buses had passed
 
government inspection so the new buses would not be needed.
 
6
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 12 and 15, 2003, Anderson delivered the fifth
 
and sixth buses. Anderson testified that on May 16, 2003, Tomasa
 
called him, swearing and telling him to come replace a service
 
door on one bus. After the phone call, Anderson stopped shipment
 
of the seventh and eighth buses, which were completed and en
 
route from the manufacturer. A couple of days later, Anderson
 
made arrangements to go to the bus yard on May 22, 2003 to change
 
the door.
 
D.	 THE INCIDENT AT KAILUA CAB'S BUS YARD AND
 
REQUESTED REPAIRS TO THE BUSES
 
When Anderson arrived at the bus yard on May 22, 2003,
 
Tomasa was sitting with three men. Anderson claimed that two of
 
the men approached him and one grabbed him by the elbow and
 
pulled him to a corner of the yard. Anderson pulled his arm away
 
from the man, and the other man began pulling Anderson in another
 
direction. Anderson testified that a woman then drove up in a
 
30-passenger bus, coaxed Anderson inside, and berated him over a
 
leak near the bus's service door. Anderson left the bus, went to
 
his car, and got a bus service door to replace the one about
 
which Tomasa had complained. Anderson testified that the service
 
door he was to replace was "fine from what I could see." 
Anderson stated that he was halfway through removing the existing
 
door when Tomasa appeared from behind and yelled, "I told you to
 
get out of here!" Anderson testified that Tomasa tackled him,
 
slammed the door on his head, pushed him towards his car, hit
 
him, stomped on his foot, and kicked him. The two men who had
 
originally confronted Anderson came over. Anderson said Tomasa
 
continued to hit him while the men mocked Anderson's pleas to
 
stop. A woman drove up in a 72-passenger bus, and the two men
 
left. Tomasa threw Anderson's tools at him and his car.
 
Anderson scooped up his tools, put them in the trunk of his car,
 
and told Tomasa, "you still have to pay me." Tomasa then punched
 
Anderson on his left cheek and called for the other men to come
 
"finish the job." Anderson got in his car and drove off the lot
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and to the Beretania Street police station, where he made a
 
report.
 
At trial, Kailua Cab offered the testimony of April
 
Oliva, an employee of Kailua Cab for more than 20 years, to rebut
 
Anderson's testimony about the incident. She testified that she
 
was in the bus yard on May 22, 2003 and pointed out to Anderson
 
leaking windows on her bus. She stated that she heard Tomasa
 
tell Anderson not to fix the bus in the bus yard. She testified
 
that Anderson and Tomasa began to argue, but neither Tomasa nor
 
the two men pushed, hit, or touched Anderson.
 
By letter dated June 6, 2003, AJA Motors' attorney,
 
Jason Wong (Wong), acknowledged that six buses had been completed
 
and paid for pursuant to the Contract. The letter also stated
 
Kailua Cab had been notified that an additional three buses had
 
been completed and a demand for payment had been made. The
 
letter warned that if Kailua Cab did not pay within five business
 
days, AJA Motors would resell the six buses remaining under the
 
contract.
 
On June 18, 2003, pursuant to an agreement of Tomasa
 
7
and Anderson, the District Court of the First Circuit  entered an
"Order Granting Mutual Injunction against Harassment," which
 
stated that Tomasa would submit his complaints to Anderson

 
through counsel and Anderson would "designate a State of Hawaii
 authorized and licensed facility" to do the repair work. Tomasa
 
submitted to AJA Motors a list of alleged problems with each bus. 
In an undated "Answer to Warranty Claims from [Kailua Cab],"
 
Anderson replied that many of the alterations requested by Tomasa
 
could not be made because they were not covered under warranty.
 
E. INSTANT SUIT FILED
 
On February 5, 2004, Kailua Cab's attorney sent a

 
letter to Wong stating that Kailua Cab was "ready, willing and
 
able to accept delivery and pay for [four] completed buses." Wong
 
7
 The Honorable Barbara P. Richardson signed the order granting the
injunction.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
informed Kailua Cab the following day that he no longer
 
represented AJA Motors.
 
On February 27, 2004, Kailua Cab's attorney sent AJA
 
Motors a letter demanding delivery of the six remaining chassis. 
When the chassis were not delivered, Kailua Cab filed its
 
Complaint, which alleged (1) breach of contract, (2) conversion,
 
and (3) restitution/unjust enrichment.8
 
On July 14, 2004, AJA Motors filed its answer and a 
Counterclaim alleging breach of contract, breach of the covenant 
of good faith and fair dealing, intentional/negligent 
misrepresentation, estoppel, and intentional interference with 
AJA Motors' prospective economic advantage as the exclusive 
franchisee in Hawai ri for Van-Con. 
On April 5, 2006, Kailua Cab filed a motion in limine
 
to exclude any reference to the May 22, 2003 incident and to the
 
mutual injunction against harassment, on the grounds that
 
testimony regarding the "attack" was not relevant and was highly
 
prejudicial and the injunction involved the two men as
 
individuals, rather than the companies that were parties to the
 
lawsuit. The circuit court allowed the testimony with a limiting
 
instruction and allowed the parties to introduce only the terms
 
of the injunction that pertained to the submission of warranty
 
complaints.
 
After a five-day trial, Kailua Cab filed a motion for a
 
directed verdict on AJA Motors's Counterclaim on the basis that
 
AJA Motors was not a licensed motor vehicle dealer, making the
 
contract for the sale of buses illegal and, therefore, any breach
 
by Kailua Cab unenforceable.
 
The jury returned a special verdict as follows:
 •	 AJA Motors had not breached the contract with
 
Kailua Cab
 
•	 Kailua Cab had breached the contract
 
8
 Kailua Cab later named Van-Con as a defendant on March 23, 2005.
Pursuant to a settlement agreement, Kailua Cab and Van-Con stipulated to
dismiss all claims between them.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
•	 Kailua Cab had interfered with AJA Motors's
 
prospective economic advantage
 
•	 Kailua Cab intentionally made misrepresentations
 and
 
• Kailua Cab negligently made misrepresentations
 
The jury awarded AJA Motors $1.00 in damages for the breach of
 
contract, $100,000 in damages for the interference with
 
prospective economic advantage claim, no monetary damages for the
 
misrepresentation claims, and $50,000 in punitive damages.
 
On May 26, 2006, the circuit court granted Kailua Cab's
 
motion for directed verdict on AJA Motors's Counterclaim for
 
breach of contract, inviting the appellate court to decide
 
whether a corporation whose president is a licensed dealer can
 
legally contract for sale of a motor vehicle when the corporation
 
does not have a license.
 
On September 26, 2006, the circuit court entered the
 
Final Judgment in favor of AJA Motors and against Kailua Cab on
 
AJA Motors' tortious interference and punitive damages claims and
 
expressly dismissed all other unidentified claims, counterclaims,
 
and cross-claims.
 
On September 27, 2006, Kailua Cab filed a Motion for
 
Entry of Judgment as a Matter of Law (Motion for Judgment as a
 
Matter of Law) and a Motion for New Trial and/or for a Reduction
 
in Damages (Motion for New Trial). The circuit court denied both
 
motions.
 
Kailua Cab timely appealed. 
II. POINTS ON APPEAL
 
Kailua Cab's points of error on appeal are as follows:
 
1. The jury failed to follow the law, as set out in
court instructions, in finding that, under the facts
presented, there was no conversion, but instead based its
verdict on emotion, prejudice, and irritation over the
length of trial.
 
2. The jury failed to follow the law, as set out in
court instructions, in finding that, under the evidence
presented, there was no breach of contract by [AJA Motors],
but instead based its verdict on emotion, prejudice, and
irritation over the length of trial.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. The jury failed to follow the law, as set out in
court instructions, in finding that [Kailua Cab] had
intentionally interfered with [AJA Motors'] prospective
business advantage, but instead based its verdict on
emotion, prejudice, and irritation over the length of trial.
 
4. The jury failed to follow the law regarding
punitive damages in the State of Hawaii, and as set out in
court instructions, in finding that [AJA Motors] was
entitled to punitive damages, and moreover awarded punitive
damages out of emotional response and prejudice.
 
5. The trial court erred in admitting testimony of
[Anderson] regarding an alleged attack on his person where
[Anderson] was not a party to the action, where there was
little probative value to such testimony, and where such
testimony would be unfairly prejudicial to [Kailua Cab].
 
6. The jury failed to heed limiting instructions
with regard to consideration of [Anderson's] testimony
describing an alleged personal attack.
 
7. The damages awarded to [AJA Motors] for
intentional interference with prospective business advantage
exceed the amount justified by the evidence.
 
AJA Motors correctly notes that Kailua Cab's opening 
brief is not in accordance with Hawai ri Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). Specifically, Kailua Cab's 
points of error do not state where in the record the alleged 
errors occurred nor where they were brought to the attention of 
the court. HRAP 28(b)(4). Although AJA Motors argues that 
points not presented in accordance with HRAP Rule 28(b) should be 
disregarded or reviewed only for plain error, the appellate court 
has a policy of affording litigants the opportunity "to have 
their cases heard on the merits, where possible." O'Connor v. 
Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai ri 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 
(1994). 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. MOTION FOR JUDGMENT AS A MATTER OF LAW/NEW TRIAL
 
A party seeking appellate reversal of a jury verdict
 
based upon a claim of insufficient evidence is, in effect,
 
seeking appellate review of the trial court's denial of either a
 
motion for judgment as a matter of law or a motion for a new
 
trial. Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawairi 286, 296, 141 P.3d 459, 469 (2006); see also Kramer v. 
Ellett, 108 Hawai ri 426, 430, 121 P.3d 406, 410 (2005). 
A trial court's ruling on a motion for judgment as a 
matter of law is reviewed de novo. Id. "Verdicts based on 
conflicting evidence will not be set aside where there is 
substantial evidence to support the jury's findings. [The 
Hawairi Supreme Court has] defined 'substantial evidence' as 
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a 
conclusion." Stanford Carr, 111 Hawai
ri at 296, 141 P.3d at 469 
(brackets in original omitted) (quoting Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai
ri 475, 486, 904 P.2d 489, 500 (1995)). In deciding a 
motion for judgment as a matter of law, "the evidence and the inferences which may be fairly drawn therefrom must be considered 
in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and the motion 
may be granted only where there can be but one reasonable 
conclusion as to the proper judgment." Kramer, 108 Hawai
ri at 
430, 121 P.3d at 410 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). "Thus, where there is conflicting evidence or 
there is insufficient evidence to make a one-way verdict proper, 
[judgment as matter of law] should not be awarded. Stanford 
Carr, 111 Hawai
ri at 296, 141 P.3d at 469 (internal quotation 
marks, citation, brackets in original, and ellipsis omitted). 
The trial court's denial of a motion for a new trial,
 
however, is reviewed for a clear abuse of discretion. Id. The
 
movant on a motion for a new trial need not convince the trial
 court to rule that no substantial evidence supports movant's
 
opponent's case, but only that the verdict rendered for the
 
opponent is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Id.
 
B. ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE
 
Different standards of review must be applied to trial
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,
depending on the requirements of the particular rule of
evidence at issue. When application of a particular
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Where the evidentiary ruling at issue concerns
admissibility based upon relevance, under Hawaii Rules of
Evidence (HRE) Rules 401 and 402, the proper standard of
appellate review is the right/wrong standard. 
Evidentiary decisions based on HRE Rule 403, which
require a "judgment call" on the part of the trial court,
are reviewed for an abuse of discretion. The trial court
 abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of
reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai ri 336, 350-51, 944 P.2d 
1279, 1293-94 (1997) (internal quotation marks, citations, and 
brackets omitted; block quote format changed) (quoting State v. 
Arceo, 84 Hawai ri 1, 11, 928 P.2d 843, 853 (1996)). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. CONVERSION
 
Kailua Cab contends that AJA Motors converted six
 
chassis that Kailua Cab had paid for with the FHB loan but never
 
received. The jury was instructed, without objection, that to
 
prevail on the claim of conversion Kailua Cab must prove three
 
elements: (1) Kailua Cab "owned or had the right to possession
 
of the property;" (2) "at the time when [Kailua Cab] owned or had
 
the right to possession of the property, [AJA Motors] exerted
 
dominion over the property in denial of or inconsistent with 
[Kailua Cab's] ownership or right to possession of the property;"
 
and (3) "[AJA Motors'] conduct legally caused damage to [Kailua
 
Cab]." See Tsuru v. Bayer, 25 Haw. 693 (1920).
 
Anderson testified that AJA Motors sold vehicles
 
fabricated upon the six chassis to other entities, including the
 
DOE, and AJA Motors did not return any money to Kailua Cab after
 
Kailua Cab canceled delivery of the final six buses. The parties
 
dispute whether Kailua Cab "owned" or had a "right of possession"
 
in the six chassis when they were sold, as part of completed
 
buses, to other customers.
 
It is undisputed that Kailua Cab bargained and paid for
 
the six chassis. AJA Motors sold the chassis to other entities
 
and kept the money from the sale; money that should have gone to
 
Kailua Cab. Therefore, the circuit court erred in not granting
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kailua Cab's Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law as to its
 
conversion claim. 
B. BREACH OF CONTRACT
 
Kailua Cab contends the jury failed to follow the law
 
in concluding that AJA Motors did not breach the Contract. On
 
appeal, Kailua Cab argues that AJA Motors breached the Contract
 
by failing to (1) turn over the chassis upon demand and (2)
 
deliver buses according to the specifications requested.
 
In regard to the first argument, we have concluded that
 
Kailua Cab was entitled to the proceeds from AJA Motors' sale of
 
the chassis. In regard to the second argument, the issue is
 
whether the buses were non-conforming and, if so, whether the
 
"nonconformity substantially impair[ed] the value of [the]
 
installment and cannot be cured."
 
Although Anderson and Tomasa presented conflicting
 
testimony, there is sufficient evidence that the buses delivered
 
were in conformity with the Contract. Tomasa's testimony is the
 
sole evidence that he had specified the mirrors, control panel,
 
and gutters were to be manufactured in a way other than how they
 
were when delivered. Although Tomasa said these parts were to be
 
installed on the twelve buses in a manner identical to buses
 
previously ordered from AJA Motors, under cross-examination he
 
admitted that five of the six previously-ordered buses had
 
gutters with the same design about which he was complaining. 
Anderson testified that at the time the Contract was signed,
 
Tomasa did not specify any changes to the buses' design, i.e.,
 
the gutters and placement of the mirrors. Moreover, the
 
Contract's second page, titled "Base Body Standard Options,"
 
lists specifications for the buses, but makes no mention of
 
modifications to the gutters, control panel, or rear-view
 
mirrors. Additionally, Anderson testified that Tomasa wanted
 
alterations to the manufacturer's designs that, in some cases,
 
would not have been covered by the manufacturer's warranty.
 In short, there was conflicting testimony about what
 
the specifications were in the Contract. Where there is
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conflicting evidence and the matter hinges on the credibility of 
witnesses, the trial court's outcome will generally not be 
disturbed on appeal. In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawai ri 443, 
454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999). From Anderson's testimony, there is sufficient evidence from which the jury could have concluded that 
Kailua Cab's complaints with the buses stemmed from Tomasa's 
failure to specify changes before signing the Contract. Further, 
there was sufficient evidence to conclude that the delivered 
buses conformed to the Contract. Accordingly, the trial court 
did not err in denying Kailua Cab's Motion for New Trial on the 
issue of AJA Motors' alleged breach of contract as to the buses. 
C.	 INTENTIONAL INTERFERENCE WITH PROSPECTIVE ECONOMIC
 
ADVANTAGE
 A tortious interference with a prospective business 
advantage claim requires a showing that there is a "colorable 
economic relationship between the plaintiff and a third party" to 
be protected. Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med. Serv. Ass'n, 
Inc., 113 Hawai
ri 77, 116, 148 P.3d 1179, 1218 (2006) (quoting 
Locricchio v. Legal Servs. Corp., 833 F.2d 1352, 1357 (9th Cir. 
1987)). It is undisputed that AJA Motors and Van-Con had a 
franchise agreement, which was terminated in November 2002. As 
such, Kailua Cab's first argument -- that AJA Motors had no 
prospective business advantage with which to interfere -- fails. 
We then turn to Kailua Cab's second argument: AJA 
Motors failed to demonstrate that Kailua Cab intended to 
interfere. Hawai ri's appellate courts have said that tortious 
interference "requires a state of mind or motive more culpable than mere intent." Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai
ri at 116, 148 
P.3d at 1218 (quoting Locricchio, 833 F.2d at 1358). This intent "denotes purposefully improper interference" or, in other words, 
"the plaintiff must prove that the defendant either pursued an 
improper objective of harming the plaintiff or used wrongful 
means that caused injury in fact." Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 
Hawai
ri at 116, 148 P.3d at 1218 (quoting Omega Envtl., Inc. v. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Gilbarco, Inc., 127 F.3d 1157, 1166 (9th Cir. 1997)). See also 
Meridian Mortgage, Inc. v. First Hawaiian Bank, 109 Hawai ri 35, 
48, 122 P.3d 1133, 1146 (App. 2005). 
1. "Wrongful means"
 
We look first at whether Kailua Cab employed wrongful
 
means to disrupt AJA Motors's business. In its Counterclaim and
 
at trial, AJA Motors based the interference claim on Kailua Cab's
 
9
five-month delay in paying for the chassis  and its refusal to

 pay for the last six buses. On appeal, AJA Motors contends
Kailua Cab interfered with its prospective business advantage
 
during the summer of 2002 when AJA Motors asked Kailua Cab to pay
 
for the chassis, Kailua Cab did not pay, and Kailua Cab "by its
 
own admission kept everyone 'in the dark' about what was
 
happening." These actions were the basis for AJA Motors's
 
misrepresentation claim.
 
a. Breach of Contract as wrongful means

 
Kailua Cab breached the terms of the contract when it 
failed to pay for the chassis when presented with the invoices, 
failed to accept delivery of conforming buses, and refused to 
accept delivery of and pay for the final six buses. The question 
here is whether contractual breaches constitute "wrongful means" 
sufficient to prove an intent to interfere with prospective 
business relations. In Kapunakea Partners v. Equilon Enterprises 
LLC, 679 F. Supp. 2d 1203, 1218-19 (D. Hawai ri 2009), the United 
States District Court for the District of Hawai ri (District 
Court) held they do not. Observing that the question had not 
been answered by a Hawai ri state court, the District Court 
predicted that if presented with the question "the Hawai ri 
Supreme Court would hold that a breach of contract, even if done 
for improper purposes, does not without more give rise to 
improper interference for purposes of a tortious interference 
with a prospective business advantage claim." Id. at 1219. 
9
 An alternate theory, proposed by AJA Motors in its initial complaint
but not pursued on appeal, was that Kailua Cab interfered with AJA Motors's
relationship with LaBeau Bros.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The District Court based its conclusion on the
 
reasoning found in the treatise Business Torts, which noted that
 
the wrongful conduct "must also be more than a mere breach of
 
contract." Kapunakea Partners, 679 F. Supp. 2d at 1218 (quoting
 
2 Phillip J. Campanella et al., Business Torts § 12.03, at 12-49
 (rev. ed. 2009)). The District Court noted that the treatise
 
pointed to the California case of Quantum Associates, Inc. v.
 
Symbol Technologies, Inc., No. C 01-02789 CRB, 2002 WL 1735356,
 
at *2 (N.D. Cal. July 12, 2002) (quoting Khoury v. Maly's of
 
California, Inc., 17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 708, 712 (Cal. Ct. App.
 
1993)), in which the United States District Court for the
 
Northern District of California observed that allowing a tortious
 
interference claim to proceed solely on the basis0 of a breach of
 
contract "would be contrary to the cautious policy of the courts
 
about extending tort remedies to ordinary commercial contracts." 
Kapunakea Partners, 679 F. Supp. 2d at 1218.
 
Further, the District Court pointed to Francis v. Lee 
Enterprises, Inc., 89 Hawai
ri 234, 244, 971 P.2d 707, 717 (1999), 
which abolished the tort of tortious breach of contract. Kapunakea Partners, 679 F. Supp. 2d at 1219. The District Court 
noted that "if a court were to conclude that a breach of contract 
could satisfy the improper interference element of the tort of 
tortious interference with a prospective business advantage under 
Hawai
ri law, it would be tantamount to resurrecting the tort of 
tortious breach of contract, albeit it in certain limited circumstances." Id. 
Other jurisdictions have also concluded that a breach
 
of contract is insufficient to prove an intent to interfere with
 
a prospective business advantage. See, e.g., Leigh Furniture &
 
Carpet Co. v. Isom, 657 P.2d 293, 309 (Utah 1982) ("A deliberate
 breach of contract, even where employed to secure economic
 
advantage, is not, by itself, an 'improper means.'"); Volcjak v.
 
Washington County Hosp. Ass'n, 723 A.2d 463, 479 (Md. Ct. Spec.
 
App. 1999) ("We have declined to recognize that there exists such
 
a wrongful act when there is merely a breach of contract that has
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
an incidental effect on the plaintiff's business relations with
 
third parties."). See also 44B Am. Jur. 2d Interference § 1
 
(2007) ("A simple breach of contract is not to be considered a
 tort unless a legal duty independent of the contract itself has
 
been violated, and this legal duty must spring from circumstances
 
extraneous to, and not constituting elements of, the
 
contract[.]"). The Utah Supreme Court reasoned that "[b]ecause
 
the law remedies breaches of contract with damages calculated to
 
give the aggrieved party the benefit of the bargain, there is no
 
need for an additional remedy in tort (unless the defendant's
 
conduct would constitute a tort independent of the contract)." 
Leigh Furniture, 657 P.2d at 309.
 
Adopting this reasoning, we conclude that AJA Motors
 
cannot as a matter of law sustain a claim for tortious
 
interference based on Kailua Cab's breach of contract alone.
 
b. Misrepresentation as "wrongful means"
 
AJA Motors contends on appeal that the interference was
 
caused during the summer of 2002, when Anderson demanded payment
 
for the chassis. AJA Motors argues that Kailua Cab "knew of the
 
problems with financing even before it entered into the contract
 
. . .[,] yet entered into the contract and kept its problems
 
secret." This "secrecy" was at the heart of AJA Motors's
 
misrepresentation claim. 
Assuming arguendo that misrepresentations were made,
10
 
there is a question whether such misrepresentations would prove
 
that Kailua Cab acted by "wrongful means" to interfere. 
"[C]onduct constituting tortious interference with business
 
relations is, by definition, conduct directed not at the
 
plaintiff itself, but at the party with which the plaintiff has
 
or seeks to have a relationship." Carvel Corp. v. Noonan, 818
 
N.E.2d 1100, 1104 (N.Y. 2004) (citing G.K.A. Beverage Corp. v.
 
10
 The circuit court, pursuant to Kailua Cab's motion for a directed
verdict, dismissed the jury's finding that Kailua Cab had intentionally and
negligently made misrepresentations that harmed AJA Motors, admitting that the
court "didn't really give it much thought, honestly, because no damages had
been given for that."
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Honickman, 55 F.3d 762, 768 (2d Cir. 1995)). The facts
 
supporting AJA Motors's misrepresentation claim, when taken in
 
the light most favorable to AJA Motors, are that Kailua Cab
 
intentionally hid the reasons for the delay in obtaining
 
financing from Anderson. Any alleged misrepresentations made
 
regarding the buses were made to Anderson and AJA Motors, not to
 
Van-Con. Moreover, there is no indication in the record that
 
Kailua Cab had any contact with Van-Con prior to a letter from
 
FHB, co-signed by Tomasa, to Van-Con ordering Van-Con to transfer
 
the chassis to another body manufacturer to complete the buses
 
after Kailua Cab had repudiated the contract. Because AJA Motors
 
failed to show the alleged misrepresentations were directed at
 
Van-Con (the third party with whom AJA Motors had a business
 
expectancy), Kailua Cab's representations, even if tortious,
 
could not be "wrongful conduct" in an interference claim. Carvel
 
Corp., 818 N.E.2d at 1104.
 
2. "Improper objective"
 The acts of interference cited in AJA Motors's 
answering brief were not "wrongful means." Therefore, we examine whether Kailua Cab pursued an "improper objective" because tort 
liability can be imposed even where otherwise legitimate means 
were used if the defendant had an improper motive for the 
interference. Kutcher v. Zimmerman, 87 Hawai
ri 394, 407, 957 
P.2d 1076, 1089 (App. 1998). 
The proposition that an "improper objective" alone will
 
suffice to prove an intent to interfere appears to be "clearly
 established." See James O. Pearson, Jr., Annotation, Liability
 
for Interference with at Will Business Relationship, 5 A.L.R. 4th
 9 § 8(b) (1981). Nevertheless, courts and commentators have
 
questioned the applicability of improper motive as the basis for
 
liability in the absence of wrongful means. For example, the
 
Utah Supreme Court in Pratt v. Prodata, Inc., 885 P.2d 786, 789
 
n.3 (Utah 1994), expressed "grave doubts" about the use of the
 
improper-purpose prong specifically in the context of commercial
 
dealings, stating that the
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
improper-purpose test creates a trap for the wary and unwary
alike: business practices that are found to be "proper
means" by a finder of fact and may otherwise be regarded as
wholly legitimate under our capitalistic economic system may
be recast through a jury's unguided exercise of its moral
judgment into examples of spite or malice. 
The Utah court also expressed concern that a finding of improper
 
purpose is shielded from appellate review because a party's
 
intent is a finding of fact. Id. In California's seminal case
 
on the subject, one judge opined that "the common law on the tort
 of intentional interference with prospective economic advantage
 
. . . is fast approaching incoherence" because of the "dissonance
 
caused by such terms as 'malice,' 'justification,' and
 
'privilege.'" Della Penna v. Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc.,
 
902 P.2d 740, 752 (Cal. 1995) (Mosk, J., concurring); see also
 Harvey S. Perlman, Interference with Contract and Other Economic
 
Expectancies: A Clash Of Tort and Contract Doctrine, 49 U. Chi.
 
L. Rev. 61, 95 (1982) ("Proof of motivation, however, is
 
error-prone and carries social costs.").
11
 
Hawairi courts have used several formulations to define 
the intent required to sustain a verdict for tortious 
interference with a prospective business advantage. Neither 
party presents argument on appeal as to which one should be 
applied. 
The first formulation can be taken from the language of 
the jury instructions themselves -- AJA Motors must demonstrate 
that Kailua Cab had a "purposeful intent to interfere." This 
language is derived from the treatise 2 Joseph D. Zamore, 
Business Torts, §§ 12.01[4]-12.03[6], at 12-11 to 12-46 (1999), 
cited to in Robert's Hawaii School Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe 
Transportation Co., 91 Hawai ri 224, 258, 982 P.2d 853, 887 
(1999). 
11
 Judge Mosk and Professor Perlman favor the use of an objective test,
i.e., whether the interfering conduct was unlawful. Della Penna, 902 P.2d at
760-61; Perlman, supra, at 128 ("The ambiguity of a malice standard and the
inevitable costs of applying it suggest that liability should be based only on
objective indicia of activity producing social loss.").
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although the Hawai ri Supreme Court in Roberts Hawaii 
established "purposeful intent to interfere" as an element of the 
tort, the court also recited the seven factors, provided in the 
Restatement (Second) of Torts, that courts should use to 
determine "whether an actor's conduct . . . is improper or not." 
Robert's Hawaii, 91 Hawai ri at 258, 982 P.2d at 887 (quoting 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 767, at 25-26 (1979)). The factor most applicable here -- "the actor's motive" -- as a 
"motive to injure another or to vent one's ill will on him 
[that] serves no socially useful purpose." Restatement (Second) 
of Torts § 767 cmt. d (1979). 
This court in Kutcher rejected the approach taken in 
Restatement (Second) of Torts as unworkable and instead adopted another formulation for "improper purpose" that focused on the 
"unjustified" nature of the interference. Kutcher, 87 Hawai
ri at 
406-07, 957 P.2d at 1088-89. This approach avoids imposing liability where the interference protects legitimate interests, 
such as competition, and is consistent with other jurisdictions 
that require proof of "legal malice -- that is, to an intent to 
do harm without justification." Pearson, supra 16 § 2(a). 
However, the Hawai
ri Supreme Court has implied that existence of 
justification is irrelevant to an interference with a prospective business advantage claim. Whitey's Boat Cruises, Inc. v. 
Napali-Kauai Boat Charters, Inc., 110 Hawai
ri 302, 317 n.25, 132 
P.3d 1213, 1228 n.25 (2006) (stating that interference with 
prospective business advantage, unlike interference with 
prospective contractual relations, does not require a showing 
that the defendant acted without proper justification). 
Still another formulation is seen in Omega 
Environmental, Inc. v. Gilbarco, Inc., supra, a case repeatedly 
cited to by Hawai ri courts. See, e.g., Robert's Hawaii, 91 
Hawairi at 258, 982 P.2d at 887; Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai ri at 
116, 148 P.3d at 1218; Meridian Mortgage, 109 Hawai ri at 48, 122 
P.3d at 1146. The Ninth Circuit stated the plaintiff must demonstrate that the defendant "pursued an improper objective of 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
harming the plaintiff." Omega Envtl., 127 F.3d at 1166 (internal
 
quotation marks and citations omitted). The court, however,
 
emphasized that "[a]sserting one's rights to maximize economic
 
interests does not create an inference of ill will or improper
 
purpose." Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
There is no evidence to support a conclusion that
 
Kailua Cab had the specific intent to disrupt the relationship
 
between AJA Motors and Van-Con, intended to harm AJA Motors, or
 
acted without justification. AJA Motors does not speculate on
 
Kailua Cab's motive beyond saying that Kailua Cab wanted to avoid
 
paying for the final six buses.
 
It has been said that the plaintiff need not prove the 
defendant had the "specific intent, or purpose of disrupting the 
plaintiff's prospective economic advantage," but rather could 
prevail on a showing that "the defendant knew that the 
interference was certain or substantially certain to occur as a 
result of its action." Korea Supply Co. v. Lockheed Martin 
Corp., 63 P.3d 937, 949-50 (Cal. 2003). "The rule applies, in other words, to an interference that is incidental to the actor's 
independent purpose and desire but known to him to be a necessary 
consequence of his action." Id. at 951. It is not 
"substantially certain" that a buyer's failure to pay will result in a manufacturer's terminating its business relationship with a 
dealer. Thus, the severance of the franchiser-franchisee 
relationship between Van-Con and AJA Motors is not a "necessary 
consequence" of the dispute between AJA Motors and Kailua Cab. 
Although it is the jury's province to determine a party's intent, 
see Bodell Constr. Co. v. Ohio Pac. Tech, Inc., 458 F. Supp. 2d 
1153, 1165 (D. Hawai
ri 2006), in the instant case there is 
insufficient evidence from which the jury could have concluded that Kailua Cab had the requisite intent to interfere with AJA's 
relationship with Van-Con. 
D. DAMAGES
 
Because AJA Motors has not offered sufficient evidence
 
that Kailua Cab intended to interfere with AJA Motors'
 
22
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prospective advantage, we need not discuss Kailua Cab's argument
 
that AJA Motors failed to introduce evidence of damages sustained
 
by AJA Motors, rather than Anderson alone. Furthermore, because
 
punitive damages applied only where the jury awarded damages on
 
AJA Motors' counterclaims for misrepresentation or intentional
 
interference with prospective economic advantage and there were
 
no underlying torts, there could be no punitive damages award. 
E. ADMITTING ANDERSON'S TESTIMONY
 
Kailua Cab challenges the admission of Anderson's
 
testimony regarding the May 22, 2003 incident because "Anderson
 
worked himself into an emotional frenzy before the jury, and the
 
jury heard 24 pages of uninterrupted bitter vitriol and
 
inflammatory language," including references to Tomasa and his
 
employees as "thugs," a "gang," and "hired assailants." Kailua
 
Cab also accurately notes that Anderson's testimony is peppered
 
throughout with references to the incident.
 
The issue on appeal is whether the court abused its
 
discretion in admitting Anderson's testimony. Kailua Cab does
 
not dispute that testimony regarding the attack was relevant. 
Kailua Cab, however, argued at trial that testimony regarding the
 
incident should be excluded because it was unduly prejudicial,
 
confusing, and distracting for the jury, and therefore
 
inadmissible under HRE Rule 403. Rule 403 provides that relevant
 
evidence "may be excluded if its probative value is substantially
 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
 
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue
 
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative
 
evidence." Rule 403 outlines "a cost-benefit calculus" that
 
requires the trial court to use its discretion to achieve the
 
"delicate balance between probative value and prejudicial
 
effect." Kaeo v. Davis, 68 Haw. 447, 454, 719 P.2d 387, 392
 
(1986).
 The circuit court weighed the probative value of
 
Anderson's testimony against the prejudice to Kailua Cab and
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concluded there was some prejudice "because it goes to bad
 
character depending on who[m] [the jurors] believe." 
Nevertheless, the circuit court also stated that the assault had
 
some probative value in that it explained Anderson's failure to
 
do repairs -- "a fact of consequence." The circuit court held
 
that "[w]eighing relevance, probative value, need and the unfair
 
prejudice, confusion and waste of time, I still feel that the
 
undue prejudice and waste of time does not outweigh substantially
 
the probative value and need for this evidence." It is clear the
 
circuit court applied the appropriate "cost-benefit calculus" and
 
therefore did not abuse its discretion in not excluding
 
Anderson's testimony regarding the incident.
 
Furthermore, the circuit court gave the following
 
limiting instruction before Tomasa testified on cross-examination
 
about the incident:
 
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you're going to hear
about evidence about an alleged incident on May 22, 2003. 
Sometimes in a trial, evidence is offered for a
limited purpose, and when that occurs, you can only consider
that evidence for that limited purpose, and that applies to
any evidence that you will hear about . . . an alleged
incident on May 22, 2003.
 
The evidence you're about to hear about this alleged
incident, if believed by you, may be considered only on the
issue of whether or not [AJA Motors] failed to make repairs.
 
You may not use this evidence for any other purpose in
this case.
 
The circuit court also gave the instruction again before Anderson
 
testified about the incident.
 
Kailua Cab contends the "jury failed to heed limiting 
instructions." However, where the judge has given limiting 
instructions to the jury, the jury is presumed to have followed 
the court's instructions. See, e.g., Shanghai Inv. Co. v. Alteka 
Co., 92 Hawai ri 482, 499, 993 P.2d 516, 533 (2000), overruled on 
other grounds by Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai ri 327, 31 P.3d 184 
(2001); State v. Konohia, 106 Hawai ri 517, 528, 107 P.3d 1190, 
1201 (App. 2005). Analogously, the Hawai ri Supreme Court has 
allowed one party's "inflammatory" testimony that alleged an 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opponent was tied to organized crime when a limiting instruction 
was given. Shanghai Inv. Co., 92 Hawai ri at 498-99, 993 P.2d at 
532-33. Kailua Cab's disagreement with the verdict does not prove that the jury disregarded the circuit court's instructions. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
The Final Judgment filed on September 26, 2006 in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is vacated, and this case is
 
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
ri, April 7, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Stephen D. Tom
Marie E. Riley
(White & Tom)
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Charles H. Brower for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
25
 