 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29530 & 29531
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PAUL A. KECK, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR.NO. 04-1-0871 & CR. NO. 04-1-1525)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Paul A. Keck (
Keck) appeals from
 
the following orders of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court), both filed on November 21, 2008: (1) Order of
 
Resentencing in Cr. No. 04-1-0871, imposing five years for each
 
of counts 1 through 6 and one year for count 7, counts 1 and 3 to
 
run consecutively to each other and consecutively to counts I and
 
II of Cr. No. 04-1-1525; and (2) Order of Resentencing in Cr. No.
 
04-1-1525, imposing five years of imprisonment for each of counts
 
I and II, to run consecutively to each other and consecutively to
 
counts 1 and 3 of Cr. No. 04-1-0871.1/
 
In these consolidated appeals, Keck asserts three
 
points of error:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in granting the State's
 
motion for resentencing because it lacked jurisdiction to
 
resentence Keck de novo following the writ of habeas corpus; 
1/
 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in denying Keck's motion
 
for disqualification based on apparent bias; and
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in twice continuing Keck's
 
resentencing hearing, resulting in a two-and-one-half month delay
 
that violated Keck's constitutional right to a speedy trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Keck's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Keck argues that the Circuit Court only had 
jurisdiction to correct the unconstitutional portions of Keck's 
sentence pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
35, and it lacked jurisdiction to resentence Keck de novo. We 
disagree. 
The issuance of a writ of habeas corpus results in
 
"invalidation (in whole or in part) of the judgment authorizing
 
the prisoner's confinement." Magwood v. Patterson, --- U.S. ---,
 
130 S.Ct. 2788, 2797 (2010) (internal quotation marks and
 citation omitted). Where a court issues a writ based on
 
constitutional error, the remedy "should put the defendant back
 
in the position he would have been in if the [constitutional]
 
violation never occurred."  Chioino v. Kernan, 581 F.3d 1182,
 
1184 (9th Cir. 2009) (internal quotation marks and citation
 
omitted). After the federal court grants a writ, "the State may
 
seek a new judgment (through a new trial or a new sentencing
 
proceeding)." Magwood, --- U.S. at ---, 130 S.Ct. at 2797
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphasis added).
 
Following the issuance of the writ, Keck's original
 
sentence was invalidated. Magwood, 130 S.Ct. at 2797. His
 
status, in essence, reverted to that of an unsentenced felon. 
The Circuit Court was not limited to correcting the sentence
 
under HRPP Rule 35 because the sentence on the extended-term
 
counts was invalidated in its entirety. Pursuant to 
2   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS ยง 603-21.5(a)(1) (2004), the Circuit Court had plenary
 
jurisdiction to resentence Keck de novo. Accord Chioino, 581
 
F.3d at 1183-86.  We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err
 
in resentencing Keck de novo.2/
 
(2) Keck argues that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion when it denied his motion for disqualification. Keck 
has not argued, either in the Circuit Court or on appeal, that 
there was any grounds for alleging actual bias against him. 
Instead, Keck argues that an appearance of bias or impropriety 
arises from the Circuit Court's action in twice continuing Keck's 
resentencing hearing, over Keck's objections, in part to allow 
the Hawai 'i Legislature to resolve pending legislation regarding 
Hawai'i's extended sentencing law. 
Recusal or disqualification is only appropriate where
 
failure to do so "would create in reasonable minds a perception
 
that the judge's ability to carry out judicial responsibilities
 
with integrity, impartiality and competence is impaired." State
 
v. Ross, 89 Hawai 'i 371, 380, 974 P.2d 11, 20 (1998) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). This is an objective test 
based on "the assessment of a reasonable impartial onlooker 
apprised of all the facts." Id. 
The record does not support Keck's assertion that the
 
Circuit Court's granting of the continuances created a reasonable
 
perception that the Court was assisting the State in securing
 
extended sentences. The court had continued similarly situated
 
cases in order to "see what the lay of the land would be"
 
following the outcome of the proposed legislation. In granting
 
2/
 Keck brings our attention to the decision of the Hawai' i Supreme
Court in State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i 495, 508-09, 229 P.3d 313, 326-27
(2010), ostensibly for the proposition that we review consecutive sentences
with heightened scrutiny when the circuit court utilizes this "less burdensomeprocedural alternative" to reach the same sentence available under extended
term sentencing. Id. at 508, 229 P.3d at 326. However, Keck has not made any
argument challenging the substance of the consecutive sentences. Thus we deem 
this point waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the continuances, the court merely sought to afford the parties
 
in Keck's case that same opportunity. Clarity as to Hawaii's
 
extended sentencing law could have benefitted either or both of
 
the parties. Moreover, at the continued resentencing hearing,
 
the Circuit Court indicated it "would be unlikely to grant the
 
motion for extended [sentence] in any event." Ultimately, the
 
Circuit Court denied the State's motion for an extended sentence.
 
In addition, Keck apparently was unavailable for the
 
first two resentencing hearings, and the court was within its
 
discretion to grant continuances on that basis alone. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Keck's motion for disqualification.
 
(3) Keck contends that the Circuit Court violated his
 
right to a speedy trial by granting continuances that resulted in
 
a delay of approximately two-and-one-half months. 
Assuming arguendo that the right to a speedy trial
 
encompasses resentencing proceedings, a roughly two-month delay
 
alone is insufficient to establish a violation. Cf. Pollard v.
 
United States, 352 U.S. 354, 361 (1957) (applying speedy trial
 analysis to resentencing). In its seminal case on the issue, the
 
U.S. Supreme Court set forth a variety of balancing factors for
 
determining whether a defendant's right to a speedy trial has
 
been violated. Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 530-32 (1972). 
The court must weigh: (1) the length of the delay; (2) the
 reason for the delay; (3) the defendant's assertion of the right;
 
and (4) resulting prejudice to the defendant. Id. 
As a threshold matter, the length of delay functions as
 
a "triggering mechanism." Id. at 530. If the delay is not
 
"presumptively prejudicial," a court need not inquire further. 
Id. Prejudice is based on the defendant's interests in avoiding
 
wrongful incarceration, minimizing anxiety and concern, and
 limiting the possibility that the defense will be impaired. Id.
 
at 532. In the post-conviction resentencing context, Keck's
 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interests in preparing a thorough defense and avoiding wrongful
 
incarceration are at their lowest ebb. Keck pled guilty to eight
 
counts of class C felonies. The maximum length of imprisonment
 
for each count was five years. HRS ยง 706-660 (1993). In light
 
of the potential sentences, a two-and-one-half month delay was
 
not presumptively prejudicial.
 
Even if a two-and-one-half month delay were sufficient
 
to trigger further inquiry, the balance of factors weighs against
 
Keck. The reason for the delay was in part because Keck was not
 
present at the first two hearings and in part because there was
 
an anticipated change to Hawaii's extending sentencing law,
 
which, once enacted, could clarify matters for both parties and
 
help avoid further delays and perhaps needless further
 
proceedings. Although Keck objected to the continuances, there
 
is no evidence that any prejudice resulted from the delay. We
 
reject Keck's contention that the reason for the delay, which he
 
characterizes as "giv[ing] the State another sentencing avenue,"
 
prejudiced him such that he was denied his right to a speedy
 
sentence. Thus, we conclude that there was no violation of
 
Keck's right to a speedy trial and the Circuit Court did not err
 
in resentencing Keck.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's orders
 
of resentencing in Cr. Nos. 04-1-0871 and 04-1-1525.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 10, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Earle A. Partington
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5 