NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28543
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARK W.S. YOUNG, Plaintiff-Appellant,
vs.
 
GEORGE W. VAN BUREN, ROBERT G. CAMPBELL,
and CHERYL R.L. KASTER, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOE #1, and JOHN DOE #2, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CV. NO. 06-1-0405)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley, and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Mark W.S. Young (Mark) appeals from
 
the April 17, 2007, judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (circuit court)  in favor of Defendants-Appellees
George W. Van Buren (Van Buren), Robert G. Campbell (Campbell),
 and Cheryl R.L. Kaster (Kaster) (collectively, Defendants) on all
 claims alleged in Mark's complaint. 
The circuit court granted the summary judgment motions
 
filed by Van Buren and Campbell on the principal ground that
 neither of them owed a duty to Mark. On appeal, Mark asserts
 
1 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided. 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the circuit court erred in granting the summary judgment
 
motions of Van Buren and Campbell and in refusing to continue the
 hearings on these motions to permit Mark to conduct further
 discovery. For the reasons set forth below, we affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
This case involves claims filed by Mark, a non-client,
 
against a lawyer who was retained by Mark's mother to prepare
 amendments to her trust and others who assisted the lawyer. Mark
 was dissatisfied with the amendments made to his mother's trust. 
The amendments were prepared by Van Buren, the lawyer retained by
 Mark's mother, with Campbell, who was Van Buren's law partner,
 serving as a witness and Kaster serving as a notary. 
In 1995, Mark's mother, Sharon M.Y. Young (Sharon),
 
created the "Sharon M.Y. Young Revocable Living Trust Agreement"
 (Trust), which named Sharon as trustee and James Vrechek
 (Vrechek) as one of the successor trustees. Sharon, then
 
widowed, had two sons, Mark and Keith W.S. Young.
 
The original Trust provided that at Sharon's death, the
 
trustee shall pay specific sums to Sharon's half-sister and half-
brother and distribute the Trust's residue to Sharon's living
 children when they reach age forty-five.  The Trust was amended
 
in 2002, but the beneficiaries remained the same. 
In June 2004, Sharon retained Van Buren to draft a
 
second Trust amendment. On June 15, 2004, while in hospice,
 
Sharon executed the second Trust amendment, which removed her
 
half-sister and half-brother as beneficiaries and added specific
 bequests to four new beneficiaries, with a large sum going to
 "the Hawaii Sat Sang Society Building Fund aka Eckankar."
2
 
Sharon's children remained the residuary beneficiaries of the
 Trust. Sharon executed the second Trust amendment in the 
2 Mark refers to the new beneficiaries as religious advisors
and the Hawaii Sat Sang Society as the local branch of the
Eckankar Church. 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
presence of Van Buren, Campbell, and Kaster, and Kaster notarized
 
the document. 
Because of a variance between Sharon's full name as
 
typed in the second Trust amendment and her signature, Van Buren
 prepared a third Trust amendment to eliminate the variance and
 make another non-material correction. On June 16, 2004, one day
 after signing the second Trust amendment, Sharon signed the third
 Trust amendment, which was signed in the presence of Van Buren,
 witnessed by Campbell, and notarized by Kaster.  Sharon died on
 
June 22, 2004, six days after signing the third Trust amendment. 
Van Buren and Campbell asserted that Sharon appeared
 
competent and of sound mind when she executed the second and
 
third Trust amendments. Neither Van Buren nor Campbell had known
 or interacted with any of the newly-added beneficiaries prior to 
the execution of the second and third Trust amendments.
 
B.
 
On July 15, 2005, approximately thirteen months after
 
Sharon's death, Mark filed a petition in probate court in Case
 No. T-05-1-0001, challenging the second and third Trust
 amendments (probate petition). The probate petition seeks to
 
invalidate the second and third Trust amendments on grounds
 
including that Sharon lacked the testamentary capacity to execute
 these Trust amendments and had been subjected to undue influence
 by Eckankar Church members.
 
On March 8, 2006, Mark filed the complaint in this
 
case, Civil No. 06-1-0405, in which he basically asserted that
 Sharon had not been competent to execute the second and third
 Trust amendments; that Defendants should have known this; and
 that Defendants breached their duty to protect others against
 unreasonable risks. Mark's complaint alleged claims against Van
 Buren, Campbell, and Kaster for negligence, gross negligence,
 conspiracy, and tortious interference with inheritance
 expectancy.
 
Van Buren filed a motion for summary judgment. Van
 
Buren's main argument was that he owed no legal duty to Mark
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
because Mark was not Van Buren's client and because Mark was not 
an intended beneficiary of the second or third Trust amendment. Mark filed a memorandum in opposition, arguing that Van Buren's motion should be denied or that alternatively, the hearing on the motion should be continued, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(f) (2000), so that Mark could depose Vrechek, the trustee of Sharon's Trust. In support of Mark's request for a Rule 56(f) continuance, Mark's attorney filed a declaration which stated: 
Plaintiff's counsel has attempted to depose James
Francis Vrechek . . . to fully inquire into and confirm
information as to his past, his relationship with
Plaintiff’s mother and the family members, his observations
of her condition at hospice, the retention of attorney
George Van Buren and his payment therefore, and the trust
amendments. 
The circuit court denied Mark's request for a continuance and
 
granted Van Buren's motion for summary judgment. 
Campbell then filed a motion for summary judgment,
 
which argued that Campbell, as a witness to the third Trust
 amendment, owed no legal duty to Mark to evaluate or ascertain
 Sharon's testamentary capacity.
3 Mark opposed Campbell's summary
 
judgment motion, arguing that it should be denied or
 alternatively, that the hearing on the motion should be continued
 so that Mark could depose Campbell, Vrechek, and the new
 beneficiaries or their associates. Prior to the hearing on
 Campbell's motion, Mark's attorney was able to depose Campbell. 
The circuit court denied Mark's request for a continuance and
 granted Campbell's motion for summary judgment. 
By stipulation of the parties, Mark subsequently
 
dismissed all claims against notary Kaster without prejudice,
 after which the circuit court entered its judgment against Mark
 and in favor of Defendants on all claims. This appeal followed. 
3 Campbell was present and observed Sharon execute both the
second and third Trust amendments, but he only signed the third
Trust amendment as a witness. 
4
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
On appeal, Mark contends that the circuit court erred
 
in granting summary judgment in favor of Van Buren and Campbell
 
because: 1) the circuit court improperly applied the six-factor
 balancing test set forth in Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai
'i 247, 21 P.3d 
452 (2001), in concluding that Van Buren owed no duty to Mark as
 a matter of law; 2) Van Buren had a duty to inquire about
 Sharon's testamentary capacity under Hawai
'i Rules of 
Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 1.4; 3) Campbell, in his role as
 witness to Sharon's testamentary instrument, owed a duty to
 reasonably ascertain Sharon's testamentary capacity; 4) the
 circuit court erroneously failed to recognize a cause of action
 for tortious interference with inheritance expectancy; and 5) the
 circuit court should have granted Mark's requests to continue the
 hearings on the summary judgment motions pursuant to HRCP Rule
 56(f).
4
 
"We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
 
summary judgment de novo." Zane v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co.,
 
115 Hawai 'i 60, 72, 165 P.3d 961, 973 (2007). 
4 We decline to review Mark's claim that the circuit court 
"failed to recognize [that] testamentary gift to religious
advisor is presumed product of undue influence under common law."
Mark's opening brief does not show, and our review of the record
on appeal does not indicate, that he raised this argument beforethe circuit court. See State v. Moses, 102 Hawai
'i 449, 455-56,
77 P.3d 940, 946-47 (2003) (stating that as a general rule, aparty that fails to raise an argument in the trial court will bedeemed to have waived that argument on appeal). We also decline to review or address Mark's contentions that the circuit court 1)"improperly determined that Probate Court could make [Mark]whole"; and 2) "improperly determined the common law axiom thatthere no legal wrong without a remedy." Mark does not direct us to where in the record these purportedly erroneous rulings can befound. See Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule
28(b)(4) (2006) (directing that each point of error shall state"where in the record the alleged error occurred" and "when thepoint involves a finding or conclusion of the court or agency, aquotation of the finding or conclusion urged as error"); see alsoState v. Hoang, 93 Hawai
'i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000)
("[W]e will not presume error from a silent record."). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Id. at 72-73, 165 P.3d at 973-74 (citations and brackets
 
omitted). 
We resolve Mark's contentions on appeal as follows:
 
A.
 
The circuit court did not misapply the six-factor test
 
set forth in Blair. In granting Van Buren's motion for summary
 judgment, the circuit court orally ruled that Van Buren owed no
 legal duty to Mark and thus Mark could not assert his negligence
 and gross negligence claims against Van Buren. We agree with
 this ruling. Van Buren owned no legal duty to Mark. Mark was
 not Van Buren's client or an intended beneficiary of the second
 or third Trust amendment, which Van Buren prepared for his client
 Sharon. In addition, Mark has and was pursuing an alternative
 remedy to bringing a malpractice lawsuit against Van Buren -­filing a petition in probate court to invalidate the second and
 third Trust amendments on the ground that his mother was
 incompetent or was subjected to undue influence when she executed
 those documents. 
For a plaintiff to prevail on a claim of negligence or 
gross negligence, one of the elements that the plaintiff must prove is that the plaintiff was owed a duty of care by the defendant. See Dairy Road Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 
Hawai
'i 398, 419, 992 P.2d 93, 114 (2000); State v. Bunn, 50 Haw. 
351, 358, 440 P.2d 528, 534 (1968). In Blair, the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court acknowledged that: 
In determining whether or not a duty is owed, we must weigh
the considerations of policy which favor the [plaintiffs']
recovery against those which favor limiting the
[defendants'] liability. The question of whether one owes a
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
duty to another must be decided on a case-by-case basis.
However, we are reluctant to impose a new duty upon members
of our society without any logical, sound, and compelling
reasons taking into consideration the social and human
relationships of our society.
 
7
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Blair, 95 Hawai 'i at 260, 21 P.3d at 465 (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted). 
In evaluating whether to impose a duty on an attorney 
to a non-client for malpractice in the estate planning context, 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court adopted a test which applies the six 
factors set forth in Lucas v. Hamm, 364 P.2d 685, 687-88 (Cal. 1961). Blair, 95 Hawai
'i at 260, 21 P.3d at 465. Under this 
test, courts are to balance the following "relevant" factors, commonly referred to as the Lucas factors: 
(1) the extent to which the transaction was intended to
affect the plaintiff; (2) the foreseeability of harm to him
[or her]; (3) the degree of certainty that the plaintiff
suffered injury; (4) the closeness of the connection between
the defendant's conduct and the injury; (5) the policy of
preventing future harm; and (6) whether imposing liability
placed an undue burden upon the legal profession.
 
Blair, 95 Hawai 'i at 254, 260, 21 P.3d at 459, 465. 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court emphasized that in applying 
the Lucas factors, "[t]he class of individuals who may bring a 
malpractice action is limited to a client's intended beneficiaries, provided no other remedy exists to prevent future harm." Id. at 261, 21 P.3d at 466 (emphasis added). 
In this case, it is undisputed that Sharon retained Van
 
Buren to prepare the second and third Trust amendments; that Mark
 was not Van Buren's client; that the second and third Trust
 amendments were not drafted to benefit Mark; and that Mark can
 pursue and has pursued in probate court his claim that the second
 and third Trust amendments should be invalidated due to Sharon's
 alleged lack of testamentary capacity and her being subjected to
 undue influence. Because Mark was not an intended beneficiary of
 the second or third Trust amendment and because he can challenge
 the validity of the amendments in probate court, we conclude
 under the Lucas factors, that Van Buren owed no duty to Mark. 
Accordingly, the circuit court properly granted summary judgment
 on Mark's negligence and gross negligence claims against Van
 Buren. See id; see also Moore v. Anderson Zeigler Disharoon
 
Gallgher & Gray, P.C., 109 Cal. App. 4th 1287, 1298 (2003)
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(concluding that an attorney preparing a will for a client owes
 
no duty to the beneficiary under a previous will to ascertain and
 document the testamentary capacity of the client).
 
B.
 
We also reject Mark's assertion that Van Buren had a 
duty to Mark to inquire about Sharon's testamentary capacity under HRPC 1.14.
5 An alleged "[v]iolation of the Rules of 
Professional Responsibility does not alone give rise to any civil liability." In re Disciplinary Bd. of Hawai
'i Supreme Court, 91 
Hawai'i 363, 370, 984 P.2d 688, 695 (1999) (citing Preamble, 
Hawai'i Rules of Professional Conduct, SCOPE & [6]). HRPC Rule 
1.14 did not create a duty owed by Van Buren to Mark and thus did
 not provide a basis for Mark to seek recovery from Van Buren. 
See HRPC, SCOPE, Paragraph [6]. 
C. 
We conclude that the circuit court properly granted
 
Campbell's motion for summary judgment because Campbell, as a
 witness to the third Trust amendment, owed no duty to Mark. Mark
 provides no persuasive authority to support his claim that
 Campbell owed any duty to Mark in Campbell's role as a witness. 
In addition, the settlor of a trust has the power to 
modify the trust if he or she reserved such power by the terms of the trust. In re Trust Estate of Daoang, 87 Hawai
'i 200, 204, 
5 HRPC Rule 1.14 provides: 
(a) When a client's ability to make adequately
considered decisions in connection with the
 
representation is impaired, whether because of
minority, mental disability, or for some other reason,
the lawyer shall, as far as reasonably possible,
maintain a normal client-lawyer relationship with the
client.
 
(b) A lawyer may seek the appointment of a
guardian or take other protective action with respect
to a client, only when the lawyer reasonably believes
that the client cannot adequately act in the client's
own interest.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
953 P.2d 959, 963 (App. 1998). Sharon's Trust authorized
 
amendments to the Trust to be made "by a writing delivered to the 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trustee during the Settlor's life." The Trust did not require
 
that amendments to the Trust, to be valid, must be verified by a
 witness. This provides additional support for the conclusion
 that Campbell, in his role as a witness to the third Trust
 amendment, did not owe any legal duty to Mark.
 
D.
 
The circuit court did not err in granting summary 
judgment on Mark's claim of tortious interference with inheritance expectancy. Mark cites no Hawai
'i authority that 
recognizes a claim for tortious interference with inheritance expectancy. The circuit court also did not err in granting summary judgment on Mark's civil conspiracy claim. "[T]here can be no civil claim based upon a conspiracy alone." Ellis v. 
Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 57, 451 P.2d 814, 822 (1969). Because the circuit court properly granted summary judgment with respect to Mark's underlying claims for negligence, gross negligence, and tortious interference with inheritance expectancy, Mark lacked any basis to assert civil conspiracy as a cause of action. 
E.
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying Mark's requests to continue the hearings on the summary
 judgment motions pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f). HRCP Rule 56(f)
 states:
 
When affidavits are unavailable. Should it appear
from the affidavits of a party opposing the motion that the
party cannot for reasons stated present by affidavit facts
essential to justify the party’s opposition, the court may
refuse the application for judgment or may order a
continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or
depositions to be taken or discovery to be had or may make
such other order as is just.
 
"The circuit court's decision to deny a request for a 
continuance pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f) shall not be reversed 
absent an abuse of discretion." Assocs. Fin. Servs. of Hawaii, 
Inc. v. Richardson, 99 Hawai 'i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 (App. 
2002). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. 
With respect to Van Buren's motion for summary 
judgment, Mark sought an HRCP Rule 56(f) continuance to secure 
Vrechek's deposition. When a party moves the court pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f), "the request must demonstrate how postponement of a ruling on the [summary judgment] motion will enable him, by discovery or other means, to rebut the movants' showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact." Wilder v. Tanouye, 7 Haw. 
App. 247, 253, 753 P.2d 816, 821 (1988) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); Acoba v. General Tire, Inc., 92 Hawai
'i 1, 
12, 986 P.2d 288, 299 (1999). The pivotal question in Van Buren's motion for summary judgment was whether Van Buren owned any duty to Mark, which in turn depended on whether Mark was an intended beneficiary of the second or third Trust amendment. Thus to prevail on his request for an HRCP Rule 56(f) continuance, Mark was required to demonstrate how Vrechek's deposition would enable him to rebut Van Buren's showing that Mark was not an intended beneficiary of the second or third Trust amendment. 
Mark's asserted justification for his need to depose 
Vrechek was inadequate to support a continuance under HRCP Rule 56(f). In particular, Mark provided no basis for believing that Vrechek's deposition would yield information that would demonstrate that Mark was an intended beneficiary of the second or third Trust amendment. See Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Hawaii, 
99 Hawai
'i at 454, 56 P.3d at 756 (upholding the denial of a 
request for a continuance under HRCP Rule 56(f) because "[n]owhere in [appellant's] declaration did [appellant] demonstrate how the requested continuance would enable him through obtained discovery to rebut [appellee's] showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact"); Cont'l Mar. of San Francisco, Inc. v. Pac. Coast Metal Trades Dist. Council, 817 F.2d 1391, 1395 (9th Cir. 1987) (holding that a party seeking a continuance under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 
12
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
56(f), "bears the burden to show what specific facts it hopes to
 
discover that will raise an issue of material fact"); Employers
 Teamsters Local Nos. 175 and 505 Pension Trust Fund v. Clorox
 Co., 353 F.3d 1125, 1129 (9th Cir. 2004) (concluding that to
 prevail under FRCP Rule 56(f), the party requesting a continuance
 must demonstrate "some basis for believing the information sought
 actually exists")
6 Under these circumstances, the circuit court
 
did not abuse its discretion in denying Mark's HRCP Rule 56(f)
 request for a continuance.
7
 
2.
 
With respect to Campbell's motion for summary judgment,
 
Mark sought a HRCP Rule 56(f) motion to secure the depositions of
 Campbell, Vrechek, and the new beneficiaries or their associates.
 However, Mark did not support his request for a continuance by
 demonstrating how these depositions would enable him to rebut
 Campbell's showing that Campbell owed no duty to Mark. In
 addition, Campbell's deposition was taken before the hearing on
 Campbell's motion for summary judgment, thereby eliminating the
 securing of Campbell's deposition as a basis for the continuance. 
We conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 in denying Mark's HRCP Rule 56(f) motion with respect to
 Campbell. 
6 When Cont’l Mar. of San Francisco and Clorox were decided, 
the version of FRCP Rule 56(f) then in effect was identical to
the current version of HRCP Rule 56(f). "Where a Hawai 'i rule of 
civil procedure is identical to the federal rule, theinterpretation of this rule by federal courts is highlypersuasive." E.g., Dejetley v. Kaho
'ohalahala, 122 Hawai 'i 251,
270, 226 P.3d 421, 440 (2010) (internal quotation marks andcitation omitted). 
7 We note that while parties should have a fair opportunity
to conduct adequate discovery, the continuance of a hearing on asummary judgment motion cannot be based on the need to conduct a"fishing expedition." See Akaka v. Yoshina, 84 Hawai
'i 383, 389,
935 P.2d 98, 104 (1997). 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the April 17, 
2007, judgment of the circuit court.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 29, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Mark W.S. Young Chief Judge
Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se
 Keith K. Hiraoka
 
(Roeca, Louie & Hiraoka) Associate Judge
for Defendants-Appellees
GEORGE W. VAN BUREN and
 ROBERT G. CAMPBELL
 
Associate Judge
 
14
 