 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29367
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RYAN KAUI CHONG and GABRIELLE FUMIE CHONG,
Plaintiffs-Appellees, v. COLETTE MARGARET ANDERSON,
et al., Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-223)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Colette Margaret Anderson
 
(Anderson) appeals pro se from the order granting Plaintiffs-
Appellees Ryan Kaui Chong and Gabrielle Fumie Chong's (the
 
Chongs) motion to enforce a settlement agreement, filed September
 
19, 2008, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1
 
Anderson's Opening Brief does not satisfy the 
requirements of Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b)(4). Under HRAP Rule 28(b)(4), an appellant's opening brief 
must provide, inter alia: 
A concise statement of the points of error set forth in
separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall state: (i)
the alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii)
where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii)
where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
manner in which the alleged error was brought to the
attention of the court or agency.
 
In Anderson's opening brief, she does not state where
 
in the record any of the alleged errors occurred or where in the
 
record the alleged errors were objected to or the manner in which
 
the alleged errors were brought to the attention of the Circuit
 
Court. Generally, "failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) is
 
alone sufficient to affirm the [lower] court's judgment." Morgan
 
v. Planning Dep't, County of Kauai, 104 Hawai 'i 173, 180, 86 P.3d 
982, 989 (2004). Nonetheless, this court observes a policy of 
affording pro se litigants the opportunity "to have their cases 
heard on the merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of 
Honolulu, 77 Hawai 'i 383, 386, 885 P.3d 361, 364 (1994). 
Accordingly, to the extent that we can discern Anderson's 
arguments, we attempt to address her alleged errors. 
The points of error identified in Anderson's opening
 
brief are summarized as follows:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in assuming that Anderson
 
was in breach of the DROA contract because that assumption
 
prejudiced the Circuit Court's decision to grant the motion to
 
enforce the Settlement Agreement;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in allowing the Chongs'
 
attorney, Hasegawa, to present false and defamatory testimony,
 
make ad hominem arguments, and act in bad faith with an intent to
 
delay and prejudice the proceedings;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in granting the motion to
 
enforce the Settlement Agreement because the Settlement Agreement
 
was too ambiguous, misleading, vague, and indefinite to be
 
enforceable; and
 
(4) The order granting the Chongs' motion to enforce
 
the Settlement Agreement should be reversed due to ineffective
 
assistance of Anderson's counsel. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Anderson's points of error as follows:
 
We review an order granting a motion to enforce a 
settlement as if it were a summary judgment. Miller v. Manuel, 9 
Haw. App. 56, 64, 828 P.2d 286, 292 (App. 1991). The party moving for summary judgment has the burden of producing support 
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material facts exists 
with respect to the essential elements of the claim or defense 
which the motion seeks to establish or which the motion 
questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it is entitled 
to summary judgment as a matter of law. Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal 
State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai
'i 159, 164, 172 P.3d 471, 476 (2007) 
(citation omitted). Once the moving party has met that burden, 
the adverse, non-moving party, "may not rest upon the mere 
allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the 
adverse party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided 
in [HRCP Rule 56], must set forth specific facts showing that 
there is a genuine issue for trial." Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e). 
Based on the evidence before the Circuit Court at the
 
time of the motion to enforce the Settlement Agreement, we
 
conclude that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to
 
the existence of a valid compromise agreement and the Chongs were
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The only evidence in
 
the record at the time of the motion was the evidence submitted
 
by the Chongs, including the following unchallenged materials: 
(1) a declaration of the Chongs' attorney certifying the
 
authenticity of the attached exhibits and attesting to the
 
existence of a Settlement Agreement and the lack of
 
responsiveness on the part of Anderson's attorney and/or Anderson
 
in implementing the agreement; (2) a copy of the written
 
3    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlement Agreement signed and dated by the Chongs, Anderson,
 
and Anderson's attorney; (3) a letter from the Chongs' attorney
 
informing the Circuit Court that a settlement had been reached;
 
and (4) various emails and letters purporting to show Anderson's
 
lack of effort in cooperating with the Chongs in closing the sale
 
as agreed to in the Settlement Agreement.
 
It is undisputed, both in the court below and on
 
appeal, that Anderson signed the Settlement Agreement. A plain
 
reading of the written, signed Settlement Agreement indicates
 
that Anderson agreed to its terms, that the parties intended to
 
be contractually bound, that the Settlement Agreement was
 
intended to resolve the disputed claims, that it was intended to
 
constitute the entire agreement between the parties, and that it
 
was entered into with full knowledge of the facts. Anderson
 
concedes in her Reply Brief that she agreed to the terms of the
 
Settlement Agreement. The Settlement Agreement was clearly
 
supported by consideration. 
Anderson did not file an opposition to the Chongs'
 
motion to enforce the Settlement Agreement and made no
 
objections, based on admissibility or otherwise, to the
 
declaration or exhibits attached in support of the motion. Nor
 
did Anderson object to or challenge the Chongs' evidence
 
purporting to show her lack of responsiveness and lack of
 
cooperation in implementing the Settlement Agreement. Anderson
 
failed to set forth specific facts to refute the Chongs' showing
 
that a valid compromise agreement existed or to argue that the
 
Settlement Agreement was unenforceable. Although Anderson orally
 
presented several arguments at the hearing on the motion, she did
 
not submit any affidavits or other admissible evidence to support
 
those arguments. Consequently, Anderson failed to raise a
 
genuine issue of material fact regarding her claim that the
 
written, signed Settlement Agreement was not mutual, valid, or
 
enforceable. Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not err in granting the Chongs' motion to enforce the Settlement
 
Agreement. We, therefore, affirm the Circuit Court's order
 
granting the motion to enforce the Settlement Agreement.
 
Anderson contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
assuming that she breached the DROA contract and alleges that
 
this purported assumption prejudiced the Circuit Court's decision
 
to grant the Chongs' motion to enforce the Settlement Agreement. 
Anderson's brief, however, merely states this allegation without
 
further argument. Anderson fails to present a discernable
 
argument as to the basis of her allegation. In addition, we see
 
nothing in the record to support Anderson's assertion that the
 
Circuit Court relied on any assumption regarding the DROA in
 
deciding the motion to enforce the Settlement Agreement. 
Anderson argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
allowing the Chongs' attorney to present false and defamatory
 
testimony, make ad hominem arguments, and act in bad faith with
 
an intent to delay and prejudice the proceedings. This argument
 
is made for the first time on appeal. The rule in this
 
jurisdiction prohibits an appellant from complaining for the
 
first time on appeal of error to which he has acquiesced or to
 
which he failed to object. Okuhara v. Broida, 51 Haw. 253, 255,
 
456 P.2d 228, 230 (1969) (citations omitted); see also HRS ยง
 641-2 (2004) ("The appellate court . . . need not consider a
 
point that was not presented in the trial court in an appropriate
 
manner."). Accordingly, we reject this ground as a basis for
 
vacating the Circuit Court's order.
 
Similarly, Anderson's third point of error, that the
 
Settlement Agreement is too vague, ambiguous, misleading, and
 
indefinite to be enforceable, is raised for the first time on
 
appeal and, therefore, does not provide valid grounds for
 
vacating the Circuit Court's order.
 
Finally, Anderson argues that the order granting the
 
Chongs' motion to enforce the Settlement Agreement should be
 
5                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reversed due to ineffective assistance of Anderson's counsel. 
Anderson does not have a right to effective assistance of counsel 
because there is no right to counsel in a civil case. See, e.g., 
Norton v. Haw. Admin. Dir. of Court, 80 Hawai 'i 197, 200, 908 
P.2d 545, 548 (1995). 
Additional arguments asserted by Anderson in her brief,
 
but not identified as points of error, are similarly without
 
merit. 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
September 19, 2008 order granting the Chongs' motion to enforce
 
the Settlement Agreement.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 26, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Colette Anderson 
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Paul K. Hamano Raymond K. Hasegawafor Plaintiffs-AppelleesRYAN KAUI CHONG and GABRIELLE FUMIE CHONG 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 