NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.1/NO. 29948
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JUNIUS HANS, aka JOLIE, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CRIMINAL NO. 06-1-2388)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
This case addresses the state of mind, or knowledge of
a victim's age, required for conviction of sexual assault in the
first degree under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(c)
(Supp. 2009) (the statute). 
Defendant-Appellant Junius Hans, also known as Jolie
(Hans), appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
entered on June 23, 2009, by the Circuit Court of the First
1Circuit (circuit court).   
Hans was found by the jury to be guilty on two counts
of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violation of the
statute, and not guilty of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in
violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(c).  Hans was sentenced to twenty
years of incarceration on each count, to be served concurrently,
with credit for time served.
On appeal, Hans contends that (1) the circuit court
erred by denying him the mistake of fact defense, and (2) the
statute was unconstitutional.  As to his first point of error,
Hans contends that the circuit court erred in (a) granting the
State's motion in limine to preclude Hans from raising any
mistake of fact issue, (b) denying Hans' motion for judgment of
acquittal, and (c) refusing to provide the jury with a mistake of
fact instruction.  As to his second point of error, Hans contends
that the statute is unconstitutional because it violates the
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
2Constitution or article I, section 5 of the Hawai #i Constitution. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs,
arguments and issues submitted by the parties, we affirm the
circuit court's judgment for the reasons discussed below.  
I. APPELLANT WAS NOT ENTITLED TO RAISE A MISTAKE OF FACT
DEFENSE, AND THUS THE CIRCUIT COURT DID NOT ERR 
Hans contends that the circuit court should have
allowed him to argue mistake of fact regarding the victim's age
as a defense at trial because, he claims, the State is required
to prove that he had knowledge of the victim's age under the
statute.  The circuit court was correct, however, in determining
that the Hawai #i Supreme Court's decision in State v. Buch, 83
Hawai#i 308, 926 P.2d 599 (1996), precluded the mistake of fact
defense under these circumstances. 
First degree sexual assault occurs when the defendant
"knowingly" engages in the act of sexual penetration with a
person of fourteen or fifteen years of age, and who is at least
five years younger and not married to the defendant:
[a] person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if . . . . [t]he person knowingly engages in
sexual penetration with a person who is at least fourteen
years old but less than sixteen years; provided that . . .
[t]he person is not less than five years older than the
minor . . .  and [t]he person is not legally married to the
minor.  
Haw. Rev. Stat. §707-730(1)(c) (emphasis added).
Hans argues that the "knowingly" requirement should
apply to each element of the offense, but this is contrary to the
supreme court's ruling in Buch.  In Buch, the supreme court
considered the meaning of the word "knowingly" in a similarly
worded subsection that defined third degree sexual assault:
"[A] person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
third degree if . . . [t]he person knowingly subjects to
sexual contact another person who is less than fourteen
years old or causes such a person to have sexual contact
with the person."
 
Buch, 83 Hawai #i at 309, n. 1, 926 P.2d at 600, n. 1 (quoting
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 707-732(1)(b) (1993)).
The supreme court concluded that "[t]he legislative
history unequivocally indicates that, where the age of the victim
is an element of a sexual offense, the specified state of mind isNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
3not intended to apply to that element."  Buch, 83 Hawai #i at 316,
926 P.2d at 607.  In sum, a defendant is responsible for knowing,
and cannot defend on the basis of not knowing, the victim's age.
This result is consistent with the history of intent
requirements concerning victims' ages in Hawai #i's sexual assault
laws.  Hawai #i courts have consistently held that knowledge
regarding the victim's age is not required for a conviction under
sexual assault statutes covering crimes against minors.  See
State v. Silva , 53 Haw. 232, 233, 419 P.2d 1216, 1217 (1971)
(noting that the offense of statutory rape has long been held to
denounce the mere doing of the act as criminal, regardless of the
perpetrator's state of mind).  Nothing in the law or the
legislative history to the sexual offense statutes (HRS §§ 707-
730, et. seq.) that has been amended since Buch was issued
supports Appellant's contention that the legislature intended to
make knowledge of the victim's age an element of the offense. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in granting the State's
motion in limine precluding Hans from raising any mistake of fact
issue, refusing to provide the jury with a mistake of fact
instruction, or in denying Hans' motion for judgment of acquital. 
II. APPELLANT'S CLAIM THAT THE STATUTE IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL WAS
NOT PROPERLY PRESERVED OR PRESENTED
In his opening brief, Hans contends that the statute is
unconstitutional under both the United States and Hawai #i
Constitutions.  As the Appellant himself observes, however, his
constitutional arguments were not raised in the circuit court. 
"Legal issues not raised in the trial court are
ordinarily deemed waived on appeal."  Ass'n of Apt. Owners of
Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai# i 97, 107, 58 P.3d
608, 618 (2002).  We therefore decline to address the merits of
the Appellant's constitutional claim.  See Molinar v. Schweizer ,
95 Hawai# i 331, 339, 22 P.3d 978, 986 (2001) (constitutional
objection raised for the first time on appeal was not addressed
because it was not properly raised in the trial court).  See also
Haw. R. App. Pro. 28(b)(4) (requiring a concise statement of the
points of error, including where in the record the alleged errorNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
4was objected to or brought to the attention of the court or
agency). 
III. CONCLUSION
For the aforementioned reasons, the June 23, 2009
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court
of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 2, 2010.
On the briefs:
Dana S. Ishibashi 
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge