NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28669
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JASON LANAKILA CABRAL; the Estate of JOSEPH PU KAIKALA;
LYNDA EVADNA KAIKALA, individually, as Special
Administratrix of the Estate of Shawn Kaikala, and
as Guardian Ad Litem for minors: SHANTEL KAIUOLA
 
CABRAL, MARK KALE CABRAL, and IOKEPA JOHN KAIKALA;
JOHN E. KRAUSE, individually and as Guardian Ad Litem
for minors: KAHEKILI JOHN KRAUSE, KEANU KAIKALA KRAUSE,
KAWENA KAIKALA KRAUSE, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Defendant/Cross-
Claim Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee,
JONI MARIE SCOTT, Defendant/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-20, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 01-1-0449)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Jason Lanakila Cabral; Joseph Pu
 
Kaikala (Joseph); Lynda Evadna Kaikala (Lynda), individually, as
 
Special Administratrix of the Estate of Shawn Kaikala, and as
 
Guardian Ad Litem for minors: Shantel Kaiuola Cabral, Mark Kale
 
Cabral, and Iokepa John Kaikala; and John E. Krause (Krause),
 
individually and as Guardian Ad Litem for minors: Kahekili John
 
Krause, Keanu Kaikala Krause, and Kawena Kaikala Krause
 
(collectively, Plaintiffs) appeal from the Judgment entered
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
April 20, 2007 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1 
(circuit court). Judgment was entered in favor of Defendant-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) and against Plaintiffs. 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend:
 1) The circuit court erred in issuing the following
 
Findings of Fact (FOFs), in whole or in part: 
a) The FOFs related to the accident, specifically (1)
 
second sentence of FOF No. 3 and second sentence of FOF No. 15,
 (2) second, third, and fourth sentences of FOF No. 13, and (3)
 
last sentence of FOF No. 17; and 
b) The FOFs related to the 1994 resurfacing project,
 
specifically, the last sentence of FOF 7, and FOFs 8, 10, and 24. 
2) Conclusions of Law (COLs) B, C, D, and E are wrong. 
3) The circuit court erroneously admitted into evidence
 
the video animation and testimony about the lack of accidents. 
4) The circuit court erroneously awarded costs to the 
State under Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 68.2 
I. BACKGROUND
 
3
On July 20, 2000, Defendant Joni Marie Scott  (Scott)
was driving her 1998 Chevy Blazer (the SUV) north on Highway 11 toward Hilo on the island of Hawai' i. At the same time, Shawn 
Kaikala (Kaikala) was driving a 1986 Honda Accord (the Honda) south on Highway 11 toward Mountain View. Kaikala's friend, 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 HRCP Rule 68 provides, in pertinent part:
 
At any time more than 10 days before the trial begins, any
party may serve upon any adverse party an offer of settlement or
an offer to allow judgment to be taken against either party for
the money or property or to the effect specified in the offer,
with costs then accrued. If within 10 days after the service of
the offer the adverse party serves written notice that the offer
is accepted . . . the clerk shall, in accordance with the
agreement, enter an order of dismissal or a judgment. An offer
 not accepted shall be deemed withdrawn . . . . If the judgment
finally obtained by the offeree is not more favorable than the
offer, the offeree must pay the costs incurred after the making of
the offer.
3
 Scott settled her claims with Plaintiffs before trial.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Fredrene Caminos (Caminos), was in the front passenger seat.
 
Highway 11 was designed, constructed, and maintained by the
 
State. It had been raining and the roadway was wet.
 
Approximately one-half mile after Mile Marker 12, Scott lost
 
control of the SUV, crossed the median line, and collided with
 
the Honda. Scott, Caminos, and Kaikala were injured; Kaikala
 
died from her injuries.
 
4
On October 16, 2001, Plaintiffs  filed a civil
complaint against Scott and the State, asserting negligence and
 
5
wrongful death actions  against Scott and the State.  On
 April 22, 2005, the State made offers of settlement with all
 
Plaintiffs except Krause. 
The offers ranged from $500 to $1,500. 
Because none of the offers were accepted within ten days of
 service, they were deemed withdrawn. See HRCP Rule 68.
 
A seven-day bench trial began on July 10, 2006. 
On
 
November 1, 2006, the circuit court entered its "Findings of Fact
 
and Conclusions of Law," holding that Plaintiffs failed to prove
 
by a preponderance of the evidence that the State was negligent
 
in the "design, construction or maintenance" of Highway 11. The
 
legal cause of the accident and Kaikala's death was attributed
 
solely to the negligence of Scott. On April 20, 2007, the
 
circuit court entered judgment in favor of the State and against
 
Plaintiffs.
 
On appeal, this court held the appeal was untimely and 
therefore, this court lacked jurisdiction. Cabral v. State, 126 
Hawai'i 92, 267 P.3d. 676 (App. 2011). On writ of certiorari, 
4
 Plaintiffs were Kaikala's boyfriend, Krause; Kaikala's parents,
Joseph and Lynda (Joseph died before trial); and Kaikala's seven children.
5
 Plaintiffs purported to assert one cause of action for negligence
against the State, another cause of action for negligence against Scott, and a
third cause of action for wrongful death. Because the actual decedent,
Kaikala, is not a party to this case, the causes of action are more accurately
stated as a wrongful death negligence action against the State and a wrongful
death negligence action against Scott, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 663-4 (1993). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded this court had jurisdiction 
under the "unique circumstances" doctrine and remanded the case 
for judgment on the merits. Cabral v. State, 127 Hawai' i 175, 
277 P.3d 269 (2012). 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
"In this jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject 
to the clearly erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence to support the finding, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the 
Employees' Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai' i, 106 Hawai' i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (internal quotation marks, 
citations, and ellipses omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. 
Ponce, 105 Hawai' i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 (2004)). "An FOF is 
also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. [The Hawai' i Supreme Court has] defined 
'substantial evidence' as credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of 
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of 
Tavares, 91 Hawai' i 394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State 
v. Kotis, 91 Hawai' i 319, 328, 984 P.2d 78, 87 (1999)). 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawai' i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted) (quoting 
Ponce, 105 Hawai' i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Findings of fact . . . that are not challenged on 
appeal are binding on the appellate court." Okada Trucking Co., 
Ltd. v. Board of Water Supply, 97 Hawai' i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 
81 (2002). 
B. Credibility Of Witnesses
 
"[T]he credibility of witnesses and the weight to be
 
given their testimony are within the province of the trier of
 
fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro
 
v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai' i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
(2001). 
C. Foundation for Introduction of Evidence
 
"When a question arises regarding the necessary 
foundation for the introduction of evidence, the determination of 
whether proper foundation has been established lies within the 
discretion of the trial court, and its determination will not be 
overturned absent a showing of clear abuse." State v. Assaye, 
121 Hawai' i 204, 210, 216 P.3d 1227, 1233 (2009) (internal 
quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
D. Evidentiary Rulings
 
The appellate court applies "two different standards of 
review in addressing evidentiary issues. Evidentiary rulings are 
reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless application of the rule 
admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under 
the right/wrong standard." State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai' i 181, 189, 
981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
E. Award of Taxable Costs
 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 120 Hawai' i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). "An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or has 
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the 
substantial detriment of a party litigant." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. 
of Employees' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai' i, 92 Hawai' i 432, 439, 
992 P.2d 127, 134 (2000) (internal quotation marks and citation 
omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err when it found that
 
"Scott lost control of her SUV, fish-tailed,
crossed the center line, barrel rolled, then
struck the Honda driven by Shawn Kaikala."
 
Plaintiffs contend the following portions of FOF No. 3
and FOF No. 15 are erroneous:
 
. . . .
 
3. . . . About .6 mile post mile marker 12 on
Highway 11, Scott lost control of her SUV, fish-tailed,
crossed the center line, barrel rolled, then struck the
Honda driven by Shawn Kaikala.
 
. . . .
 
15. . . . The SUV then barrel rolled between one and
 
three times before it landed onto the Honda.
 
There was substantial evidence to support the circuit
 
court's conclusion that the SUV barrel rolled and then hit the
 
Honda, evidence which along with other factors served to negate
 
Plaintiffs' theory that the SUV hydroplaned as a result of the
 
State's negligent design, construction, or maintenance of Highway
 
11. 
Plaintiffs challenge the portions of the FOFs stating 
that the SUV barrel rolled before striking the Honda. Plaintiffs 
argue that the SUV did not barrel roll until after it struck the 
Honda, which would be consistent with their claim that the SUV 
hydroplaned due to sheets of water running across the road. 
Plaintiffs point to the testimony of Hawai' i County Police 
Officer Gregory Ikeda (Officer Ikeda), who testified: "The [SUV] crossed the double yellow line, entered the path of the [Honda] 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and was struck on the passenger side of the vehicle, rolled over
 
the top of the [Honda], killing the driver." Officer Ikeda
 
further testified that because the Honda is low to the ground and
 
the SUV has a higher center of gravity, "when the [Honda] hit the
 
tall SUV, it catapulted the SUV over the top."
 Plaintiffs also point to statements made to the police by
 
witness Dean Uchino (Uchino), a tour bus driver driving a tour
 
bus directly behind the Honda. The police report by Officer
 
Ikeda states that Uchino said the following:
 
I saw the blue [SUV] coming down the road ahead of us. It
 
appeared to fishtail and then began to hydroplane sideways
as it was coming down from the Volcano direction. The car
 spun as it proceeded toward the Honda exposing the
passenger's side of the blue [SUV]. It continued sliding,
crossing into the Volcano-bound land of traffic; and finally
the exposed passenger's side of the [SUV] was struck by the
Honda and it was heading toward Volcano. The impact sent
the blue [SUV] into the air and rolling over the top of the
Honda.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
However, at Uchino's deposition on June 26, 2002, he
 
stated: 
I see an SUV coming down towards us and she started to
swerve, sliding on the pavement and then she started to flip
over, not end over end, but kind of barrel roll as I would
 say. And there was another car in front of me and that car
 stopped. And as that car -- the SUV was coming towards her,
they rolled right over this car that was the car in front of
 me.
 
(Emphasis added.) When asked if he was "absolutely clear" that
 
"the SUV began to barrel roll before it came into contact with
 
the Honda," Uchino replied, "Yes." He also testified that the
 
SUV might have rolled at least three complete revolutions before
 
it hit the Honda.
 
When queried by Plaintiffs' attorney, Uchino indicated
 
that "maybe [the SUV] didn't tumble until it hit [the Honda]." 
Uchino also admitted "I can't really say for sure which was going
 
on, whether [the SUV] was sliding or barrel rolling." He
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acknowledged that he was "unsure at this point whether [the SUV]
 
barrel rolled before impact or after[.]"
 
At trial, on direct examination by the State, Uchino
 
testified that "I saw a car, SUV, coming towards us from the
 
Volcano area fishtail couple times and then started to tumble and
 
rolled right over a smaller car." When asked if the SUV rolled
 
over before it struck the Honda, Uchino replied, "I think it
 
did." He then proceeded to testify that he thought the SUV
 
rolled over once or twice before striking the Honda and described
 
the roll as a barrel roll.
 
On cross-examination, Plaintiffs' counsel showed Uchino
 
the notes he had written at the time of the accident, which
 
stated, "I was traveling south on Highway 11 when we witnessed a
 
north bound SUV hydroplane, turn sideway and collide broadside
 
into a small car traveling south. It appeared the passenger side
 
of the SUV contacted the car on the driver side front of the car
 
and rolled over the car." He acknowledged he made no mention of
 
the SUV rolling over prior to impact.
 
On April 21, 2003, David Yoshida (Yoshida), an expert
 
in accident investigation and reconstruction, submitted a report
 
to the State opining that the SUV went out of control due to a
 
steering over-correction by Scott, not hydroplaning. Even so, he
 
indicated that the SUV rolled over after impact with the Honda.
 
In a supplemental report submitted May 3, 2005, Yoshida
 
incorporated Uchino's statements that the SUV had barrel rolled
 
prior to impact with the Honda. Yoshida conducted further
 
investigation and concluded that the gouge marks on Highway 11
 
supported the scenario of the SUV barrel rolling two to three
 
times before hitting the Honda. Yoshida concluded that "Scott
 
fails to maintain control of her SUV while negotiating the
 
subject curve to the left and makes a series of steer corrections
 
that produce a fishtail condition. Her speed, worn rear tires
 
and a wet road condition contribute to her loss of control."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In spite of conflicting testimony, there was 
substantial evidence to support the circuit court's finding that 
the SUV barrel rolled before it hit the Honda, indicating that 
the SUV did not hydroplane due to alleged negligent road 
conditions caused by the State. Furthermore, "the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are within 
the province of the trier of fact and, generally, will not be 
disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro, 97 Hawai' i at 92, 34 P.3d at 
22.
 
Although Plaintiffs argue that the SUV did not barrel 
roll before impact and therefore must have hydroplaned, Plaintiffs failed to object to FOFs 18, 19, 20, and 24, all of 
which support the theory that the SUV did not hydroplane. 
"Findings of fact . . . that are not challenged on appeal are 
binding on the appellate court." Okada Trucking Co., Ltd., 97 
Hawai'i at 458, 40 P.3d at 81. 
B. Sentences 3-5 of FOF 13 are not in error.
 
Plaintiffs contend the last three sentences of FOF 13 are in
 
error:
 
13. . . . [Uchino] first noticed the SUV's loss of
control when it was uphill from the tour bus near some
residences. At the point the SUV first lost control,
Highway 11 is crowned, and well before the transition to
where super elevation of the highway begins. The speed of
the SUV when it began to fishtail was between 50-60 miles
per hour.
 
Plaintiffs argue that the finding is erroneous because (1) Uchino
 
was not sure where the SUV lost control, (2) control was not lost
 
at Highway 11's crowned area, and (3) the SUV was traveling under
 
50 miles per hour.
 
There was substantial evidence to support the circuit
 
court's findings in FOF 13. Uchino testified that he first saw
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6
the SUV fishtailing  when it was uphill near the residences.  His
 
use of the term "fishtailing" presumes a loss of control. 
Plaintiffs acknowledge that the State's expert witness Richard
 
Ryan (Ryan) testified that the accident took place where the road
 
was crowned. 
Plaintiffs' expert witness Richard Van Bruggen also
 
testified that the area in question was a crown area that drained
 to the side.
 
Plaintiffs fail to argue that the SUV was traveling 
under 50 miles per hour, so that argument need not be considered. 
See Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai
'i 243, 251, 30 P.3d 
257, 265 (2001). Even considering the statement, Yoshida testified that the SUV was traveling between 50-60 miles per hour 
when it began to fishtail. Uchino testified that while 
fishtailing, the SUV was "[p]robably under the speed limit or 
about the speed limit" of 55 miles per hour. 
Because "the credibility of witnesses and the weight to 
be given their testimony are within the province of the trier of 
fact," and there was substantial evidence to support the court's 
findings, the last three sentences of FOF 13 were not in error. 
Tamashiro, 97 Hawai' i at 92, 34 P.3d at 22. 
C.	 The circuit court erred in finding that "[i]f
anything, [witnesses] saw water flowing from the
highway off onto the shoulders" but the error is
harmless.
 
FOF 17 reads:
 
17. After the accident and before police arrived,
witnesses at the scene said that they did not see any
standing water, or water ponding on the highway. They did
not see any water flowing from the shoulders onto the
highway. If anything, they saw water flowing from the
highway off onto the shoulders.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
6
 According to the on-line Merriam-Webster dictionary, "fishtail" means
"to have the rear end slide from side to side out of control while moving
forward." http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/fishtail (last accessed
August 24, 2012).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because Plaintiffs fail to find error in the first two 
sentences of FOF 17, we must take as fact that the witnesses did 
not see standing or ponding water, or water "flowing from the 
shoulders onto the highway." Okada Trucking Co., Ltd., 97 
Hawai'i at 458, 40 P.3d at 81. Plaintiffs only assert that the 
circuit court erred in the last sentence, which reads: "If 
anything, [the witnesses] saw water flowing from the highway off 
onto the shoulders." (Emphasis added.) 
In support of their assertion, Plaintiffs contend that
 
witness Lucille Waldron (Waldron) testified that she saw "sheets
 
of water on the road." In the record Plaintiffs cite to, Waldron
 
made no comment about "sheets of water," but merely stated that
 
she "noticed that water was on the road, flowing down to Hilo." 
When asked if she noticed whether or not there was water flowing
 
from the road toward the shoulders, she replied that she did not
 
notice.
 
Plaintiffs also cite to Uchino's testimony at trial,
 
where he stated he saw a sheet of water, but did not remember "if
 
it was moving down the highway or off the highway."
 
Neither of these witnesses testified that they saw 
water flowing onto the shoulder of the road. The circuit court 
erred in making the assumption that "[i]f anything, they saw 
water flowing from the highway off onto the shoulders." However, 
the error is harmless. State v. Propios, 76 Hawai' i 474, 486, 
879 P.2d 1057, 1069 (1994) (erroneous finding of fact was harmless error). The witnesses' testimony provide substantial 
evidence to support the unchallenged sentences of FOF 17, which 
found that there was no standing water, no ponding water, and no 
water flowing onto the road. 
D.	 The FOFs related to the 1994 resurfacing project,
specifically, the last sentence of FOF 7, and FOFs
8, 10, and 24, are not erroneous.
 
Plaintiffs contend the following FOFs are in error:
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
7. On May 24, 1994, the State designed plans for the
regular maintenance resurfacing of Highway 11. The actual
 
resurfacing took place during the summer of 1995. The
 
resurfacing was properly done according to the plans.
 
8. It is undisputed that at the time of the original
design and construction of the highway it complied withFederal and State of Hawai' i design guidelines. The 
resurfacing that occurred in 1995 was for regularmaintenance during which a new layer of asphalt was placedon the highway surface. For such regular maintenancerepaving, the highway need not be brought up to compliancewith guidelines then in effect. 
. . . .
 
10. The Plaintiffs have failed to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the portion of Highway 11
between mile marker 11 and 13 where the accident occurred
 was negligently designed, constructed or maintained.
 
. . . .
 
24. The design, construction or maintenance of the
highway was not proven by Plaintiffs by a preponderance of
the evidence to be a legal cause of the accident.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Plaintiffs do not contest the first two sentences of
 
FOF 7, but only contest the last sentence, which states that the
 
resurfacing was properly done according to plans. Plaintiffs
 
argue that the evidence shows the contractor did not follow the
 
plans, did not meet the designed cross-slope, and there was a
 
lack of "as-built" plans to document compliance with the plans.
 
Plaintiffs assert that Carson Elizares from the State
 
Department of Transportation (DOT) testified that "the contractor
 
did not comply with the plans." However, Plaintiffs direct us to
 
a record devoid of such an assertion. On the other hand, Alvin
 
Takeshita (Takeshita), DOT traffic engineer, testified in his
 
deposition that the portion of Highway 11 between Mile Markers 12
 
and 13 "was properly designed according to the national
 
engineering guidelines as well as the Hawaii State Design
 
Manual." Plaintiffs fail to point to where in the record the
 
"designed cross-slope" requirement is set out. Stanley Tamura
 
testified that there were no significant differences between the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1994 design of the road when it was resurfaced and the 2001
 
pavement study. He also testified that the contours of the road
 
in the accident area were not substantially changed by the 1994
 
resurfacing project from the 1948 contours or grade. Finally,
 
Ryan testified that there were no violations of the design
 
guidelines of Highway 11 between markers 12 and 13. Ryan
 
testified that the 1995 repaving project followed the guidelines. 
Takeshita testified that because the resurfacing project was a
 
special maintenance project, not a realignment project, it was
 
not necessary for the project to be compliant with the Hawaii
 
State Design Manual. DOT assistant district engineer Salvador
 
Panem testified that in the resurfacing project, DOT merely
 
overlaid the existing pavement with new asphalt concrete and did
 
not attempt to realign the highway.
 
Because the credibility of the witnesses and weight
 
given to their testimony lies in the province of the circuit
 
court, we conclude there was sufficient evidence presented for
 
the court to find that the resurfacing to Highway 11 was properly
 
done and was not negligently designed, constructed, or
 
maintained. 
Finally, Plaintiffs contend that, via adverse
 
inference, this court should conclude that superelevation plans
 
existed for the 1994 repaving project and no "as-built" plans
 
were created after the project. Because this contention is
 
raised for the first time on appeal, we do not address it.
 
E. COLs B, C, D and E are not wrong.
 
Plaintiffs contend the following COLs are wrong:
. . . .
 
B. Plaintiffs have failed to prove by a preponderance
of the evidence and the [circuit court] concludes that the
[State] was not negligent in the design, construction or
maintenance of Highway 11 between mile marker 12 and 13.
 
C. Plaintiffs have failed to prove by a preponderance
of the evidence and the [circuit court] concludes that the
design, construction and maintenance of Highway 11 between
 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mile Markers 12 and 13 legally caused the Scott's [SUV] to
fish-tail, cross the centerline and collide into the Kaikala
[Honda].
 
D. The [circuit court] concludes by a preponderance of
the evidence that Scott was negligent in the operation of
her SUV by going down hill in a vehicle with worn tires on a
wet road at a speed which caused her to lose control of the
SUV.
 
E. The negligence of Scott is the sole legal cause of
the accident and death of Shawn Kaikala.
7
 
. . . .
 
"[B]ecause the court's conclusions are dependent upon
 
the facts and circumstances" of the case, we review the COLs
 
under the clearly erroneous standard. Chun, 106 Hawai' i at 430, 
106 P.3d at 353. Having determined that the challenged circuit
 court's FOFs were supported by substantial evidence, and because
 
the COLs follow from the FOFs, we conclude that the COLs are not
 
wrong.
 
F.	 Circuit court did not err in admitting a video
animation of the accident into evidence.
 
After the State laid a foundation for the video
 
animation illustrating Yoshida's opinion of the SUV's path down
 
Highway 11 through its impact with the Honda to its final resting
 
place, the circuit court admitted two CDs of the video animation
 
into evidence. The State only showed the CD depicting the event
 
in rain.
8
 
7
 Reading the circuit court's FOFs and COLs in context, the circuit
court clearly meant: (1) in COL B, that Plaintiffs had failed to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the State was negligent in the design,
construction or maintenance of the relevant portion of Highway 11; and (2) in
COL C, that the circuit court concluded that the design, construction and
maintenance of Highway 11 was not the legal cause of the Scott vehicle's
collision with the Kaikala vehicle.
8
 At trial, the State misidentifies the CDs by stating that D-190
animates the event with rain and D-191 animates it without rain. In
 actuality, the CDs are reversed. At trial, D-191 showing the event in rain is
what was shown, even though the State identified the CD as D-190.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs contend the animation is not consistent with
 
Uchino's testimony, is hearsay, and there was insufficient
 
foundation laid as to the CDs' reliability.
 
The CD shows the SUV making four complete rolls on the
 
road, striking and rolling over the Honda on its fifth roll. In
 
Uchino's deposition and as written in two police reports, Uchino
 
stated that the SUV hit the Honda and then barrel rolled over the
 
top. But at trial, Uchino testified that the SUV rolled between
 
one to three times before striking the Honda. In FOF 15, the
 
circuit court recognized Uchino's uncertainty as to number of
 
barrel rolls when it found that "[t]he SUV then barrel rolled
 
between one and three times[.]"
 
The CDs are not hearsay because they were not
 
introduced for the truth of the matter asserted but as a visual
 
depiction of the State's theory of the case. Hawaii Rules of
 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 801. The CDs were relevant, probative, and
 
admissible for that purpose. See Howell v. Union Pac. R. Co.,
 
980 So. 2d 854, 859 (La. App. 2008) (computer animation used to
 illustrate expert's opinion was admissible).
 
Plaintiffs fail to provide any argument to support 
their statement that there was insufficient foundation laid as to 
the reliability of the CDs. Points not argued are waived. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
G.	 The circuit court did not err in admitting the
State's testimony regarding the traffic accident
history between Mile Markers No. 12 and 13.
 
When Ryan testified regarding traffic count and traffic
 
accident history, Plaintiffs did not object to Ryan's testimony,
 
even when he stated that "the subject location has 9 to 10,000
 
ADT [average daily traffic]." Plaintiffs only objected to the
 
State's question as to whether the traffic accident history would
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have alerted the State to any wet weather problem in the accident
 
area.
 
Also, when Takeshita was deposed, he stated without
 
objection that the average daily traffic for the portion of
 
Highway 11 in question was 10,600. Takeshita also testified
 
without objection that a location would have to have two traffic
 
accidents per year for three consecutive years before it would be
 
considered a high accident location. He noted, again without
 
objection, that Plaintiffs' expert witness, Ron Nickel, had
 
reviewed the motor vehicle accident reports for the subject
 
portion of Highway 11 and only found two accidents for a ten-year
 
period. The circuit court did not err in admitting the State's
 
testimony regarding the number of accidents.
 
H. Award of Costs
 
Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred in granting
 
the "[State's] Motion for Award of Fees and Costs" (Motion for
 
Fees and Costs). Plaintiffs assert that the State's April 22,
 
2005 HRCP Rule 68 offers were frivolous and incomplete. 
Plaintiffs also contend that the expert witness costs improperly
 
included costs incurred before the HRCP Rule 68 offers were
 
rejected, arguing that because the State did not attach invoices
 
to its Motion for Fees and Costs, it failed to meet its burden of
 
proof that the costs were incurred after the HRCP Rule 68 offers
 
were made. Plaintiffs contend that the circuit court failed to
 
distinguish costs awarded under HRCP Rule 54(d) from those
 
awarded under HRCP Rule 68.
 
HRCP Rule 54 creates a strong presumption that the 
prevailing party will recover costs. Wong, 88 Hawai' i at 53-54, 
961 P.2d at 618-19. The rule provides that "[e]xcept when express provision therefor is made either in a statute or in 
these rules, costs shall be allowed as of course to the 
prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs[.]" HRCP 
Rule 54(d)(1). When a particular taxable cost is allowed, the 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
actual disbursement is presumptively reasonable, and it is the
 
burden of the adverse party to challenge its reasonableness. In
 
the absence of a challenge, the trial court does not abuse its
 
discretion in awarding the cost. Wong, 88 Hawai' i at 53-54, 961 
P.2d at 618-19.
 
HRS § 607-9 describes the types of costs that are
 
allowed the prevailing party:
 
All actual disbursements, including but not limited
to, intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and counsel,
expenses for deposition transcript originals and copies, and
other incidental expenses, including copying costs,
intrastate long distance telephone charges, and postage,
sworn to by an attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable by
the court, may be allowed in taxation of costs. In
 determining whether and what costs should be taxed, the
court may consider the equities of the situation.
 
HRCP Rule 68, related to offers of settlement and 
judgment, is a cost-shifting provision that affects how costs are 
awarded when an offer of settlement or judgment is not accepted. 
As a means to encourage settlement, HRCP Rule 68 also provides 
for a wider range of costs than would be permissible under HRCP 
Rule 54. Canalez v. Bob's Appliance Serv. Ctr., Inc., 89 Hawai' i 
292, 308-09, 972 P.2d 295, 310-11 (1999) (policy behind rule is to encourage settlement). The decision to tax costs will not be 
disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion. Wong, 88 Hawai' i 
at 52, 961 P.2d at 617. 
On April 22, 2006, the State made HRCP Rule 68 offers
 
to all Plaintiffs except John Krause, which were not accepted. 
After prevailing at trial, on April 9, 2007, the State filed its
 
Motion for Fees and Costs pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(d) and HRCP
 
Rule 68 for $189,749.46. The State noted that the fees and costs
 
incurred after the settlement offers amounted to $118,171.50
 
On May 24, 2007, the circuit court issued its "Court
 
Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part [State's] Motion for
 
Award of Fees and Costs Filed April 9, 2007" (Order Granting Fees
 
and Costs), awarding costs to the State in the amount of
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$119,470.46. The circuit court found the State was entitled to 
costs under HRCP Rule 54(d), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607­
9, and HRCP Rule 68. The circuit court allowed expert witness 
fees under HRCP Rule 68; deposition copy costs under HRCP Rule 68 
and HRS § 607-9; and photocopying costs under HRCP Rule 68, 
although we note that photocopy expenses are also allowed under 
HRS § 607-9. See Kikuchi v. Brown, 110 Hawai' i 204, 211, 130 
P.3d 1069, 1076 (App. 2006). The circuit court denied costs for expert witness Robert Post, some trial transcripts, FedEx 
delivery services, miscellaneous costs, and City Express 
messenger services. 
The State agreed with Plaintiffs that circuit court's
 
Order Granting Fees & Costs needs to be modified as it relates to
 
a non-offeree. Because no settlement offer was made to Krause,
 
he was not an offeree and post-offer costs for expert fees under
 
HRCP Rule 68 cannot be awarded against him. The State recommends
 
that the circuit court's Order Granting Fees & Costs "be modified
 
to reflect that all Plaintiffs are jointly and severally liable
 
for the costs awarded under [HRCP] Rule 54, or $29,220.09, and
 
all Plaintiffs except [Krause] are additionally jointly and
 
severally liable for the expert fees of $90,250.37." See Pulawa
 
v. GTE Hawaii Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 23 n. 18, 143 P.3d 1205, 1225 
n.18 (2006) (it is within court's discretion to tax costs against
 
non-prevailing parties jointly and severally).
 
Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred in failing 
to identify which costs were awarded under HRCP Rule 54(d) and 
which were awarded under HRCP Rule 68, arguing that only those 
costs actually incurred after the date of the qualifying offer of 
settlement are eligible under HRCP Rule 68. Canalez, 89 Hawai' i 
at 308, 972 P.2d at 311. Furthermore, Plaintiffs contend that the State must provide invoices to support its requests for costs 
incurred after the date of the HRCP Rule 68 settlement offers. 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Contrary to Plaintiffs' contentions, it is their burden 
to raise a challenge below as to the dates the costs were 
incurred, which they failed to do. Wong, 88 Hawai' i at 5, 961 
p.2d at 619. Only after Plaintiffs object to specific items does "[t]he burden of proving correctness of items" shift to the 
State. Wong, 88 Hawai' i at 53, 961 p.2d at 618 (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). Absent a challenge below, Plaintiffs have not preserved the challenge on appeal. 
The State argued at the hearing on its Motion for Fees
 
and Costs that it was only requesting "the expert fees which were
 
incurred as costs after making the offers of settlement on April
 
22, 2006, which is discretionary [under HRCP Rule 68]." The
 
State submitted a sworn affidavit attached to a "copy of the
 
itemization of all fees and costs . . . incurred by the State in
 
defending this action after service of the offers of settlement."
 Plaintiffs contend that the Order Granting Fees and
 
Costs was defective because any award under HRCP Rule 68 is only
 
awardable against adult offerees. Plaintiffs argue that a HRCP
 
Rule 68 offer is not valid when offered to a minor because the
 
offer "would not fully and completely decide the minor's claim
 
because he or she would be free to disaffirm any contract prior
 
to reach the age of majority." This argument is without merit. 
Five of the plaintiffs were minors when the State 
served separate HRCP Rule 68 Offers of Settlement on each 
Plaintiff except Krause, Kaikala's boyfriend. The offers were 
served through Plaintiffs' attorney. At the time of service, 
Krause was the guardian of the person and property of three minor 
plaintiffs and Lynda was guardian for two minor plaintiffs. Any 
settlement offer and acceptance as to minor children was subject 
to circuit court approval. Leslie, 91 Hawai' i at 403, 984 P.2d 
at 1229. Plaintiffs cite to no authority to support their argument that an offer accepted on behalf of a minor by the 
minor's guardian and approved by the court is not a valid, final 
19
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contract fully and completely deciding the claims, and we find 
none. See Kikuchi, 110 Hawai' i at 209, 130 P.3d at 1074. 
Plaintiffs also contend that the State must itemize its 
costs specific to each plaintiff to be a qualifying cost request. 
For example, the record depositions for school records must be 
assessed only against the plaintiff whose records they are. 
Plaintiffs raise this argument for the first time on appeal and 
we need not address it. "Appellate courts will not consider an 
issue not raised below unless justice so requires." Bitney, 96 
Hawai'i at 251, 30 P.3d at 265. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment entered April 20, 2007 in the Circuit
 
Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed except for the award of
 costs against John Krause. The case is remanded for modification
 
of the "Court Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Defendant State of Hawaii's Motion for Award of Fees and Costs
 
Filed April 9, 2007" to reflect that although all Plaintiffs are
 
jointly and severally liable for costs of $29,220.09 awarded
 
under HRCP Rule 54, John Krause is not jointly or severally
 
liable for the expert fees of $90,250.37, awarded pursuant to
 
HRCP Rule 68. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Joy A. San Buenaventura
and Peter Van Name Esser9  
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Donna H. Kalama Deputy Attorney Generalfor Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Cross-ClaimDefendant/Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 Peter Van Name Esser made his appearance in the Application for Writ
of Certiorari filed in the Hawai' i Supreme Court under appellate court case
number SCWC-28669. 
20
 