NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29826
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FREDERICK JOHN HARRIS, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
THOMAS R. KELLER, ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE COURTS, STATE OF HAWAII, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT

 
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 3RC09-1-0102K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In a secondary appeal, Petitioner-Appellant pro se

 
Frederick John Harris (Harris) appeals from the Decision and
 
Order Affirming Administrative Revocation filed on March 19, 2009
 
in the District Court of the Third Circuit, North and South Kona
 
Division (district court).1
 Harris's opening and reply briefs do not follow the 
requirements of Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b) to provide, among other things, a concise statement of the case and a concise statement of the points of error. Lack of 
substantial compliance with HRAP Rule 28 is grounds for 
1
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissal. HRAP Rule 30 ("When the brief of an appellant is
 
otherwise not in conformity with these rules, the appeal may be
 
dismissed[.]").
 
However, we recognize that the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
"has consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants 
the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, where 
possible." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai 'i 225, 230, 909 
P.2d 553, 558 (1995). Therefore, this case is reviewed for any meritorious claims. 
It appears that Harris is raising two issues on appeal
 
in regards to his challenge of the one-year administrative
 
revocation of his driver's license: (1) whether his refusal to
 
submit to a breath and/or blood test was a valid refusal when
 
Officer Tominaga (Officer Tominaga), the arresting officer,
 
allegedly gave him a Miranda warning (identifying a right to
 
consult an attorney) while at the same time informing him that he
 
had no right to consult an attorney before deciding whether or
 
not to submit to any test; and (2) whether the Administrative
 
Driver's License Revocation Office (ADLRO) failed to properly
 
subpoena Officer Tominaga, thus denying Harris due process.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that 
Harris's appeal is without merit.
 
A.	 The district court did not err when it affirmed
 
the administrative revocation of Harris's driver's
 license.
 
Under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-38(e) (2007
 
Repl.), after an administrative hearing to review the decision to
 
revoke a person's license, the director shall affirm the
 
administrative revocation if the director determines that there
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was (1) reasonable suspicion to stop the motor vehicle; (2)
 
probable cause to believe the respondent operated the vehicle
 
while under the influence of an intoxicant; and (3) proof by a
 
preponderance of the evidence that (a) the respondent operated
 
the vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant; or (b)
 
the respondent operated the vehicle and, after being informed of
 
the sanctions, refused to submit to a breath, blood, or urine
 
test.
 
In Officer Tominaga's sworn statement, he found
 
reasonable suspicion to stop Harris when "[w]hile on traffic
 
enforcement[, I] observed the vehicle [Harris] was operating to
 
cross the double solid yellow line and travel in the oncoming
 
lane of travel. Vehicle speed was measured at 71 mph in a 55 mph
 
zone." Officer Tominaga found probable cause to believe Harris
 
was operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant
 
based on Harris's physical indicators of intoxication and
 
inability to perform administered field sobriety tests:
 
[Harris] (lone occupant in vehicle) displayed red, glassy
eyes, strong odor of an intoxicating beverage emanated from
facial area. Could not perform HGN (kept moving head),
unable to perform WAT (unable to stay in Instructional
Stance), unable to perform OLS. Could not understand
 instructions for finger to nose.
 
Officer Tominaga also indicated in his sworn statement
 
that he informed Harris of the consequences of refusing to be
 
tested for alcohol concentration.2
 
2 On the form, Officer Tominaga swore that he read the following to
Harris:
 
1.	 Any person who operates a vehicle upon a public way, street,
road, or highway or on or in the waters of the State shall
be deemed to have given consent to a test or tests of his or
her breath, blood, or urine, for the purpose of determining
alcohol concentration or drug content as applicable.
 
2.	 You are not entitled to an attorney before you submit to any
test or tests to determine your alcohol and/or drug content.
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Following his arrest, Harris signed two implied consent
 
for testing forms. On the one-page "Use of Intoxicants While
 
Operating a Vehicle Implied Consent for Testing" form, Harris
 
checked off that he "refused to take either a breath test or a
 
blood test" and signed the acknowledgment statement. Harris also
 
signed a three-page form, "Operating a Vehicle Under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant-Implied Consent LIQUOR," in which was
 
written under Part F.1. on the second page that 
[i]f you refuse to take any tests and your driving record
shows no prior alcohol or drug enforcement contacts during
the five years preceding the date of arrest, your driving
privilege will be revoked for one year, whereas if you
choose to take a test and fail it, your driving privileges
will be revoked for a period of three months up to one year.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
In the January 27, 2009 Findings of Fact, Conclusions
 
of Law, and Decision (FOF/COL/Decision), the Hearing Officer
 
determined that the sworn statement of Officer Tominaga was
 
credible, reliable, and trustworthy. The Hearing Officer
 
concluded that Officer Tominaga informed Harris of his choices to
 
take a breath test, blood test, both tests, or to refuse any
 
test, and what the sanctions for refusal were and that Harris
 
acknowledged the consent forms with his signature.
 
Harris argues on appeal that Officer Tominaga read him
 
his Miranda rights and then told him his driver's license would
 
be rescinded for a year if he refused to consent to testing. 
Harris claims he was told he had a right to consult counsel and,
 
2(...continued)
3.	 You may refuse to submit to a breath or blood test, or both,
for the purpose of determining alcohol concentration and/or
a blood or urine test, or both, for the purpose of
determining drug content. If you refuse to submit to a
breath or blood test, or both, none shall be given, except
as required in [HRS ยง] 291E-21, but you shall be subject to
the procedures and sanctions under [HRS] chapter 291E, part
III, or [ยง] 291E-65 as applicable.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at the same time, that he had no right to consult an attorney
 
prior to choosing to take or refuse all or any of the tests, and
 
therefore, due to his confusion, there was no "refusal" under
 
Hawaii implied consent law.
 
Harris had no right to a Miranda warning before
 
submitting to a breath or blood test because he had no right to
 
consult with an attorney. State v. Taniguchi, 72 Haw. 235, 238,
 
815 P.2d 24, 26 (1991) (citing State v. Severino, 56 Haw. 378,
 380-81, 537 P.2d 1187, 1189 (1975)). Even if Harris had been
 
given a Miranda warning, it was his burden to establish that he
 
was confused as to his right to consult an attorney. "[T]he
 
burden is upon the defendant to establish that he was confused as
 
to his right to consult with an attorney, and this confusion led
 
to his refusal of any chemical tests." Taniguchi, 72 Haw. at
 
238-39, 815 P.2d at 26. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has also held that "where an 
arrested person asserts a belief that he is entitled to consult with counsel before submitting to a breath or blood test under 
Hawaii's implied consent law, the police officer must explain 
that the person has no right to consult with counsel under Hawaii 
law." Id. at 239, 815 P.2d at 26 (emphasis added). 
In the instant case, there is no evidence Harris
 
asserted a belief at the time of his arrest that he was entitled
 
to consult with counsel. Even if he did assert such a belief,
 
Officer Tominaga's sworn statement indicates Harris was informed
 
that no such entitlement existed and Harris signed the form,
 
acknowledging that he had been "informed of the information in
 
this report."
 
Therefore, we conclude that the district court, in its
 
review of the administrative record, did not err in affirming the 
FOF/COL/Decision that found Harris operated the vehicle under the
 
influence of an intoxicant, was mandated to take an alcohol
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concentration test, was informed of the choice of taking one of
 
the applicable tests or refusing the tests, refused any of the
 
applicable tests, and was not confused regarding his right to
 
consult with counsel.
 
B.	 The district court did not err when it affirmed
 
the administrative review finding that the
subpoena of Officer Tominaga was timely issued and
without delay on the part of ADLRO.
 
Harris contends ADLRO purposefully and "neglectfully 
and/or willfully withheld from the accused party ADLRO's timely 
issuance of a necessary subpoena timely requested by [Harris]," 
thus denying Harris the opportunity to "confront and examine" 
Officer Tominaga. (Emphases in original.) He argues that the 
subpoena request was mailed by him from the Island of Hawai
'i via 
the U.S. Postal Service on January 15, 2009 and was received by ADLRO on January 16, 2009, and the subpoena should have been 
mailed out on January 16, 2009 because the "delivery of business 
and residential mail was timely and normal" on January 16, 2009. 
That there was mail service on January 16, 2009 is
 
undisputed but irrelevant. On Friday, January 16, 2009, all
 
state offices were closed due to a civil emergency (a high wind
 
advisory was in effect). Monday, January 19, 2009, was a federal
 
holiday with no mail service. Therefore, a letter mailed on
 
Thursday, January 15, 2009, would not have been received by an
 
open state office until Tuesday, January 20, 2009. According to
 
the record, Harris's "actual request and subpoena documents" were
 
received January 20, 2009 and the subpoena was mailed to Harris
 
that afternoon.
 
The Hearing Officer found that Harris could have
 
obtained the subpoena through other means, including via attorney
 
Paul J. Cunney, who was representing Harris during the period of
 
January 14 through January 20, 2009 and whose office was in
 
Honolulu.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The transcript of the January 22, 2009 administrative
 
hearing reveals that Harris was given numerous opportunities to
 
continue the hearing until the arresting officer could be served,
 
but he declined to request a continuance.
 
We conclude the district court did not err in affirming
 
the administrative revocation of Harris's driver's license, where
 
the Hearing Officer found that ADLRO had timely issued a subpoena 
and where Harris waived his right to examine Officer Tominaga
 
when he declined to continue the hearing.
 
Therefore, 
The Decision and Order Affirming Administrative
 
Revocation filed March 19, 2009 in the District Court of the
 Third Circuit, North and South Kona Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 17, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Frederick J. Harris,
Petitioner-Appellant pro se. 
Dorothy Sellers,
Solicitor General,Kimberly Tsumoto Guidry,Deputy Solicitor General,for Respondent-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
7
 