 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29680
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JACOB P. MASON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0874) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Jacob P. Mason (Mason) by complaint with
 
second-degree robbery, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) ยง 708-841(1)(b) (Supp. 2011).
1 Prior to trial, Mason filed
 
a motion to suppress his identification by the alleged victim. 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) denied the
 motion and subsequently filed an "Amended Findings of 
1
 HRS ยง 708-841(1)(b) provides in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the second
degree if, in the course of committing theft . . . :
 
. . . 
(b)	 The person threatens the imminent use of force against
the person of anyone who is present with intent to
compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with
the property[.]
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to
 
Suppress Evidence and Identification."2
 
Mason proceeded to trial and the jury found him guilty
 
of the included offense of attempted second-degree robbery.3 The
 
Circuit Court sentenced Mason to five years of probation, with
 the special condition of 58 days of incarceration with credit for
 time served. 
Mason appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and
 
Probation Sentence" (Judgment) filed by the Circuit Court on
 February 6, 2009. On appeal, Mason argues that the Circuit Court
 erred in: (1) denying his motion to suppress his identification
 by the alleged victim because Mason claims that (a) his
 identification was the fruit of an unlawful detention and (b) the
 pretrial identification procedure used was impermissibly
 suggestive and the alleged victim's identification was
 unreliable; (2) denying his motion for judgment of acquittal
 because he claims there was insufficient evidence to sustain a
 conviction for attempted second-degree robbery; and (3) giving
 
2
 The Circuit Court denied Mason's suppression motion prior to trial.
Apparently, written findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order denying
the motion were signed by the Circuit Court but not filed. The Circuit Court
 subsequently filed the "Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
Denying Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence and Identification" on October
2, 2009, and this document was included in the record on appeal. 
3
 HRS ยง 705-500 (1993), the criminal attempt provision of the Hawaii
Penal Code, provides in relevant part as follows:
 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if
the person:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the
circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conduct
intended to culminate in the person's commission of
the crime. 
. . . .
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step under
this section unless it is strongly corroborative of the defendant's
criminal intent. 
2
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the jury an instruction on accomplice liability.4 For the
 
reasons discussed below, we affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
The alleged victim (Complainant) was thirteen years old
 
at the time of the charged offense. According to Complainant, he
 
was walking to school at 7:15 in the morning carrying an iPod in
 his hand. As Complainant reached an intersection, a white car
 pulled up about five feet away from him. Complainant could see
 the passenger's face through the front passenger window. While
 
the car was stopped at a stop sign, the passenger rolled down the
 
window, stuck his head out of the window, and said to Complainant
 in an aggressive tone, "Hey, give me your fucking iPod or I'll
 put my balls in your mouth." Frightened, Complainant took a few
 
steps backwards while still looking at the car. The car moved
 
forward five feet, then stopped, and Complainant saw the front
 
passenger door open and the passenger's foot come out of the car.
 Complainant turned and ran home.
 
Complainant called his father (Father), who was a
 
police officer, and told Father what had happened. Complainant
 
described the car to Father as white with a "spray can paint job"
 
and provided Father with a license plate number. Complainant
 also described the man who threatened him as a Caucasian man, in
 his late twenties, skinny, weighing approximately 140 pounds,
 with short, dark hair.
 
Later that morning, at about 10:56, Mason was stopped
 
by Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Garrick Hung (Officer
 Hung) for driving a car with no front license plate. Mason was
 the only occupant of the vehicle. Over HPD dispatch, Father
 heard a request for information about the car Officer Hung had
 stopped, which had a license plate number that was one letter off
 from the license plate number Complainant had provided. Father
 
4
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over Mason's motion to suppress
his identification by the alleged victim, and the Honorable Patrick W. Border
presided over Mason's trial.
 
3
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contacted Officer Hung and obtained a description of Mason and
 
the car Mason was driving. Father told Officer Hung that the car
 and the person stopped may have been involved in a robbery
 attempt on Complainant earlier that morning. Father asked
 
Officer Hung to detain Mason until Father could bring Complainant
 
to the scene. 
Father then drove to the scene and arrived "a couple
 
minutes" after speaking to Officer Hung. Father observed that
 Mason and the car matched the description Complainant had
 provided and asked the sergeant at the scene to detain Mason
 until Father could get Complainant. Father picked up Complainant
 and drove him to the scene. Complainant immediately identified
 the car as the one involved in the earlier incident and Mason as
 the person who tried to rob him.
 
According to Complainant, when he was taken to the
 
scene, he "instantly" recognized Mason as the perpetrator based
 on Mason's eyes, which he described as "kinda piercing," and
 Mason's short hair.  Complainant also identified Mason at trial
 
and stated he was "a hundred percent sure" that Mason was the man
 
who threatened him. 
Mason's defense at trial was mistaken identification. 
Mason testified that he had picked up an acquaintance named
 "Chad" and that "Chad" was the person in the passenger seat who
 had yelled at Complainant, demanding the iPod. 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments that Mason raises on appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in denying Mason's motion
 
to suppress Complainant's identification of Mason as the
 perpetrator.
5
 
5
 In reviewing the Circuit Court's denial of Mason's suppression motion,
we consider both the evidence presented at the suppression hearing and at
trial. State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai' i 472, 481, 32 P.3d 116, 125 (App. 2001). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1.
 
Mason contends that his detention after the traffic
 
stop was unduly prolonged and therefore that his identification
 
by Complainant was the fruit of an unlawful detention. We
 disagree.
 
Mason was properly stopped and detained for driving 
with no front license plate. When Mason was unable to provide his driver's license, car registration, or proof of insurance, Officer Hung was justified in continuing to detain Mason to conduct checks to determine the status of Mason and the car he was driving and to issue citations for the violations that had been discovered. Meanwhile, while Officer Hung was conducting these checks, he was contacted by Father, and before Officer Hung completed issuing the citations, Father arrived at the scene. Through the exchange of information between Officer Hung and Father and Father's observations at the scene, the police determined that Mason and the car he was driving matched the Complainant's description of the suspect and the car in which the suspect had been riding. We conclude that while Mason was validly being detained for the traffic stop, the police developed reasonable suspicion to believe that Mason had been involved in the attempted robbery of Complainant, and Mason's continued detention in order to pursue the attempted robbery investigation was lawful. See State v. Dawson, 120 Hawai' i 363, 369, 205 P.3d 
628, 634 (App. 2009) (discussing the reasonable suspicion requirement for a lawful investigative detention). Accordingly, Mason's identification by Complainant was not the fruit of an unlawful detention. 
2.
 
Mason contends that his pretrial identification by
 
Complainant by means of a "show-up" was impermissibly suggestive
 and that Complainant's identification was unreliable. A
 defendant who challenges the admissibility of an eyewitness
 identification on the ground of an impermissibly suggestive
 pretrial identification procedure bears the burden of proof. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Araki, 82 Hawai' i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 (1996). 
In determining whether the defendant is entitled to suppress the 
identification, the court "is faced with two questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether, upon viewing the totality of the circumstances, . . . the witness's identification is deemed sufficiently reliable so that it is worthy of presentation to and consideration by the jury." Id. (block quote format and citation 
omitted). 
The factors for the court to consider in determining
 
the reliability of an identification include: 
the opportunity of the witness to view the criminal at the
time of the crime, the witness's degree of attention, the
accuracy of the witness's prior description of the criminal,
the level of certainty demonstrated by the witness at the
confrontation, and the length of time between the crime and
confrontation.
 
Id. at 485, 923 P.2d at 902 (quoting State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 
383, 392, 894 P.2d 80, 89 (1995) (citation and brackets 
omitted)). A witness's identification of the defendant that is reliable is admissible even though the witness identified the defendant during an impermissibly suggestive pretrial procedure. See id. at 485-86, 923 P.2d at 902-03; State v. Mitake, 64 Haw. 217, 220-21, 638 P.2d 324, 327 (1981). 
The Circuit Court concluded that although the pretrial
 
identification procedure used was impermissibly suggestive, the
 Complainant's identification, under the totality of the
 circumstances, was sufficiently reliable to be considered by the
 jury. We need not address the Circuit Court's determination that
 the pretrial identification procedure used was impermissibly
 suggestive because we agree that under the totality of the
 circumstances, Complainant's identification was sufficiently
 reliable to be considered by the jury. Among other things, the
 record shows that Complainant was close to the suspect during the
 incident; Complainant's description of the suspect to Father
 immediately after the incident matched Mason's description; at
 the pretrial confrontation, Complainant immediately recognized
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mason as the person who had threatened him; and only
 
approximately four and a half hours elapsed from the time of the
 incident until the confrontation. We hold that the Circuit Court
 did not err in permitting the admission of evidence regarding
 Complainant's identification of Mason.
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in denying Mason's motion 
for judgment of acquittal. Among other things, the State presented evidence that Complainant identified Mason as the person who had threatened to take Complainant's iPod and had opened the door and begun to step out before Complainant turned and ran home. When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, see State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1241 (1998), there was sufficient evidence to support Mason's conviction for attempted second-degree robbery. 
C.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in giving the jury an 
instruction on accomplice liability. Mason's testimony, in combination with other evidence presented, provided a sufficient basis for the Circuit Court to give the instruction on accomplice liability. See State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 462, 486, 946 P.2d 
32, 56 (1997); State v. Keaweehu, 110 Hawai' i 129, 134, 129 P.3d 
1157, 1162 (App. 2006). 
III.
 
We affirm the Judgment filed by the Circuit Court on
 
February 6, 2009. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 24, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Ronette M. Kawakami 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 