 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29806
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
REGINALD KEALOHA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
KAHULUI TRUCKING & STORAGE, INC. dba
A&B FLEET SERVICES; ISLAND EQUIPMENT, INC. dba
AMERICAN MACHINERY; and DOE ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-224)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this personal injury case, Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Reginald Kealoha (Kealoha) appeals from the Judgment entered in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court)  in favor
of Defendant-Appellee Kahului Trucking & Storage Inc. dba A&B
 
Fleet Services (A&B Fleet Services). 
A&B Fleet Services had been
 
hired by Kealoha's employer, Young Brothers Ltd. (Young
 Brothers), to attach a top handler to a 30-ton Hi-Lift, so that
 it could be used to lift 40-foot shipping containers. Kealoha
 was injured when a shipping container being lifted broke lose and
 fell on his left foot and ankle. 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided . 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court's Judgment was entered pursuant to
 
orders granting two separate motions for summary judgment filed
 
by A&B Fleet Services. The first motion for summary judgment was
 based on the lack of causation. The second motion was based on
 the alternative ground that A&B Fleet Services did not owe a duty
 of care to Kealoha.
 
On appeal, Kealoha claims that the Circuit Court erred
 
in determining on summary judgment that (1) there was no causal
 connection between A&B Fleet Services' alleged negligence and
 Kealoha's injuries; and (2) A&B Fleet Services did not owe
 Kealoha a duty of care. We conclude that there are genuine
 
issues of material fact regarding whether A&B Fleet Services owed
 
Kealoha a duty of care and whether A&B Fleet Services' alleged
 negligence caused Kealoha's injuries. We therefore vacate the
 Circuit Court's Judgment and remand the case for further
 proceedings. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 A.
 
Kealoha was employed by Young Brothers as a 
longshoremen at Young Brothers' marine terminal in Kawaihae, Hawai'i. On the day Kealoha was injured, Young Brothers 
requested that A&B Fleet Services connect Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift #215. Top Handler #102 is an attachment that permits Hi-Lift #215, a 30-ton forklift, to lift large shipping containers from the top. Top Handler #102 was designed to permit the use of an electrical indicator light warning system when attached to compatible Hi-Lifts. The indicator light system would inform the Hi-Lift operator, through indicator lights on the Hi-Lift dashboard, whether Top Handler #102 was fully engaged with, and securely attached to, the container being lifted. Because the Top Handler #102/Hi-Lift #215 combination did not permit the use of the indicator light system, the operator of Hi-Lift #215 had to rely on mechanical "green flag" indicators located at the ends 
2
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Top Handler #102 to determine if Top Handler #102 was fully
 
engaged.
 
On the day in question, A&B Fleet Services attached Top
 
Handler #102 to Hi-Lift # 215. While the Top Handler #102/Hi-
Lift #215 combination was being used to move an empty 40-foot
 shipping container, the container broke loose and fell to the
 ground, crushing Kealoha's left foot and ankle. 
B.
 
Young Brothers purchased the Hi-Lift #215, a Hyster
 
brand 30-ton lift truck, in 1980.  Hi-Lift #215 is a forklift
 
which can be converted into a machine that can be used to lift
 
and transport large shipping containers by removing the Hi-Lift's
 forks and connecting a top handler attachment. To transport the
 
shipping containers, the Hi-Lift operator lowers the top handler
 
onto the top of the container and aligns four locking mechanisms
 (twist locks) on the top handler with pockets located at the four
 corners of the container.  Once the twist locks are aligned and
 
seated in the corners of the container, the Hi-Lift operator
 
pulls a lever which causes the twist locks to turn. Once the
 twist locks have rotated ninety degrees, they are fully engaged
 and the top handler is securely attached to the container. 
As a safety mechanism, the left and right ends of Top
 
Handler #102 have mechanical "green flag" indicators, which turn
 synchronously with the turning of the twist locks to become
 displayed and visible to the Hi-Lift operator. When the green
 flags are fully displayed, it indicates that the twist locks have
 turned ninety degrees and are fully engaged. 
Top Handler #102 was purchased by Young Brothers in the
 
mid-1980s, after it had purchased Hi-Lift #215. Top Handler #102
 was equipped with an orange cord and plug that could be plugged
 into newer-model Hi-Lifts, which unlike Hi-Lift #215 had
 indicator lights mounted within their dashboards. When the
 orange cord from Top Handler #102 was connected to such Hi-Lift
 models, two green indicator lights on the dashboard would
 activate and light up when the twist locks were fully engaged. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The indicator lights served as an additional safety feature
 
beyond the mechanical green flags to indicate to the Hi-Lift
 operator that the twist locks were fully engaged.
 
The indicator lights could not be used in the Top
 
Handler #102/Hi-Lift # 215 combination. Hi-Lift #215 was not
 equipped with an outlet to which the orange cord on Top Handler
 #102 could be connected and did not have indicator lights on its
 dashboard. Hi-Lift #215 was sold with a prior generation top
 handler attachment that had indicator lights on a panel that
 could be attached to or separated from the Hi-Lift. 
Young Brothers had routinely used top handlers attached
 
to 30-ton Hi-Lifts with no indicator lights. Young Brothers Lead
 Operator Quinten Chong (Chong) recalled that this combination had
 been used at Kawaiahae terminal (where Kealoha was employed)
 since at least 1990, when Chong was first stationed there. Chong
 did not experience problems resulting from the lack of indicator
 lights with this combination or the use of the mechanical green
 flag indicators. 
Originally, Young Brothers employees had attached the
 
top handlers to the 30-ton Hi-Lifts. Sometime after 1990, Young
 Brothers decided to outsource the task of attaching and
 disconnecting the top handler to outside mechanics or
 contractors, such as A&B Fleet Services. In 2005, Young Brothers
 began using A&B Fleet Services to perform the task of attaching
 the top handlers to the Hi-Lifts at its Kawaihae terminal. Prior
 to that time, Young Brother had used another company, HT&T, to
 attach and detach the top handlers. Young Brothers, HT&T, and
 A&B Fleet Services had all connected Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift
 #215, resulting in a combination with no indicator lights, during
 the time period each was performing this task.
 
Attaching and removing the top handler was the most
 
common task A&B Fleet Services performed for Young Brothers. 
There was no written contract between Young Brothers and A&B
 Fleet Services regarding these services. When Young Brothers
 needed to attach the top handler, it would call A&B Fleet
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Services and arrange to meet at the terminal. A&B Fleet Services
 
did not have or refer to the manufacturer's service manual to
 determine how to connect Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift #215. In
 attaching the top handler, the A&B Fleet Services mechanic would
 check with the Hi-Lift operator to make sure that the top handler
 was functioning, which would include checking the alignment of
 the mechanical green flags, before leaving. 
II.
 
On March 26, 2006, Young Brothers requested that A&B
 
Fleet Services connect Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift #215. Hi-Lift
 #215, a 30-ton Hi-Lift, was the only Hi-Lift available for use at
 the time. None of Young Brothers' 30-ton Hi-Lifts were equipped
 with indicator lights. Young Brothers had a 35-ton Hi-Lift that
 was equipped with indicator lights to which Top Handler #102
 could be attached, but Young Brothers did not request this
 combination. Because Hi-Lift #215 was not equipped with
 indicator lights, the orange cord and plug on Top Handler #102,
 which were designed to facilitate the use of an indicator lights
 system, was left unconnected. 
A&B Fleet Services mechanics Dwayne Coit (Coit) and
 
Sidney Salboro (Salboro) attached Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift
 #215 in the morning. After the top handler was attached, the
 
person operating Hi-Lift #215, Young Brothers employee Roland
 
Shimaoka (Shimaoka), checked to make sure the equipment was
 operating correctly, gave the mechanics the okay, and drove away.
 
Shimaoka operated the Top Handler #102/Hi-Lift #215 for
 
four hours without any problems. He was relieved in the
 afternoon by Young Brothers operator Patrick Tanaka (Tanaka). 
Around 3 p.m., Tanaka engaged an empty 40-foot shipping container
 with the intent to load the container on a Young Brothers barge. 
Tanaka transported the container approximately 75 feet to a
 coning station where Kealoha was responsible for placing metal
 cones on the bottom of the container so it could be properly
 stacked on the barge. During the coning process, the left side
 of the container released from Top Handler #102 and fell to the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pier deck. The right side fell quickly thereafter crushing
 
Kealoha's left foot and ankle. 
Tanaka stated that before lifting the container, he
 
looked at the two mechanical green flag indicators on either side
 of Top Handler #102 and confirmed that it was fully secured. 
Young Brothers Safety and Environmental Manager, Nathan Kapule
 (Kapule), investigated the incident. According to Kapule's
 incident report, 
[t]he top [handler] was inspected and found to have a faulty
twist lock/green flag indicator with the right side only.
The left side twist lock/green flag indicator was inspected
and no discrepancies found. This would indicate that the
 machine operator may have seen the faulty green flag
indicator on the right side, and did not confirm the partial
rotation of the left side green flag indicator and lifted
the container, the left side being the true representation
of the twist lock. The result was the release of the
 container.
 
Kapule's report identified two causal factors for the accident:
 
(1) a faulty right side flag indicator, and (2) machine operator
 error because the operator "did not confirm the twist lock/green
 flag indicator to the left side of the top [handler] attachment."
 Ultimately Kapule concluded that the root cause of the accident
 was operator error:
 
Although there are several types of hi-lifts with top
[handler] attachments[,] Machine Operators are trained to
confirm the twist locks are secured prior to lifting a
container. Therefore, in my investigation the facts
indicate the left side of the top [handler] attachment of
the [Hi-Lift] #215 was operating as designed. If the
 Machine Operator visually inspected the left side twist
lock/green flag indicator prior to lifting the 40-foot
Matson container he would have found the twist lock did not
 fully rotate. The root cause of the incident was operator
error. 
Despite his conclusions relating to the causes of the accident,
 
Kapule admitted during a deposition that: (1) he did not know
 whether the right side flag indicator was faulty at the time of
 the accident; and (2) Tanaka had told him that Tanaka confirmed
 that both green flags indicated that the locks were fully
 engaged.
 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. 
In his First Amended Complaint, Kealoha alleged that
 
A&B Fleet Services: (1) negligently installed Top Handler #102 to
 
an incompatible Hi-Lift # 215, which lacked the necessary
 indicator warning lights, causing a shipping container to be
 dropped on his foot; (2) negligently failed to follow the
 directives of the Hyster manufacturer's manual and international
 safety standards regarding indicator lights on top handlers; and
 (3) knowingly bypassed a critical safety system. 
A&B Fleet Services filed two motions for summary
 
judgment, each asserting alternative grounds on which summary
 judgment could be granted. In its first motion for summary
 judgment, A&B Fleet Services argued that no causal connection
 existed between its alleged negligent conduct, i.e. attaching Top
 Handler #102 to a Hi-lift without indicator lights, and Kealoha's
 injuries. 
The Circuit Court granted A&B Fleet Services' First
 
Motion for Summary Judgment, concluding that
 
there is no genuine issue of material fact in dispute and
that [A&B Fleet Services] is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. Specifically, [Kealoha's] theory of
negligence is speculative and unsupported by facts presented
to the Court and there is an absence of evidence to show any
causal connection between [A&B Fleet Services'] alleged
negligence and the subject accident.
 
In its second motion for summary judgment, A&B Fleet
 
Services argued that it did not owe a legal duty of care to
 
Kealoha to "warn Young Brothers or to refuse to attach [Top
 Handler #102] to [Hi-Lift #215] as requested by Young
 Brothers[.]" Specifically, A&B Fleet Services argued that it
 
"was simply asked by Young Brothers to perform a physical task -­
connect two pieces of equipment" and that the injuries sustained
 by Kealoha were an unforeseeable risk arising out of this limited
 engagement with Young Brothers. The Circuit Court granted A&B
 
Fleet Services' second motion for summary judgment determining
 
that "there [were] no genuine issues of material fact in dispute 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and that [A&B Fleet Services was] entitled to judgment as a
 
matter of law."
 
Based on its orders granting A&B Fleet Services' first
 
and second motions for summary judgment, the Circuit Court
 entered Judgment in favor of A&B Fleet Services on April 6, 2009. 
Kealoha appeals from this Judgment.
 
DISCUSSION
 
Kealoha argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
determining on summary judgment that (1) A&B Fleet Services did
 not owe him any legal duty of care with respect to its conduct in
 attaching Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift #215; and (2) that there
 was no causal connection between A&B Fleet Services' alleged
 negligence and Kealoha's injury. 
We review a trial court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo, Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai' i 48, 56, 109 
P.3d 689, 697 (2005), using the same standard applicable to the trial court. Iddings v. Mee–Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 
267 (1996). Summary judgment is proper "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure Rule 56(c) (2000). "A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai' i 247, 252, 21 
P.3d 452, 457 (2001) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted; format altered). The evidence and the inferences drawn from the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & 
Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). "In other 
words, we must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Querubin, 107 Hawai' i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (block 
quote format and citation omitted). 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
In granting A&B Fleet Services' second motion for 
summary judgment, the Circuit Court ruled that A&B Fleet Services 
did not owe a duty of care to Kealoha. "It is well settled that 
a negligence action lies only where there is a duty of care owed 
by the defendant to the plaintiff." Ah Mook Sang v. Clark, 130 
Hawai'i 282, 291, 308 P.3d 911, 920 (2013). Whether a defendant 
owes an injured plaintiff a duty of care is generally a question of law to be determined by the court. See Knodle v. Waikiki 
Gateway Hotel, Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 385, 742 P.2d 377, 383 (1987). 
The question of whether a duty is owed must be decided 
on a case-by-case basis and turns on the facts and circumstances presented by the particular case. Ah Mook Sang, 130 Hawai' i at 
291, 308 P.3d at 920. In determining whether to impose a duty of care in a particular case, the following factors are relevant: 
whether a special relationship exists, the foreseeability of
harm to the injured party, the degree of certainty that the
injured party suffered injury, the closeness of the
connection between the defendants' conduct and the injury
suffered, the moral blame attached to the defendants, the
policy of preventing harm, the extent of the burden to the
defendants and consequences to the community of imposing a
duty to exercise care with resulting liability for breach,
and the availability, cost, and prevalence of insurance for
the risk involved.
 
Blair, 95 Hawai' i at 260, 21 P.3d at 465 (ellipses and citation 
omitted; format altered). Where disputes arise regarding facts 
necessary to determine whether a legal duty of care exists or should be imposed, summary judgment is inappropriate. See 
Crichfield v. Grand Wailea Co., 93 Hawai' i 477, 487, 6 P.3d 349, 
359 (2000); Phillips v. Cricket Lighters, 841 A.2d 1000, 1008-10 (Pa. 2003). 
II.
 
In this case, Kealoha's allegations of negligence arise
 
from A&B Fleet Services' actions in installing Top Handler #102
 onto Hi-Lift #215. Although no written contract existed, Young
 Brothers hired A&B Fleet Services to attach its top handlers to
 its Hi-Lifts. Kealoha's theory of liability is that A&B Fleet
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10Services was negligent in attaching Top Handler #102 to Hi-Lift
#215 because this top handler/Hi-Lift combination was
incompatible in that it did not permit the use of indicator
lights, thereby creating a safety risk.
A&B Fleet Services argues that its responsibilities
under its agreement with Young Brothers was limited to simply
performing the physical task of connecting a specific top handler
to a specific Hi-Lift.  A&B Fleet Services contends that it was
not responsible for installing safety devices or making safety
recommendations.  It therefore claims that it owned no legal duty
to Kealoha.
The record, however, contains evidence conflicting with
A&B Fleet Services' claims regarding the limited scope of its
responsibilities under its agreement with Young Brothers. 
Kealoha presented evidence that A&B Fleet Services'
responsibilities went beyond simply physically connecting
equipment and included providing advice and assistance on safety
matters.  According to Eddie Magaoay, a Young Brothers employee,
Young Brothers relied upon the A&B Fleet Services mechanics to
inform Young Brothers of safety issues they encountered in
installing the top handlers and to make recommendations regarding
safety matters:
Q: Now, when A&B Fleet Service[s] did the hookup of the
top handler to the Hi-Lift, did you have any -- did Young
Brothers have any expectation as to what the scope of their
services would be?  
For example, if it didn't have indicator lights, did
you expect them to -- to say, "hey, you need indicator
lights"?
A:Yes.  We relied on them to tell us what they find, of
their finding.
Q:Right.
A:Of their recommendation.
Q:Yeah.
A:You know, whether it needs to be repaired, replaced.
We rely on them because we can't be there to -- NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q: Right.
 
A: To make those calls.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
In addition, according to Edmund Baquiring, a senior
 
A&B Fleet Services mechanic, it was part his responsibility "to
 
notify Young Brothers if [he] found any safety violations
 concerning [Young Brothers'] equipment" and to recommend repairs
 that may need to be done on the equipment. Dwayne Coit stated
 that he was instructed, as an A&B Fleet Services mechanic, to
 inform his supervisor if he encountered any "unsafe condition" in
 a customer's equipment and the supervisor would then determine
 whether to take the equipment out of service.
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to Kealoha,
 
there were genuine issues of material fact concerning the scope
 of A&B Fleet Services' contractual responsibilities to provide
 safety recommendations and advice to Young Brothers and the
 extent to which Young Brothers relied on A&B Fleet Services'
 expertise in safety matters. The existence of these factual
 disputes, in turn, preclude the granting of summary judgment in
 favor of A&B Fleet Services based on the claimed absence of a
 duty of care. 
A&B Fleet Services argues that it did not owe Kealoha
 
any legal duty because "the subject accident was not reasonably
 foreseeable as a matter of law." We disagree.
 
Regardless of its source, a duty is only owed "to those
 
who are foreseeably endangered by the conduct and only with
 respect to those risks or hazards whose likelihood made the
 conduct or omission unreasonably dangerous." Doe Parents No. 1
 
v. State Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai' i 34, 72, 58 P.3d 545, 583 
(2002) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted). The test for foreseeability is 
whether there is some probability of harm sufficiently
serious that a reasonable and prudent person would take
precautions to avoid it. As the gravity of the possible
harm increases, the apparent likelihood of its occurrence
need be correspondingly less to generate a duty of
precaution. And against this probability, and gravity, of
 
11
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the risk, must be balanced in every case the utility of the
type of conduct in question.
 
Knodle, 69 Haw. at 388, 742 P.2d at 385 (internal quotation
 
marks, brackets, footnote, and citations omitted). 
Here, A&B Fleet Services' alleged negligence arises
 
from its conduct in installing Top Handler #102 onto Hi-Lift
 #215, an incompatible combination that did not permit the use of
 indicator lights, a safety feature designed to warn the Hi-Lift
 operator if the shipping container being lifted was not properly
 secured. Top Handler #102 was designed to be installed onto a
 
Hi-Lift with indicator lights in its dashboard, a feature which
 
Hi-Lift # 215 did not have. A prior generation top handler sold
 
with Hi-Lift #215 was equipped with indicator lights on a panel
 
that could be attached to the Hi-Lift. The Top Handler #102/Hi-
Lift #215 combination, however, did not permit the use of
 indicator lights. 
The service manual for Top Handler #102 specifically
 
lists Hi-Lift models that were compatible with Top Handler #102,
 and Hi-Lift #215 not among the models listed. Although Top
 Handler #102 is equipped with mechanical flags, Kealoha presented
 evidence that the indicator lights provide a more accurate means
 of determining whether the twist locks are fully engaged. 
According to Larry Stone (Stone), a retired Hyster engineer, Top
 Handler #102 was not intended to be used with just mechanical
 flags and no indicator lights "[b]ecause the operation of the
 mechanical flags alone will not necessarily define a full twist-
lock engagement. When the lights are used with it, then the
 twist-lock lights come on at near full engagement." When Hi-Lift
 #215 was originally delivered to Young Brothers, it was delivered
 with a top handler designed with indicator lights on a panel that
 could be attached to Hi-Lift #215. 
The clear purpose of the indicator lights is to warn
 
the Hi-Lift operator that a shipping container being lifted is 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not securely attached to the top handler and may fall. Given the
 
size of the shipping containers being moved by the Top Handler
 #102/Hi-Lift #215 combination, the gravity of the possible harm
 resulting from a container breaking loose and falling is great. 
We reject A&B Fleet Services' claim that as matter of law,
 Kealoha's injuries were not a foreseeable result of its alleged
 negligent conduct.
 
Based on the record before this court, we conclude that
 
Kealoha produced sufficient evidence to establish the existence
 of genuine issues of material fact regarding whether A&B Fleet
 Services owed a duty of care to Kealoha. We therefore conclude
 that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in
 favor of A&B Fleet Services on this issue. 
III.
 
Kealoha argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
determining on summary judgment that there was no causal
 connection between A&B Fleet Services' alleged negligence and
 Kealoha's injury. We agree.
 
In a negligence action, the plaintiff bears the burden 
of establishing that the defendant's alleged negligence was a legal cause of the plaintiff's injury. As the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has explained, the plaintiff need only show that the defendant's "negligence was a substantial factor in causing plaintiff's injuries." Knodle, 69 Haw. at 390, 742 P.2d at 386 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "The presence of a reasonably close connection between the defendant's conduct and the plaintiff's injury, i.e. whether the breach of duty was more likely than not a substantial factor in causing the harm complained of is normally a question for the jury[.]" Id. at 
385, 742 P.2d at 383 (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). Accordingly, determining causation on a motion for summary judgment is only appropriate where "the facts are such that they will support only one reasonable inference." 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Id. at 389, 742 P.2d at 385. We conclude that the record in this
 
case raises genuine issues of material fact relating to the legal
 cause of Kealoha's injuries, and that the Circuit Court erred in
 granting A&B Fleet Services' first motion for summary judgment on
 the issue of causation.
 
A&B Fleet Services argues that its actions could not
 
have caused Kealoha's injuries because Tanaka, the operator of
 Hi-Lift # 215 at the time of the accident, stated that he saw
 both green flags before he lifted the container involved in the
 accident. A&B Fleet Services argues that because there was no
 evidence that Tanaka was misled by the green flags, its alleged
 negligence in installing a top handler/Hi-Lift combination
 without indicator lights could not have caused the accident.
 
Kealoha, however, provided evidence that conflicted
 
with A&B Fleet Services' claim. Stone testified in his
 deposition that Top Handler #102 was designed to operate with
 indicator lights "[b]ecause the operation of the mechanical flags
 alone will not necessarily define a full twist-lock engagement." 
Stone's testimony provides evidence that the mechanical flags
 
were an imprecise indicator and would not necessarily have
 provided an accurate display of the actual twist lock position. 
Thus, even if Tanaka had visually confirmed the display of the
 green flags, the twist locks may not have been fully engaged. 
Moreover, Kealoha provided a declaration from Richard Gill
 (Gill), an expert in human factors engineering, which supported
 Kealoha's claim that the lack of indicator lights could have
 caused the accident:
 
3.	 The indicator lights are easier for the operator to
see; they also create a measure of redundancy, which
was critical in this case due to the fact that one of
 the mechanical flags was out of alignment. In
 addition, the mechanical indicator flags can be easily
misread and violate basic human factors design
principles. That is, the sole purpose of the
mechanical indicator flag is to convey to the operator
a discrete status (i.e. safe vs. unsafe) pertaining to
the container/tophandler connection. Thus, in
accordance with basic human factors design principles
the "display" (i.e. the device that tells the operator
the status of the machine) should only display status
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
information (i.e. safe vs. unsafe). However, the
mechanical indicator flag system displays continuous
information or information that varies continuously
depending o[n] how many degrees the flag rotates
through. Such a design needlessly increases the
complexity of the operator's task, increases the
likelihood of the operator misreading the display
depending on how far it has rotated, and increases the
chances of a daily error due to the flag system being
partially out of alignment (i.e. such as on the
subject tophandler). There is no marker or guideline
on the flags that tells the operator that the
twistlocks have fully rotated. The flag system offers
no precise mechanism for distinguishing partial
twistlock rotation from full twistlock rotation. It
 is a crude system at best. . . . As the twistlocks
 turn incrementally the indicator flags also turn
incrementally. . . .
 
The twist lock system is designed so that an operator
 
cannot accidentally disengage the twist locks once the container
 
is lifted off the ground. Kealoha presented evidence that
 inspection of the container after the incident revealed that the
 four pockets at the corners of the container (to which the top
 handler engages) were not damaged. The absence of damage to the
 corner pockets of the container and the design of the twist lock
 system to prevent accidental disengagement by the operator while
 the container is in the air indicate that the container was not
 properly engaged when it was lifted, regardless of what the green
 flags indicated. 
We conclude that there are genuine issues of material
 
fact regarding whether A&B Fleet Services' alleged negligence in
 installing Top Handler # 102 onto Hi-Lift #215, a combination
 that did not permit the use of indicator lights, a designed
 safety feature, caused Kealoha's injuries. Therefore, the
 Circuit Court erred in granting A&B Fleet Services' motion for
 summary judgment on the issue of causation. 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment and its orders
 
granting summary judgment in favor of A&B Fleet Services. 
We 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 
Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Katharine M. Nohr 
Preston Easley
Richard K. Griffith
 for Plaintiff-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Jeffrey H.K. Sia
Ronald m. Shigekane
Diane W. Wong
(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, 
Sia & Nakamura, LLLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
 
16
 