FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
GEORGE MIYASHIRO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ROEHRIG, ROEHRIG, WILSON & HARA; STANLEY H. ROEHRIG,

Attorney at Law, ALC; GLENN HARA, Attorney at Law;
CAROL MIYASHIRO; TROY MIYASHIRO; TITLE GUARANTY
CO.; and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100, Defendants-Appellees
 
NO. 28395
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-211)
 
MARCH 23, 2010
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD, J., AND
CIRCUIT COURT JUDGE TRADER, IN PLACE OF
NAKAMURA AND FUJISE, JJ., ALL RECUSED
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant George Miyashiro (George)1
 appeals
from the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's (Circuit Court)
 
April 24, 2007 Second Amended Final Judgment.2 On appeal, George
 
seeks relief from five orders granting summary judgment against
 
him and the Circuit Court's limitations on the role of George's
 
pro hac vice counsel. 
We hold: (1) the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion when it denied a motion to remove agreed-upon
 
1/
 As several members of the Miyashiro family are necessarily
referenced in this Opinion, for the purpose of brevity and clarity, their
first names are used.
 
2/
 The Honorable George M. Masuoka presided. 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limitations on pro hac vice counsel's role in this case; (2) the 
Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor 
of an escrow company on the claim that escrow breached its 
contractual duty by delivering stock certificates in care of a 
party's attorney when the only address provided to the escrow 
company was in care of the party's attorney and the party 
executed a document that identified the address in care of the 
attorney as the party's address; (3) the Circuit Court erred in 
granting summary judgment on the Hawai 'i Rules of Professional 
Conduct when, inter alia, there existed genuine issues of 
material fact in dispute concerning an attorney's implied 
authorization to disclose information related to the 
representation when the person to whom the disclosure was made 
had withdrawn her consent to a highly significant part of the 
agreement that was the subject of the attorney's representation; 
even when a disclosure of information may be impliedly authorized 
in the first instance, in the face of a significant change in 
circumstances, that authorization may be subject to limitations, 
and may give way to other duties, such as the duty to keep the 
client reasonably informed, reasonably advised, and in the 
decision-making role, including with respect to the means by 
which the client's objectives are pursued; (4) the Circuit Court 
erred in granting summary judgment on a bylaws provision 
controlling the transfer of shares of stock in a closely-held 
corporation when summary judgment was based on a determination 
that the bylaws required board of directors' consent for any 
stock transfer, but the bylaws do not require directors' consent 
and, instead, set forth a mandatory procedure whereby stock may 
be transferred; (5) the Circuit Court did not err in granting 
summary judgment on a conspiracy claim when the plaintiff failed 
to adduce evidence supporting each of the elements of an 
underlying criminal or unlawful purpose or criminal or unlawful 
means used to accomplish a lawful purpose; and (6) the Circuit 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court erred in granting summary judgment based on a plaintiff's
 
allegedly admitted embezzlement and breach of fiduciary duty when
 
it appears from the record that there are genuine issues of
 
material fact concerning the alleged misappropriations and
 
concerning whether plaintiff necessarily would have been removed
 
as president of the company and otherwise would have been
 
divested of his interest in the company in the absence of his
 
attorney's alleged breaches. 
Accordingly, we affirm in part and vacate in part, and
 
we remand this case for a trial on George's remaining claims.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
In 1965, George's father Jack Miyashiro (Jack) 
established Jack's Tours, Inc. (Jack's Tours), a Hawai 'i 
corporation that operates a touring business on the Big Island of Hawai
'i. In conjunction with Jack's retirement from Jack's Tours 
in 1988, Jack named George President of Jack's Tours. George served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Jack's Tours 
from 1988 until January 1999. Also upon his retirement, Jack 
gifted shares of stock in Jack's Tours, which were all previously 
owned by him, to George, George's brother Raymond Miyashiro 
(Raymond), Raymond's daughter Leslie Miyashiro (Leslie), and 
George's sons Jeff Miyashiro (Jeff) and Troy Miyashiro (Troy). 
Between 1988 and 1998, George bought additional shares of stock 
from Jack. As of July 1998, George owned 28% of the outstanding 
shares of Jack's Tours, Raymond and Leslie owned or controlled 
28%, collectively, and Jeff and Troy each owned 22% of the 
outstanding shares of Jack's Tours. 
A. The Lawsuits involving Raymond
 
Beginning in 1997, various disputes developed between
 
George and Raymond, who owned and operated another touring
 
business, Trans Hawaiian, Inc. (Trans Hawaiian). Trans Hawaiian
 
operated primarily on the island of Oahu. George alleges that
 
Trans Hawaiian owed a significant amount of money to Jack's
 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tours. George avers that he sought to substantially reduce the
 
debt owed by Trans Hawaiian to Jack's Tours and declined to
 
provide support services for Trans Hawaiian until the debt was
 
reduced. 
In 1997, Trans Hawaiian and the trustee of Raymond's
 
trust initiated two lawsuits, one against Jack's Tours and the
 
other against George, individually and in his capacity as an
 
officer and director of Jack's Tours. George claims that these
 
suits were brought in anticipation of his actions to reduce Trans
 
Hawaiian's outstanding indebtedness to Jack's Tours. In Case No.
 
97-402, filed in the Circuit Court by Lance Castroverde, as
 
Trustee for the Raymond Miyashiro Trust (Raymond Trust) and
 
derivatively on behalf of Jack's Tours, it was alleged that
 
George and/or others under his dominion or control constituted a
 
majority of the board of directors of Jack's Tours, and provided
 
unjustified payments and benefits to George, George's ex-wife
 
Carol Miyashiro (Carol), Troy, and others (97-402). The
 
complaint in 97-402 sought damages, an accounting, and other
 
relief from George and Doe Defendants based on claims of breach
 
of fiduciary duty, mismanagement, misappropriation, diversion
 
and/or conversion of funds, unjust enrichment, theft and
 
embezzlement, and fraud.
 
Trans Hawaiian filed a complaint against Jack's Tours
 
in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Hilo Division,
 
seeking $12,381.69 for unpaid transportation and related services
 
and products. This case was transferred to the Circuit Court and
 
numbered Case No. 97-471, upon the filing of a counterclaim by
 
Jack's Tours alleging that Trans Hawaiian owed Jack's Tours
 
approximately $150,000 for certain services and accommodations
 
(97-471).
 
Although the cases were never consolidated, in mid­
1998, 97-471 and 97-402 were settled in a joint settlement
 
agreement. The terms of the settlements were put on the record
 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
before the Circuit Court on July 24, 1998. The parties agreed to
 
settle both cases on the following terms:

 
1.	 All shares of stock in Jack's Tours, Inc., owned or
controlled by Raymond Miyashiro or his daughter Leslie
shall be transferred to George Miyashiro or, per his
directions, in consideration for the payment in full
of the sum of $300,000.00, to Raymond Miyashiro or his
designee. Such a transfer is contingent on George
obtaining PUC approval as required by law or PUC
order. Raymond will cooperate in obtaining such
approval.
 
2.	 Civil No. 97-402, Castroverde v. Miyashiro, shall be
dismissed with prejudice, with each party to bear
their own attorneys [sic] fees and costs.
 
3.	 The appropriate corporate approval for the sale
and transfer of stock as provided for herein by
Jack's Tours, Inc., shall be presented to
Raymond Miyashiro within 15 days of the Court's
approval or as otherwise agreed by the parties.
 
4.	 Civil No. 97-471, TransHawaiian Services, Inc. vs.
Jack's Tours, Inc., shall be dismissed with prejudice,
with each side to bear their own attorneys [sic] fees
and costs. It is expressly understood and agreed that
the Counterclaim of approximately $150,000.00 by
Defendant Jack's Tours, Inc., against Plaintiff
TransHawaiian Services, Inc., shall be forever barred
through this dismissal.
 
5.	 Jack's Tours, Inc., shall provide services of a retail
value of up to $300,000.00 to TransHawaiian Services,
Inc., its nominee, or designee during a 3-year time
period. In the event that ownership of Jack's Tours,
Inc., is transferred, or Jack's Tours, Inc., wishes to
terminate this provision, it shall be allowed to do so
by paying the remaining value of the services, less a
24% deduction. For so long as there shall be a
balance outstanding pursuant to this provision, in the
event that Jack's Tours, Inc., desires to sell the
majority shares of its stock or a controlling interest
of its ownership rights, TransHawaiian Services, Inc.,
or Raymond Miyashiro shall have first the right to
match or equal any bona fide offer to purchase
presented to Jack's Tours, Inc., or any of its
stockholders, officers, or directors, and upon
matching or equaling the proposed purchase price, the
seller shall be obligated to transfer said interest to

 
Raymond Miyashiro or TransHawaiian Services, Inc.
6. 
	The appropriate corporate actions necessary to
effectuate the terms and conditions herein shall
 be presented within 15 days of the Court's
approval of this settlement.
 
7.	 The terms and conditions herein shall bind the heirs,
successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
8. 	This Court shall retain jurisdiction over this
matter for purposes of assuring compliance with
the terms and conditions of this settlement by
the parties to this litigation. Any party may
move this matter for consideration by this Court
upon appropriate notice to the other party. The
 decision of the Court shall be binding and non-
appealable.
 
9. 	An appropriate escrow will be established to handle
this transaction. The parties shall provide
appropriate escrow instructions.
 
B.	 The Escrow Transaction
 
On or about October 2, 1998, George and the Raymond
 
Trust entered into an escrow agreement, designating Defendant-
Appellee Title Guaranty Escrow Services, Inc. (Title Guaranty) as
 
the escrow agent for the transfer of stock certificates to George
 
and the payment of $300,000.00 to the Raymond Trust. The escrow
 
instructions prepared and signed by the parties provided the
 
following directions to Title Guaranty for the closing of the
 
escrow transaction:
 
These escrow instructions are agreed upon and issued
jointly by Lance Castroverde, Trustee of the Raymond
Miyashiro Trust, and George Miyashiro, Individually and as
President of Jack's Tours, Inc., with regard to the transfer
of shares of stock in Jack's Tours, Inc., held by Lance
Castroverde as Trustee of the Raymond Miyashiro Trust to
George Miyashiro or his designee. It is agreed that Title
Guaranty shall act as escrow for this transaction.
 
This transfer is made pursuant to the terms and
provisions of that settlement agreement between the parties
in Civil No. 97-402 as set forth in that certain "Script for
Placing Terms of Settlement on the Record - July 22, 1998" a
copy of which is attached hereto.
 
1.	 No later than five (5) days prior to the closing date
set forth herein, George Miyashiro shall deposit the
sum of Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00)
with escrow to be distributed in accordance with these
 instructions;
 
2.	 No later than five (5) days prior to the closing date
set forth herein Lance Castroverde shall present to
escrow his letter dated September 3, 1998, to Matthew
S. K. Pyun, Esq., indicating that the Public Utilities
Commission has received the notification of this
 transfer of shares and no further action is
 anticipated;
 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3.	 No later than five (5) days prior to closing, George
Miyashiro as President of Jack's Tours, Inc., shall
deposit with escrow all stock certificates of Jack's
Tours, Inc., owned or controlled by Lance Castroverde
as Trustee of the Raymond Miyashiro Trust, Raymond
Miyashiro and Leslie Miyashiro. It is expressly
understood that no other shares owned by Lance
Castroverde as Trustee of the Raymond Miyashiro Trust,
Raymond Miyashiro and Leslie Miyashiro shall remain
outstanding;
 
4.	 At or prior to closing Lance Castroverde as Trustee of
the Raymond Miyashiro Trust, Raymond Miyashiro and
Leslie Miyashiro shall as necessary execute all stock
certificates to be transferred to George Miyashiro,
and shall deposit with escrow a certification that any
shares transferred are free and clear of any
encumbrances or liens.
 
At closing escrow shall:
 
5.	 Escrow shall close this matter on October 19, 1998;
 
6.	 Pay to the Raymond Miyahiro Trust the sum of Three
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000);
 
7.	 Deliver to George Miyashiro the duly executed stock
certificates of Jack's Tours, Inc; 
8.	 Deliver to George Miyashiro the certification of Lance
Castroverde as Trustee of the Raymond Miyashiro Trust,
Raymond Miyashiro and Leslie Miyashiro, that the
transferred shares are free and clear of any liens or
encumbrances;
 
9.	 Deliver to each party a copy of Lance Castroverde's
letter to Matthew S. K. Pyun, Jr., Esq., dated
September 3, 1998, indicating that the Public
Utilities Commission has been duly notified of the
transfer of the shares of stock;
 
10.	 Escrow shall be authorized to make any delivery as
provided herein to the authorized representative of
the parties provided that a duly executed written
authorization is provided escrow prior to or at
closing;
 
11.	 Collect one-half (½) of its fees from each of the
parties.
 
On or about October 7, 1998, a letter from Defendant-
Appellee Stanley H. Roehrig (Roehrig) was hand-delivered to Title
 
Guaranty. The letter stated:
 
Please accept this as a supplemental escrow
instruction with regard to the above escrow. My client,
Jack's Tours, Inc. has authorized me to hold for
safekeeping, any and all shares of stock of Jack's Tours,
 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inc., at the close of escrow, in order to work out further
family details.
 
The October 7, 1998 letter was signed by Roehrig, but
 
was not signed or counter-signed by George. Roehrig claims that
 
George told him to hold Raymond's shares after the closing of the
 
Title Guaranty escrow. Although the letter reflects a "cc" to
 
George, Raymond's attorney, and George's ex-wife Carol, George
 
denies authorizing the letter or receiving a contemporaneous
 
copy.3 As discussed further herein, George strongly denies
 
authorizing Roehrig to hold the stock certificates after the
 closing of escrow. The record contains no written agreement,
 
letter, memo, fax, note, email, or other writing signed by George
 
that evidences George's approval of the supplemental escrow
 
instruction.
4
 
However, on or about October 15, 1998, a Tentative
 
Buyer's Statement was generated by Title Guaranty. This
 
statement provides an address "C/O ATTORNEY STANLEY H ROEHRIG"
 
for both George and Jack's Tours. George's undated signature
 
appears on the second page of the statement, acknowledging its
 
receipt.
 
Escrow closed on October 19, 1998. The stock
 
certificates were sent by Title Guaranty to "MR. GEORGE MIYASHIRO
 
PRESIDENT JACK'S TOURS INC." "C/O ATTORNEY STANLEY H.
 
ROEHRIG[.]" Roehrig claims that, with George's approval, the
 
shares were given to Roehrig "in trust, pending a decision of the
 
3/
 The record also contains an October 6, 1998 letter from Roehrig's
legal assistant, stating that Roehrig was representing George and Jack's
Tours. The October 6, 1998 letter did not reflect a "cc" to George.
 
4/
 It appears, however, that someone at Jack's Tours received a copy
of Roehrig's October 7, 1998 letter because, on October 13, 1998, Donald
Bowers of Jack's Tours faxed a copy of the letter back to Roehrig with a
handwritten note stating, "George said all 28% is his" and "Carol will have to
wait until he is dead." Also on October 13, 1998, Donald Bowers sent another
fax to Roehrig with the message, "George Keeps [sic] telling me to let you
know The [sic] stock is his and he don't [sic] want to split with anyone." At
 deposition, Roehrig testified that, on October 14, 1998, George told him, "I'm
going to do it" and then deposited $300,000.00 into escrow.
 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Jack's Tours] directors on how the shares would be allocated." 
George claims that Roehrig wrongfully redirected the stock
 
certificates to himself and wrongfully withheld them from George. 
The record contains no written agreement, letter, memo, fax,
 
note, email, or other writing signed by George that evidences
 
George's approval of the purported trust arrangement.
 
C. The Attorney-Client Relationship
 
There are numerous points of material disagreement
 
between George and Roehrig regarding the nature and scope of
 their relationship. Both parties agree, however, that there was
 
an attorney-client relationship formed between George and Roehrig
 
and that this relationship was memorialized in an engagement
 
letter. The engagement letter, dated September 15, 1997, was
 
addressed to George, individually, without reference to any
 
corporate capacity or to Jack's Tours. The letter states that
 
"this firm's representing you in matters generally concerning
 
your personal and business affairs," is signed by Roehrig, and is
 
countersigned by George. The letter contains no discussion of
 
the representation or possible representation of multiple clients
 
(such as George and Jack's Tours), multiple roles (such as
 

 Roehrig acting as a trustee or stakeholder, as well as lawyer),or any disclosure or explanation of the implications, advantages,
 
or risks of common representation. The letter does not purport
 
to waive any conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of
 
interest. It appears from the record that the engagement
 
agreement set forth in the September 15, 1997 letter was never
 
amended or supplemented. There were no subsequent conflict
 
waivers, Roehrig's position being (as stated at oral argument)
 
that no conflict waiver was needed in this case, and George's
 
position being that Roehrig breached his ethical and professional
 
duties to his client.
 
George contends that Roehrig was never authorized to
 
represent any interest other than George's individual interests. 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Roehrig also states that George disclosed to him that George had5/
engaged in "criminal activity" at Jack's Tours and that George was afraid that
those activities would be discovered in the litigation with Raymond.  However,
neither of the September 15, 1997 letters mention the existence of any
business-practice-related conditions to Roehrig's representation of George or
any representation of Jack's Tours by Roehrig.  Roehrig cites George's letter
as support for the proposition that his firm's legal representation was made
conditional on George clearing future business decisions with Hara because of
the lawyers' concerns about George's allegedly unlawful conduct. George denies
that he and Roehrig discussed such issues or that there were any
pre-conditions to Roehrig's representation. 
More specifically, George's letter to counsel stated:6/
As my personal and business affairs become more
complex, I find that I am dealing with more and more lawyers
who represent me personally and/or some of the entities with
which I am involved.
I am presently in the process of attempting to
evaluate the various legal matters with which I am involved
in order to prioritize the efforts and resources to be
spent.  I am currently consulting with Glenn Hara, Esq., and
Stanley Roehrig, Esq.  I look to them as general counsel in
coordinating my various legal matters.
I am asking that you assist Stan and Glenn should they
contact you for information. [ ]
10George states that he initially retained Harold Chu, Esq., to
serve as the attorney for both Jack's Tours and George in 97-402
and 97-471, but that a conflict of interest arose requiring
separate representation.  George further states that he hired
Roehrig to act as his personal attorney in 97-402.  On July 24,
1998, when the settlements in 97-402 and 97-471 were put on the
record before the Circuit Court, Harold Chu stated that he
represented Jack's Tours in 97-471 and Roehrig stated that he
represented George in 97-402.  
Roehrig claims that he was hired to represent George
against Raymond and Trans Hawaiian, both personally and as
president of Jack's Tours.5  Roehrig points to a second 
September 15, 1997 letter from George to various attorneys
notifying them that George had hired Roehrig and Glenn Hara
(Hara) to help George coordinate his various legal matters.6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11George does not deny sending the letter, but maintains that
Roehrig was hired only to represent his interests. 
As noted above, Roehrig informed Title Guaranty that he
represented Jack's Tours, as well as George.  
D. Roehrig's Interactions with Carol
Central to the dispute between George and Roehrig is a
series of communications between Roehrig and George's ex-wife
Carol.  Many details and aspects of these communications are
disputed by the parties, including whether and to what extent
they were impliedly authorized by George, whether they were
necessary to the completion of the settlements of 97-402 and 97-
471, whether Roehrig kept George reasonably informed about the
communications, whether Roehrig explained matters related to the
communications to the extent reasonably necessary for George to
make informed decisions, whether Roehrig impermissibly disclosed
information to Carol related to his representation of George,
whether Roehrig failed to adequately represent George's interests
with respect to the issue of Carol's consent to the transfer of
Raymond's stock to George, and whether Roehrig at some point
began to cooperate with, act in concert with, and/or take
directions from Carol to the point that Roehrig's communications
and actions were adverse to George.  George claims, and Roehrig
does not dispute, that at the time Roehrig was representing
George there was personal animosity and legal adversity between
George and Carol.
Notwithstanding the disputed nature of the facts
surrounding the communications between Roehrig and Carol, the
opposing arguments regarding their materiality, and the
conflicting inferences that arguably may be drawn from the
evidence, it is necessary for this court to reference some of theFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
It is neither possible nor fruitful for this court to fully7/
catalogue the voluminous affidavit and deposition testimony, documents, and
proffered inferences to be drawn from the evidence, that were presented to the
Circuit Court in conjunction with the summary judgment motions in this case.  
12testimonial and documentary evidence presented by the parties in
conjunction with the summary judgment motions.7  
At deposition, Roehrig testified that about two days
prior to placing the settlements on the record in 97-402 and 97-
471, he called Carol to "check with her if she was okay with what
we were planning to put on the record . . . because it was going
to require her approval as a director."  Roehrig further
testified that, after explaining the terms of the settlement
script to Carol, informing her that the settlement would be
placed on the record before the court, and that, as directors of
Jack's Tours, she and Troy would have to sign consents for the
stock transfer, Carol said that "it sounded okay with her." 
Apparently, Roehrig made no attempt to confirm Carol's approval
in writing prior to placing the settlement on the record.  The
record does not reflect any communication with Troy regarding his
consent.  George maintains that the communication with Carol was
unnecessary, as discussed further below, because director consent
was not required for intra-family transfers of stock in Jack's
Tours.
Apparently, after the settlements in 97-402 and 97-471
were placed on the record, Carol changed her mind.  Hara drafted
a memo to file, dated July 29, 1998, describing a call he
received from Carol.  The memo stated that Carol had some
questions about the script.  Hara informed her that the
settlements had already been placed on the record.  Carol raised
concerns about George getting Raymond and Leslie's stock,
possible tax consequences to Troy if stock was transferred to
him, and Raymond's right of first refusal to purchase the Jack's
Tours stock.  Carol indicated that she would be signing and
mailing the consent.  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On or about July 30, 1998, Carol wrote to Roehrig
 
regarding the consent of the directors:
 
There is a provision in the settlement that concerns
 
me.
 
#1 Transfer of shares of stock in Jack's Tours, Inc.
to George. In all fairness to the remaining shareholders,
Troy and I are in agreement that the shares of stock in
Jack's Tours, Inc. be transferred to Jack's Tours, Inc. or
its remaining shareholders as approved by its Board of
Directors.
 
I have confidence that Raymond Miyashiro will not
oppose this revision.
 
On or about August 26, 1998, Carol again wrote to
 
Roehrig: 
I am inquiring about the status of a proposed
distribution of the shares of stock in Jack's Tours, Inc.
purchased from Ray Miyashiro, et al. for the Board of
Directors Approval. Have you come up with a fair
distribution of shares for the remaining shareholders for
Board consideration? 
I am also interested to know how George plans to
arrange the $300,000 payment to Raymond.
I would appreciate an updated report on the
settlement. 
A document that appears to be a September 3, 1998 memo
 
to file by Hara includes: "SHR already talked to Carole [sic]
 
Miyashiro re: her most recent letter. She will sit tight." In
 
opposition to summary judgment, George also offered a copy of a
 
document, also dated September 3, 1998, that appears to be a
 
draft of a letter or fax from Roehrig, and states:
 
Dear Carole [sic]:
In our telephone conversation on September _, 1998 ,8
 
we agreed that the time is not yet right to address the
issue of the distribution of shares of Jack's Tours among
the remaining shareholders. It is my understanding that the
$300,000 to be paid in cash will be paid out of George's
pocket.
Also, the settlement agreement calls for the provision
of services worth $300,000.00 by Jack's to TransHawaiian
[sic]. I am told by Don Bowers that Jack's has already
started to provide these services.
If you have any other questions please call me. 
8/
 The blank in the date appears to be filled in with a "2."
 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
George also submitted to the Circuit Court an unsigned document,9/
typed on RRWH letterhead with a date of October 7, 1998, and bearing what
appears to be a handwritten slash across it, that read:
INSTRUCTIONS TO ESCROW
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
I hereby authorize escrow to turn over any and all
stock certificates of Jack's Tours, Inc., to the care of
Stanley H. Roehrig, Esq. at the close of escrow.
The document has a blank signature line for JACK'S TOURS, INC. By George
Miyashiro Its President.  In a declaration, George states that he refused
Roehrig's request to sign the document and instead drew a line through it.  
In deposition, Carol testified that, at about the time of the10/
October 6, 1998 letter (which she refers to by the date of the fax cover),
George threatened to discontinue his financial support for Troy in order to
induce Carol and Troy to consent to the stock transfer to George.  Carol also
described George's threats as occurring at or about the time that the Title
Guaranty escrow closed. 
14On or about September 3, 1998, Carol wrote to Roehrig:
It's been a week and I haven't heard anything from
you.  I would like to request a response to my August 26,
1998 letter to you, a copy of which I am enclosing.
A typed memo from Hara to Roehrig dated September 29,
1998, states:
RE:  Raymond's shares of stock
Attached is a letter from Roy Nakamoto that is self-explanatory. 
You were going to call Carol Miyashiro re: any problems with Don
signing the shares as secretary.
Please call Carol Miyashiro so we can set [sic] the stock
certificates signed and ready to be endorsed by Castroverde
and put into escrow.
On the bottom of the typed message, a handwritten
response read in part (the last few words were cut off in the
copy submitted to the court):
Glen:
Carol says o.k. for only this.
Hereafter she has reservations about Don.  She will send me
a letter w/ details.
SHR
P.S.  Make sure we keep our hands on shares.  Have Geo [sic]
sign note to Escrow agreeing that we hold stock . . . 9
On or about October 6, 1998, Carol again wrote a letter
to Roehrig (which was faxed to Roehrig on October 7, 1998):10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
There is conflicting evidence regarding whether George signed the11/
consent form before or after the edits and whether the changes to the consent
form effectively modified stock distribution under the settlement. George
denies agreeing to any modification of the settlement terms, specifically the
term by which he received Ray and Leslie's stock in Jack's Tours. 
15Dear Mr. Roehrig:
I received a copy of the escrow instructions from your
office in yesterday's mail.
Troy and I object to the instructions as shareholder
[sic] and directors of the company[.]  It is in violation of
the consent of Directors as the transfer is in conflict with
what we signed "the shares of stock shall be transferred to
Jack's Tours, Inc. or its remaining shareholders as approved
by its Board of Directors."
I want to make it clear that Troy and I do not approve
the escrow instructions as written and reserve all legal
rights.
Per your instructions to me, you will be notifying
escrow that all stock certificates shall be held with you,
in trust, until final settlement is made on the distribution
by all parties involved.
In our conversation of this afternoon, I believe the
amount compensated by the company has been misrepresented. 
Total consideration is $750,000, not $600,000, as mentioned
$300,000 cash to be paid personally by George, $300,000 in
services from Jack's Tours plus a waiver of accounts
receivable of $150,000 due and owing to the company for
services previously rendered.
Therefore, of Ray's 28% share George will receive
11.2% for his $300,000 cash payment, and 16.8% of Jack's
Tours services divided by three, 5.6% each.  The fair
distribution is as follows:
George (11.2% + 5.6%) 16.8%
Troy  5.6%
Jeff  5.6%
28.0%
Carol's October 6, 1998 letter apparently referred to a
consent of director's form prepared by RRWH, upon which Carol
apparently added a handwritten "amendment," which was initialed
by Carol and Troy.11  The purported amendment, dated July 31,
1998, states that the shares of Jack's Tours stock would be
transferred to "Jack's Tours or its remaining shareholders as
approved by its Board of Directors," rather than to George.
On the day after receiving Carol's letter, Roehrig sent 
the "supplemental escrow instruction" to Title Guaranty,
directing delivery of the shares of Jack's Tours stock to Roehrig
purportedly per the authorization of "his client," Jack's Tours.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Honorable Riki May Amano presided.12/
16After the October 18, 1998 closing of escrow, on
November 4, 1998, Carol again wrote to Roehrig:
Re: Distribution of Shares of Stock in Jack's Tours, Inc.
Purchased from Ray Miyashiro
In reviewing our phone conversation yesterday, I felt
that your options mentioned were unfair and lacking in good
faith.
As directors of the company, Troy and I believe that
my proposal in my letter to you dated October 6, 1998 is
fair for all concern [sic] and stands.
E. Further Events Following the Close of the Title
Guaranty Escrow
On October 20, 1998, Donald Bowers of Jack's Tours sent
a fax to Roehrig stating, "George asked me when will he get his
Stock.  Do I need to have Doug Ing let the PUC know of the
transfer to George or has this been done??"  In a declaration
submitted in opposition to summary judgment, George attested
that, "[f]rom October 20, 1998, through [and] into the first part
of 1999, I tried time and time again to get Stan Roehrig to give
me my share certificates and at all times he refused to do so." 
Roehrig does not deny this.  
On January 4, 1999, Roehrig resigned as George's
attorney and continued to hold custody of the stock certificates.
On March 9, 1999, George filed a motion in the Circuit Court to
enforce the July 24, 1998 settlement agreement in 97-402 and 97-
471.12  On March 31, 1999, the Circuit Court held a hearing on the
motion and, after hearing from all parties, ordered that Roehrig
turn over possession of the stock certificates to George.
On April 5, 1999, Carol, Jeff, Troy, and Jack's Tours
filed a complaint against George and Don Bowers, in Civil No. 99-
151 in the Circuit Court ( 99-151), for fraud, embezzlement, and
injunctive relief.  The complaint prayed for, inter alia, an
order requiring George to deliver the subject Jack's Tours stockFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The complaint averred, inter alia, that Carol had become president13/
of Jack's Tours in January of 1999.  
The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.14/
17certificates to Carol.13  After various motions and hearings, on
May 19, 1999, the Circuit Court entered a preliminary injunction
in 99-151 ordering George to deposit the stock certificates with
the Circuit Court pending the resolution of the lawsuit.14 
Effective August 15, 2002, George entered into a
settlement agreement with the other parties in 99-151 that
resulted in George selling or otherwise relinquishing all of his
interest in Jack's Tours, including the disputed stock
certificates, in exchange for consideration that included certain
payments to George and dismissal with prejudice of all claims
against George. 
F. The Relevant Proceedings Below
1. George's claims against the defendants
On July 19, 2004, George filed a complaint against
Roehrig, RRWH, Roehrig, Hara, Carol, Jeff, Title Guaranty, and
Doe Defendants.  On August 4, 2004, George filed a first amended
complaint ( Complaint ).  The Complaint included claims for:  (1)
legal malpractice; (2) breach of fiduciary duty; (3) negligent
misrepresentation; (4) constructive fraud; (5) conspiracy to
defraud; (6) breach of contract; and (7) a second breach of
contract claim.  Counts 1-4 and 6 were directed against RRWH,
Roehrig and Hara.  The conspiracy claim in count 5 was directed
against RRWH, Roehrig, Hara, Carol and Jeff.  Count 7 set forth a
breach of contract claim against Title Guaranty.  
All claims against Carol and Jeff were dismissed by
notice on October 20, 2004.  All claims against RRWH and Hara
were dismissed with prejudice by stipulation and order on
September 1, 2005.  After these dismissals, the remaining claimsFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hara, now a Circuit Court judge, disqualified himself from hearing15/
this case on July 22, 2004.  The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura disqualified
himself on July 27, 2004.  The Honorable Judges Terence T. Yoshioka, Ben H.
Gaddis and Barbara T. Takase disqualified themselves on December 7, 2004.  On
December 10, 2004, the Honorable Matthew S.K. Pyun, Jr., formerly the attorney
for Raymond and Trans Hawaiian, disqualified himself.  On December 14, 2004,
the Honorable George M. Masuoka of the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit was
assigned to preside temporarily in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit for
this case. 
18were counts 1 through 6 against Roehrig and count 7 against Title
Guaranty. 
2. The pro hac vice  motions
On September 16, 2004, George filed a motion to allow
Eugene J. Albertini, Esq. ( Albertini ) to appear as pro hac vice
counsel.  The motion was heard on October 11, 2004 by the
Honorable Ronald Ibarra.  Judge Ibarra denied the pro hac vice
motion without prejudice.  Subsequently, on December 8, 2004,
Judge Ibarra disqualified himself from this case.15
On November 22, 2004, George filed a second motion for
appointment of Albertini as pro hac vice  counsel.  George's
motion was heard by the Honorable George M. Masuoka on April 6,
2005.   After hearing that the parties reached an agreement
concerning admission of Albertini pro hac vice, subject to
certain limitations, Judge Masuoka agreed to grant limited pro
hac vice status to Albertini.  Albertini's limited status did not
permit him to take part in courtroom proceedings or address the
court, but did allow him to take depositions, engage in mediation
or settlement discussions, and be present in court with George's
lead counsel David Gierlach ( ).  At the April 6, 2005
hearing, it was clearly stipulated, twice stated on the record by
Roehrig's counsel, that the issue of Albertini's participation in
the trial was reserved.  The Circuit Court adopted the parties'
stipulation, subject to Albertini's continued good conduct.  The
September 1, 2005 written order granting in part and denying in
part George's motion to allow Albertini to appear as pro hac viceGierlachFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19counsel, however, did not mention the reservation of the issue of
Albertini's participation at trial.
On August 28, 2006, George filed a third motion asking
the Circuit Court to expand Albertini's limited pro hac vice
status to "full status."  On September 19, 2006, the motion was
argued before Judge Masuoka.  Judge Masuoka orally denied the
motion to alter Albertini's limited pro hac vice status.  Judge
Masuoka explained his reasoning: 
Now, this Court, as both of you well know, was not
going to permit Mr. Albertini pro hac vice status.  This
Court is of the belief that it's discretionary with the
court. It's not the rule doesn't make sense. [sic]
It would be you pay the fees and you can do a case. 
Never mind how many, as long as you're coming in here only
in a civil case.  You find somebody to work with. 
The Court has discretion.  And the Court, to a certain
extent, agreed with Judge Ibara [sic] in the first instance. 
And this Court also cautioned you, Mr. Gierlach, that in the
event that Mr. Albertini didn't meet the Court's
professional standards, this Court would revoke pro hac vice
and you would have to continue with the case.
Likewise, this Court also said that the Court always
considers local counsel as lead counsel.  But because of the
agreement between yourself, Mr. Gierlach, and the opposing
counsel saying you would agree to permit him to participate
in the preparation of the case but not make any presentation
to the Court, this Court, notwithstanding its better
judgment, permitted him to come in pro hac vice on a limited
basis.
This Court cannot see changing that.  If this Court
were to change, it would go back to its original intention
and say, "No, Mr. Gierlach, you originally took the case. 
You do the case."
If you were too busy, et cetera, you should not [have
taken the case] because you had the case once [before].  So
you had an idea of what it was, that it was dismissed
without prejudice and it was filed again.
So you knew to a certain extent what the case was
about because the rules require you to do an investigation
prior to filing any complaint on behalf of any client.
So under the circumstances, since this Court has
already permitted Mr. Albertini on a limited basis to appear
as pro hac vice and this was on the agreement of the other
counsel, the Court is not going to revoke that order.  But
nor is it going to permit any expanded participation by Mr.
Albertini.          FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20On October 5, 2006, George petitioned the Hawai #i
Supreme Court for a writ of mandamus seeking to compel the
Circuit Court to grant Albertini full pro hac vice  status.   As
discussed further below, on November 1, 2006, the petition for a
writ of mandamus was denied.  George then petitioned the United
States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari.  That petition was
rejected.  See Miyashiro v. Masuoka, 127 S.Ct. 2035 (2007).
3. The subject summary judgment motions
Title Guaranty filed a motion for summary judgment on
February 8, 2006.  The motion was granted on July 3, 2006.  An
order granting Title Guaranty's motion for a Hawai #i Rules of
Civil Procedure (HRCP ) Rule 54(b) judgment apparently was entered
on October 11, 2006 and a notice of appeal was filed.  That
appeal was dismissed based on jurisdictional defects (judgment
was not properly entered).
On September 11, 2006, Roehrig filed four motions for
summary judgment and a master statement of facts in support.  
Roehrig's motions for summary judgment dealt with four "central
aspects" of the case.  Roehrig's motions included:
(1) a motion for summary judgment on George's
(allegedly) admitted embezzlement and breach of fiduciary duty; 
(2) a motion for summary judgment on conspiracy claims;
(3) a motion for summary judgment on Bylaws; and 
(4) a motion for summary judgment on the Hawai #i Rules
of Professional Conduct ( HRPC). 
The substance of these motions will be addressed below
in conjunction with this court's review of the Circuit Court
orders granting them.
After arguments were presented at an October 16, 2006
hearing, all four motions were granted orally at a December 21,
2006 hearing and by written orders entered on December 28, 2006. 
On December 28, 2006, the Circuit Court entered a Final Judgment
in favor of Roehrig and against George on all claims alleged inFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We note that the September 1, 2005 Stipulation for Partial16/
Dismissal With Prejudice, which dismissed the claims against Hara and RRWH,
specifically stated that each party was to bear his or its own attorney's fees
and costs.
21the Complaint.  An Amended Final Judgment was entered on January
11, 2007, also entering judgment in favor of Title Guaranty and
against George.  The Circuit Court filed a Second Amended Final
Judgment on April 24, 2007, which included an attorneys' fees
award in favor of RRWH, Roehrig and Hara, and against George, in
the amount of $616,060.21.16  George timely filed a notice of
appeal.
II. POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, George raises the following points of error: 
(1) The Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying
"full" pro hac vice status to Albertini;
(2) The Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of Title Guaranty; 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of Roehrig on Roehrig's motion regarding 
violations of the Hawai# i Rules of Professional Conduct; 
(4) The Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of Roehrig on the issues related to Jack's
Tours' bylaws; 
(5) The Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of Roehrig on George's conspiracy claims;
(6) The Circuit Court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of Roehrig on the issue of George's allegedly
admitted embezzlement and breach of fiduciary duty to Jack's
Tours; and
(7) The Circuit Court erred in ordering George to pay
attorneys' fees and costs to Roehrig.
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
Rule 1.9 of the Rules of the Supreme Court of the State
of Hawai# i (RSCSH) states: FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
22Any attorney actively licensed to practice law by the
highest court of a state or territory of the United States
or the District of Columbia who is not a resident of Hawai# i
may be permitted to associate himself or herself with a
member or members of the Hawai# i bar in the presentation of a
specific case at the discretion of the presiding judge or
judges.
This court thus reviews the denial or limitation of pro
hac vice status for an abuse of discretion.  An abuse of
discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." 
Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839
P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo .  See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and County of
Honolulu, 99 Hawai# i 508, 514, 57 P.3d 433, 439 (2002); Bitney v.
Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawai #i 243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264
(2001).
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has articulated that: 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.  The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.  In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the party opposing the motion.
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawai# i 341, 344, 90
P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted).
The evidentiary standard required of a moving party in
meeting its burden on a summary judgment motion depends on
whether the moving party will have the burden of proof on the
issue at trial.  Where the moving party is the defendant, who
does not bear the ultimate burden of proof at trial, summary
judgment is proper when the nonmoving party-plaintiff --FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In his points of error, George references all three pro hac vice17/
orders, but he only presents argument related to the Circuit Court's ruling on
George's August 28, 2006 renewed motion to allow Albertini to appear as
counsel pro hac vice with full status.  Points not argued may be deemed
waived. Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7).  Moreover,
in light of George's stipulation to the limitations set forth in the Circuit
Court's September 1, 2005 order granting in part and denying in part George's
second motion to allow Albertini to appear as counsel pro hac vice, any
objection to the Circuit Court's first two rulings on Albertini's pro hac vice
status was either mooted or waived.
23fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the
existence of an element essential to that party's case, and
on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial.
In such a situation, there can be no genuine issue as to any
material fact, since a complete failure of proof concerning
an essential element of the nonmoving party's case
necessarily renders all other facts immaterial. The moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law because the
nonmoving party has failed to make a sufficient showing on
an essential element of [his or] her case with respect to
which [he or] she has the burden of proof.
Exotics Hawai# i-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co., 116
Hawai#i 277, 302, 172 P.3d 1021, 1046 (2007) (citations, internal
quotation marks, brackets, and ellipses omitted). 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard."
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of the State of Hawai# i, 120
Hawai#i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (citations and
brackets omitted).
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Albertini's Pro Hac Vice Status
George argues that the Circuit Court abused its
discretion when it arbitrarily denied Albertini "full" pro hac
vice status on September 19, 2006.17  George argues that Albertini
should have been granted full pro hac vice status because
Albertini:  (1) is a California attorney in good standing; (2) is
George's attorney of choice; (3) had already been granted partial
pro hac vice status by the Circuit Court; and (4) was already
intimately familiar with George's case.
George does not, however, explain what exactly he means
by "full" pro hac vice counsel status.  In his opening brief,FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
24George states, "Gierlach did not have the time or inclination to
be primary counsel in this case."  In his August 28, 2006 renewed
motion to the Circuit Court, George argued that he has a
constitutional right to "counsel of choice" with "full standing." 
Apparently, George contends that it was an abuse of the Circuit
Court's discretion not to grant Albertini the same rights,
privileges, and responsibilities of a Hawai# i-licensed attorney,
for the purposes of his representation of George in this case. 
We disagree.
In Hawai# i, pro hac vice status is governed by RSCSH
Rule 1.9 (emphasis added): 
Any attorney actively licensed to practice law by the
highest court of a state or territory of the United States
or the District of Columbia who is not a resident of Hawai# i
may be permitted to associate himself or herself with a
member or members of the Hawai# i bar in the presentation of a
specific case at the discretion of the presiding judge or
judges.
Rule 1.9 includes no mandate for unlimited admission to
practice pro hac vice before Hawai# i courts.  Instead, Rule 1.9
provides a presiding judge with the discretion to allow an out-
of-state licensed attorney to associate himself or herself with a
Hawai#i-licensed attorney in a particular case.  Rule 1.9 permits
pro hac vice counsel to practice only in association with a
Hawai#i-licensed attorney.  Hawai# i courts commonly allow pro hac
vice admission subject to continuing conditions, such as
requiring the Hawai #i-licensed attorney to serve as lead counsel
and to meaningfully participate in the case, and specifying that
all service be made on the Hawai# i-licensed attorney, rather than
requiring opposing parties to send court filings and discovery
papers to the mainland counsel.  See, e.g., Bank of Hawaii v.
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i 372, 376, 394, 984 P.2d 1198, 1202, 1220
(1999) (circuit court granted pro hac vice application on the
conditions that: (1) there shall be meaningful participation by
local counsel; (2) service shall be on local counsel; and (3)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Nor would it be an abuse of discretion for the Circuit Court to18/
consider a more limited request to allow Albertini to participate as 
(continued...)
25local counsel shall at all times remain lead counsel; supreme
court affirmed further conditions upon any future request for pro
hac vice admission).
Before further examining George's argument that the
Circuit Court abused its discretion in retaining the agreed-upon
limitations on Albertini's pro hac vice  admission, we consider
the Hawai #i Supreme Court's review of this very issue.  In its
order denying George's petition for a writ of mandamus, the
supreme court ruled that Judge Masuoka did not commit a "flagrant
and manifest abuse of discretion."  The supreme court concluded: 
[I]t appears that there is no federal or state
constitutional right to pro hac vice appearance of counsel
before any Hawai# i state court. See Bank of Hawaii v.
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i 372, 388, 984 P.2d 1198, 1214 (1999).
Granting Eugene Albertini full pro hac vice status in Civil
No. 04-1-0211 was within the discretion of the circuit
judge, see RSCSH 1.9, and the refusal to do so for the
reasons for which pro hac vice appearance was initially
denied was not a flagrant and manifest abuse of discretion. 
Neither party addresses the distinction between the
flagrant-and-manifest-abuse-of-discretion standard applied by 
supreme court on a petition for writ of mandamus and the abuse
of-discretion standard applied on direct appeal, or whether
principles of stare decisis or collateral estoppel dictate our
conclusion.  In any case, we find the supreme court's reasonin
to be compelling and applicable to George's contention that th
Circuit Court abused its discretion.  In light of the facts an
circumstances of this case, particularly George's prior agreem
to the limited representation and the concerns articulated in 
first instance by Judge Ibarra and reiterated by Judge Masuoka
the September 28, 2006 hearing, we conclude that the Circuit
Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Albertini full p
hac vice counsel status.18 the
-
g
e
d
ent
the
 at
roFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)18/
associated pro hac vice counsel in the trial proceedings upon the remand of
this case.
26B. Summary Judgment in Favor of Title Guaranty
The Complaint sets forth a single breach-of-contract
claim against Title Guaranty.  In addition to incorporating by
reference the factual allegations of the Complaint, Count VII
states:
Defendant Title Guaranty Co. entered into a contract
with Plaintiff in which Defendant Title Guaranty agreed to
act only consistent with instructions given by Plaintiff. 
Title Guaranty breached its contractual obligations owed to
Plaintiff and as a direct and proximate result, Plaintiff
has sustained substantial pecuniary damages in an amount to
be proved at trial.
George argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
entered summary judgment in favor of Title Guaranty and against
George because there were genuine issues of material fact in
dispute.  George argues, in part, that there is "no doubt" that
Title Guaranty breached its duty to George, as a party to the
escrow, when Title Guaranty delivered the Jack's Tours stock
certificates to Roehrig as directed in Roehrig's October 7, 1998
"supplemental escrow instruction."  However, before we consider
the issue of Roehrig's supplemental escrow instruction, we must
more specifically identify Title Guaranty's contractual duty to
George.
It is undisputed that the subject contract is embodied
in the escrow instructions prepared and signed by the parties to
the 97-402 and 97-471 settlements, as set forth in Section I.B.
above, and the additional terms set forth in the Tentative
Buyer's Statement, which was also signed by George.  The parties'
escrow instructions (at ¶ 7) create a duty for Title Guaranty to
deliver the stock certificates to George, but do not specify an
address for delivery.  The Tentative Buyer's Statement identifies
George's address as being in care of Roehrig.  George does not
deny that he received and executed the Tentative Buyer'sFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
George's failure of proof concerning his contract claim also19/
renders immaterial, with respect to George's claim against Title Guaranty, the
issue of whether the stock transfer restrictions contained in the Bylaws
and/or Articles of Incorporation of Jack's Tours prevented the transfer of
shares from Raymond to George absent the consent of the directors of Jack's
Tours.  Therefore, we need not address this issue in the context of the
summary judgment entered in favor of Title Guaranty.  The Bylaws issue was
also the subject of one of Roehrig's summary judgment motions and, therefore,
is addressed in that context in Section IV.D. below.
27Statement.  The uncontroverted evidence is that the only address
for George ever provided to Title Guaranty was in care of
Roehrig.  George has failed to make a showing sufficient to
establish the existence of an element essential to his case,
i.e., that Title Guaranty had a contractual duty to deliver the
stock certificates to him other than in care of Roehrig.  See,
e.g., Exotics Hawai# i, 116 Hawai# i at 301-02, 172 P.3d at 1046
(describing the burden of the nonmoving plaintiff on a summary
judgment motion).  Simply put, George has failed to bring forward
evidence that Title Guaranty breached its duty under the terms of
the escrow agreement.
As stated by the supreme court in Exotics Hawai #i, "a
complete failure of proof concerning an essential element of the
nonmoving party's case necessarily renders all other facts
immaterial."  Id.  Here, George's complete failure of proof
concerning an essential element of his breach-of-contract claim
renders immaterial the disputed facts regarding Roehrig's
allegedly unauthorized supplemental escrow instruction and
whether Title Guaranty accepted Roehrig's supplemental
instruction.19  
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
did not err when it entered summary judgment in favor of Title
Guaranty and against George.
C. Roehrig's Motion for Summary Judgment on the Hawai #i
Rules of Professional Conduct
 As reported above, the Complaint includes six causes
of action in which George seeks relief from Roehrig.  Roehrig'sFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
28summary judgment motion on the HRPC did not seek summary judgment
by reference to any particular cause of action.  Instead, in this
motion, Roehrig primarily argued:
In order to achieve George's objective of Raymond's
trust surrendering its shares of stock in Jack's Tours, Inc.,
it was necessary for George to obtain Carol's consent to the
share transfer.  As George's attorney, Roehrig had to
communicate with Carol in order to obtain her consent to the
transfer of Raymond's trust's shares.  Accordingly, under the
HRPC, Roehrig's communication with Carol was impliedly
authorized by George in order for Roehrig to carry out his
representation of George and settle the Castroverde lawsuit.
This part of Roehrig's argument is made in connection
with HRPC Rule 1.6(a), which provides:
A lawyer shall not reveal information relating to
representation of a client unless the client consents after
consultation, except for disclosures that are impliedly
authorized in order to carry out the representation, and
except as stated in paragraphs (b) and (c).
Roehrig contends that all of his communications with
Carol were "impliedly authorized" under HRPC Rule 1.6(a) because
he needed to obtain Carol's consent in order to achieve George's
objective of the Raymond Trust surrendering its shares of stock,
and to settle the lawsuits with Raymond.  First, there is a
genuine issue of material fact regarding whether George's
objective was for George to gain control of Jack's Tours in
conjunction with the settlement of the lawsuits, or simply to
divest Raymond of any continuing interest in Jack's Tours in
conjunction with the settlement of the claims that George engaged
in wrongdoing.  Second, as detailed in Section I.D. above,
Roehrig's communications with Carol went beyond seeking her
consent to the stock transfer set forth in the 97-402 and 97-471
settlement agreements.  Certainly no later than July 29 or 30,
1998, when Carol expressly and repeatedly informed Roehrig and
Hara that she would not consent to the transfer of the shares of
stock in Jack's Tours on the terms that George had understood and
agreed to – i.e., Raymond's stock would be transferred to George –FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
29a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Roehrig's
communications were impliedly authorized.
In the face of a potentially game-changing development
in an attorney's representation of a client, such as Carol's
change-of-mind as to her consent, the "implied authorization"
provision in HRPC Rule 1.6(a) must be analyzed in conjunction with
other relevant provisions of the HRPC and the attorney's
substantive legal duties.  In this case, for example, HRPC Rule
1.6(a) should be considered in light of HRPC Rule 1.4, which
provides:
Rule 1.4.  Communication.
(a)  A lawyer shall keep a client reasonably informed
about the status of a matter and promptly comply with
reasonable requests for information. . . . .
(b)  A lawyer shall explain a matter to the extent
reasonably necessary to permit the client to make informed
decisions regarding the representation.
In other words, even when a disclosure of information
may be impliedly authorized in the first instance, that
authorization may be subject to limitations, and may give way to
other duties, such as the duty to keep the client reasonably
informed, reasonably advised, and in the decision-making role,
including with respect to the means by which objectives are
pursued.  See also HRPC Rule 1.2(a) ("A lawyer shall abide by a
client's decisions concerning the objectives of representation,
subject to [certain limitations], and shall consult with the
client as to the means by which the objectives are to be
pursued.")  In this case, there is evidence in the record that
Roehrig's communications revealed not only the fact of and terms
of the proposed settlements in advance of Carol's initial consent. 
After Carol took a position that was adverse to George, Roehrig
further informed Carol of information related to Roehrig's
representation of George such as the source of funds, the proposed
escrow instructions, and strategic information and/or advice as to
the advisability of seeking to amend the settlements that were put
on the record in 97-402 and 97-471 versus closing the transactionFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Accordingly, at this point, we need not delve into George's20/
argument that the communications with Carol were unnecessary because her
consent was unnecessary.
30with Raymond and then working out a different distribution of the
shares of stock.  There exists a genuine issue of material fact as
to whether Roehrig's communications with Carol were impliedly
authorized pursuant to HRPC Rule 1.6(a).20
In his summary judgment motion on the HRPC, Roehrig
further argued that neither of the two March 1999 affidavits that
he filed in 97-402, in support of his motion for leave to deposit
stock certificates with the Circuit Court, violated HRPC Rule 1.6. 
Roehrig's motion to deposit the stock followed George's motion to
enforce the settlement agreement, which sought an order that the
stock be turned over to George.  In these affidavits, Roehrig
disclosed the details of his purported separate agreements with
George and Carol –  i.e., that Roehrig would act as a stakeholder
for the Jack's Tours stock certificates –  including the substance
of his alleged conversations with George.  Roehrig claimed, inter
alia, that his first affidavit (dated March 19, 1999) did not
disclose any privileged attorney-client communications, and that
his second affidavit (dated March 30, 1999) followed an affidavit
executed by George, which purportedly disclosed some of their
attorney-client communications, thereby waiving George's privilege
in advance of Roehrig's second affidavit.
In opposition to the motion for summary judgment, George
argued that Roehrig's affidavits in support of his March 1999
request to deposit the stock certificates with the Circuit Court
were simply the final act in what George alleges was a breach of
Roehrig's common law duties to George including, inter alia , that
Roehrig breached his duty of loyalty to his client and that
Roehrig's representation of George fell below the reasonable
standard of care, skill, and diligence which must be exercised by
an attorney.  We agree that Roehrig's affidavits were the lastFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As there has been substantial argument presented to Circuit Court21/
and on appeal regarding the effect of Judge Nakamura's rulings in 99-151, we
want to be clear that this conclusion is based on the fact that Judge
Nakamura's order that Roehrig testify excused Roehrig from his obligation to
maintain the confidentiality of George's representation-related information at
the hearing before Judge Nakamura.  This conclusion is not based on collateral
estoppel or any other preclusive doctrine.  The supreme court has held:
In order to establish a claim of collateral estoppel,
the party asserting the claim has the burden of establishing
that: (1) The issue decided in the prior adjudication is
identical to the one presented in the action in question;
(2) there is a final judgment on the merits; (3) the issue
(continued...)
31manifestation of Roehrig's refusal to turn the stock certificates
over to George.  Thus, Roehrig's statements were potentially
relevant to breaches other than the alleged breaches of
confidentiality.  We also agree, however, with the Circuit Court's
analysis that statements made by Roehrig in his March 30, 1999
affidavit in response to George's March 27, 1999 affidavit were
not in violation of George's attorney-client privilege or HRPC
Rule 1.6(a) because George waived his privilege in furtherance of
his attempt to gain possession of the stock certificates from
Roehrig.  Thus, Roehrig's affidavit disclosures were not in
violation of the HRPC confidentiality duty.  See HRPC Rule
1.6(c)(3).
Additionally, Roehrig claimed that his testimony during
a preliminary injunction hearing in 99-151 did not violate HRPC
Rule 1.6(a) because Judge Nakamura ruled in that case that George
had waived his privilege, and Judge Nakamura ordered Roehrig to
testify.  On this point, we agree that summary judgment was
properly granted in part.  HRPC Rule 1.6(c)(6) provides that:
A lawyer may reveal information relating to
representation of a client to the extent the lawyer
reasonably believes necessary:
. . . 
(6) to comply with other law or court order.
Thus, Roehrig's hearing testimony pursuant to the order
of Judge Nakamura was within the exception set forth in HRPC Rule
1.6(c)(6).21FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)21/
decided in the prior adjudication was essential to the final
judgment; and (4) the party against whom collateral estoppel
is asserted was a party or in privity with a party to the
prior adjudication.
Lingle v. Haw. Gov't Employees Ass'n, 107 Hawai# i 178, 186, 111 P.3d 587, 595
(2005) (emphasis added, citations and brackets omitted, format altered).
As 99-151 was dismissed with prejudice after settlement, and there
was no final judgment on the merits, Judge Nakamura's rulings have no
collateral estoppel effect.  See also McLellan v. Atchison Ins. Agency, Inc.,
81 Hawai# i 62, 69, 912 P.2d 559, 569 (App. 1996) (collateral estoppel did not
apply to preclude the present action because the prior case was dismissed
based on a stipulated settlement and the issues in question were not actually
litigated and decided); cf. In re Dowsett Trust, 7 Haw. App. 640, 645, 791
P.2d 398, 402-03 (1990) (stipulation of dismissal with prejudice constitutes a
final judgment on the merits for the purpose of res judicata though not for
the purpose of collateral estoppel; all elements of res judicata must be
satisfied for doctrine to apply).
32Finally, we conclude that many of the allegations set
forth in the Complaint, if proven at trial, could be construed as
actions in violation of the HRPC.  As detailed in the report from
George's expert, Professor Randall Roth, and as set forth in
letters dated August 16 and September 25, 2006, there was evidence
in the record that, inter alia :  (1) there was personal animosity
and legal adversity between George and Carol, including open legal
questions about claims Carol was making to George's property,
including stock in Jack's Tours; (2) Roehrig divulged confidential
information to Carol without George's consent, and arguably
provided legal advice to Carol that adversely affected George; (3)
Roehrig refused to deliver the stock certificates to George,
notwithstanding George's repeated demands, even writing a memo to
Hara stating, "make sure we keep our hands on shares;" (4) Roehrig
caused George and Carol to believe that George could not vote the
Jack's Tours shares, if Roehrig held them; (5) prior to and after
Roehrig's withdrawal from representation of George, he continued
to communicate with Carol, without George's consent, and sometimes
without George's knowledge.  Professor Roth opined that Roehrig
violated Rules 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, possibly 1.6, 1.7, probablyFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
331.8, 1.9, possibly 1.10, 1.13, 1.15(f)(4), possibly 1.16, 2.2,
possibly 3.3, 4.1, 4.3, and 8.4 of the HRPC.
Under HRPC Rule 1.7(b), for example: 
A lawyer shall not represent a client if the representation
of that client may be materially limited by the lawyer's
responsibilities to another client or to a third person, or
by the lawyer's own interests, unless: 
(1) the lawyer reasonably believes the representation will
not be adversely affected; and 
(2) the client consents after consultation. When
representation of multiple clients in a single matter
is undertaken, the consultation shall include
explanation of the implications of the common
representation and the advantages and risks involved.
The comments section of Rule 1.7 recommend that "[i]f such a
conflict arises after representation has been undertaken, the
lawyer should withdraw from the representation."  There is a
genuine issue of material fact regarding whether Roehrig's
representation of George was materially limited by the
responsibility he undertook to Carol and/or Jack's Tours, when he
purportedly became a stakeholder or trustee for the stock
certificates.
In a declaration, George attested that he learned that
Roehrig and Carol were having ongoing communications for the first
time at an October 6, 1998 meeting with Roehrig.  George further
states that "[a]t no time did Roehrig ever receive any waiver of
conflict of interest from me to talk to a clear adversary and I
did not approve at anytime of Roehrig's actions." 
Finally, we recognize that violation of the HRPC does
not, per se, equate liability in tort or contract.  See, e.g.,
HRPC, Scope, ¶ 6 ("Violation of a rule should not give rise to a
cause of action nor should it create any presumption that a legal
duty has been breached.").  However, as the supreme court noted in
Delmonte v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 90 Hawai# i 39, 54 n.12,
975 P.2d 1159, 1174 n.12 (1999) (citations and internal quotation
marks omitted):FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
34[T]he requirements of the HRPC are at least relevant to a
determination of the duty owed by an attorney to his or her
client.  Given the potential consequences of their violation
and the fundamental nature of their purpose, it would not be
logical or reasonable to say that the Bar Rules, in general,
do not play a role in shaping the care and skill ordinarily
exercised by attorneys practicing law.
There are genuine issues of material fact concerning
whether Roehrig's communications with Carol constituted legal
advice – e.g., whether Carol should have sought changes to the 97-
402 and 97-471 settlements and whether Carol should "sit tight"
until after the escrow closed – therefore an adverse
representation.  Roehrig also held himself out as attorney for
Jack's Tours, which arguably required disclosures to George
regarding the implications of common representation, consultation
and consent.  See HRPC Rule 1.7(b)(2).
Accordingly, we conclude that summary judgment on the
HRPC was properly granted in part only with respect to the
allegations involving Roehrig's March 1999 affidavits and April
1999 hearing testimony.  In all other respects, there are genuine
issues of material fact and the Circuit Court erred in granting
Roehrig's motion for summary judgment on the HRPC.
D. Roehrig's Motion for Summary Judgment on the Bylaws
Roehrig's motion for summary judgment on the Bylaws,
like his motion for summary judgment on the HRPC, did not
seek summary judgment by reference to any particular cause of
action.  Instead, in this motion, Roehrig argued that:  (1) all of
George's claims against Roehrig are based on the premise that
George would have been the majority shareholder in Jack's Tours,
but for Roehrig's breaches of his duties to George; (2) the Bylaws
of Jack's Tours required its directors' consent to any transfer of
Raymond's shares;  (3) two of the directors, Carol and Troy,
consented only to the transfer of Raymond's shares to Jack's Tours
or its remaining shareholders as approved by its board of
directors; and (4) therefore, George was never legally entitled toFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
While other parts of the Bylaws are arguably relevant to George's22/
claims that Roehrig's representation of George in conjunction with the
structure and implementation of the settlement of 97-402 and 97-471, and the
events thereafter, fell below the reasonable standard of care, skill, and
diligence which must be exercised by an attorney, in light of our ruling
regarding Section 5.05(a) and the scope of our review, we need not consider
them.
35receive all of Raymond's shares and, accordingly, suffered no
damages as a result of Roehrig's breach, if any.
In opposition to this summary judgment motion, George
argued Roehrig "did not do his homework" regarding the Bylaws and
that his interpretation of the Bylaws, and his representation of
George in conjunction therewith, fell below the standard of
diligence and care that Roehrig owed to his client.  The critical
section of the Jack's Tours Bylaws, Section 5.05(a),22 provides in
relevant part:
SECTION 5.05  RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFERS. (a) The shares
of stock of this corporation shall not be transferable or
assignable or be the subject of sale until first offered in
writing to the Board of Directors of the corporation for
purchase at the book value as of date of offer.  In
determining the book value, the value of good will or firm
name shall be included only to the extent as carried in the
books of the corporation. The Board of Directors shall
determine whether to purchase it in the corporate name thirty
(30) days after date of offer.  If said offer is refused by
the Board of Directors, then the said shares of stock shall
be offered by the Board of Directors upon such terms as the
Board of Directors may determine to a person or persons they
may select, which offer shall be open for sixty (60) days
from the date of refusal by the Board of Directors.  If there
be no acceptance by the offeree or offerees within the said
sixty (60) day period, then the said shares of stock may be
transferred, assigned or sold by the shareholder for a period
of sixty (60) days thereafter.  If the said shares are not
transferred, assigned or sold within the last sixty (60) day
period, then the said shares must again be offered to the
Board of Directors and the procedure set forth herein be
repeated before the said shares may be transferred, assigned,
or sold. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the
Shareholders may transfer and assign their interests in any
of the Shares to themselves and their spouses, descendants,
or trusts for the benefit of such persons (Family Assignees)
without making the offers to sell the Shares provided in this
Agreement.  If the Shares are so transferred, the shares
shall remain subject to all the terms and provisions of this
Agreement. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
36The crux of George's argument in response to the summary
judgment motion was that "George was represented by Roehrig, who
had a responsibility to make certain that he understood all the
requirements necessary in order to have Raymond and Leslie
Miyashiro's shares transferred to George.  That included reading
the By-laws. . . ."  George further argued that consent of the
Jack's Tours directors was not required for intra-family
transfers, and that Roehrig's assumption of a position to the
contrary was adverse to his client and fell below the standard of
care Roehrig owed to George.
We need not reach the issue of George's interpretation
of the Bylaws.  This was Roehrig's motion for summary judgment. 
The motion hinged on Roehrig's argument that, as a matter of law,
the Bylaws of Jack's Tours required its directors' consent to any
transfer of Raymond's shares.  Nowhere in Section 5.05(a) is there
any statement whatsoever that directors' consent is required for a
transfer of shares of stock.  Instead, Section 5.05(a) of the
Jack's Tours Bylaws sets forth a specific procedure whereby stock
in Jack's Tours may be transferred, assigned or sold.  This
procedure can be summarized as follows:
 Step 1:  The stock must be offered to the board of
directors for purchase at book value in the corporate
name.  The board has thirty days to buy the stock.
Step 2:  If the board does not buy the stock, the board
shall offer the stock to a person or persons they may
select.  That offer stays open for sixty days.
Step 3:  If there is no acceptance of the board's offer,
the shareholder then may transfer, assign or sell the
stock.  The shareholder has sixty days to complete this
transaction.
Step 4:  If the shareholder transaction is not completed
within sixty days, the shares must again be offered toFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
While various alternative scenarios for the transfer of Raymond's23/
shares were possible within the terms of the Jack's Tours Bylaws, none of them
are before this court.   
37the board of directors and steps 1, 2, and 3 are
repeated.
Bylaws Section 5.05(a) requires that these steps be
followed.  Under Section 5.05(a), the directors of Jack's Tours
had no right to simply approve, reject, or modify the terms of
Raymond's transfer of stock to George.23  Accordingly, we reject
Roehrig's argument that, as a matter of law, the Bylaws required
directors' consent to the transfer of Raymond's shares to George. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting Roehrig's
motion for summary judgment on the Bylaws.
E. Roehrig's Motion for Summary Judgment on George's
Conspiracy Claims
In count 5 of the Complaint, George alleges that
Roehrig, Carol and Jeff participated in a conspiracy to defraud
George.  In addition to incorporating by reference his other
factual allegations, the conspiracy to defraud cause of action
alleges: 
a.The Defendants were each communicating with one and
another, from in or about June 1998 through April 1999
and did so, all with a view to devising a plan, whereby
Carol, Jeff and Troy would ultimately receive a
controlling interest of the outstanding shares in JACKS
TOURS; 
b. All parties to the conspiracy concealed their specific
intent to devise a plan whereby George would be
divested of not only his 28% but also the 28% of JACKS
TOURS shares which George was buying from Raymond and
Leslie; 
c. The nature of the action of the Defendants to this
cause of action constitutes scienter in that it is
clear from the overt, wanton, and malicious conduct of
the Defendants said actions were all designed to divest
George of his stock ownership; 
d. The Defendant attorneys, by improperly acquiring
possession of Share Certificate Nos. 125 & 126, did so
to further the intent of the conspiracy to take control
of JACK'S TOURS from George; 
e. As a consequence of the actions of the conspirators,
George has sustained substantial pecuniary damages, in
an amount to be proved at trial;FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Section 551 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts also addresses24/
liability for wrongful non-disclosure, or fraud by omission:
(1) One who fails to disclose to another a fact that he
knows may justifiably induce the other to act or
refrain from acting in a business transaction is
(continued...)
38f. The conduct of the conspirators was willful, wanton,
and engaged in with callous disregard for the rights
and sensibilities of George and George is entitled to
an award of punitive damages.
(Emphasis as appears in the Complaint.)
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has defined civil conspiracy
as the "combination of two or more persons or entities by
concerted action to accomplish a criminal or unlawful purpose , or
to accomplish some purpose not in itself criminal or unlawful by
criminal or unlawful means."  Robert's Haw. Sch. Bus, Inc. v.
Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91 Hawai# i 224, 252 n.28, 982 P.2d 853,
881 n.28 (1999) (emphasis added), superseded by statute on other
grounds as stated in Hawai# i Med. Ass'n v. Hawai #i Med. Serv.
Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai# i 77, 148 P.3d 1179 (2006).  The supreme
court explained that "[c]ivil conspiracy does not alone constitute
a claim for relief."  Id. at 260 n.44, 982 P.2d at 889 n.44.  In
other words, concerted action is not enough.  A civil conspiracy
claim must include either that the alleged conspirators had a
criminal or unlawful purpose for their concerted action or that
the alleged conspirators used criminal or unlawful means  to
accomplish a lawful objective.
Here, George alleges that Roehrig conspired with Carol
and Jeff to defraud him.  The elements of fraud are:  (1) false
representations made by the defendant; (2) with knowledge of their
falsity (or without knowledge of their truth or falsity); (3) in
contemplation of plaintiff's reliance upon them; and (4)
plaintiff's detrimental reliance. See, e.g., Hawaii's Thousand
Friends v. Anderson, 70 Haw. 276, 286, 768 P.2d 1293, 1301
(1989).24  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)24/
subject to the same liability to the other as though
he had represented the nonexistence of the matter that
he has failed to disclose, if, but only if, he is
under a duty to the other to exercise reasonable care
to disclose the matter in question. 
(2) One party to a business transaction is under a duty to
exercise reasonable care to disclose to the other
before the transaction is consummated,
(a) matters known to him that the other is entitled
to know because of a fiduciary or other similar
relation of trust and confidence between them[.]
However, George has failed to adduce any evidence that, for
example, prior to the settlement in 97-402 and 97-471, Roehrig conspired with
Carol and/or Jeff to misrepresent Carol's consent to the transfer of Raymond's
shares of stock in Jack's Tours to George.  On the contrary, George has
adduced evidence that Carol orally consented to the transfer, that Carol's
consent was not reduced to writing before the settlement was placed on the
record, and that Carol changed her mind after the settlement was recorded. 
Although we have concluded that the Bylaws do not require director consent,
had the directors effectively consented to the transfer of Raymond's shares to
George, it appears that this dispute would not have arisen.  Nevertheless,
there is no evidence in the record that material information was withheld from
George prior to the settlement. George's conspiracy claim is not supported by
any evidence of fraud by omission.
39After reviewing all of George's arguments and evidence
regarding the conspiracy claim, including those presented in
response to Roehrig's summary judgment motion, in George's
appellate briefs, and at oral argument, there appears to be no
evidence of a representation or misrepresentation that George
relied upon to his detriment.  The communications between Roehrig
and Carol, even if they constituted a breach of Roehrig's duties
to his client, were professional malpractice, not fraud.  Roehrig,
arguably wrongfully, took on the role of stakeholder of the stock
certificates and refused to turn them over to his client. 
However, George has failed to identify representations made by
Roehrig, Jeff, and/or Carol to induce George to agree to Roehrig's
assumption of the stakeholder role.  Instead, George alleges that
he did not agree to Roehrig holding the stock certificates.  As
George rejected Roehrig's role as stakeholder, he cannot beFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The allegedly admitted actions of embezzlement and breach of25/
fiduciary duty were blacked out pursuant to a protective order.
Roehrig substantially and substantively expands this no-causation26/
argument in his appellate brief, arguing:  (1) the primary reason George
(continued...)
40arguing that he relied on representations that induced him to
agree to this arrangement.  In short, George's vague allegations
of fraud and conspiracy are not legally sufficient.  George failed
to adduce evidence supporting each of the elements of an
underlying criminal or unlawful purpose or means.  Therefore, we
conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting Roehrig's
summary judgment motion on George's conspiracy claim.
F. Roehrig's Motion for Summary Judgment on Embezzlement
and Breach of Fiduciary Duty
Roehrig's motion for summary judgment based on George's
allegedly admitted embezzlement and breach of fiduciary duty, like
his motion for summary judgment on the HRPC and on the Bylaws, did
not seek summary judgment by reference to any particular cause of
action.  Instead, in this motion, Roehrig argued that all of
George's alleged injuries and damages were caused by George's own
conduct – his allegedly admitted embezzlement from Jack's Tours
and breach of fiduciary duty, presumably his duty to the other
shareholders.  Roehrig's motion was quite brief, the entire
argument was stated as follows:
George Miyashiro admitted that while he was President
of Jack's Tours, Inc., he had the corporation _________.25 
George's trial expert, Thomas Ueno, co-authored a report
which stated that _______ had been embezzled from the
corporation.  Had George not settled the Jack's Tours, Inc.
lawsuit (Civil No. 99-151), he would ultimately have lost the
presidency of the corporation, his directorship, and his
stock in the company, and become liable to the corporation
for his misconduct.  None of this was the result of any act
or omission of Stanley H. Roehrig.  In a legal malpractice
action, "where reasonable persons would not dispute the
absence of causality . . . the court may take the decision
from the jury and treat it as a question of law." 
Accordingly, Roehrig is entitled to summary judgment in his
favor and against George on all claims.
(Footnotes, citation, and brackets omitted.)26FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)26/
settled 99-151 was to avoid further discovery of his misdeeds; (2) George
caused his own losses related to his interest in Jack's Tours when he settled
99-151; (3) when the judge in 97-402 ordered Roehrig to turn the stock
certificates over to George, the causal link between Roehrig's actions and
George's damages was broken; (4) Judge Nakamura caused Roehrig to testify at
the April 1999 hearing in 99-151; (5) Roehrig did not cause Carol's change of
position regarding her consent to Raymond's transfer of the stock to George;
(6) Roehrig's failure to assert promissory estoppel against Carol either was
not malpractice or otherwise did not matter, under the circumstances of the
case; and (7) George's damages are that he did not get away with fraud, which
is not a legally cognizable basis for damages.  Basically, Roehrig argues that
we should affirm the summary judgment based on George's allegedly admitted
embezzlement and breach of fiduciary duty on different grounds than presented
in the motion.  It is not the role of this court to entertain new summary
judgment motions on appeal.  Indeed, even if we were to consider affirming
this particular summary judgment order on "alternate grounds," it appears from
the record that genuine issues of material fact exist regarding additional
reasons ##1-3 & 6.  Although we agree with the premise of additional reason
#4, that Judge Nakamura caused Roehrig to testify, this is only a limited part
of Roehrig's alleged breach of his duties to George and is addressed by this
court's affirmance in part of the summary judgment on the HRPC.  Similarly,
there appears to be genuine issues of material and disputed facts surrounding
Carol's withdrawal of her consent to the stock transfer to George (additional
reason #5) and, as discussed in conjunction with this court's ruling on the
summary judgment on the Bylaws, genuine issues of material fact as to whether
Roehrig's legal services fell below the standard of care owed to George in
conjunction with the corporate approval issues related to the settlements in
97-402 and 97-471.  Finally, regarding additional reason #7, we agree that I-
did-not-get-away-with-fraud is not a legally cognizable basis for damages. 
However, it appears, inter alia, that there was substantial overlap between
the embezzlement claims brought against George in 97-402, which were dismissed
with prejudice, and the embezzlement claims brought against George in 99-151. 
Issues related to the 99-151 suit, evidence in the record of this case, and
the reasonable inferences therefrom, raise questions of law not presented to
either the Circuit Court or this court, and raise genuine issues of material
fact regarding George's reasons for and the impact of the settlement of 99-151
on George's claims for damages.
41On appeal, as in the court below, George argues that
there were disputed issues of material fact regarding whether
George embezzled money from Jack's Tours or breached a fiduciary
duty.  We agree.  We begin by reviewing the meaning of
embezzlement.  Black's Law Dictionary states: 
The elements of [embezzlement] are that there must be a
relationship such as that of employment or agency between the
owner of the money and the defendant, the money alleged to
have been embezzled must have come into the possession of the
defendant by virtue of that relationship and there must be an
intentional or fraudulent appropriation or conversion of the
money.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
42BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 522 (6th ed. 1990), cited in State v.
Borochov, 86 Hawai# i 183, 190 n.5, 948 P.2d 604, 611 n.5 (App.
1997).
It is undisputed that money belonging to Jack's Tours
came into George's possession.  The dispute in this case concerns
whether there was an intentional or fraudulent appropriation or
conversion of that money.  Roehrig presented expert testimony that
over $1.3 million dollars had been embezzled from Jack's Tours
over a number of years.  George presented excerpts of testimony
from the same experts, wherein the experts stated that it was
unclear who took the moneys or received the moneys.  George's
expert witness testified, inter alia , that "[w]e did not find any
evidence of embezzlement by George[.]"  In a sworn declaration,
George denied embezzling money from Jack's Tours and averred that
he was advanced cash from Jack's Tours, a twelve-million-a-year
business, on a recurring basis for the purpose of "wining and
dining" tour agents.  
A party that moves for summary judgment has the burden
"to show the absence of any genuine issue as to all material
facts, which, under applicable principles of substantive law,
entitles the moving party to judgment as a matter of law."  Jou v.
Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai #i 159, 164, 172 P.3d
471, 476 (2007) (block format and citation omitted).  The burden
has two components: 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material facts
exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim or
defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the
motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only when
the moving party satisfies its initial burden of production
does the burden shift to the non-moving party to respond to
the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate specific
facts, as opposed to general allegations, that present a
genuine issue worthy of trial.
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the movingFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
43part [sic] is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.
Id. (quoting French v. Hawai# i Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai #i 462,
470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)).
Even if we were inclined to view Roehrig's evidence more
favorably than George's, we are reviewing the entry of summary
judgment on this issue.  It appears from the record of this case
that genuine issues of material fact exist on this issue.  Indeed,
even if George had misappropriated money from Jack's Tours, it
does not appear from the record that he necessarily would have
been removed as president of the company and otherwise would have
been divested of his interest in the company.  We cannot conclude,
as a matter of law, that there is a complete absence of causality
between Roehrig's alleged breaches and the damages allegedly
suffered by George.  
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
erred in granting summary judgment based on embezzlement and
breach of fiduciary duty.
G. Attorneys' Fees and Costs
In light of our rulings on the summary judgment orders
and the remand of the case for a trial on the merits of George's
remaining claims, we vacate the Circuit Court's April 17, 2007
order awarding RRWH, Roehrig, and Hara attorneys' fees and costs. 
Accordingly, we will not otherwise address the issues and
arguments related to the award of attorneys' fees and costs.
V. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's April 24,
2007 Second Amended Final Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
44in part.  We remand this case to the Circuit Court for further
proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
David J. Gierlach
for Plaintiff-Appellant
Peter Van Name Esser;
Keith K. Hiraoka
(Roeca, Louie & Hiraoka)
and Brian J. De Lima
(Crudele & De Lima)
with him on the briefs
for Defendants-Appellees
Roehrig, Roehrig, Wilson
& Hara, Stanley H. Roehrig
and Glenn S. Hara
Diana L. Van De Car
for Defendant-Appellee
Title Guaranty Escrow Services,
Inc.
NO. 28395; GEORGE MIYASHIRO vs. ROEHRIG, ROEHRIG, WILSON & HARA; STANLEY H.
ROEHRIG, Attorney at Law, ALC; GLENN HARA, Attorney at Law; CAROL MIYASHIRO;
TROY MIYASHIRO; TITLE GUARANTY CO.; and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100
Opinion of the Court by Leonard, Jr. - March 19, 2010