  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29185
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KENT K. FONOIMOANA, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
SUNRISE CONSTRUCTION, INC., and
SEABRIGHT INSURANCE COMPANY,
Employer/Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2006-023 (2-02-02768))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Claimant-Appellant

 
Kent K. Fonoimoana (Fonoimoana) appeals from the May 20, 2008,
 
"Decision and Order," filed by the Labor and Industrial Relations
 Appeals Board (LIRAB), that affirmed in part and reversed in part
 the decision of the Director of the Department of Labor and
 Industrial Relations (Director).
1
 
I. 
Fonoimoana was employed by Sunrise Construction, Inc.
 
(Sunrise) as a lead framer/carpenter when he was injured in a
 work accident on March 5, 2002. Two walls for a residence being
 constructed had been braced in an "L shape" on a concrete slab. 
Fonoimoana was in a semi-squatted position, lifting another wall
 
1
 The LIRAB affirmed the Director's decision, except with respect to the
Director's denial of further medical treatment for Fonoimoana's neck. The
 
LIRAB concluded that Fonoimoana was entitled to "further medical treatment
 pursuant to Section 386-21, HRS [(Hawaii Revised Statutes),] reasonably
required by his March 5, 2002 work-related neck or cervical spine injury." 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with a co-worker, when the main wall that had previously been
 
braced fell on Fonoimoana's back. Fonoimoana estimated that the
 main wall weighed between 900 and 1,400 pounds. 
The parties agree that Fonoimoana sustained injury to
 
his neck as a result of the work accident. After a magnetic
 resonance imaging (MRI) was taken of Fonoimoana's cervical spine,
 Fonoimoana was diagnosed as having a herniated nucleus pulposus
 at C6-7. Fonoimoana underwent surgery consisting of an anterior
 cervical discectomy and fusion at C6-7.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Fonoimoana argues that: (1) the LIRAB erred
 
in finding that Fonoimoana did not sustain a personal injury
 involving the low back as a result of the work accident; (2) the
 Director erred in deciding to close Fonoimoana's vocational
 rehabilitation case, and the LIRAB erred in failing to remand the
 issue of the closure of Fonoimoana's vocational rehabilitation
 case to the Director for reconsideration; (3) the LIRAB erred in
 determining that Fonoimoana's entitlement to temporary total
 disability (TTD) benefits ended on July 29, 2004, and in
 determining that Employer-Appellee Sunrise and Insurance Carrier-
Appellee Seabright Insurance Company (Seabright) (collectively
 referred to as "Employer") were entitled to credit TTD benefits
 paid to Fonoimoana after July 29, 2004, against his award for
 permanent partial disability (PPD) benefits; (4) the LIRAB erred
 in determining the extent of Fonoimoana's disability resulting
 from the work accident; (5) the LIRAB did not provide Fonoimoana
 with a fair trial because it did not require Employer to provide
 Fonoimoana with access to all relevant records and witnesses; and
 (6) the LIRAB and the Director "failed to equally apply the laws
 and statutes of the State of Hawaii thus violating [Fonoimoana's]
 rights of due process and equal protection or equal justice under
 the law." 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the LIRAB's
 
Decision and Order.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Fonoimoana on appeal
 
as follows:
 
A.
 
We conclude that the LIRAB did not err in finding that
 
Fonoimoana did not sustain a personal injury involving the low
 
back as a result of his work accident. In making this finding,
 the LIRAB credited the opinion of Dr. Raymond Taniguchi, M.D., a
 neurosurgeon, who opined that Fonoimoana did not sustain a low
 back injury or aggravate his pre-existing low back condition as a 
result of his work injury. The LIRAB also noted that
 Fonoimoana's medical records did not reflect any contemporaneous
 reports or complaints of low back symptoms for more than a month
 following the work accident. 
Fonoimoana basically argues that the LIRAB should not 
have credited Dr. Taniguchi's opinion, but instead should have credited Fonoimoana's testimony and other evidence Fonoimoana claims supported his position. However, in reviewing a decision of the LIRAB, we give deference to the LIRAB's assessment of the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence. See Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai
'i 263, 268, 47 P.3d 730, 735 (2002); 
Moi v. State of Hawai 'i, Dept. of Public Safety, 118 Hawai 'i 239, 
242, 188 P.3d 753, 756 (App. 2008). We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support the LIRAB's finding. 
B.
 
We reject Fonoimoana's claims of error with respect to
 
the closure of his vocational rehabilitation case. Fonoimoana
 participated in vocational rehabilitation between November 2002
 and July 2004. In April 2004, Fonoimoana submitted a vocational
 rehabilitation plan for approval. Employer objected to aspects
 of the plan, and the plan was denied by the Vocational
 Rehabilitation Branch of the Department of Labor and Industrial
 Relations (DLIR). Fonoimoana sought reconsideration of this
 denial, and the Vocational Rehabilitation Branch affirmed its
 denial of Fonoimoana's plan on April 29, 2004. Pursuant to
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-14-48(c),2 Fonoimoana 
requested a hearing on the Vocational Rehabilitation Branch's 
denial of his vocational rehabilitation plan, and a hearing was scheduled for July 21, 2004. However, at the request of the parties, this hearing was cancelled. 
By a notice dated July 29, 2004, the DLIR informed the
 
parties that Fonoimoana's vocational rehabilitation case would be
 closed if no objection was filed within ten days. The notice
 further stated that "in accordance with [HAR] Section 12-14­
30,[ 3
] if the director receives no objection within ten calendar
days from the date of this notice, the closure will be considered
 final and the employee may not request further reconsideration
 under [HAR] Section 12-14-48." Fonoimoana did not file an
 objection to the closure of his vocational rehabilitation case,
 and the case was closed effective July 29, 2004. Fonoimoana was
 represented by counsel at the time that his vocational
 rehabilitation case was closed. 

 
Based on these circumstances, we conclude that the
Director did not err in closing Fonoimoana's vocational

 
rehabilitation case and that the LIRAB did not err in failing to
 remand the issue of this closure to the Director for
 reconsideration. By failing to timely object to the closure of
 his vocational rehabilitation case, Fonoimoana waived his right
 to challenge the closure. 
2
 HAR § 12-14-48(c) provides in relevant part:
 
(c) A reconsideration determination [issued by the
rehabilitation unit] is considered final unless a written request
for hearing is filed within ten calendar days from the date of the
reconsideration determination. A hearing shall be held before a
hearings officer designated by the director.
 
3 HAR § 12-14-30(d) provides in relevant part:
 
(d) If no objection is received by the director within ten
calendar days from the date of the director's closure notice, the
closure will be considered final and the employee may not request
further reconsideration under section 12-14-48.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
We conclude that the LIRAB did not err in determining
 
that Fonoimoana's entitlement to TTD benefits ended on July 29,
 
2004, and in determining that Employer was entitled to a credit
 for TTD benefit payments Employer made after July 29, 2004,
 against amounts owed to Fonoimoana for his PPD award. TTD
 benefits may be terminated "[1] upon order of the [Director] or
 [2] if the employee is able to resume work." HRS § 386-31(b) (1993); see Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai
'i 86, 
92 n.6, 34 P.3d 16, 22 n.6 (2001). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
upheld the termination of a claimant's TTD benefits under § 386-31(b) where claimant's medical condition was stable and the claimant's vocational rehabilitation was properly closed. See 
Atchley v. Bank of Hawai
'i, 80 Hawai 'i 239, 244, 909 P.2d 567, 572 
(1996). 
Here, Dr. James Langworthy, M.D., an occupational
 
medicine specialist, found that Fonoimoana's medical condition
 was stable and that Fonoimoana's PPD was ratable as of February
 19, 2003. Fonoimoana's claim that the LIRAB erred in ending his
 TTD benefits on July 29, 2004, is based on his argument that his
 vocational rehabilitation plan should not have been closed on
 that date. However, as previously noted, Fonoimoana waived his
 right to challenge the closure of his vocational rehabilitation
 plan. Accordingly, his claim that the LIRAB erred in ending his
 TTD benefits on July 29, 2004, must also fail. Moreover, because
 Fonoimoana's entitlement to TTD benefits ended on July 29, 2004,
 Employer was entitled to a credit for the TTD benefits it paid to
 Fonoimoana after July 29, 2004, against the amounts it owed to
 Fonoimoana for his PPD award. See HRS § 386-52 (1993). 
D.
 
We conclude that the LIRAB did not err in determining
 
the extent of Fonoimoana's disability resulting from the work
 accident. Fonoimoana argues that the extent of his disability is
 greater than the thirty percent PPD of the whole person that was
 found by the Director and affirmed by the LIRAB. However, the
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decisions of the Director and the LIRAB were supported by Dr. 
Langworthy's disability rating with which Dr. Taniguchi agreed. We cannot say that the LIRAB erred in crediting Dr. Langworthy's disability rating and in affirming the Director's award of thirty percent PPD of the whole person. See Nakamura, 98 Hawai
'i at 
268, 47 P.3d at 735. 
E.
 
We reject Fonoimoana's contention that the LIRAB did
 
not provide Fonoimoana with a fair trial because it did not
 require Employer to provide Fonoimoana with access to all
 relevant records and witnesses. Fonoimoana, in particular,
 argues that the LIRAB erred in failing to compel Employer to
 produce requested documents and in quashing subpoenas he issued
 for three witnesses at trial. The record, however, shows that
 Fonoimoana did not comply with discovery requirements, and
 therefore, the LIRAB did not err in denying his request to compel
 the production of documents. 
As to the witness subpoenas, Fonoimoana failed to file
 
a "live witness identification," as required by the First Amended
 Pretrial Order, to provide Employer with notice of the witnesses
 Fonoimoana intended to call at trial. Thus, the LIRAB did not
 err in quashing the subpoenas Fonoimoana had served on the three
 witnesses. See HAR § 12-47-22(b)(2) ("An individual not
 
identified in the party's live witness statement shall not be
 allowed to testify at trial."). Moreover, based on Fonoimoana's
 proffer of the anticipated testimony of the three witnesses, we
 conclude that their testimony was sought on matters that were
 
4
 uncontested, such as how the accident occurred, or would not
4
 The LIRAB temporarily remanded the case to the Director for a
determination of the specific description of Fonoimoana's work accident. On
remand, Employer did not challenge Fonoimoana's account of the accident. The
 Director adopted Fonoimoana's account in entering findings on how the accident
occurred, which neither party appealed and which the LIRAB accepted. After
 reviewing the Director's decision, which adopted Fonoimoana account of the
accident, Dr. Taniguchi, whose opinion the LIRAB relied upon, stated that
Fonoimoana's account did not change his opinion that Fonoimoana's low back
condition was not attributable to the accident. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
have affected Fonoimoana's entitlement to benefits, such as his
 
contention that Employer falsely altered his original report of
 how the accident occurred. Accordingly, the quashing of the
 subpoenas did not result in any substantial prejudice to
 Fonoimoana.
 
F.
 
The record does not support Fonoimoana's claim that the 
LIRAB and the Director violated his rights to "due process and
 equal protection or equal justice under the law," and we conclude
 that this claim lacks merit. 
IV.
 
We affirm the May 20, 2008, "Decision and Order" filed 
by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 24, 2011. 
On the briefs:

 
Kent K. Fonoimoana
 
Claimant-Appellant Pro Se
 
Sidney J.Y. Wong Chief Judge
Colette H. Gomoto
 Blaine W. Fujimoto
(Wong & Oshima)
for Employer/Insurance Associate Judge
Carrier-Appellee
 
Associate Judge

 
7
 