NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.NO. 29210
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CFI, INC., A Hawai #i Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v.
HAMAKUA COAST REALTY, INC., a Hawai #i Corporation,
and DENIS FERRARI, Defendants-Appellees,
and
ERNEST B. TEXEIRA, and ALA KAI REALTY, INC.,
a Hawai #i Corporation,
Defendants/Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellees,
and
TEX, INC., a Hawai# i Corporation, et al., Defendants.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-0380)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant CFI, Inc. (CFI or Buyer), the buye
of undeveloped real property, sued its real estate agents, the
seller, and the seller's real estate agents.  The Circuit Court
of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court)1 granted summary judgment i
favor of CFI's agents and the seller's agents.  On appeal, CFI
argues that the Circuit Court erred in these grants of summary
judgment.  We agree.r
n
CFI's predecessors in interest, Third-Party Defendant
Donald J. Cook (Cook) and Third-Party Defendant Daniel J. Ferrari
(Daniel), negotiated the purchase from Defendant Tex, Inc. (Tex
or Seller) of a 14.049-acre parcel of undeveloped real propertyNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2located in Hâm âkua on the Island of Hawai #i (Hâmâkua Property or
the Property).  The Hâm âkua Property was listed for sale as
property that could be developed into a 40-lot subdivision. 
Defendants/Third-Party Plaintiffs-Appellees Ernest B.
Texeira (Texeira) and Ala Kai Realty, Inc. (Ala Kai)
(collectively, "Seller's Agents") were the real estate agents
representing Tex.  Defendants-Appellees Hamakua Coast Realty,
Inc. (HCR) and Denis Ferrari (Denis)2 (collectively, "CFI's
Agents") were the real estate agents representing Cook and
Daniel, and later CFI.
CFI asserted claims against CFI's Agents and Seller's
Agents based on the allegation that prior to CFI's purchase of
the Hâmâkua Property, CFI's Agents and Seller's Agents failed to
disclose an encroachment and setback violation by a structure on
an adjoining property which was material to CFI's decision to
purchase.  The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
CFI's Agents and Seller's Agents on the ground that CFI failed to
present evidence at the summary judgment hearing that CFI's
Agents or Seller's Agents had knowledge of the alleged
encroachment and setback violation.  However, neither CFI's
Agents nor Seller's Agents, as the movants seeking summary
judgment, met their initial burden of establishing the absence of
a genuine issue of material fact by producing evidence that they
had no knowledge of the alleged encroachment and setback
violation.  Thus, the burden of producing evidence on the factual
issue of the knowledge of CFI's Agents or Seller's Agents did not
shift to CFI.  
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in basing its
grant of summary judgment in favor of CFI's Agents and Seller's
Agents on the failure of CFI to respond with affirmative proof
that they had knowledge of the alleged encroachment and setback
violation.  We vacate the judgments entered in favor of 
2Denis Ferrari is the father of Daniel J. Ferrari.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3BACKGROUND
I.
CFI's predecessors in interest, Cook and Daniel,
submitted a Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance (DROA) to Tex
dated July 21, 2004, offering to purchase the Hâm âkua Property
for $1,450,000.  The DROA contained provisions imposing staking,
survey, and disclosure obligations on the Seller.  Paragraph C-42
of the DROA provided:
Survey.  Prior to the Scheduled Closing Date, Seller shall,
at Seller's sole cost and expense, have a registered land
surveyor (a) stake the Property even if the stakes are
visible and, (b) if improvements exist along the Property
line, provide Buyer with a map (with surveyor's stamp) and
accompanying report to show the perimeters of the Property
and the location of any improvements in the vicinity of the
perimeter Property lines.  This survey and map may not
address whether improvements on the Property are in
compliance with State and/or County requirements, and/or
subdivision covenants, conditions, and restrictions.
Paragraph C-44 of the DROA, which appeared under the heading
"SELLER'S DISCLOSURES  (Required by Hawaii Statute for residential
real property)," provided in relevant part:CFI's Agents and Seller's Agents, and we remand the case for
further proceedings. 
Seller's Obligation to Disclose.  Under Hawaii law, Seller
is obligated to fully and accurately disclose in writing to
Buyer any fact, defect, or condition, past or present, that
would be expected to measurably affect the value of the
Property to a reasonable person.  Withing 7 days from the
Acceptance Date, Seller shall provide Buyer with a written
disclosure statement signed and dated by Seller within six
(6) months before or ten (10) days after the Acceptance
Date.  Such Disclosure shall be prepared in good faith and
with due care and shall disclose all material facts relating
to the Property that: (i) are within the knowledge or
control of Seller; (ii) can be observed from visible,
accessible areas; or (iii) which are required by Section
508D-15 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
Tex accepted Cook and Daniel's offer set forth in the
DROA, and escrow was opened with Island Title Corporation.  In
the meantime, CFI was incorporated, and Cook instructed escrow to
allow title to vest in CFI.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Just to let you know that there are no CC&R's[3] for the
subject property.  Also, the sellers do not have a
disclosure form because they have nothing to disclose.  For
the survey, my clients are currently in the process of
getting a surveyor to put out a new survey of the property. 
If you have any questions please feel free to call me at 
. . . and I'll get back to you as soon as possible. 
 
On November 23, 2004, Cook and Daniel signed a
"Condition Clearance Supplement to Escrow Instructions," as
President and Secretary, respectively, of CFI.  This document 
stated, in relevant part:
Any and all special and/or standard provisions and
conditions of the DROA and any amendments and addenda
thereto have been met to our complete satisfaction,
including but not limited to provisions relating to staking,
survey, termite clearance reports, appliances, plumbing and
electrical fixtures/systems, FIRPTA/HARPTA certifications,
lease and property disclosures.  Escrow is instructed to
close without exception. 
It also appears that on or about November 28, 2004, a document
entitled "Written Notice to Escrow of Satisfaction of
Contingency" was signed on CFI's behalf and provided escrow with
written notice that the survey contingency set forth in Paragraph
C-42 of the DROA had been satisfied.
On or about November 30, 2004, Tex issued a Warranty
Deed to CFI, which closed the sale of the Hâ mâkua Property.  The
Warranty Deed provided in relevant part that the "Grantor does
hereby covenant with the Grantee that the Grantor is lawfully
seised in fee simple of said granted premises and that the said
premises are free and clear of all encumbrances except as
aforesaid, and except for assessments for real property taxes." 
The Warranty Deed did not identify the alleged encroachment and
setback violation by the adjoining land owner as an encumbrance.On August 4, 2004, Texeira (one of Seller's Agents)
sent a facsimile transmission to Denis (one of CFI's Agents),
which stated:
3 "CC&R" apparently refers to "Covenants, Conditions, and
Restrictions."NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5II.
On November 29, 2006, CFI filed a complaint in the
Circuit Court against Seller, Seller's Agents, and CFI's Agents
(collectively, "Defendants").  CFI alleged that Defendants failed
to disclose to CFI that a structure under construction on a
neighboring property was on the boundary of and encroaching upon
the Hâmâkua Property.  The neighboring property is owned by
Third-Party Defendant First Assembly of King's Cathedral and
Chapels (First Assembly).
CFI claimed that because of the alleged encroachment
and setback violation, it "[w]ill be unable to build on certain
lots of the 40 lot subdivision" and "may be forced to redraw the
40 lot subdivision plat . . . and start over the subdivision
process with a lesser number of lots for subdivision."  
According to CFI, it did not learn of the alleged encroachment
and setback violation by First Assembly until about December 4,
2004, after the sale had closed.  CFI also asserted that it made
two requests for a boundary survey to Tex after closing; that the
survey was completed around June 9, 2005; and that CFI received
the survey report in late July 2005.  A survey map attached as
Exhibit E to the complaint showed that there was a structure
labeled "House" on First Assembly's property that touches or is
"0.0 Clear" of the boundary line.
CFI's complaint alleged claims of actual and/or
constructive fraud (Count 1) and negligence (Count 2) against
Seller's Agents; negligence (Count 5) against CFI's Agents; and
fraudulent, negligent, or innocent misrepresentation (Count 4)
against both Seller's Agents and CFI's Agents.  The complaint
asserted that Seller's Agents and CFI's Agents owed a duty to CFI
to exercise reasonable care; that they knew or should have known
of the alleged encroachment and setback violation; and that they
were obligated to disclose the encroachment and setback violation 
to CFI because they knew it was material to CFI's decision to
purchase the H âmâkua Property.  The complaint also alleged claims
of actual and/or constructive fraud (Count 1); negligence (CountNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4 HRS § 669-11 (Supp. 2010) provides:
For the purposes of this part, "de minimis
structure position discrepancy" means:
(1) For commercial property, industrial property,
and multi-unit residential property, 0.25
feet;
(2) For all other residential property, 0.5 feet;
(3) For agricultural and rural property, 0.75
feet; and
(4) For conservation property, 1.5 feet;
between the location of an improvement legally
constructed along what was reasonably believed to be
the boundary line and the actual location of the
(continued...)
6III. 
Numerous cross-claims and a third-party complaint were
filed in response to CFI's complaint.  The Seller's Agents filed
cross-claims against Tex and CFI's Agents and a Third-Party
Complaint against Cook, Daniel, and First Assembly; CFI's Agents
filed cross-claims against Tex, Seller's Agents, and First
Assembly; Daniel filed a cross-claim against Cook and CFI; and
Tex filed a cross-claim against First Assembly. 
A.
On September 7, 2007, Tex filed a motion for partial
summary judgment against CFI (Tex's MSJ).  In this motion, Tex
argued that it was entitled to summary judgment on CFI's
complaint because: 1) under the doctrine of merger, any of CFI's
rights contained in the DROA were extinguished upon CFI's
acceptance of the Warranty Deed; 2) there was no breach of the
Warranty Deed because there was no encroachment under Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 669-1145 and 669-12,  as First2); breach of contract and express and implied warranties (Count
3); and fraudulent, negligent, or innocent misrepresentation
(Count 4) against Tex.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Assembly's building, being on the property line, was a de minimis
structure position discrepancy; 3) assuming that CFI had the
right to enforce the DROA, CFI could not make any claim based on
the DROA because CFI acknowledged "complete satisfaction" of all
the provisions and conditions of the DROA, including the survey
requirement; and 4) CFI was not entitled to disclosures under
Paragraph C-44 of the DROA because HRS § 508D-46 only requires
4(...continued)
boundary line based on the most recent survey.
5 HRS § 669-12 (Supp. 2010) provides in pertinent part:
(1) A de minimis structure position discrepancy
shall not be considered an encroachment or a
basis for a zoning violation;
. . .
(4) Liability for any claims for injuries or
damages to persons or property arising out
of, or in connection with, an improvement
within a de minimis structure position
discrepancy shall be borne by the property
owner who constructed the improvement or the
property owner's successor in interest[.]
6 HRS § 508D-4 (2006) provides, in pertinent part, that
no seller may sell residential real property unless:
(1) Prior to the sale of such residential real
property, a disclosure statement is:
(A) Signed and dated by the seller within
six months before or ten calendar days
after the acceptance of a real estate
purchase contract by the buyer; and
(B) Delivered to the buyer as provided in
section 508D-5[.]
At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 508D-1 (Supp. 2004)
defined the terms  "disclosure statement" and "residential real
property" as follows:
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8disclosures for residential real property and the H âmâkua
Property did not qualify as residential real property because it
was undeveloped property containing no residential structures. 
B. 
On September 20, 2007, CFI's Agents filed a substantive
joinder in Tex's MSJ.  In their joinder, CFI's Agents
incorporated Tex's MSJ in its entirety and specifically argued
that they were entitled to summary judgment because: 1) the
alleged setback violation did not constitute an encroachment
under HRS §§ 669-11 and 669-12; and 2) CFI waived its right to
pre-closing staking, survey, and property disclosures under the
DROA by signing the Condition Clearance Supplement to Escrow
Instructions.
C.
6(...continued)
"Disclosure statement" means a written statement
prepared by the seller or at the seller's direction,
that purports to fully and accurately disclose all
material facts relating to the residential real
property being offered for sale that:
(1) Are within the knowledge or control of the
seller;
(2) Can be observed from visible, accessible
areas; or
(3) Are required to be disclosed under sections
508D-15 and 508D-4.5.
Except for the disclosures required under section
508D-15, no seller shall have any duty to examine any
public records when preparing a disclosure statement.
. . . .
"Residential real property" means fee simple or
leasehold real property on which currently is situated:
(1) From one to four dwelling units; or
(2) A residential condominium or cooperative
apartment, the primary use of which is occupancy
as a residence.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9On September 24, 2007, Seller's Agents filed a motion
for partial summary judgment against CFI (Seller's Agents' MSJ)  
In their motion, Seller's Agents argued that they were entitled
to summary judgment because: 1) under the doctrine of merger,
CFI's rights under the DROA were extinguished upon CFI's
acceptance of the Warranty Deed; 2) based on HRS §§ 669-11 and
669-12, First Assembly's building was on the property line and
this did not constitute an encumbrance under the Warranty Deed;
3) CFI acknowledged complete satisfaction of the provisions and
conditions of the DROA through the Condition Clearance Supplement
to Escrow Instructions and Written Notice to Escrow of
Satisfaction of Contingency; and 4) CFI was not entitled to
disclosures under Paragraph C-44 of the DROA because the
disclosures required by HRS § 508D-4 only apply to residential
real property and the Hâ mâkua Property was "vacant land."  
D.
E.
On November 29, 2007, the Circuit Court held a hearing
on Tex's MSJ, CFI's Agents' substantive joinder in Tex's MSJ, and
the Seller's Agents' MSJ.  At the hearing, CFI's Agents and
Seller's Agents argued for the first time that CFI had failed to 
present evidence that they had knowledge of the alleged O nNovember 19, 2007, CFI filed a memorandum in
opposition to Tex's MSJ and the Seller's Agents' MSJ.  In its
memorandum in opposition, CFI argued that factual disputes
existed as to the claims raised in its complaint which precluded
summary judgment.  CFI also argued that the Circuit Court should
decline to rule on Defendants' motions for summary judgment to
enable CFI to conduct further discovery.  CFI claimed that the
parties had not done extensive discovery because the case had
been accepted into the Court Annexed Arbitration Program.  In
addition, CFI addressed the Defendants' legal arguments and
argued that case law from Hawai #i and other jurisdictions
supported the various tort and contract theories on which its
complaint was based.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10encroachment and setback violation prior to closing.  CFI's
Agents asserted that there was no evidence to show that they
"were aware of any so-called alleged encroachment of the
property."  Sellers' Agents argued that "based on the facts
presented to the Court, it's obvious and it is crystal clear that
there was no way for anyone from Ala Kai Realty to have known
that there was this potential alleged encroachment[.]"7  The
Circuit Court asked CFI what evidence it had that Seller's Agents
or CFI's Agents knew of the alleged encroachment at the time of
closing.  CFI responded that the "sellers' side" said that there
was nothing to disclose.
7 The quoted statement was made by counsel for Ala Kai, and
Texiera was employed by Ala Kai.  At the hearing, counsel for
Texiera stated his concurrence with the arguments made by Ala
Kai.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11At the November 29, 2007, hearing, the Circuit Court
announced that it would grant CFI's Agents' substantive joinder
in Tex's MSJ and Seller's Agents' MSJ.  The Circuit Court found
that there was "no genuine material issue of fact" regarding
whether CFI's Agents and Seller's Agents "knew at the time of
closing that there was a structure on the property line or in the
setback."  The Circuit Court took Tex's MSJ under advisement.  
F.
On January 14, 2008, CFI filed a motion to reconsider
the Circuit Court's granting of summary judgment in favor of
CFI's Agents and Seller's Agents (Motion for Reconsideration). 
As part of the Motion for Reconsideration, CFI submitted the
affidavit of Cook, which asserted that: (1) prior to signing the 
"waiver declaration" for the staking and survey conditions of the
DROA and proceeding with closing, Cook asked Denis, his agent,
"if all looked okay" and "if nothing was apparently wrong from
the position of the properly line stakes"; (2) Denis "said all
was well" and advised Cook to sign the "release waiver" and
proceed with closing; (3) Cook would not have signed the waiver
but for the advice of Denis; (4) Cook also signed the waiver in
reliance on the "nothing to disclose" fax from Texeira, who was
Tex's agent; (5) upon viewing the H âmâkua Property four days
after closing, it was clear to Cook that First Assembly's
building was "too close to the property line"; and (5) Tex is a
trust set up by Texeira's grandfather and Texeira's father was
involved in staking the H âmâkua Property.
On January 22, 2008, the Circuit Court filed an order
granting CFI's Agents' substantive joinder in Tex's MSJ and
entering summary judgment in favor of CFI's Agents on all claims
in CFI's complaint.  On February 28, 2008, the Circuit Court
filed an order granting Seller's Agents' MSJ and entering summary
judgment in favor of Seller's Agents on all claims in CFI's
complaint.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12On March 13, 2008, the Circuit Court filed an order
denying CFI's Motion for Reconsideration.  The Circuit Court did
not address the merits of the Motion for Reconsideration but
denied the motion because it was filed on January 14, 2008,
before the Circuit Court had issued its final written order
granting Seller's Agents' MSJ.8  On May 22, 2008, the Circuit
Court filed separate Judgments in favor of CFI's Agents and
Seller's Agents and against CFI, with respect to all claims
asserted in CFI's complaint against CFI's Agents and Seller's
Agents.  The Circuit Court certified that there was no just
reason for delay in entering the Judgments.9
DISCUSSION
On appeal, CFI asserts that the Circuit Court erred in
granting summary judgment in favor of CFI's Agents and Seller's
Agents because disputed issues of material fact exist which
preclude summary judgment.  We conclude that the Circuit Court
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of CFI's Agents and
Seller's Agents.
In analyzing the allocation of the burdens borne by the
parties in a motion for summary judgment, the Hawai #i Supreme
Court has concluded:
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law.  This burden has two components.
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
8 Although the Circuit Court did not refer to its final
order entering summary judgement in favor of CFI's Agents, its
rationale for denying the Motion for Reconsideration was also
applicable to that order.
9 As for Tex, the Circuit Court issued separate summary
judgment orders in favor of Tex as well as judgments in favor of
Tex and against CFI on all claims in CFI's complaint and awarding
attorney's fees to Tex.  CFI has filed a separate appeal from
these judgments, and briefing in that appeal is still ongoing.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
14facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law.  Only when the moving party satisfies its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving
party to respond to the motion for summary judgment and 
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion.  This burden always remains with the moving
party and requires the moving party to convince the court
that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that the
moving part[y] is entitled to summary judgment as a matter
of law.
French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai# i 462, 470, 99 P.3d
1046, 1054 (2004) (some emphasis in original omitted) (quoting
GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 Hawai# i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530,
535 (App. 1995)).  
I.
In its complaint, CFI asserted claims for negligence
(Count V) and misrepresentation (Count IV) against CFI's Agents. 
The crux of CFI's complaint against CFI's Agents was that they
had breached their duty to disclose the existence of the alleged
encroachment and setback violation, caused by First Assembly's
building being on the boundary line, because this circumstance
was material to CFI's decision to purchase the Hâ mâkua Property. 
In its complaint, CFI alleged that CFI's Agents knew or should
have known about the alleged encroachment and setback violation.
In Hawai# i, "[t]he rules of agency apply to the
relationship between a real estate broker and principal.  The law
imposes upon a real estate broker a fiduciary obligation
comprised of utmost good faith, integrity, honesty, and loyalty,
as well as a duty of due care and diligence."  Property House,
Inc. v. Kelley, 68 Haw. 371, 377, 715 P.2d 805, 810 (1986)
(citations omitted).  Further,
a real estate agent bears a duty to make a full, fair, and
timely disclosure to the principal of all facts within the
agent's knowledge which are, or may be, material to the
transaction and which might affect the principal's rights
and interests or influence his actions.  "Unless otherwise
agreed, an agent is subject to a duty to use reasonable
efforts to give his [or her] principal information which is NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15relevant to affairs entrusted to him [or her] and which, as
the agent has notice, the principal would desire to have.
Id. (citations and ellipsis points omitted). 
CFI's Agents did not file a separate motion for summary
judgment against CFI, but filed a motion for substantive joinder
in Tex's MSJ.  Tex, however, was the seller in the transaction,
and Tex's arguments were directed at establishing that it had not
breached its obligations as the seller under the DROA or the
Warranty Deed and that First Assembly's structure did not
constitute an encroachment or an encumbrance under the Warranty
Deed.  While incorporating all of Tex's MSJ, CFI's Agents in
their substantive joinder focused on Tex's arguments that: (1) 
the alleged encroachment and setback violation by the First
Assembly structure was de minimis and did not constitute an
encroachment under HRS §§ 669-11 and 669-12; and (2) by signing
the Condition Clearance Supplement to Escrow Instructions, CFI
waived its right to the pre-closing staking, survey, and
disclosure requirements of the DROA.  
Significantly, in their moving papers, CFI's Agents did
not allege, much less present affidavits establishing, that they
had no knowledge of the alleged encroachment and setback
violation.  Indeed, the first time that CFI's Agents raised the
issue was at the hearing on the summary judgment motions when
they argued that there was no evidence to show that they "were
aware of any so-called alleged encroachment of the property."  
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
CFI's Agents on the ground that there was no genuine issue of
material fact as to whether CFI's Agents knew at the time of
closing "that there was a structure on the property line or in
the setback."  Our review of the record establishes that the
Circuit Court based its decision on CFI's failure to present
evidence at the summary judgment hearing that CFI's Agents had
knowledge of the alleged encroachment and setback violation prior
to closing.  However, CFI's Agents did not meet their initial
burden as the party moving for summary judgment of producingNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16evidence that they had no knowledge of the alleged encroachment
and setback violation.  As noted, CFI's Agents did not present
evidence or even raise the issue of their lack of knowledge in
their moving papers.  Because CFI's Agents did not meet their
initial burden of producing evidence that no genuine issue of
material fact existed as to their lack of knowledge, the burden
did not shift to CFI to respond by producing specific evidence
demonstrating that CFI's Agents had knowledge of the encroachment
and setback violation, as CFI alleged in the complaint.  See
French, 105 Hawai# i at 470-73, 99 P.3d at 1054-57.  Accordingly,
it was error for the Circuit Court: (1) to find that there was no
genuine issue of material fact that CFI's Agents lacked knowledge
of the alleged encroachment and setback violation based on CFI's
failure to present affirmative proof of such knowledge; and (2)
to grant summary judgment to CFI's Agents on that basis.
CFI's complaint asserted tort claims of negligence and
misrepresentation against CFI's Agents.  CFI's Agents' joinder in
Tex's MSJ did not directly address or resolve CFI's tort claims
against CFI's Agents.  Whether First Assembly's building
constituted an encroachment or encumbrance under the law would
not resolve these tort claims.  CFI claimed that CFI's Agents'
failure to disclose that First Assembly's building was on the
property line, regardless of whether this constituted an
encroachment or encumbrance, was a breach of the duties owed by
CFI's Agents to CFI because this condition was material to CFI's
decision to purchase.  See Property House, 68 Haw. at 377, 715
P.2d at 810.10  In addition, CFI's purported waiver of its right
under the DROA to enforce Tex's staking, surveying, and
10 The record indicates that First Assembly's building was
within the twenty-foot side yard setback required for First
Assembly's property.  In its complaint, CFI asserted that because
of the alleged setback violation by First Assembly, CFI would not
be able to "build on certain lots" within the Hâm âkua Property,
and that disclosure of the alleged setback violation would have
affected its decisions to purchase the H âmâkua Property and to
incur expenses associated with the property.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17disclosure obligations would not resolve CFI's tort claims
against CFI's Agents, which were not based on the DROA, but on
CFI's Agents' breach of their duties as CFI's real estate agents. 
The same holds true with respect to CFI's Agents' joinder in the
other arguments raised by Tex in its summary judgment motion,
which were directed at establishing that Tex had not breached the
DROA or the Warranty Deed.  
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in basing its
grant of summary judgment in favor of CFI's Agents on its finding
that there was no genuine issue of material facts regarding their
lack of knowledge of the alleged encroachment and setback
violation.  We also conclude that the arguments presented in
CFI's Agents' substantive joinder in Tex's MSJ did not establish
that CFI's Agents are entitled to summary judgment on CFI's
negligence and misrepresentation claims.  Accordingly, we vacate
the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of CFI's
Agents.   
II.
In its complaint, CFI alleged that Seller's Agents were
liable to CFI for fraud, negligence, and misrepresentation. 
These claims were based on CFI's allegations that Seller's Agents
failed to disclose the existence of the alleged encroachment and
setback violation and engaged in misrepresentation by stating
that there was nothing to disclose about the H âmâkua Property.  
In this regard, we note that the Hawai #i Supreme Court
has recognized the tort of negligent misrepresentation as set
forth in Section 552 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts
(1977).11  Chun v. Park, 51 Haw. 501, 467-68, 462 P.2d 905, 908-
11 Section 552 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts provides
in pertinent part:
§ 552.  Information Negligently Supplied for the
Guidance of   Others
(1) One who, in the course of his business, profession
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1809 (1969) (adopting the tentative draft of Section 552, which
later was incorporated in the Restatement (Second) of Torts);
State ex rel. Bronster v. United States Steel Corp., 82 Hawai #i
32, 41, 919 P.2d 294, 303 (1996).  In Shaffer v. Earl Thacker
Co., Ltd., 6 Haw. App. 188, 716 P.2d 163 (1986), this court held
that this tort applied in a suit by a buyer of residential
property against the seller's brokers.  The buyer claimed that
prior to his entering into the DROA, the seller's brokers had
misrepresented the boundary line, the absence of encroachments,
and the square footage of the property.  Id. at 189-90, 716 P.2d
at 163-64.  This court concluded:
The tort of negligent misrepresentation was recognized
by the Hawaii Supreme Court in Chun v. Park, 51 Haw. [501],
462 P.2d 905 (1969) (title company retained by seller owes
to buyer a duty of reasonable care in conducting and
preparing a title search despite a lack of privity).  We
know of no valid reason why this tort should not apply to
real estate brokers representing the sellers of residential
real property.
Id. at 192, 716 P.2d at 166.
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
Seller's Agents on the basis that there was no genuine issue of
material fact that Seller's Agents had no knowledge of the
alleged encroachment and setback violation at the time of
closing.  The Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment on this
basis was erroneous for the same reasons we previously discussed
regarding CFI's Agents.  
Like CFI's Agents, Seller's Agents did not raise the
issue of their lack of knowledge of the alleged encroachment or
setback violation, or meet their initial burden of producing
11(...continued)
or employment, or in any other transaction in which he
has a pecuniary interest, supplies false information
for the guidance of others in their business
transactions, is subject to liability for pecuniary
loss caused to them by their justifiable reliance upon
the information, if he fails to exercise reasonable
care or competence in obtaining or communicating the
information.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19evidence on this issue, in their moving papers.  Instead,
Seller's Agents argued that they were entitled to summary
judgment because: 1) under the doctrine of merger, CFI's rights
under the DROA were extinguished upon CFI's acceptance of the
Warranty Deed; 2) based on HRS §§ 669-11 and 669-12, First
Assembly's building was on the property line and this did not
constitute an encumbrance under the Warranty Deed; 3) CFI
acknowledged complete satisfaction of the provisions and
conditions of the DROA through the Condition Clearance Supplement
to Escrow Instructions and Written Notice to Escrow of
Satisfaction of Contingency; and 4) CFI was not entitled to
disclosures under Paragraph C-44 of the DROA because the
disclosures required by HRS § 508D-4 only apply to residential
real property and the Hâ mâkua Property was "vacant land."  The
first time that Seller's Agents argued the issue of their lack of
knowledge was at the hearing on the motions for summary judgment. 
Thus, the Circuit Court erred in shifting the burden to CFI to
produce specific evidence of Seller's Agents' knowledge of the
alleged encroachment and setback violation and in ruling against
CFI based on its failure to produce such evidence.  See French,
105 Hawai# i at 470-73, 99 P.3d at 1054-57.12  
We further conclude that the arguments presented in
Seller's Agents' MSJ did not establish that Seller's Agents are
entitled to summary judgment on CFI's claims.  Those arguments
were directed at whether there had been a breach of the DROA and
not on whether Seller's Agents owed tort duties to CFI that had
been breached.  Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit Court's grant
of summary judgment in favor of Seller's Agents.  
We note that on appeal, Ala Kai cites to the
declaration filed by Daniel on February 5, 2008.  Daniel and Cook
12 Seller's Agents' arguments on appeal are premised on the
correctness of the Circuit Court's finding that there was no
genuine issue of material fact that Seller's Agents lacked
knowledge of the alleged encroachment and setback violation
before closing.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20were CFI's predecessors in interest in the purchase of the
Hâmâkua Property.  In his declaration, Daniel asserts that he and
Cook knew about the problem of the alleged encroachment and
setback violation before escrow closed on the sale of the H âmâkua
Property.  Ala Kai contends that based on Daniel's declaration,
"there is no dispute" that the officers of CFI13 knew about the
alleged encroachment and setback violation before closing. 
Daniel's declaration was filed by Tex in support of Tex's motion
to have the Circuit Court amend or reconsider the court's
finding, issued in ruling on Tex's MSJ, that CFI "learned of
[First Assembly's] abutting structure after closing. . . ." 
However, this declaration as well as Daniel's supplemental
declaration, which contained similar assertions as the first
declaration, were both filed after the Circuit Court had issued
its order granting Seller's Agents' MSJ.  Therefore, Daniel's
declarations were not considered by the Circuit Court in granting
summary judgment in favor of Seller's Agents.  See Ass'n of Apt.
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai #i 97, 108, 
58 P.3d 608, 619 (2002) ("When reviewing a summary judgment, an
appellate court's consideration of the record is limited to those
materials that were considered by the trial court in ruling on
the motion.")  Moreover, Cook filed a declaration disputing the
assertions made in Daniel's first declaration, and the Circuit
Court did not grant Tex's motion to amend or reconsider the
Circuit Court's finding that CFI learned of First Assembly's
abutting structure after closing.  Under these circumstances, we
cannot accept Ala Kai's argument that there is no dispute that
CFI's officers knew of the alleged encroachment and setback
violation before closing.
III.
In vacating the Circuit Court's grant of summary
judgment in favor of CFI's Agents and Seller's Agents, we express
13 Ala Kai identifies Daniel as the Secretary of CFI and
Cook as the President of CFI.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21no view on whether CFI's Agents or Seller's Agents may be able to
demonstrate their entitlement to summary judgment on a more fully
developed record.  We also do not consider whether CFI's Agents
or Seller's Agents may be entitled to summary judgment based on
arguments that were not raised in the Circuit Court or on appeal.
  CONCLUSION
We vacate (1) the May 22, 2008, Judgment entered by the
Circuit Court in favor of CFI's Agents and (2) the May 22, 2008,
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court in favor of Seller's
Agents, and we remand the case for further proceedings consistent
with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 7, 2011.
On the briefs:
Douglas L. Halsted
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge
Sidney K. Ayabe
Ronald T. Michioka
(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, Sia &
Nakamura, A Limited Liability
Law Partnership)
for Defendants-AppelleesAssociate Judge
Nelson H. Kinoshita
for Defendant/Third-Party
Plaintiff-Appellee Ernest B. TexeiraAssociate Judge
Dwayne Stephen Lerma
Jo Anne E. Goya
(Lerma & Goya)
for Defendant/Third-Party
Plaintiff-Appellee Ala Kai Realty,
Inc., a Hawai# i Corporation
Christopher J. Roehrig
for Defendant Tex, Inc.