NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29670
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
FRANKO CHOSA, aka Roy Joseph, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
FREEDOM BAIL BONDS, Surety/Movant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 08-1-1254)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In a civil proceeding within a criminal case,
 
Surety/Movant-Appellant Freedom Bail Bonds (FBB) appeals from the
 
"Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Judgment and Order of
 
Forfeiture of Bail Bond" filed on November 5, 2008 in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 
FBB's appeal is without merit.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 804-51 (Supp. 2009)
 
provides in relevant part:
 
§804-51 Procedure.  Whenever the court, in any
criminal cause, forfeits any bond or recognizance given in a
criminal cause, the court shall immediately enter up
judgment in favor of the State and against the principal or
principals and surety or sureties on the bond, jointly and
severally, for the full amount of the penalty thereof, and
shall cause execution to issue thereon immediately after the
expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is given
via personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the surety or sureties on the bond, of the
entry of the judgment in favor of the State, unless before
the expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is
given to the surety or sureties on the bond of the entry of
the judgment in favor of the State, a motion or application
of the principal or principals, surety or sureties, or any
of them, showing good cause why execution should not issue
upon the judgment, is filed with the court. If the motion
 or application, after a hearing held thereon, is sustained,
the court shall vacate the judgment of forfeiture and, if
the principal surrenders or is surrendered pursuant to
section 804-14 or section 804-41, return the bond or
recognizance to the principal or surety, whoever shall have
given it, less the amount of any cost, as established at the
hearing, incurred by the State as a result of the
nonappearance of the principal or other event on the basis
of which the court forfeited the bond or recognizance. If
 the motion or application, after a hearing held thereon, is
overruled, execution shall forthwith issue and shall not be
stayed unless the order overruling the motion or application
is appealed from as in the case of a final judgment.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
On September 11, 2008, the circuit court ordered the
 
bail bond of Defendant Franko Chosa aka Roy Joseph (Chosa)
 
forfeited due to Chosa's nonappearance at a hearing where his
 
presence was required. The circuit court filed a Judgment and
 
Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond on September 17, 2008. On
 
September 23, 2008, FBB received notice of the bail bond
 
forfeiture, which triggered the start of the thirty-day period in
 
which execution of the judgment of forfeiture was stayed. On
 
September 29, 2008, within the thirty-day period, FBB filed a
 
Motion to Set Aside Judgment and Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond
 
2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(First Motion to Set Aside). The showing of good cause set forth
 
in the motion was surety attorney's declaration that Chosa "will
 
have been taken into custody or will personally appear before the
 
Court to provide a reasonable explanation as to the reasons for
 
[his] failure to appear at the date and time when previously
 
ordered." The hearing was subsequently set for October 8, 2008.
 
On October 8, 2008, FBB's First Motion to Set Aside was
 
heard and denied. Chosa was not in custody and did not appear at
 
the hearing to provide a reasonable explanation for his
 
nonappearance. 
On October 17, 2008, still within the thirty-day
 
period, FBB filed another Motion to Set Aside Judgment and Order
 
of Forfeiture of Bail Bond (Second Motion to Set Aside). The
 
showing of good cause set forth in the motion was surety
 
attorney's declaration that Chosa "will have been taken into
 
custody or will personally appear before the Court to provide a
 
reasonable explanation as to the reasons for [his] failure to
 
appear at the date and time when previously ordered." The
 
hearing was set for October 29, 2008.
 
On October 29, 2008, FBB's Second Motion to Set Aside
 
was heard and denied. Chosa was not in custody and did not
 
appear at the hearing to provide a reasonable explanation for his
 
nonappearance.
 
FBB did not demonstrate the existence of "good cause" 
as defined by the Hawai 'i Supreme Court in State v. Camara, 81 
Hawai'i 324, 916 P.2d 1225 (1996). "Good cause" exists where, 
prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period under HRS § 804­
51, a defendant voluntarily surrenders, or is surrendered by the 
surety, or provides a satisfactory reason for failing to appear 
in court when required. Camara, 81 Hawai 'i at 330, 916 P.2d at 
1231. FBB did not provide a satisfactory reason for Chosa's nonappearance. A satisfactory reason exists when a defendant is 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prevented from appearing in court due to no fault of his making. 
Id. FBB did not surrender Chosa, nor did Chosa voluntarily
 
surrender, during the thirty-day search period or during the
 pendency of FBB's First and Second Motions to Set Aside. 
Therefore, 
The "Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Judgment and
 
Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond" filed on November 5, 2008 in
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 21, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Richard D. Gronna 
for Surety/Movant-Appellant. 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge

 
4
 