NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29732
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
FRANK SANES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 05-1-2537)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
This is a homicide case arising out of an incident that
 
occurred on the morning of December 1, 2005, at Star Karaoke in
 
the Waimalu Shopping Center, where the decedent, Bill Refilong
 
(Refilong), suffered two knife wounds, one of which was fatal. 
Defendant-Appellant Frank Sanes (Sanes) was indicted on December
 
6, 2005 for second degree murder pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-701.5 (1993) and 706-656 (1996). Following
 
a jury trial, Sanes was found guilty of manslaughter pursuant to
 
HRS § 707-702 (2003) and sentenced to 20 years of incarceration. 
Sanes appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's
 
(Circuit Court) March 2, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence.1
 
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
1 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND
 
At trial, Sanes admitted that he caused the knife wound
 
responsible for Refilong's death, but claims that he was acting
 
in self-defense. Testimony relevant to this appeal includes the
 
following:
 
A. Mary Flynn's Testimony
 Forensic pathologist Mary Flynn performed Refilong's
 
autopsy and testified that Refilong bled to death as a result of
 a stab wound to the neck. Flynn also observed a similar stab
 
wound to Refilong's back. Refilong's blood contained .263 grams
 
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood and tested negative for
 
cocaine, opiates, PCP, methamphetamine, and amphetamine.
 
B. Efraim Paulis's Testimony
 
Efraim Paulis (Paulis) was Refilong's cousin and
 
testified with the assistance of an interpreter. Paulis
 
testified that upon arriving at Star Karaoke, he noticed an
 
acquaintance named Emmanuel Esteras (Esteras) sitting at a table
 
with four other men. Refilong then approached Esteras's table
 
and began talking to someone at that table. Paulis did not
 
notice any arguments arising out of that particular conversation. 
Paulis followed Refilong and the men Refilong spoke to outside of
 
Star Karaoke. Paulis then spoke to an unidentified person and
 
asked them what caused Refilong to appear to be "angry and
 
confused," although Paulis's interpreter immediately asked that
 
the word "angry" be stricken. Sanes raises issues related to the
 
interpreter's error in this appeal.
 
Paulis further testified that, approximately five
 
minutes later, Paulis was met by his other cousin, Blackie Otto
 
(Otto), outside of the bar. Soon after, a car containing two men
 
parked near the entrance of the bar. The driver then threatened
 
to stab Refilong if he saw him at a bus stop. Both the driver
 
and the passenger then proceeded to exit the car; the driver with
 
a sword, and the passenger, who was identified as Sanes, with a
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
twelve to fifteen inch sheathed knife. Paulis testified that the
 
driver appeared angry and Sanes appeared drunk. According to
 
Paulis, none of the men, except for the driver and Sanes, had
 
weapons that night, nor did he have any weapons or threaten the
 
driver or Sanes.
 
When Sanes got out of the car, Paulis testified that
 
Sanes "ran out and he stabbed [Refilong]." Paulis only witnessed
 
Sanes stab Refilong once to the right side of his neck from the
 
back with a downward blow. After Sanes stabbed Refilong,
 
Refilong fell to the cement, and the driver and Sanes returned to
 
the car and drove away.
 
C. Emmanuel Esteras's Testimony
 Esteras testified that he was at Star Karaoke when
 
Refilong walked into the bar with Paulis, and that he did not
 observe any arguments while inside, although he did leave to use
 
the restroom before Refilong spoke to Sanes or his group. While
 
Esteras was in the restroom, the men went outside and Esteras
 
later followed. Once outside, Esteras witnessed Sanes and
 
Refilong arguing, while Esteras's cousin Alex Terno aka Tainy
 
Estes (Tainy) and Refilong and Paulis were also arguing with each
 
other. 
Upon exiting the bar, Esteras noticed a car parked
 
outside of Star Karaoke and identified Tainy as the driver and
 
Sanes as the passenger. At this time, Paulis was arguing with
 
Sanes and wanted to fight him, while Refilong argued with Tainy
 
and told him to buy more beer for his group. Esteras testified
 
that he did not witness Sanes cut Refilong in the back, although
 
he did witness Sanes stab Refilong in the neck. Esteras did not
 
witness Refilong chase Sanes after being stabbed, and instead,
 
testified that Refilong fell into the parking lot after the fatal
 
blow, with Sanes and Tainy entering the car and leaving
 
thereafter.
 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. John Lean's Testimony
 
John Lean (Lean) had a lengthy criminal record. As
 
discussed below, at some point, Lean entered into a cooperation
 
agreement with prosecutors, pursuant to which Lean would testify
 
in two unrelated murder cases. 
Lean testified that he met Sanes at the Oahu Community
 
Correctional Center (OCCC), where Lean was being held in the
 
"hole" because he was a "management problem." Lean said that he
 
met Sanes in the hole in December of 2005, at which time Sanes
 
admitted to Lean that he had "cut somebody with a sword" at the
 
Waimalu Shopping Center. Sanes explained to Lean that he killed
 
Refilong because Refilong was "eyeballing" him. Sanes further
 
stated that he killed Refilong because Sanes admired his uncle,
 
who was incarcerated for murder, and wanted to be like him. Lean
 
reported that Sanes smiled and appeared to think that the murder
 
was funny when he made his admission to Lean. 
Upon cross-examination, it was revealed that Lean's
 
lawyer was negotiating the cooperation agreement "sometime in
 
December also, maybe November" of 2005. The letter from the
 
prosecutors was received on December 28, 2005 and signed in April
 
of 2006.
 
E. Frank Sanes's Testimony
 Sanes testified that, on the night of the incident, he
 
and Tainy stopped at Waimalu Shopping Center after spotting
 Esteras and his coworker, Jerry Timothy. Esteras and his
 
coworker invited Sanes and Tainy into Star Karaoke and offered to
 
buy them beer. Sanes said that he had never been into Star
 
Karaoke before and did not enter looking for trouble. Sanes
 
stated that Refilong and Paulis entered the bar a short time
 
before the 2:00 a.m. closing time, at which point Refilong
 
approached Sanes's table and asked Sanes's group to buy Refilong
 
and Paulis beer. Sanes then told his group that they should
 
4  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
leave because Refilong looked drunk and Sanes was worried that
 
Refilong would "make trouble." 
Sanes and Tainy left the bar and went out to their car,
 
while Refilong and Paulis followed them outside and continued
 
demanding that Sanes and Tainy buy them beer. Paulis then said
 
that if Sanes and Tainy did not exit their car, he and Refilong
 
would cut them and break their car. Sanes stated that he
 
subsequently exited the car to get Tainy so that they could
 
leave, and while exiting the car, found a knife in the pocket
 
area of the passenger seat. Paulis had a knife, which he pulled
 
out from the sheath while walking towards Sanes and Tainy. Sanes
 
then heard Tainy say "cut," at which point Sanes threw his knife
 
back because he was scared he was going to be hurt. This swing
 
hit Refilong, although Sanes did not identify who had been hit
 
until after the blow. Sanes heard Tainy's car moving and was
 
afraid that he was being left behind. While running to the car,
 
Sanes felt someone grab his shoulder and say he was going to kill
 
Sanes, which caused Sanes to react by swinging his knife
 
backwards over his shoulder, delivering the second and fatal blow
 
to the right side of Refilong's neck. Sanes entered the car and
 left the scene because he did not want to get hurt.  Sanes
 
testified that he did not see Refilong with a weapon, although he
 
did see Refilong with his hands in his pockets, which led Sanes
 
to believe that Refilong was hiding something.
 
F. Ronald Takasato's Testimony
 Ronald Takasato was the lead detective for Refilong's
 
homicide. During Detective Takasato's testimony, Sanes's counsel
 attempted to introduce a newspaper clipping found in Refilong's
 
wallet, which described six men involved in a previous stabbing
 
at the same shopping center. The prosecutor objected to its
 
introduction based on a lack of relevance and hearsay grounds. 
After a bench conference, the objection was sustained pursuant to
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 401 and 403.
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Sanes raises the following points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred when it found that Lean
 
was not acting as an agent for the State when Sanes made his
 admissions to Lean;
 
(2) Sanes was denied due process and a fair trial as
 
the result of an inaccurate interpretation of the testimony of
 
Paulis;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred by precluding evidence of
 
a newspaper clipping found in Refilong's wallet;
 
(4) Sanes received ineffective assistance of counsel
 
when his trial counsel failed to move to suppress Lean's
 
statements and to fully prepare Sanes for his testimony;
 
(5) The Circuit Court erred by failing to give a
 
cautionary instruction concerning Lean's lack of credibility; and
 
(6) Sanes was deprived of a fair trial as a result of
 
prosecutorial misconduct related to the State's alleged depiction
 
of Sanes as a "management problem" housed in the "hole."
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Findings of facts, including the Circuit Court's 
finding that Lean was not acting as an agent of the State when 
Sanes spoke to Lean, are reviewed under the clearly erroneous 
standard. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 
(1994). "A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) 
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the 
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made." State v. Keliiheleua, 
105 Hawai
'i 174, 178, 95 P.3d 605, 609 (2004) (citations 
omitted). 
The denial of a motion for mistrial is within the sound 
discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a 
clear abuse of discretion. State v. Plichta, 116 Hawai 'i 200, 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
214, 172 P.3d 512, 526 (2007); State v. Loa, 83 Hawai 'i 335, 349, 
926 P.2d 1258, 1272 (1996). Therefore, the Circuit Court's 
denial of Sanes's motion for a mistrial based on purported errors 
in the translation of Paulis's testimony is reviewed for an abuse 
of discretion. 
A trial court's determination that evidence is relevant 
is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review. State v. 
St. Clair, 101 Hawai 'i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003). 
"Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative 
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by 
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence." HRE Rule 403. Whether 
relevant evidence is admissible under Rule 403 is a determination 
well-suited to a trial court's exercise of discretion because it 
requires a "cost-benefit calculus" and a "delicate balance 
between probative value and prejudicial effect." Kaeo v. Davis, 
68 Haw. 447, 454, 719 P.2d 387, 392 (1986). Hawai 'i's appellate 
courts review such a determination for an abuse of discretion. 
Id.; see State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 706 
(2002). 
In claims of ineffective assistance of counsel, the 
defendant has the burden of proving: (1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, 
judgment, or diligence; and (2) that such errors or omissions 
resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a 
potentially meritorious defense. State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 
504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 (2003). "[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely 
be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v. Richie, 88 
Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted; emphasis in original). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The standard of review for jury instructions that were 
not objected to at trial was clarified in State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai'i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), where the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that 
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under [Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in thecase of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of reviewis effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmlesserror standard of review because it is the duty of the trialcourt to properly instruct the jury. As a result, onceinstructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, withoutregard to whether timely objection was made, if there is areasonable possibility that the error contributed to the
defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted). Thus, the 
appellant must first demonstrate instructional error by rebutting 
the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are 
correct." Id. at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v. 
Eberly, 107 Hawai 'i 239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005). If the 
appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden shifts to 
the State to prove that the error was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981. 
Sanes's claim of prosecutorial misconduct is raised for 
the first time on appeal. Therefore, we determine whether the 
statements were improper and, if so, whether they constituted 
plain error that affected Sanes's substantial rights. HRPP 52(b) 
and State v. Suan 121 Hawai 'i 169, 174, 214 P.3d 1159, 1164 (App. 
2009). IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Lean as an Agent of the State
 Sanes argues that Lean was an agent of the State
 
because at the time of Sanes's statements to Lean, Lean was
 negotiating a plea agreement to testify in two unrelated homicide
 
cases. 
This issue has not been squarely discussed in Hawai
'i. 
There have been, however, cases elsewhere in which an inmate has 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
made incriminating statements to another inmate, thus raising the
 
issue of whether the second inmate is an agent of the state. In
 
United States v. Stevens, 83 F.3d 60 (2d Cir. 1996), it was held
 
that inmate-informants who proffered incriminating statements by
 
the defendant to the government were not agents of the State
 
until they (1) reached an actual agreement with the government;
 
and (2) subsequently obtained further information at the
 
direction of the government. 83 F.3d at 64-65. As another
 
federal circuit court explained, "[a]n inmate who voluntarily
 
furnishes information without instruction from the government is
 
not a government agent[.]" United States v. Brink, 39 F.3d 419,
 
423 (3d Cir. 1994) (citing United States v. Van Scoy, 654 F.2d
 257, 260 (3d Cir. 1981)). Similarly, in United States v. Watson,
 
894 F.2d 1345 (D.C. Cir. 1990), it was explicitly held that
 
government involvement is not implicated when an inmate-informant
 
gains incriminating information with the aim of exchanging such
 
information in the future without an agreement with, or direction
 
from, the government. 894 F.2d at 1348 (citing United States v.
 
Hicks, 798 F.2d 446, 448-49 (11th Cir. 1986)); see also, Stevens,
 
83 F.3d at 64.
 
We find the reasoning in these cases to be persuasive. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err when
 
it found that Lean was not an agent of the State when Sanes made
 
his incriminating statements. Although Lean was negotiating to
 
testify in two other homicide trials, nothing in the record
 
suggests that he actually had an agreement to assist in the
 
investigation of any homicides at the time of Sanes's statements,
 
nor is there any evidence that Lean was acting pursuant to
 
instructions from the government when he spoke to Sanes at OCCC. 
B. Sanes's Motion for a Mistrial
 Sanes argues that his motion for a mistrial was
 
erroneously denied because the Chuukese interpreter, Betty Irons
 
(Irons), spoke a different dialect than Paulis, was not a
 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
certified court interpreter, and had difficulty understanding and
 
interpreting Paulis's testimony. In support of his argument,
 
Sanes cites the portion of the November 10, 2008 transcript in
 
which Irons asks the court to strike the word "anger" from
 
Paulis's testimony. Sanes also highlights three instances in
 
which Irons needed to "catch up," two instances in which she had
 
to rephrase her translation, and another instance where she
 
sought the help of another interpreter to understand a word.
 
The constitutional guarantee of due process does not
 
guarantee a perfect trial. State v. Casipe, 5 Haw. App. 210,
 
216, 686 P.2d 28, 34 (1984). Thus, when the proficiency of an
 interpreter is challenged, a court must determine whether "the
 
testimony as presented through the interpreter [was]
 
understandable, comprehensible, and intelligible, and if not,
 
whether such deficiency resulted in the denial of the defendant’s
 
constitutional rights[.]" Id. at 214, 686 P.2d at 32 (citations
 
omitted). Moreover, "[t]here is a rebuttable presumption that an
 interpreter in the course of performing his official duty has
 
acted regularly[,]" and that "[a]lthough an interpreter may have
 
encountered some difficulties translating the testimony, those
 
difficulties, without more, are not sufficient to rebut the
 
presumption." Id.
 
Sanes submits that Irons was not certified as a
 
qualified court interpreter and that she spoke a different
 
dialect than Paulis. Although it would have been ideal to use a
 
certified reporter who spoke the same dialect as Paulis, these
 
facts do not constitute per se reversible error by the Circuit
 
Court. This court has held that a defendant is not denied due
 
process where, although there may be an alleged difference in
 
dialect, the testimony as presented through the interpreter was
 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
understandable, comprehensible, and intelligible. Casipe, 5 Haw.
 
App. at 216, 686 P.2d at 34.2
 
It appears that Irons did have some difficulty when
 
translating parts of Paulis's testimony. The question, however,
 
is whether Sanes was denied his constitutional rights as a result
 
of a defective translator. Casipe, 5 Haw. App. at 214, 686 P.2d
 
at 32. 
Sanes fails to show how the exchanges he cites or the
 
generalized errors he alleges resulted in any prejudice to him. 
Sanes points to areas of the record in which Irons needed to
 
catch up with Paulis's testimony or clarify a translation. Sanes
 
does not allege any particular instance in which he was
 
materially affected by Irons's need to rephrase a statement or
 
that she misinterpreted words or phrases. Furthermore, Sanes
 
does not demonstrate why Irons's initial translation of the words
 
"confused" and "angry" amounted to an error capable of rebutting
 
the presumption that Irons was a capable interpreter. Irons's
 
error was corrected shortly after it was made. It was an
 
isolated mistake. The Circuit Court reviewed with the parties
 
the transcript of the angry-versus-confused translation and, to
 
the defendant's apparent satisfaction, read that portion of the
 
transcript to the jury. We cannot conclude that Sanes suffered
 
prejudice as a result of this corrected error. Sanes was not
 
denied due process and a fair trial as a result of Irons's
 
interpretation. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Sanes's motion for a mistrial.
 
2
 We also note that, pursuant to HRE Rule 604, "[a]n interpreter is
subject to the provisions of these rules relating to qualification as an
expert[.]" Thus, a courtroom interpreter is considered an expert that may be
cross-examined as to the trustworthiness or validity of their interpretation.
See HRE Rule 702; McCandless v. Waiahole Water Co., 35 Haw. 314, 320 (1940)
(holding that a party has a right to cross-examine a witness offered as a
translator to test the qualifications of the witness). Failure to do so may
be viewed as an abandonment by the defense. State v. Brooks, 44 Haw. 82, 89,
 
352 P.2d 611, 616 (1960).
 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. The Newspaper Clipping
 
Sanes argues that the Circuit Court erroneously
 
excluded from evidence a newspaper clipping found in Refilong's
 wallet after his death. This clipping purportedly described an
 
incident at the same shopping center as Refilong's homicide where
 
six men were involved in a stabbing. Sanes argues that the
 
newspaper clipping was relevant to his argument that Refilong was
 
the initial aggressor and that Sanes was acting in self defense. 
Sanes argues that the newspaper clipping would support the
 
inference that Refilong "associates with people who engage in
 
knife fights" and that "a person who would carry around such a
 
clipping is more likely to be someone who would engage in such a
 
knife fight himself."
 
We disagree. As the trial court concluded, any
 
inference to be drawn from the introduction of the clipping would
 
have been purely speculative. Moreover, the clipping was
 
apparently never recovered, so there is no record of what it
 
said. Indeed, even if the newspaper clipping was marginally
 
relevant, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
held that the probative value of the clipping was "far outweighed
 
by the risk of the jury misinterpreting it, speculating,
 
accepting speculative arguments based on it."
 
D. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 Sanes argues that he received ineffective assistance of
 
counsel in two instances. First, Sanes argues that his trial
 counsel did not prepare him to testify using a diagram of the
 
crime scene that was used at trial to illustrate the location
 
where the incident occurred. Sanes argues that this lack of
 
preparation made it appear that "the testimony is scripted and
 
the witness is not following the script[,]" and that,
 
alternatively, counsel questioned the credibility of his own
 
witness by impressing that he believed the first cut occurred in
 
a manner different from what Sanes testified. This claim is
 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
without merit. It is evident from the transcript that Sanes was
 
merely confused as to the orientation or layout of the diagram. 
The confusion was relieved when Sanes was shown actual pictures
 
of a planter and newspaper stand and Sanes testified regarding
 
where the knife blows occurred in relation to these items. 
Sanes's trial counsel did not commit an error or omission
 
reflecting his lack of skill, judgment, or diligence as it
 
relates to the diagram of the crime scene.
 
Sanes also claims various errors by trial counsel
 
relating to Lean's testimony, arguing: (1) counsel should have
 
objected to Lean's testimony as more prejudicial than probative;
 
(2) counsel should have objected to Lean's testimony that he was
 
kept in the hole as a management problem, thereby implying that
 Sanes was a management problem; (3) counsel should have impeached
 
or moved to strike certain testimony that was inconsistent with
 
Lean's original statement; (4) counsel should have requested a
 
cautionary instruction regarding Lean's credibility; and (5)
 
counsel's cross-examination strategy – attempting to show that
 
Sanes was merely boasting to show that he was a tough guy – was
 
so weak as to be constitutionally infirm. Upon careful review of
 
the entire record, and consideration of the arguments made in the
 
parties' briefs and at oral argument, we conclude that Sanes did
 
not meet his burden of demonstrating (1) that there were specific
 
errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment,
 
or diligence; and (2) such errors or omissions resulted in either
 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 
meritorious defense. See, e.g., State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346,
 
348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (citations omitted).
 
E. Cautionary Instruction
 
Sanes argues that the Circuit Court erred by failing to
 
give a cautionary instruction regarding Lean's credibility. This
 argument is also without merit. The following instruction was
 
given to the jury regarding the credibility of witnesses:
 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It is your exclusive right to determine whether and to
what extent a witness should be believed and to give weight
to his or her testimony accordingly. In evaluating the
weight and credibility of a witness's testimony, you may
consider the witness's appearance and demeanor; the
witness's manner of testifying; the witness's intelligence;
the witness's candor or frankness, or lack thereof; the
witness's interest, if any, in the result of this case; the
witness's relation, if any, to a party; the witness's
temper, feeling, or bias, if any has been shown; the
witness's means and opportunity of acquiring information;
the probability or improbability of the witness's testimony;
the extent to which the witness is supported or contradicted
by other evidence; the extent to which the witness has made
contradictory statements, whether in trial or at other
times; and all other circumstances surrounding the witness
and bearing upon his or her credibility.
 
Inconsistencies or discrepancies in the testimony of a
witness, or between the testimony of different witnesses,
may or may not cause you to discredit such testimony. In
 weighing the effect of inconsistencies or discrepancies,
whether they occur within one witness's testimony or as
between different witnesses, consider whether they concern
matters of importance or only matters of unimportant detail,
and whether they result from innocent error or deliberate
falsehood.
 
The jury was properly instructed to weigh the
 
credibility of witnesses based on factors that, according to
 
Sanes, should cast doubt on Lean's credibility. The jury was
 
fully apprised of Lean's criminal history, his behavioral
 
problems at OCCC, and the nature and timing of his cooperation
 
agreement, and thus, was able to fully assess his credibility. 
Accordingly, a more specific cautionary instruction was not
 
necessary. See, e.g., State v. Jones, 62 Haw. 572, 581-82, 617
 
P.2d 1214, 1221 (1980) (holding that a jury instruction regarding
 the credibility of witnesses was sufficient, thus rendering a
 
cautionary instruction unnecessary).
 
F. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 Sanes's final argument is that the State committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct by eliciting from Lean that he was in
 the hole at OCCC because Lean was a management problem, thereby
 
attempting to create the false impression that Sanes was in the
 
hole because he too was a management problem. We consider: (1)
 
the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative
 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence 
against the defendant. See, e.g., State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai 'i 
20, 24, 108 P.3d 974, 981 (2005). 
Here, on direct examination, the prosecutor elicited
 
from Lean that the hole was where they send inmates that are a
 management problem, that he was in the hole because he took a
 
shower in his cell sink, and that he met Sanes there. This was
 
basically the circumstances of their encounter and did not
 
necessarily reflect badly on Sanes. The prosecution did not
 
elicit testimony that the only reason inmates were placed in the
 
hole was because they were a management problem and did not argue
 
in closing that Sanes had been placed in the hole because he was
 
a management problem. No cautionary instruction was given
 
because none was requested. 
Even if the reference to Sanes's being in the hole were
 
to be considered improper, the third and final factor convinces
 
us that any such prosecutorial conduct was harmless beyond a
 
reasonable doubt. The evidence supporting Sanes's manslaughter
 
conviction is overwhelming. Sanes testified that he delivered
 
the first blow to Refilong because he was afraid of getting hurt
 
and that he delivered the second blow in "self-defense" because
 
he was afraid of being left behind by Tainy. In addition, this
 
testimony is directly contradicted by the testimony of the other
 
witnesses, who stated that Sanes simply exited the car and
 
stabbed Refilong in the neck. Sanes also testified that Refilong
 
was unarmed. Finally, Lean testified that Sanes admitted to
 
killing Refilong because Sanes wanted to be like his uncle, and
 
that he did so without remorse. Thus, even if we were to
 
construe the elicitation of the in-the-hole testimony as
 
misconduct, it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's March
 
2, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 27, 2010. 
Walter R. Schoettle
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge

James M. Anderson
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
16 