  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28516

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
GERARD R. LALES, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.

WHOLESALE MOTORS COMPANY, dba JN AUTOMOTIVE GROUP,
JOHNNY MARTINEZ, and GARY MARXEN, SR.,
Defendants-Appellees.

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

(CV. NO. 03-1-2415)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

This case arises out of an employment discrimination

lawsuit brought by Plaintiff-Appellant Gerald R. Lales (Lales). 
 
Lales filed a First Amended Complaint in the Circuit Court of the

1
First Circuit (Circuit Court) against Defendants-Appellees
 
Wholesale Motors Company, dba JN Automotive Group (JN), Johnny

Martinez (Martinez), and Gary Marxen, Sr. (Marxen) (collectively,

Defendants). Lales alleged, among other things, that during the
 
course of his employment by JN as a car salesperson, he was

harassed by derogatory comments about his French national origin

and ancestry made by Martinez and Marxen and was later

terminated, in retaliation for his complaints of discrimination. 
 
1

The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.

  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The First Amended Complaint asserted six causes of action (COA):
 
(1) discriminatory acts towards Lales, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 378
2 (COA 1); (2) retaliation for
 
Lales's complaints of discrimination, in violation of HRS Chapter
 378 (COA 2); (3) breach of employment contract (COA 3); (4)
 termination of Lales after he complained of national origin
 harassment, in violation of public policy (COA 4); (5)
 discriminatory acts towards Lales, in violation of Section 703 of
 Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), 42 U.S.C.
 § 2000e-2
3 (COA 5); and (6) retaliation for Lales's opposing
 
2 At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 378-2 (Supp. 1999) provided
in pertinent part:
 
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
 
(1) 	Because of race, sex, sexual orientation, age,
religion, color, ancestry, disability, marital status,
or arrest and court record: 
(A) 	For any employer to refuse to hire or employ or
to bar or discharge from employment, or
otherwise to discriminate against any individual
in compensation or in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment;
 
. . . 
(2) 	For any employer, labor organization, or employment
agency to discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate
against any individual because the individual has
opposed any practice forbidden by this part or has
filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any
proceeding respecting the discriminatory practices
prohibited under this part; [or]
 
(3)	 For any person whether an employer, employee, or not,
to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of
any of the discriminatory practices forbidden by this
part, or to attempt to do so[.]
 
3  42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1) states as follows:
 
(a)
 Employer practices
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer-­
(1)
 to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any
individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any
individual with respect to his compensation, terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such
individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national
origin[.]
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI �I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
harassment, in violation of Section 704(a) of Title VII, 42
 
U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a)4 (COA 6). The Circuit Court granted summary
 
judgment in favor of Martinez, Marxen, and JN on all COAs raised
 by Lales in the First Amended Complaint. The Circuit Court also
 found that the claims raised by Lales in his First Amended
 Complaint were frivolous and awarded attorney's fees of
 $149,667.85 and costs of $9,272.81 to Defendants. 
On appeal, Lales asserts that the Circuit Court: (1)
 
abused its discretion in failing to recuse itself on the basis of
 bias or the appearance of bias; (2) erred in granting summary
 judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 1 and 2; (3) erred in
 granting summary judgment in favor of JN on COAs 1, 2, 4, 5, and
 6; (4) erred in awarding attorney's fees and costs to Defendants;
 
and (5) abused its discretion in denying Lales's post-judgment
 
motions. 
For the reasons discussed below, we: (1) conclude that
 
the Circuit Court did not err in failing to recuse itself; (2) 
vacate the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of
 Marxen on COAs 1 and 2; (3) vacate the Circuit Court's grant of
 summary judgment in favor of JN on COAs 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6; (4)
 vacate the Circuit Court's award of attorney's fees and costs to
 Defendants; (5) conclude that it is unnecessary for us to
 separately address Lales's claim that the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in denying his post-judgment motions; and (6) 
4
 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a) states, in pertinent part, as follows:
 
(a) Discrimination for making charges, testifying, assisting, or
participating in enforcement proceedings
 
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to
discriminate against any of his employees or applicants for
employment . . . because he has opposed any practice made an
unlawful employment practice by this subchapter, or because he has
made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner
in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this subchapter.
 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 
Memorandum Opinion.5
 
BACKGROUND6
 
I.
 
Lales was employed by JN as a car salesperson for
 
almost a year before he was terminated. While employed by JN,
 Lales worked with Martinez, who was his sales manager and
 immediate supervisor for a period of time, and was supervised by
 Marxen, the General Sales Manager for JN. 
Lales received a termination notice, which stated that
 
he was being terminated due to a "lack of production," and
 because he missed a "training meeting." Lales questioned Marxen
 about these reasons, and Marxen reconsidered and allowed Lales to
 continue working. However, the following day, Lales was again
 terminated for allegedly selling a car to a customer by falsely
 representing that it was equipped with air conditioning. The
 previously issued termination notice was modified by changing the
 date and adding the comment: "LIED TO CUSTOMER & THE USED CAR
 MANAGER. CAUSING US TO INSTALL AIR CONDITIONING." 
After his termination, Lales jointly filed a complaint 
alleging national origin discrimination and retaliation with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the Hawai'i Civil Rights Commission (HCRC). As part of his 
5 In the Circuit Court, Lales did not oppose the grant of summary
judgment in favor of all Defendants on COA 3 for breach of employment contract
and did not oppose the grant of summary judgment in favor of Martinez andMarxen on COAs 5 and 6 for claims under Title VII. On appeal, Lales does notchallenge: (1) the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor ofMartinez on all COAs; (2) the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment infavor of Marxen on COAs 3 through 6; and (3) the Circuit Court's grant ofsummary judgment in favor of JN on COA 3. We affirm the Circuit Court's grantof summary judgment in favor of Martinez, Marxen, and JN on the COAs thatLales does not challenge on appeal; Lales has abandoned any challenge to theserulings by failing to contest them on appeal. See State v. Cummings, 101
Hawai'i 139, 141 n.2, 63 P.3d 1109, 1111 n.2 (2003). 
6
 Because we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party in reviewing a trial court's decision on a motion for summaryjudgment, Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 176
P.3d 91, 103 (2008), we present the evidence in the light most favorable toLales. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint, Lales submitted a statement under penalty of perjury,

in which he alleged, among other things, that Marxen "frequently

referred to me as a '[F]rench bastard'[] and told me to go back

to my country because America does not need French people[,]" and

that Marxen told Martinez "'to go and kick the ass of that French

bastard.'" According to Lales's statement, Martinez repeatedly

harassed Lales by calling him "Frenchy" and telling him that

"'the French are useless bastards'"; that despite his complaints

about Martinez's discrimination and harassment, Lales was

transferred to Martinez's sales team; and that Lales remained on

Martinez's sales team for months before being allowed to transfer

to a new sales team, despite protesting Martinez's continuing

harassment and discrimination. Lales alleged that he was

"discriminated against and harassed because of my national

origin, French"; that he "worked in a hostile environment and was

retaliated against for protesting the discrimination and

harassment"; and that the reasons given for his termination were

"pretextual."

The EEOC issued a "Determination" which stated that its

investigation revealed that Lales "was harassed because of his

national origin, French[,]" but that it was unable to conclude,

based on the information obtained, that Lales was discharged in

retaliation for opposing discrimination in the workplace. The

EEOC determined that "there is reasonable cause to believe that

Respondent [(identified in the Determination as JN)]

discriminated against [Lales] because of his national origin." 
 After the EEOC's Determination, the HCRC issued a "Notice of

Dismissal and Right to Sue" letter to Lales.

II. 
 
Lales subsequently filed his Complaint and the First

Amended Complaint in Circuit Court. Martinez, Marxen, and JN
 
each filed separate motions for summary judgment. Lales filed

memoranda in opposition to these motions, which included his

declaration. In Lales's declaration submitted in opposition to

Marxen's motion for summary, Lales stated:

5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
5. . . . I was subjected to discrimination on the
basis of my national origin/ancestry when my supervisor,
Defendant MARXEN[,] referred to me as "fucking French
bastard," "Frenchie," made derogatory remarks about French
people, told my immediate supervisor, Defendant JOHNNY
MARTINEZ[,] to "beat my fucken French ass," and made remarks
about French people. I was also subjected to ancestry
harassment by Defendant MARTINEZ and other employees at my
workplace, based upon my national origin - French. During
my work at JN AUTOMOTIVE GROUP, someone placed feces on my
car, for which a police report was made.

6. Defendant MARTINEZ was my immediate supervisor
and referred to me as "French fries," "Pepe Le Pieu," I was
told that I stink, that French women are just whores,
"French are wimps" and other derogatory remarks. I asked to

be transferred because of Defendant MARTINEZ's behavior

towards me which included threats.

Lales also asserted that Marxen prevented him from participating

in a radio promotion because of his French accent. Lales stated

that he was terminated for the false reason of not selling enough

vehicles, when he did not have the lowest sales at that time;

that he was told he was terminated for not attending a meeting,

but did not recall receiving notice of the meeting and did not

know of anyone being terminated for not attending a sales

meeting; and that he did not see or sign the termination notice

referring to his lying to a customer about air conditioning and

that he denied telling the customer the vehicle had air

conditioning. Lales declared that before he was terminated, he
 
complained orally to Marxen, his co-workers, and others about the

remarks made about his ancestry, and that he sought advice from

an attorney about hostile work environment and ancestry

discrimination. He stated that he was aware of other sales

representatives who were discriminated against on the basis of

race or national origin by Marxen and JN. 
 
In Lales's declaration submitted in opposition to JN's 
 
motion for summary judgment, he generally repeated these matters

and asserted additional details, including that: (1) he is French

and was born in France; (2) about a month before he was

terminated, he complained to Marxen about being harassed and

Marxen called him a "'Fucken French Bastard,'" told him to get

out of Marxen's office, and told Maritnez to "'beat his F******

6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
French Ass'"; (3) after questioning the initial reasons for his

termination -- failing to sell enough vehicles and missing a

meeting -- Marxen changed his mind and allowed Lales to continue

to work; (4) the next day, Lales was terminated and told to leave

for selling a truck without air conditioning; (5) he "den[ied]

that [he] told the customer the truck had air conditioning" and

asserted that the sales agreement did not identify the truck as

having air conditioning and that the sales documents given to the

customer show that the truck was sold "'as is'"; and (6) "[o]ther

employees told [the customer] that the [t]ruck had air

conditioning in it and were not fired"; and (7) he suffered

financially and emotionally as a result of the discrimination and

being fired.

III. 
 
The Circuit Court granted the motions for summary

judgment filed by Martinez, Marxen, and JN. In granting JN's
 
motion, the Circuit Court filed its "Findings of Fact,

Conclusions of Law and Order." The Circuit Court also issued an

order awarding attorney's fees and costs to Defendants. 
 
The Circuit Court filed an Amended Final Judgment on

February 5, 2007, which entered judgment in favor of Defendants

and against Lales on all of Lales's COAs and awarded $149,667.85

in attorney's fees and $9,272.81 in costs to Defendants. The

Circuit Court subsequently denied Lales's motion for

reconsideration of the order awarding attorney's fees and costs

and Lales's "Motion to Vacate, Alter or Amend Judgment, Motion

for Stay of Entry of Judgment and for Rule 54(b) Certification

for Appeal." This appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION

I.

Lales argues that the Circuit Court abused its

discretion in denying his motion for recusal, which was based on

the Circuit Court's alleged bias against Lales's counsel. We

disagree.

7

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We review the denial of a motion for recusal or 
disqualification for abuse of discretion. State v. Ross, 89 
Hawai'i 371, 376, 974 P.2d 11, 16 (1998). The Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has stated that "[d]ecisions on recusal or disqualification present perhaps the ultimate test of judicial discretion and should thus lie undisturbed absent a showing of abuse of that discretion." Id. at 375, 974 P.2d at 15. 
Over a year after Lales filed his First Amended

Complaint, the case was reassigned to Judge Randal K.O. Lee

(Judge Lee). Lales filed a motion to recuse Judge Lee because
 
before Judge Lee became a judge, he and Lales's attorney, Daphne

Barbee (Barbee), had been opposing counsel in a lengthy criminal

case, in which Judge Lee served as the prosecutor and Barbee

served as defense counsel. In support of this motion, Barbee

submitted a declaration of counsel, in which she stated that the

supreme court reversed her client's conviction after the first

trial, which lasted six months, due to the prosecutor's discovery

violations, and that a mistrial was granted at the retrial due to

the unconstitutionality of the indictment, which was affirmed on

appeal. Barbee asserted that as the result of "the longstanding
 
adversarial positions and lengthy litigation" between herself and

Judge Lee when he served as a prosecutor, she believed that Judge

Lee was biased against her, which may adversely affect her

clients, including Lales. Judge Lee denied Lales's motion for
 
recusal.

The Hawai' i Supreme Court has "suggested a two-part 
analysis for disqualification or recusal cases." Ross, 89 
Hawai'i at 377, 974 P.2d at 17. First, "HRS § 601-7 [(the 
judicial disqualification statute)] is applied to determine whether the alleged bias is covered by any of the specific instances prohibited therein." Id. Second, "[i]f the alleged 
bias falls outside of the provisions of HRS § 601-7, the court may then turn, if appropriate, to . . . notions of due process . . . in conducting the broader inquiry of whether 'circumstances fairly give rise to an appearance of impropriety and reasonably 
8

    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
cast suspicion on the judge's impartiality." Id. (citation,

brackets, and ellipsis points omitted). 
 
HRS § 601-7 (1993 & Supp. 2011) provides, in pertinent

part:

(b) Whenever a party to any suit, action, or
proceeding, civil or criminal, makes and files an affidavit
that the judge before whom the action or proceeding is to be
tried or heard has a personal bias or prejudice either
against the party or in favor of any opposite party to the
suit, the judge shall be disqualified from proceeding
therein. Every such affidavit shall state the facts and the
reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice exists . . . .

(Emphasis added.) HRS § 601-7 only refers to personal bias or 
prejudice against a "party." However, Canon 3(E) of the Hawai' i 
Code of Judicial Conduct (Revised) (1992) (HCJC), which was in effect when Judge Lee rendered his decision, also required a judge to disqualify himself or herself where the judge has a personal bias or prejudice concerning a party's lawyer. In addition, Canon 2 of the HCJC provided that "[a] judge shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety in all of the judge's activities."
7 
On appeal, Lales argues that Judge Lee abused his

discretion in failing to recuse himself on the basis of bias or

the appearance of bias. In support of this argument, Lales cites 
 the circumstances set forth in Barbee's declaration. Lales also

argues that Judge Lee's unfavorable rulings against Lales in this

case demonstrate bias. 
 
We conclude that Judge Lee did not abuse his discretion 
in denying Lales's motion for recusal. The circumstances cited in Barbee's declaration did not demonstrate actual bias, that Judge Lee's impartiality might reasonably be questioned, or that Judge Lee's presiding over Lales's case would create an appearance of impropriety. See Schutter v. Soong, 76 Hawai' i 
187, 205-06, 873 P.2d 66, 84-85 (1994) ("[I]n order to establish a 'personal' bias, [movant] must be able to show 'marked personal 
7

The current Hawai' i Revised Code of Judicial Conduct contains 
provisions very similar to Canon 3(E) and Canon 2 of the HCJC. 
9

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
feelings on both sides inflicting lingering personal stings' on 
[the judge]." (citation and ellipsis points omitted.)). There was nothing to "'create in reasonable minds a perception that the judge's ability to carry out judicial responsibilities with integrity, impartiality and competence [was] impaired.'" Ross, 
89 Hawai' i at 380, 974 P.2d at 20 (quoting commentary to Canon 2 
of the HCJC). The rulings by Judge Lee against Lales also do not support Lales's argument because parties "may not predicate their claims of disqualifying bias on adverse rulings, even if the rulings are erroneous." Id. at 378, 974 P.2d at 18. 
II.

Marxen moved for summary judgment against Lales. With

respect to Lales's COAs 1 and 2, which asserted claims under HRS

Chapter 378, Marxen argued that he was entitled to summary

judgment because: (1) the right to sue letter issued by the HCRC

only covered JN and not Marxen; and (2) HRS § 378-2 only permits

claims against employers and not individual employees. In its

written order, the Circuit Court granted summary judgment in

favor of Marxen on Lales's HRS Chapter 378 claims on the ground

that "Lales did not receive [from the HCRC] a Right to Sue

[letter] against Defendant Marxen." 
 
On appeal, Lales asserts that the Circuit Court erred

in granting summary judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 1 and 2. 
 Lales argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that the

HCRC's right to sue letter did not cover Marxen simply because

Marxen's name was not in the caption of the letter. He also

argues that he is entitled to sue individual employees for

violating HRS § 378-2. 
 
We review a trial court's grant of summary judgment de 
novo. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 
92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A

fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect

10

   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The

evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, this court must view all
of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the

light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.

Id. (brackets omitted) (quoting Price v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 
107 Hawai' i 106, 110, 111 P.3d 1, 5 (2005)). 
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that

the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of

Marxen on Lales's HRS Chapter 378 claims.

A.

The background concerning the HCRC's issuance of its

right to sue letter and the Circuit Court's grant of summary

judgment in favor of Marxen is as follows. After he was

terminated by JN, Lales filed a complaint with both the HCRC and

the EEOC by means of a declaration. In his declaration, Lales
 
alleged that he had been discriminated against and harassed by

Marxen and Martinez while employed by JN, and that he had been

subjected to retaliation for protesting the discrimination and

harassment. Lales's complaint identified both JN and Marxen as

respondents. Lales's complaint was dual filed as Charge No.
 
11620 with the HCRC and Charge No. 378-A3-00050 with the EEOC. 
 
The HCRC sent the same "Notice of Charge of

Discrimination" letter (Charge Letter) to both JN and Marxen. In

the caption, the Charge Letter stated:

Re:		 Gerard Lales vs. Wholesale Motors, Inc. JN Automotive
Group and Gary Marxen, Individually
FEPA[ 8
] No. 11620; EEOC No. 378-A3-00050
 
The Charge Letter to Marxen informed him that Lales had filed

"the enclosed complaint of employment discrimination under the

Hawaii Employment Practices Law and the U.S. Civil Rights Act of

1964, as amended, . . . against your organization." Pursuant to

a work sharing agreement between the HCRC and the EEOC, Lales's

complaint was investigated by the EEOC. Based on its

investigation, the EEOC issued a "Determination" which identified

8

The acronym FEPA stands for "Fair Employment Practices Agency." 
 
11

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI �I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lales as the "Charging Party" and only JN as the "Respondent." 
In its Determination, the EEOC found reasonable cause to believe
 that Respondent harassed and discriminated against Lales because
 of his national origin, but was unable to conclude that he was
 discharged in retaliation for opposing discrimination. As the
 result of the EEOC's investigation and final determination of
 Lales's complaint, the HCRC dismissed Lales's complaint and
 issued a notice of right to sue to Lales, pursuant to Hawai� i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) §§ 12-46-11 (1999) and HAR 12-46-20
 (1993).
9
  
The caption of the "Notice of Dismissal and Right to
 
Sue" letter (Right to Sue Letter) sent by the HCRC to Lales did
 not include Marxen's name and stated: 
Re:	 Notice of Dismissal and Right to Sue in
Gerard Lales vs. Wholesale Motors, Inc. JN Automotive Group
FEP No. 11620; EEOC No. 378-2003-00050
 
The Right to Sue Letter indicated that JN's president, Joseph
 
9 HAR § 12-46-11 provides in pertinent part:
 
(a) The executive director [of the HCRC] shall dismiss the
complaint:
 
. . . 
(6)	 If the complaint has been investigated by an
appropriate local, state, or federal enforcement
agency, such as the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Office for Civil Rights, or Office of
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, and a final
determination regarding the complaint has been made by
the agency[.]
 
HAR § 12-46-20 provides in pertinent part:
 
(a) 	A notice of right to sue shall authorize:
 
(1)	 A complainant alleging violations of chapters 368,
378, or 489, HRS, to bring a civil suit pursuant to
section 368-12, HRS, within ninety days after receipt
of the notice; 
. . . .
 
(d) The commission's executive director shall issue a notice
of right to sue:
 
(1)	 Upon dismissal of the complaint pursuant to section
12-46-11[.] 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  HRS § 368-12 (1993) states:10
The [Hawaii Civil Rights] commission may issue a notice of right
to sue upon written request of the complainant.  Within ninety
days after receipt of a notice of right to sue, the complainant
may bring a civil action under this chapter.  The commission may
intervene in a civil action brought pursuant to this chapter if
the case is of general importance.
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has explained that
Pursuant to HRS § 368–11(a) (1993), the HCRC has
jurisdiction, inter alia, "over the subject of discriminatory
practices made unlawful by . . . part I of [HRS] chapter 378," 
which includes HRS § 378–2 (1993).  HRS § 368–11(d) (1993)
provides in relevant part that, "[f]or purposes of [HRS ch. 368,]
'unlawful discriminatory practice' means an unfair discriminatory
practice or like terms, as may be used in . . . part I of [HRS]
chapter 378."
Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai# i 226, 230 n.4, 921 P.2d 146, 150 n.4
(1996).  As a section of HRS Chapter 378, Part I, HRS § 378-2 "is incorporated
by reference into the substantive and procedural provisions of HRS [Chapter]
368[.]"  Id.  at 231 n.6, 921 P.2d at 151 n.6.   
13Nicolai, and Marxen received a copy of the letter, by the
notation: 
c: Joseph Nicolai, President/Director
Gary Marxen, as an individual
at the end of the letter.  The Right to Sue Letter informed Lales 
that in accordance with HAR § 12-46-11, the HCRC was dismissing
Lales's complaint and issuing him a right to sue letter.  It
further informed Lales that he had the right to file a private
lawsuit against "the Respondent in the State Circuit Court within
ninety (90) days after receipt of this notice pursuant to [HRS] 
§ 368-12[10] and [HAR] § 12-46-20." 
B.
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
Marxen on Lales's HRS Chapter 378 claims on the ground that Lales
"did not receive a Right to Sue [letter] against Defendant
MARXEN."  Noting the difference between the caption of the Charge
Letter, which includes Marxen's name, and the caption of the
Right to Sue Letter, which does not, the Circuit Court found that
Marxen was "distinctively missing" from the Right to Sue Letter. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 11Hoshijo explained that the initials "FEPA" stand for "Fair Employment
Practices Agency" and that numbers for the HCRC Charge No. 11620 and the
"FEPA" No. 11620 are the same.  We note that the caption of the Right to Sue
Letter used the initials "FEP" rather than "FEPA" and states the EEOC charge
number as "EEOC No. 378-2003-00050" rather than "EEOC No. 378-A3-00050." 
14The Circuit Court subsequently issued an order awarding
attorney's fees and costs to Defendants.  The Circuit Court's
order was based, in part, on its determination that Lales's
complaint against Marxen was frivolous because Lales did not have
a right to sue letter covering Marxen.  Lales filed a motion for
reconsideration of the Circuit Court's order granting attorney's
fees and costs to Defendants.  In support of his motion, Lales
submitted the declaration of William Hoshijo (Hoshijo), the
Executive Director of the HCRC.  In his declaration, Hoshijo
asserted that: (1) the omission of any reference to Marxen in the
caption of the Right to Sue Letter was "an inadvertent clerical
error"; (2) "[t]he case numbers [in the caption], FEPA No. 11620,
EEOC No. 378-A3-00050,[11]. . . indicate that the entire case was
being dismissed, including any claims against Gary Marxen,
individually"; (3) the HCRC sent a copy of the Right to Sue
Letter to Marxen; and (4) the Right to Sue Letter "allowed Mr.
Lales to file a civil action against Gary Marxen despite the fact
that the 'with regards to' line of the letter did not contain Mr.
Marxen's name."  The Circuit Court denied Lales's motion for
reconsideration.
C.
Lales was required to exhaust administrative remedies
by filing a complaint with the HCRC and obtaining a notice of
right to sue from the HCRC in order to file a civil action on his
HRS Chapter 378 claims.  See French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc.,
105 Hawai #i 462, 475-77, 99 P.3d 1046, 1059-61 (2004); Schefke v.
Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai# i 408, 416 n.5, 32
P.3d 52, 60 n.5 (2001) (citing HRS §§ 368-11, 368-12, and 378-4);
Ross v. Stouffer Hotel Co., 76 Hawai# i 454, 460, 879 P.2d 1037,
1043 (1994); Linville v. State of Hawai #i, 874 F. Supp. 1095,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
151104 n.4 (D. Hawai# i 1994).  We conclude that the Right to Sue
Letter issued to Lales was sufficient to authorize Lales to
proceed with his lawsuit against Marxen. 
HRS Chapter 368, which establishes the filing of an
administrative action and the issuance of notice of right to sue
as prerequisites for Lales to bring a civil action on his HRS
Chapter 378 claims in court, is "a remedial statute designed to
enforce civil rights protections and remedy the effects of
discrimination," and therefore, "should be liberally construed in
order to accomplish that purpose."  Furukawa v. Honolulu
Zoological Soc'y, 85 Hawai #i 7, 17, 936 P.2d 643, 653 (1997); see
also Ramirez v. Nat'l Distillers & Cem. Corp., 586 F.2d 1315,
1321 (9th Cir. 1978) (concluding that in keeping with the
remedial goals of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the statute, the
procedural framework, and the pleadings must be liberally
construed in favor alleged victims of discrimination and that
"[p]rocedural technicalities should not be employed to impede a
Title VII claimant from obtaining a judicial hearing on the
merits").  The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held that construing a
prior statute of limitations provision in HRS Chapter 378 to
favor "adjudication on the merits is more consistent with the
remedial purposes of Part I of HRS Chapter 378 than one likely to
bar potentially meritorious claims."  Ross, 76 Hawai# i at 462,
879 P.2d at 1045.
The purpose of requiring the filing of a prior
administrative complaint is to provide notice to the charged
party of the claim and to give the administrative agency the
opportunity to investigate and conciliate the claim.  See Woodman
v. Runyon, 132 F.3d 1330, 1342 (10th Cir. 1997) (explaining the
purpose of the requirement of exhaustion of administrative
remedies with respect to Title VII claims); Martin v. Fisher, 13
Cal. Rptr. 2d 922, 924 (Cal. Ct. App. 1992) (explaining the
purpose of the exhaustion requirement under California's
employment discrimination law).  Given the function served by the
administrative complaint and the remedial goals of the CivilNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16Rights Act of 1964, federal courts have liberally construed the
scope of a Title VII plaintiff's administrative claim to permit
the filing of a discrimination lawsuit, in response to arguments
that the plaintiff failed to exhaust administrative remedies. 
See Sosa v. Hiraoka, 920 F.2d 1451, 1456-57 (9th Cir. 1990);
B.K.B. v. Maui Police Dept. , 276 F.3d 1091, 1100-03 (9th Cir.
2002).  Thus, even where a party is not named in an EEOC charge,
federal courts have permitted a Title VII lawsuit to be brought
against that party as long as the party not named in the EEOC
charge was involved in the acts giving rise to the EEOC charge or
should have anticipated that the claimant would name the party in
a Title VII lawsuit.  Sosa, 920 F.2d at 1458-59; E.E.O.C. v.
Nat'l Educ. Ass'n, Alaska, 422 F.3d 840, 847 (9th Cir. 2005).
In Martin v. Fisher,  13 Cal. Rptr. 2d 922, the
California Court of Appeals considered a situation very similar
to this case under California's employment discrimination
statutory scheme.  Martin jointly filed a discrimination
complaint against her employer, Texaco Refining and Marketing
Inc. (TRMI), with the EEOC and the analogous California
administrative agency, the Department of Fair Employment and
Housing (DFEH).  Id.  at 922.  The administrative complaint did
not name Fisher as a charged party, but identified Fisher,
Martin's functional superior at TRMI, as the individual who had
taken some of the discriminatory actions against Martin.  Id.  at
922-23.  Martin received right to sue letters from the EEOC and
the DFEH which named only TRMI and not Fisher.  Id.  at 923.  The
trial court dismissed Martin's lawsuit against Fisher on the
grounds of failure to exhaust administrative remedies.  Id. at
922.
On appeal, the California Court of Appeals framed the
issue as whether Martin's discrimination suit was barred "where
[Fisher] was named in the body of [Martin's] administrative
complaint, but not as a charged party."  Id. at 923.  In holding
that Martin's lawsuit against Fisher was not barred, the court
reasoned as follows:NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17The function of an administrative complaint is to
provide the basis for an investigation into an
employee's claim of discrimination against an
employer, and not to limit access to the courts.  A
strict rule [that only a party named in the caption of
the administrative suit may be sued, regardless of any
other circumstances,] would harm victims of
discrimination without providing legitimate protection
to individuals who are made aware of the charges
through the administrative proceeding.  If they are
described in the charge as the perpetrators of the
harm, they can certainly anticipate they will be named
as parties in any ensuing lawsuit.
. . . .
Similarly, the right-to-sue letter, while triggering
certain rights in the plaintiff, is primarily notification
that no further administrative action will be taken in the
case.  Although its issuance is a prerequisite to judicial
action . . . , we do not believe the plaintiff should be
bound by the caption of the administrative charge, which is
reflected in the right-to-sue letter.
Id. at 924. 
The reasoning in Martin is consistent with the Hawai# i
Supreme Court's liberal construction of Hawai #i's employment
discrimination statutes to accomplish their remedial purposes. 
In this case, Lales's administrative complaint, which was jointly
filed with the HCRC and the EEOC, identified "Gary Marxen,
Individually" as a respondent and alleged that Marxen harassed
and discriminated against Lales on the basis of his national
origin.  The record reflects that Marxen was notified of and
served with Lales's administrative complaint.  Thus, Marxen had
ample and specific notice of Lales's discrimination claim against
Marxen and should clearly have anticipated that Lales would name
him in a discrimination lawsuit.  In addition, Marxen was named
in the caption of the Charge Letter; the caption of the Right to
Sue Letter referred to Lales's discrimination cases before the
HCRC and EEOC, "FEP No. 11620; EEOC No. 378-2003-00050"; and
Marxen does not dispute that he was mailed a copy of the Right to
Sue Letter.  Indeed, Lales presents a more compelling case for
allowing his lawsuit to proceed than that presented in Martin. 
Lales's administrative complaint actually named Marxen as a
respondent, whereas Martin's complaint did not name Fisher as aNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18charged party, and Marxen received a copy of the complaint and
Right to Sue Letter, while Fisher was not served with either the
complaint or right to sue letter, but learned of the charges
through his employment and his interview by an EEOC
representative.  See Martin, 13 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 922-23.   
The purpose of a right to sue letter is to provide
notice that no further administrative action will be taken, that
the complainant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies,
and that the time for bringing suit has started to run.  See HRS
§ 368-12; Martin, 13 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 924;  Lacy v. Chrysler
Corp., 533 F.2d 353, 356-59 (8th Cir. 1976).  Neither the
relevant statutes nor the HCRC rules require the HCRC to name a
person in the caption of the notice of right to sue in order for
that person to be sued in court for discrimination.  Under the
circumstances of this case, to deny Lales the ability to pursue 
his complaint in Circuit Court because the Right to Sue Letter
did not specifically name Marxen in the caption would elevate
form over substance and would be inconsistent with the remedial
purposes of Hawai# i's employment discrimination statutes.  See
Furukawa, 85 Hawai #i at 17, 936 P.2d at 653; Ross, 76 Hawai #i at
462, 879 P.2d at 1045; Martin, 13 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 924; B.K.B.,
276 F.3d at 1100-03.  We therefore conclude that the Circuit
Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor Marxen on COAs
1 and 2, Lales's HRS Chapter 378 claims, on the ground that the
HCRC's Right to Sue Letter did not authorize Lales to file suit
against Marxen.
D. 
Because the Circuit Court granted summary judgment on
this ground, it did not address Marxen's alternative argument
that Marxen was not subject to liability in his individual
capacity under HRS § 378-2.  If Lales was not entitled to sue
Marxen individually under HRS § 378-2, then the Circuit Court
would have been correct in granting summary judgment in favor of
Marxen on COAs 1 and 2, albeit on a different ground than it NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12 The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor on Marxen on
Lales's Title VII claims, COAs 5 and 6, based on Lales's concession that
Marxen was not subject to individual liability under Title VII.  As noted in footnote 5, supra, Lales does not challenge the Circuit Court's grant ofsummary judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 5 and 6.
19asserted.  We therefore consider whether Lales was entitled to
bring suit against Marxen individually under HRS § 378-2. 
Citing federal cases holding that liability under Title
VII only extends to employers and not to employees in their
individual capacities,
 e.g., Miller v. Maxwell's Int'l. Inc., 991
F.2d 583, 587-88 (9th Cir. 1993), Marxen argues that HRS Chapter
378 and HRS § 378-2 should similarly be construed as only
subjecting employers, and not individual employees, to liability
for discriminatory acts.12  We disagree.  As explained below, we
conclude that employees are subject to individual liability under
HRS § 378-2 when they are agents of an employer or when they aid,
abet, incite, compel, or coerce prohibited discriminatory
practices.  Accordingly, Marxen was not entitled to summary
judgment on Lales's HRS Chapter 378 claims on the ground that HRS
§ 378-2 only permits claims against employers, and not employees
in their individual capacities.  
We start with the language of the statute.  HRS § 378-2
provided in relevant part:
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
(1) Because of race, sex, sexual orientation, age,
religion, color, ancestry, disability, marital status,or arrest and court record: 
(A) For any employer to refuse to hire or employ orto bar or discharge from employment, orotherwise to discriminate against any individualin compensation or in the terms, conditions, orprivileges of employment;
. . . 
(2) For any employer . . . to discharge, expel, orotherwise discriminate against any individual becausethe individual has opposed any practice forbidden bythis part or has filed a complaint, testified, orassisted in any proceeding respecting thediscriminatory practices prohibited under this part;[or]NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20(3)For any person whether an employer, employee, or not,
to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of
any of the discriminatory practices forbidden by this
part, or to attempt to do so[.]
HRS ÿÿ 378-1 (1993), in turn, (1) defines "employer" to mean "any
person, including the State or any of its political subdivisions
and any agent of such person , having one or more employees, but
shall not include the United States" (emphasis added); and (2)
defines "person" to mean "one or more individuals, and includes,
but is not limited to, partnerships, associations, or
corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, or the State or any of its political
subdivisions."
Therefore, under HRS ÿÿ 378-2, an employer, which is
broadly defined to include "any person . . . having one or more
employees" and "any agent of such person," is subject to
liability for engaging in the specified unlawful discriminatory
practices.  A plain reading of the statutory provisions supports
the conclusion that an individual employee, who is an agent of an
employer, can be held individually liable as an "employer." 
Moreover, HRS ÿÿ 378-2(3) clearly provides that "any person[,]
whether an employee, employer, or not[,]" is subject to
individual liability for aiding and abetting the prohibited
discriminatory practices.  Thus, the statutory language
contradicts Marxen's contention that HRS ÿÿ 378-2 does not permit
claims against employees in their individual capacities.        
In Sherez v. State of Hawai'i Dept. of Educ. , 396 F.
Supp. 2d 1138 (D. Hawai i 2005), the United States District Court
for the District of Hawai i considered the question of whether
employees are subject to liability in their individual capacities
under HRS ÿÿ 378-2.  Noting a split among the judges of the
District of Hawai i on this issue, the court in Sherez held that
under HRS ÿÿ 378-2, employees are subject to individual liability
when they act as agents of an employer.  Id. at 1146 & n.7.  The
court employed the following reasoning, with which we agree, »
»
»NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21in analyzing the Hawai i Legislature's intent in using the term
"agent" in the definition of "employer": »
[HRS] Chapter 378 casts liability for employment
discrimination broadly.  It applies to the smallest
employers, even individual employers who employ only one
other person.  In addition, [HRS ÿÿ 378-2(3)] imposes
individual liability on those who aid, abet, or incite
employment discrimination.  Aider and abettor liability
extends to everyone, even those not employed or affiliated
with the discriminatory employer.  It is hard to imagine
that the Hawaii legislature meant to impose liability on
small employers and on individuals who aid and abet
discrimination, yet at the same time meant to immunize the
individual agents who actually engage in unlawful
discrimination.  Thus, taken in context, the language "any
person . . . including . . . any agent of such person" in
the definition of employer contemplates that agents are
individually liable as employers under the statute.
Id. at 1147 (ellipsis points in original).
The Sherez court also explained, in a manner we find
persuasive, why federal precedents that had construed Title VII
as not subjecting employees to individual liability should not be
followed in construing HRS Chapter 378.
As discussed above, individual employees are not subject to
liability under Title VII which, like [HRS] chapter 378,
imposes liability on employers for employment
discrimination.  Miller v. Maxwell's Int'l, Inc. , 991 F.2d
583, 587 (9th Cir.1993).  Miller interpreted the agency
language in the Title VII definition of "employer" as
imposing respondeat superior
 liability on the employer for
its agents' acts, while not imposing individual liability on
the agent.  However, Title VII differs from chapter 378 in
relevant detail: federal law imposes liability only on
employers with fifteen or more employees while chapter 378
imposes liability on employers with one or more employees. 
Compare  HRS § 378-1 with 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2.
Miller viewed the fifteen or more employee requirement
in Title VII critical in determining Congressional intent
with respect to individual liability.  The court reasoned
that "if Congress decided to protect small entities with
limited resources from liability, it is inconceivable that
Congress intended to allow civil liability to run against
individual employees."  Id.   In contrast, HRS § 378-1 does
not limit employer liability to larger employers.
Additionally, unlike Title VII, chapter 378 imposes aider
and abetter liability on individuals.  HRS § 378-2(3).  As
discussed above, construing "employer" to include individual
agents of employers is entirely consistent with the
statutory scheme of chapter 378.  Because of these crucial
differences between the levels [of] liability imposed by
Title VII and chapter 378, the court does not find Title VII
precedent helpful in interpreting the HRS § 378-1 definition
of employer.
Id. at 1148 (brackets omitted). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
22Although the Hawai i Supreme Court has not directly
addressed the issue of liability of employees in their individual
capacities presented by this appeal, decisions of the Hawai i
Supreme Court support the conclusion that liability under HRS 
ÿÿ 378-2 extends to employees in their individual capacities.  In
Steinberg v. Hoshijo , 88 Hawai i 10, 960 P.2d 1218 (1998), the
complainant and Dr. Steinberg were both employed by a medical
clinic, and Dr. Steinberg was the complainant's supervisor.  Id.
at 11, 960 P.2d at 1219.  The Hawai i Supreme Court affirmed the
circuit court's order, which upheld a decision of the HCRC that
Dr. Steinberg had subjected the complainant to sexual harassment,
in violation of HRS ÿÿ 378-2, and was liable for compensatory and
punitive damages.  Id.   The court noted that "[t]he parties do
not dispute that Dr. Steinberg was an agent of the Clinic and
therefore an 'employer' as defined by HRS ÿÿ 378-1."  Id. at 18
n.10, 960 P.2d at 1226 n.10 ; see also  Sam Teague, Ltd. v Hawai i
Civil Rights Comm'n , 89 Hawai i 269, 275-77, 971 P.2d 1104, 1110-
12 (1999) (concluding that the HCRC properly allowed complainant
to amend her complaint to add owner of employer as a party in his
personal capacity because HRS ÿÿ 378-1 defines "employer" to
include agents of persons having one or more employees). »
»
»
»
»
»
In Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96
Hawai i 408, 32 P.3d 52, the plaintiff sued his two corporate
employers as well as the individual owners, Jonathan and Fred
Kirshner, of one of the corporate employers.  Id. at 415, 417, 32
P.3d at 59, 61.  The Hawai i Supreme Court overturned the trial
court's grant of directed verdicts in favor of Jonathan and Fred
as to their liability in their individual capacities on
plaintiff's claim of retaliation in violation of HRS ÿÿ 378-2. 
Id. at 441-42, 32 P.3d at 85-86.  The court rejected Fred's claim
that he could not be held personally liable for the alleged
retaliatory decision because the decision had ultimately been
left to Jonathan.  The court held that given the broad language
of HRS ÿÿ 378-2(3), which "provides that ' any person  whether an
employer, employee, or not' can be held liable for 'aid[ing],»
»NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI »I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
23abet[ing], incit[ing] , compel[ling], or coerc[ing] the doing of
any discriminatory practices forbidden by this part,'" Fred could
be held liable for inciting the discriminatory decision, even if
he was offering advice, and not making any decision.  Id. at 442,
32 P.3d at 86 (brackets in original).  The supreme court
concluded that the trial court erred in granting the directed
verdicts because based on the evidence presented at trial, the
jury could have found discriminatory retaliation by Jonathan and
Fred in violation of HRS ÿÿ 378-2(3).  Id.  
Based on the plain language of the relevant statutory
provisions and Hawai i Supreme Court decisions, we conclude that
Lales was entitled to bring suit against Marxen individually
under HRS ÿÿ 378-2. »
III.
Lales argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting
summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales's COA 1 (HRS Chapter 378
harassment), COA 2 (HRS Chapter 378 retaliation), COA 4
(termination in violation of public policy), COA 5 (Title VII
harassment), and COA 6 (Title VII retaliation).  We agree.  
A.
We first address the Circuit Court's grant of summary
judgment in favor of JN on COAs 1 and 5, Lales's HRS Chapter 378
and Title VII claims for harassment based on ancestry and
national origin discrimination.  Lales argues that the Circuit
Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on these
claims because: (1) the Circuit Court erroneously applied the
legal test for vicarious liability based on harassment by a co-
worker, rather than harassment by a supervisor; (2) the Circuit
Court erroneously applied the affirmative defense set forth in
Faragher v. City of Boca Raton , 524 U.S. 775 (1998), to Lales's
HRS Chapter 378 harassment claim; and (3) the Circuit Court
failed to view the evidence in the light most favorable to Lales
and instead based its grant of summary judgment on improper
credibility determinations and findings on disputed facts.  As
explained below, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
granting summary in favor of JN on COAs 1 and 5.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1.
 
HAR § 12-46-175 (1990), the HCRC rule for harassment
 
based on ancestry, provides, in relevant part, as follows:
 
Harrassment.  (a) Harassment on the basis of ancestry
is a violation of chapter 378, HRS.
 
(b) Ethnic slurs and other verbal or physical conduct
relating to an individual's ancestry constitute harassment
when this conduct:
 
(1)	 Has the purpose or effect of creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive working
environment;
 
(2)	 Has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's work
performance; or
 
(3)	 Otherwise adversely affects an
individual's employment opportunity.
 
Similar standards apply to hostile work environment
 
harassment based on national origin under Title VII, which
 
requires a plaintiff to prove: 
(1) that he [or she] belongs to a protected group, (2) that
he [or she] has been subject to unwelcome harassment, (3)
that the harassment was based on a protected characteristic
of the employee, such as . . . national origin, (4) that the
harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the
terms and conditions of employment and create a
discriminatorily abusive working environment, and (5) that
the employer is responsible for such environment under
either a theory of vicarious or direct liability. 
Piquion v Walgreen Co. , 369 F. Supp. 2d 1339, 1346 (S.D. Fla.
 
2005).
 
HAR § 12-46-175 also addresses the circumstances under
 
which an employer may be held vicariously liable for the acts of
 
its employees, and it provides, in relevant part, as follows:
 
(c) The employer has an affirmative duty to maintain a
working environment free of harassment on the basis of
ancestry.
 
(d) An employer is responsible for its acts and those
of its agents and supervisory employees with respect to
harassment on the basis of ancestry regardless of whether
the specific acts complained of were authorized or even
forbidden by the employer and regardless of whether the
employer knew or should have known of their occurrence. The
 commission will examine the circumstances of the particular
employment relationship and the job functions performed by
the individual in determining whether an individual acts in
a supervisory or agency capacity.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(e) With respect to conduct between fellow employees,
an employer shall be responsible for acts of harassment in
the workplace on the basis of ancestry, where the employer,
its agent, or supervisory employee, knows or should have
known of the conduct, unless the employer can show that it
took immediate and appropriate corrective action.
 
For purposes of imposing vicarious liability on an
 
employer for ancestry harassment, HAR § 12-46-175 distinguishes
 
between harassment by a co-worker and harassment by a supervisor. 
With respect to harassment by a supervisor, HAR ÿÿ 12-46-175(d)
 imposes "strict" vicarious liability on the employer. On the
 other hand, with respect to harassment by a co-worker, HAR ÿÿ 12­46-175(e) imposes vicarious liability on an employer if it knows
 or should have known of the harassing conduct and fails to take
 corrective action. 
In Faragher  and the companion case of Burlington
 
Indus., Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998), the United States
 Supreme Court addressed the circumstances under which an employer
 could be held vicariously liable under Title VII for sexual
 harassment committed by a supervisory employee against a
 subordinate. The Court in Faragher held as follows:
 
In order to accommodate the principle of vicarious
liability for harm caused by misuse of supervisory
authority, as well as Title VII's equally basic policies of
encouraging forethought by employers and saving action by
objecting employees, we adopt the following holding in this
case and i
n Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth , 524 U.S.
742, 118 S.Ct. 2257, 141 L.Ed.2d 633 (1998), also decided
today. An employer is subject to vicarious liability to a
victimized employee for an actionable hostile environment
created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively
higher) authority over the employee. When no tangible
employment action is taken, a defending employer may raise
an affirmative defense to liability or damages, subject to
proof by a preponderance of the evidence, see Fed. Rule Civ.
 
Proc. 8(c). The defense comprises two necessary elements:
(a) that the employer exercised reasonable care to prevent
and correct promptly any sexually harassing behavior, and
(b) that the plaintiff employee unreasonably failed to take
advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities
provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise. While
 
proof that an employer had promulgated an antiharassment
policy with complaint procedure is not necessary in every
instance as a matter of law, the need for a stated policy
suitable to the employment circumstances may appropriately
be addressed in any case when litigating the first element
of the defense. And while proof that an employee failed to
fulfill the corresponding obligation of reasonable care to
avoid harm is not limited to showing an unreasonable failure
 
25
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to use any complaint procedure provided by the employer, a
demonstration of such failure will normally suffice to
satisfy the employer's burden under the second element of
the defense. 
No affirmative defense is available, however,
when the supervisor's harassment culminates in a tangible
employment action, such as discharge, demotion, or
undesirable reassignment. See Burlington , 524 U.S., at
762-763, 118 S.Ct., at 2269.
 
Faragher, 524 U.S. at 807-08 (emphases added).
 
Thus, under Faragher , an employer is subject to
 
"strict" vicarious liability for harassment by a supervisor, but
 
may assert the articulated affirmative defense, except "when the
 
supervisor's harassment culminates in a[n] [adverse] tangible
 employment action." Id. at 808.
 
2.
 
In granting summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales's 
harassment claims, the Circuit Court relied on the Hawai» i 
Supreme Court's decision in Arquero v. Hilton Hawaiian Village 
LLC,
 104 Hawai
» i 423, 91 P.3d 505 (2004), for the proposition 
that to establish employer liability, the harassed employee must 
show that the employer knew or should have known of the harassment and failed to take appropriate corrective action. We conclude that such reliance was misplaced because 
Arquero 
involved co-worker harassment, and not harassment by a supervisor.
13 Here, Lales alleged that he was subjected to 
repeated acts of harassment based on his ancestry and national origin by Marxen who was his supervisor. 
The Circuit Court also erred in applying the
 
affirmative defense set forth in Faragher  because as Faragher
 
itself makes clear, the affirmative defense does not apply "where
 a supervisor's harassment culminates in tangible employment 
13
 In Arquero, plaintiff sued her employer, claiming that she had been
sexually harassed by a co-worker. In support of the standards it applied to
evaluate the employer's liability, the Hawai »i Supreme Court cited the HCRC
rules for sexual harassment, HAR ÿÿ 12-46-109 (1990), which basically applies
the same distinction between an employer's vicarious liability for harassmentby a co-worker and harassment by a supervisor as the HCRC rules for ancestry
harassment. See Arquero, 104 Hawai
»i at 428 n.7, 91 P.3d at 510 n.7. Because 
Arquero involved harassment by a co-worker, the Hawai »i Supreme Court did not
consider HAR ÿÿ 12-46-109(c), which imposes "strict" vicarious liability on anemployer for sexual harassment by a supervisor. 
26
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action, such as a discharge . . . ." Here, because the alleged
 
harassment by Marxen did culminate in Lales's discharge, the
 Faragher  affirmative defense did not apply. We note that the
 
parties argue over, and several amicus curiae briefs were filed
 on, the question of whether this court should apply the Faragher
 affirmative defense to harassment claims brought under HRS
 Chapter 378. We decline to decide this question. Because the
 requirements set forth in Faragher for applying the Faragher
 affirmative defense have not been met in this case, we need not
 address what the result would be in a different case where a
 supervisor's alleged harassment does not culminate in tangible
 employment action.
 
Where a supervisor's harassment culminates in 
tangible employment action, both Faragher and HAR § 12-46-175
 
impose "strict" vicarious liability on an employer. Accordingly,
 the Circuit Court erred in applying the Arquero  standards for co­
worker harassment and the Faragher  affirmative defense in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of JN.
14
 
3.
 
In ruling on JN's motion for summary judgment, the 
Circuit Court was required to view all the evidence, including the inferences drawn therefrom, in the light most favorable to Lales, the non-moving party. See  
Kamaka, 117 Hawai» i at 104, 176 
P.3d at 103. 
Lales argues that the Circuit Court failed to view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to him and instead drew inferences and made credibility determinations against him. We agree. 
For example, the Circuit Court supported its rejection
 
of Lales's assertion that he was subjected to numerous abusive
 
14
 Relying in part on Faragher, Defendants, supported by several amicus
curiae, also argue that HAR § 12-46-175(d), which imposes "strict" vicarious
liability on employers for harassment by supervisors, is ultra vires as not
 
within the HCRC's rulemaking authority. We do not address the asserted
 
argument because it is directed at situations where the Faragher  affirmative
 
defense would apply, a situation not presented by this case. We also decline
 to address the argument because Defendants did not challenge HAR §
12-46-175(d) on ultra vires grounds in the Circuit Court.
 
27
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
verbal comments by Marxen regarding Lales's French ancestry and
 
national origin, which Lales set forth in his declaration filed
 in opposition to JN's motion for summary judgment, by finding
 that "Lales's credibility is questionable . . . ."
15 In
 
addition, the Circuit Court rejected Lales's assertion, also
 contained in his declaration in opposition to JN's motion for
 summary judgment, that Lales opposed Marxen's suggestion that
 Lales call himself "Frenchy" and use that name on Lales's
 business cards because Lales felt that this was offensive. The
 Circuit Court cited conflicting evidence presented on this issue
 by JN and found that Lales's credibility was questionable. 
We conclude that when viewed in the light most
 
favorable to Lales, the matters set forth in Lales's declaration
 in opposition to JN's motion for summary judgment, which
 
presented evidence that Lales was subjected to persistent,
 derogatory, and unwelcome statements and comments about his
 ancestry and national origin, established that there were genuine
 issues of material fact regarding his claims against JN for
 harassment based on ancestry and national origin discrimination. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment
 in favor of JN on COAs 1 and 5.
 
B.
 
We also conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting summary judgment in favor of JN on COAs 2 and 4, Lales's
 HRS Chapter 378 and Title VII claims for retaliation. 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has adopted a three-part test 
for retaliation claims under HRS ÿÿ 378-2(2) that is consistent 
with the test applicable to such claims under Title VII. Under the test adopted by the Hawai» i Supreme Court for retaliation 
claims under HRS ÿÿ 378-2(2): 
(1) the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of
such retaliation by demonstrating that (a) the plaintiff (i)
 
15
 The Circuit Court's finding that Lales's credibility was questionable
was based on inferences it drew from Lales's answers to requests for
admissions that did not directly refute Lales's claims.
 
28
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"has opposed any practice forbidden by [HRS chapter 378,
Employment Practices, Part I, Discriminatory Practices] or
(ii) has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any
proceeding respecting the discriminatory practices
prohibited under this part," HRS § 378-2(2), (b) his or her
"employer, labor organization, or employment agency [has]
. . . discharge[d], expel[led], or otherwise discriminate[d]
against the plaintiff," id. , and (c) "a causal link [has]
exist[ed] between the protected activity and the adverse
action"; (2) if the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case
of retaliation, the burden shifts to the defendant to
provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the
adverse employment action; and (3) if the defendant
articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back to the
plaintiff to show evidence demonstrating that the reason
given by the defendant is pretextual. 
Schefke, 96 Hawai» i at 426, 32 P.3d at 70 (case citations 
omitted; brackets in original).16
 
In support of its motion for summary judgment, JN
 
presented evidence in the form of declarations and deposition
 
testimony of the following: (1) Lales never submitted a complaint
 to Nicolai, JN's president, or other management personnel
 regarding discriminatory treatment; (2) Lales introduced himself
 as "Frenchy," asked people at JN to call him "Frenchy," and used
 the name "Frenchy" on documents he submitted to JN; (3) Marxen
 was not biased against Lales due to his French national origin,
 Marxen would not have hired Lales if he were biased, and Marxen
 did not harass or witness anyone else harassing Lales; (4) Lales
 was initially terminated for his low sales production and missing
 a mandatory meeting; (5) this termination was withdrawn based on
 
16 In Schefke, the Hawai »i Supreme Court described the test for
retaliation claims under Title VII as follows: 
Under Title VII . . . federal courts have held that, in a
prima facie case of retaliation, "an employee must show that (1)
he [or she] engaged in a protected activity; (2) his [or her]
employer subjected him [or her] to an adverse employment action;
and (3) a causal link exist[ed] between the protected activity and
the adverse action." "If a plaintiff has asserted a prima facie
retaliation claim, the burden shifts to the defendant to
articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for its
decision." "If the defendant articulates such a reason, the
plaintiff bears the ultimate burden of demonstrating that the
reason was merely a pretext for a discriminatory motive." 
Schefke , 96 Hawai
»i at 425, 32 P.3d at 69 (citations and footnote omitted;
brackets in original). 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lales's pleas, but was reinstated upon discovery that Lales had
 
misrepresented to customers that a vehicle sold by Lales had air
 conditioning, when it did not; (6) the customers, husband and
 wife, advised JN that Lales lied about the vehicle containing air
 conditioning and the wife stated that Lales introduced himself as
 "Frenchy."
 
Lales submitted a declaration in opposition to JN's
 
summary judgment motion, which presented the following evidence:
 (1)
 Lales is French; (2) Marxen, his supervisor, and Martinez,
 
his immediate supervisor for a period of time, repeatedly made
 derogatory comments to Lales about, and used derogatory terms to
 describe, Lales's French ancestry and national origin; (3)
 shortly before his termination, Lales verbally complained to
 Marxen about the ancestry and national origin harassment; (4)
 
Marxen told Lales "'You Fucking French Bastard, get out of my
 office'"; (5) Lales was initially told he was being terminated
 for not selling enough cars and for missing a meeting, even
 though other employees had lower sales, he had not received
 notice of the meeting, and was not aware of other employees being
 terminated for missing a meeting; (6) after Lales questioned
 Marxen about the reasons given for his termination, Lales was
 allowed to continue to work, but the next day, Lales was
 terminated for purportedly lying to a customer about air
 conditioning; (7) Lales denied telling the customer that the car
 had air conditioning and asserted that other JN employee had told
 the customer that the car had air conditioning, but were not
 fired; and (8) he suffered financially and emotionally as a
 
result of the discrimination and being fired. 
In granting summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales's
 
retaliation claims, the Circuit Court concluded that there were
 no genuine issues of material fact and that JN was entitled to
 judgment as a matter of law because: (1) Lales failed to prove a
 causal link between the protected activity and the adverse
 action, an element of his prima facie case; and (2) Lales failed 
30
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to prove that JN's proffered reason for termination was
 
pretextual. 
We conclude that given the conflicting evidence 
presented by the parties, the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales's retaliation claims. When viewed in the light most favorable to Lales, he presented sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case of retaliation by showing that: (1) he verbally complained to Marxen about harassment based on Lales's ancestry and national origin, see O'Neal v. Ferguson Const. Co., 237 F.3d 1248, 1255 (10th Cir. 2001) ("Informal complaints to superiors constitute protected activity."); Passantino v. Johnson & Johnson Consumer Products, Inc., 212 F.3d 493, 506 (9th Cir. 2000) (same); (2) JN terminated Lales, thereby subjecting Lales to an adverse employment action; 
and (3) his termination was within a month of his complaints to Marxen regarding the harassment. See Suzuki v. State, 119 
Hawai» i 288, 302, 196 P.3d 290, 304 (App. 2008) ("Causation in 
retaliation cases 'can be inferred from timing alone where an adverse employment action follows on the heels of protected activity.'" (quoting Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc. , 281 
F.3d 1054, 1065 (9th Cir. 2002)); Passantino , 212 F.3d at 507 
("[W]hen adverse employment decisions are taken within a reasonable period of time after complaints of discrimination have been made, retaliatory intent may be inferred. Moreover, . . . evidence based on timing can be sufficient to let the issue go to the jury, even in the face of alternative reasons proffered by the defendant." (citations omitted)). In addition, Lales 
presented sufficient evidence to establish genuine issues of material fact regarding whether JN's proffered reasons for Lales's termination were pretextual. The Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales's COAs 2 and 4. 
C.
 
Lales contends that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 
summary judgment in favor of JN on Lales's COA 4 for termination
 
in violation of public policy because JN did not address this
 
31
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claim in its motion for summary judgment and thus Lales was not 
given a fair opportunity to respond. A trial court is normally precluded from granting summary judgment on a ground to which the nonmovant was given "either an inadequate opportunity or no opportunity to respond." Edwards v. Honeywell, Inc., 960 F.2d 
673, 674 (7th Cir. 1992). On the other hand, to the extent that Lales's COA 4 is based on public policy derived from the provisions of HRS Chapter 378, it would be barred. See Takaki v. 
Allied Machinery Corp., 87 Hawai» i 57, 63, 951 P.2d 507, 513 
(App. 1998) ("If . . . the statutory or regulatory provisions which evidence the public policy themselves provide a remedy for the wrongful discharge, provision of a further remedy under the public policy exception is unnecessary." (block quote format, citation, and emphasis omitted)). 
In this case, the substance of Lales's public policy
 
claim is unclear because the parties did not address it in
 
connection with JN's motion for summary judgment. In light of
 the undeveloped state of the record regarding Lales's COA 4 and
 our decision to remand the case for further proceedings on other
 COAs asserted by Lales, we vacate the Circuit Court's grant of
 summary judgment in favor of JN on COA 4. 
IV.
 
The Circuit Court's decision to award attorney's fees
 
and costs to Defendants was based in significant part on its
 finding that Lales made claims against Marxen and JN that were
 frivolous, and thus attorney's fees and costs were authorized by
 HRS ÿÿ 607-14.5 (Supp. 2011). The Circuit Court found that Lales
 
made frivolous claims against Marxen and JN in that: (1) Marxen
 was not entitled to file suit against Marxen on Lales's HRS
 Chapter 378 discrimination claims because the Right to Sue Letter
 issued by the HCRC did not name Marxen in the caption; and (2)
 Lales's claims against JN were not reasonably supported by the
 facts and law as evidenced by the Circuit Court grant of summary
 judgment in favor of JN on all of Lales's COAs. Our analysis in
 
this case and decision to vacate the Circuit Court's grant of
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
summary judgment in favor of Marxen and JN on numerous COAs
 
asserted by Lales undermines the principal bases for the Circuit
 Court award of attorney's fees and costs in favor of
 Defendants.
17 Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit Court's award
 
of attorney's fees and costs to Defendants. 
V.
 
We need not separately address Lales's claim that the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying his post-judgment
 motions. This is because in support of this claim, Lales simply
 incorporates the arguments he previously made with respect to his
 other points of error. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, (1) we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Amended Final Judgment to the extent that it (a) entered
 
judgment in favor of Marxen on COAs 1 and 2, (b) entered judgment
 in favor of JN on COAs 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6, and (c) awarded
 attorney's fees and costs to Defendants; (2) we affirm the
 Amended Final Judgment to the extent that it (a) entered judgment
 in favor of Martinez, (b) entered judgment in favor Marxen on
 COAs 3, 4, 5, and 6, and (c) entered judgment in favor of JN on
 COA 3; and (3) we remand the case for further proceedings
 consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, May 9, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Daphne E. Barbee
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Roger S. Moseley
Renee M. Furuta
 (Moseley Biehl Tsugawa Lau & 
Muzzi LLLC)
for Defendants-Appellees
 
17 We also note that the Circuit Court did not have the benefit of our
 
analysis in this Memorandum Opinion in evaluating Martinez's request for
attorney's fees and costs. 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On the briefs (continued):
 
Wesley M. Fujimoto
Bryan P. AndayaRyan E. Sanada
(Imanaka Kudo & Fujimoto LLLC)
for Amicus Curiae Hawai» i Employers Council 
John Ishihara
 Hawai» i Civil Rights Commission
Department of Labor and
Industrial Relations 
for Amicus Curiae Hawai» i Civil Rights Commission 
Shelton G.W. Jim On
 Henry F. Beerman
(Jim On & Beerman)
for Amicus Curiae
 
Hawaii Automobile Dealers Assn.
 
John L. Knorek
 
(Torkildson, Katz, Moore &
Hetherington)
for Amicus Curiae
 The Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii
 
Ronald Albu
 
(Albu & Albu)
for Amicus Curiae
 
National Employment Lawyers
Association- Hawai» i Chapter 
34
 