OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
ROSA YANG, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ABERCROMBIE & FITCH STORES, Defendant-Appellant,
and JOHN PEYTON, DUSTIN ARES, JOHN DOES 1-10,
JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10, and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
NO. 29757
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-1025-05 GJK)
 
APRIL 30, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FUJISE and LEONARD, JJ.
 
Defendant-Appellant Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Inc.
 
(A&F) brings this interlocutory appeal from the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's) Order Denying Defendant
 
Abercrombie & Fitch Stores' Motion To Dismiss Plaintiff Rosa
 
Yang's Complaint Filed On May 20, 2008 (Order Denying Dismissal),
 
which was filed on March 12, 2009.1 In the Order Denying
 
Dismissal, the Circuit Court rejected A&F's request to dismiss
 
1/
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff-Appellee Rosa Yang's (Yang's) claims against A&F on the 
ground that Yang's claims are all barred by the exclusive remedy 
provision in the Hawai' i Workers' Compensation Law, which is set 
forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-5 (1993). 
As discussed herein, we hold that the exclusivity
 
provision in HRS § 386-5 bars Yang's claims against A&F for the
 
personal injuries she allegedly suffered arising out of and in
 
the course of her employment, which were allegedly caused by the
 
willful acts of her co-employees acting in the course and scope
 
of their employment, but that this provision does not bar Yang's
 
claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. 
Accordingly, we affirm in part and vacate in part, remanding the
 
case to the Circuit Court. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The Incident at A&F's Store
 
On a motion to dismiss, the facts alleged in the 
complaint are considered to be true. Bremner v. City & Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 96 Hawai' i 134, 138, 28 P.3d 350, 355 (App. 2001). 
Accordingly, for the purpose of this review, we present the facts as they are alleged in Yang's complaint. 
Yang was a store manager at the A&F Men's Store (Men's 
Store) at the Ala Moana Shopping Center in Honolulu. A&F is an 
Ohio corporation registered to do business in the State of 
Hawai'i. On or about March 6 or 7, 2007, a wallet (Wallet) was 
found and turned over to Yang and another manager while they were 
working at the Men's Store. Yang and the other manager found 
$600 in cash (Money) in the Wallet and placed the Wallet and its 
contents in a safe located in the Men's Store. 
After returning to the Men's Store a few days later,
 
Yang checked the Wallet in the safe and discovered that the Money
 
was missing. On March 12, 2007, Yang reported the Money missing
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
 to Defendant-Appellee John Peyton (Peyton), an A&F Loss
Prevention Agent. After conducting interviews with "everyone"
 
about the Wallet and viewing security video footage, on March 16,
 
2007, Peyton escorted Yang out of the Men's Store, "in plain
 
view", to the manager's office at the A&F Women's Store. 
Peyton closed the office door and informed Yang that he
 
wanted her to speak with a second A&F Loss Prevention Agent, 
3
Defendant-Appellee Dustin Ares (Ares).  Ares began interrogating
 
Yang over the phone and asking for personal information. Ares
 then began describing the means and motivations of employees who
 
steal and cheat the company, as well as A&F's loss prevention
 
methods. He asked Yang when was the first time she had taken
 
money out of A&F. Yang was completely taken aback and denied
 
that she had ever taken any money. Despite this denial, Ares and
 
Peyton persisted in their allegations, including that she took
 
the Money out of the Wallet, and pressured her to confess. Yang
 
felt embarrassed, harassed, insulted, and humiliated. At the
 
conclusion of the interrogation, Peyton suspended her "without
 
any factual evidence proving that [Yang] had taken the Money." 
He retrieved her handbag from the Men's Store and escorted her
 
out of the Women's Store in plain view of her co-workers. Yang
 
had been crying and was very embarrassed to be seen in that
 
condition. 
In addition, in conjunction with her claim for wrongful
 
termination, Yang alleges that she was suspended and then
 
terminated for abusing A&F's discount policy, without any factual
 
or legal basis.
 
2/
 Although named as a defendant, Peyton has not been served with the
complaint. 
3/
 Like Peyton, although named as a defendant, Ares has not been
served with the complaint. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. The Proceedings Below
 
On March 22, 2007, Yang filed a claim with the
 
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR) seeking
 
workers' compensation benefits for a stress-related injury
 
arising out of the above-described incident. On October 17,
 
2007, DLIR rendered a decision that Yang was entitled to receive
 
workers' compensation benefits.
 
On May 20, 2008, Yang filed a complaint, which included
 
the following counts: (1) unlawful and/or false imprisonment;
 
(2) harassment; (3) defamation and/or defamation per se; (4)
 
false light invasion of privacy; (5) wrongful termination in
 
violation of public policy; (6) tortious interference with
 
contractual relations; (7) tortious interference with economic or
 
prospective opportunities; (8) civil conspiracy; (9) intentional
 
infliction of emotional distress; and (10) willful and wanton
 
conduct. As averred in the complaint, and as confirmed at the
 
oral argument before this court, all of Yang's claims arise out
 
of the assertion that Peyton and Ares engaged in tortious
 
conduct, while in the course and scope of their employment with
 
A&F, for which they should be held personally and individually
 
liable to Yang, and that A&F should be held liable to Yang based
 
on respondeat superior and/or vicarious liability. Yang prayed
 
for general, special, compensatory, and punitive damages.
 
On June 16, 2008, A&F filed its motion to dismiss 
pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) 
and Hawai' i's Workers' Compensation Law, which is set forth in 
HRS Chapter 386. After opposition and reply memoranda were filed, a hearing was held on July 31, 2008. At the hearing, the 
Circuit Court stated its preliminary analysis, but asked for 
supplemental briefing. After further briefing by both parties, 
another hearing was held on October 28, 2008. The Circuit Court 
denied A&F's motion to dismiss, explaining: 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
All right. The Court's view, [] with all due respect, is
still that I'm constrained by the plain language of the
applicable statutes as I understand it. And as I understand
 it, again, it covers accidents. I don't think the
 intentional acts of the employer count as accidents.
Accidents specifically under the statute do include the
willful act of third persons directed against the employee.
And these third persons can be co-employees. And I agree
with you there's a lot of case law on that. But I don't
 think -- as I said, I don't think any of the cases are on
point as to the situation, the factual situation that's
alleged here. I just don't think a third person is the same
thing as the employer. And the willful acts of third
 persons that are also included in the definition of
accidents are just that. They're the willful acts of third
persons, not the employer.
I'm still troubled by the potential double recovery
issue, as I'm troubled by the implications of what the Court
sees as the plain language of the statute.
I'm going to deny your motion to dismiss for those
 
reasons. But if you want to take it up interlocutory, I'll
let you do it. So -- because I think, you know, obviously I
could be wrong about this. And I can see that, because to
me, it's a very -- it's kind of a strange situation in the
Court's view. The Court's -- as I said, the Court looks at
the -- looks at the plain language as I understand it and it
seems to constrain one ruling, but that ruling seems to go
against certain other principles.
So -- and again, the Court understands that the statement in
the Furukawa case is dicta. We talked about that last time too. 
But there is that statement in Furukawa which says most states
recognize that all or nearly all intentionally tortious acts
committed by the employer against the employee in the course of
employment are excluded from the workers' compensation system. I
 mean, that language is clearly in Furukawa. It's not necessarily
a part of the holding. I understand that. But it's there. And
 that's our Supreme Court that said that.
 
After the Order Denying Dismissal was entered, A&F
 
filed a motion for approval of interlocutory appeal, which was
 
granted pursuant to HRS § 641-1(b) (1993 & Supp. 2010). This
 
timely appeal followed.
 
II.	 
POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
A&F raises the following, as its points of error:
 (1) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that the
 
exclusive remedy provision in HRS § 386-5 did not bar Yang's suit
 for alleged injuries suffered because of her employment, which
 
were caused by the alleged willful acts of her co-employees
 
acting in the course and scope of their employment;
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that 
Furukawa v. Honolulu Zoological Soc'y, 85 Hawai' i 7, 936 P.2d 643 
(1997), created an exception to the exclusive remedy provision 
under HRS § 386-5 for all intentional torts; 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that an
 
intentional tort committed by a co-employee acting in the course
 
and scope of his or her employment is not an "accident," as
 
defined in the HRS § 386-3 because the employer is vicariously
 
liable for the intentional acts of its employees;
 
(4) The Circuit Court erred in concluding that a co­
employee is not a "third person" as used in HRS § 386-3(a) and, 
therefore, the "willful acts" of the co-employee are not covered 
by Hawai' i's Workers' Compensation Law; and 
(5) The Circuit Court erred in failing to dismiss
 
Yang's complaint against A&F where she seeks a double recovery,
 
i.e., damages in a lawsuit against her employer as well as
 
workers' compensation benefits, for the same injury allegedly
 
suffered in the course of her employment. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews a trial court's ruling on 
an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss de novo. AFL Hotel & 
Rest. Workers Health & Welfare Trust Fund v. Bosque, 110 Hawai' i 
318, 321, 132 P.3d 1229, 1232 (2006). 
Questions of law are reviewed upon appeal under the 
right/wrong standard of review. Maile Sky Court Co. v. City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu, 85 Hawai' i 36, 39, 936 P.2d 672, 675 (1997) 
(citation omitted). "The standard of review for statutory construction is well-established. The interpretation of a 
statute is a question of law which this court reviews de novo. 
Where the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous, our 
only duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." 
Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Dennison, 108 Hawai' i 380, 384, 120 
P.3d 1115, 1119 (2005) (citation and quotation marks omitted). 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Thus, we apply the right or wrong standard to the 
Circuit Court's determination that Yang's claims against A&F are 
not barred by the exclusivity provision in the Hawai' i Workers' 
Compensation Law. IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. The Workers' Compensation Statute
 
The central issue in this case is whether Yang's claims 
against A&F are statutorily barred because Yang's alleged injuries arose out of her employment with A&F. The starting 
point in statutory construction is to determine the legislative 
intent from the language of the statute itself, reading it in the 
context of the entire statute and consistent with its purpose. 
Lingle v. Haw. Gov't Emps. Ass'n Local 152, 107 Hawai' i 178, 183, 
111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005). "Laws in pari materia, or upon the 
same subject matter, shall be construed with reference to each 
other. What is clear in one statute may be called upon in aid to 
explain what is doubtful in another." Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 
97 Hawai' i 376, 393, 38 P.3d 95, 112 (2001) (citation omitted); 
HRS § 1-16 (2009). 
The exclusive remedy provision of the Hawai' i Workers' 
Compensation Law, HRS § 386-5 (1993), provides: 
Exclusiveness of right to compensation; exception.
  
The rights and remedies herein granted to an employee or the
employee's dependents on account of a work injury suffered
by the employee shall exclude all other liability of the
employer to the employee, the employee's legal
representative, spouse, dependents, next of kin, or anyone
else entitled to recover damages from the employer, at
common law or otherwise, on account of the injury, except
for sexual harassment or sexual assault and infliction of
 emotional distress or invasion of privacy related thereto,
in which case a civil action may also be brought.
 
The sweeping scope of this provision is plain. Under
 
the workers' compensation statute, the workers' compensation
 
benefits provided to an employee on account of a work injury
 
"shall exclude all other liability of the employer to the
 
employee . . ." on account of that injury. Specific exceptions
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were later carved out by the Legislature: sexual harassment or 
sexual assault – not harassment or assault in general; infliction 
of emotional distress related to sexual assault or sexual 
harassment – not just any infliction of emotional distress; 
invasion of privacy related to sexual assault or sexual 
harassment – not invasion of privacy generally. See Nelson, 97 
Hawai'i at 394-95, 38 P.3d at 113-14, and Furukawa 85 Hawai' i at 
18, 936 P.2d at 654 (both discussing that the purpose of the 1992 amendments to exclusivity provision was to enable employees to 
file suits based on sexual harassment or sexual assault arising 
out of and in the course of employment). 
HRS § 386-1 (1993) defines "work injury" as a "personal
 
injury suffered under the conditions specified in section 386-3." 
HRS § 386-3(a) (Supp. 2011) describes the nature of the injuries
 
that are compensable:
 
Injuries covered. (a) If an employee suffers personal
injury either by accident arising out of and in the course
of the employment or by disease proximately caused by or
resulting from the nature of the employment, the employee's
employer or the special compensation fund shall pay
compensation to the employee or the employee's dependents as
provided in this chapter.
 
Accident arising out of and in the course of the employment
includes the wilful act of a third person directed against an
employee because of the employee's employment.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
HRS § 386-8, which covers the liability of a third
 
person for a compensable work injury, provides, in relevant part:
 
Liability of third person. When a work injury for
which compensation is payable under this chapter has been
sustained under circumstances creating in some person other
than the employer or another employee of the employer acting
in the course of his employment a legal liability to pay
damages on account thereof, the injured employee or his
dependents . . . may claim compensation under this chapter
and recover damages from such third person.
 
. . . .
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Another employee of the same employer shall not be
relieved of his liability as a third party, if the personal
injury is caused by his wilful and wanton misconduct.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
B. Hawai'i Workers' Compensation Jurisprudence 
The Hawai' i Workers' Compensation Law has a long 
history demonstrating the consistent application of the statute's 
exclusive remedy provision, with great judicial deference to 
Legislature's perview, and resulting certainty for workers and 
employers. The following Hawai' i Supreme Court cases do not 
constitute an exhaustive survey of cases, but exemplify the treatment of the exclusivity provision and inform our views on 
the issue presented in this case. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has demonstrated great 
reluctance to narrow the scope of the exclusivity provision, 
recognizing the pros and cons of doing so, but maintaining its 
deference to the Legislature's domain. For example, in Kamali v. 
Hawaiian Elec. Co., 54 Haw. 153, 504 P.2d 861 (1972), a defendant 
and third-party plaintiff sought contribution from the employer 
of an injured worker, alleging that the employer was a joint 
tortfeasor. Noting that most jurisdictions with similar 
exclusivity provisions have held that such claims are barred, the 
supreme court explained: 
This position is compelling, particularly in light of
a clear expression of legislative intent to absolve the
employer of all liability save that imposed by statute. The
 purpose of such legislation is to achieve certainty ­certainty that an employee will be compensated for all work
injuries regardless of his negligence or fault; and
certainty with regard to the amount for which the employer
shall be liable. The effect is a compromise where the chance
that an employee may not recover at all and the chance that
an employer will be charged with an excessive judgment are
eliminated.
 
The position of the majority of jurisdictions is that
to allow contribution in the face of the exclusive liability
provision of the Workmen's Compensation Law would be to
strip the employer of the very protections intended by the
statute.
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, a minority of jurisdictions have adopted a
theory of limited contribution against an employer which
does not subvert the policy of the Workmen's Compensation
Law. Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation, § 76.22, p.
238 (1970). Basic to this position is the proposition that
it is unfair for one joint tortfeasor to bear the entire
loss merely because the other joint tortfeasor is an
employer. Since full contribution would obviously render an
employer's protection illusory, limited contribution is
allowed up to the amount for which the employer would have
been liable under the Workmen's Compensation Law.
 
The policy underlying the Workmen's Compensation Law
and the principles of contribution among joint tortfeasors
were reconciled in Newport Air Park, Inc. v. United States,
293 F.Supp. 809 (D.R.I. 1968), where the court adopted the
minority position of limited contribution and stated at 815:
 
(1) 	it preserves the economics of the compensation
system;
 
(2) 	it effectuates the policy of contribution which
the passage of the uniform law (of contribution)
suggests;
 
(3) 	it harmonizes the compensation law with the law
of contribution and
 
(4) 	it protects the non-employer tortfeasor from the
possible gross inequity of carrying the whole
liability for wrongs caused in perhaps major
part by the employer tortfeasor.
 
However, as equitable as the minority position is, HRS
§ 386-5 clearly and unequivocally precludes all contribution
by a third party against an employer on the theory that the
employer was a joint tortfeasor. The adoption of any theory
allowing contribution is a situation for legislative
consideration.
 
Id. at 157-59, 504 P.2d at 864-65 (emphasis added).
 
Thus, fully recognizing the policy considerations in 
favor of a narrower view, the Hawai' i Supreme Court grounded its 
decision in the overarching balance struck by the Legislature in 
creating the workers' compensation system and the clear directive 
that the liability of the employer was intended to be its only 
liability, direct or indirect, for its workers' injury, absent a 
further legislative action. 
In Estate of Coates v. Pacific Eng'g, 71 Haw. 358, 791 
P.2d 1257 (1990), the Hawai' i Supreme Court took a similarly 
hands-off approach when asked to limit the exclusivity bar to 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligence actions only, and to otherwise chip away at the
 
exclusive remedy's scope. In Estate of Coates, the deceased
 
employee's survivors recognized that the exclusivity provision of
 
the Workers' Compensation Law barred a negligence action against
 
the employer, but sought, inter alia, to recover under a strict
 
liability theory. Id. at 360, 791 P.2d at 1259. Acknowledging
 
that a handful of jurisdictions have allowed such suits under a
 
"dual capacity doctrine," the supreme court instead embraced the
 
following "strong arguments" against its adoption:
 
Whatever frail vitality the dual capacity doctrine has
in other jurisdictions, we do not think that it warrants
adoption here. To do so might undermine extensively the
policy sought to be achieved by the workmen's compensation
act. There are endlessly imaginable situations in which an
employer might owe duties to the general public, or to
non-employees, the breach of which would be asserted to
avoid the exclusive liability provision in our statute. It
would be an enormous, and perhaps illusory, task to draw a
principled line of distinction between those situations in
which the employee could sue and those in which he could
not. The exclusive liability provision would, in any event,
lose much of its effectiveness, and the workmen's
compensation system as a whole might be destabilized.
 
The Hawaii State Legislature, by enacting the
exclusivity provision, intended that our Workers'
Compensation system be the exclusive remedy for work-related
injuries and deaths.
 
Authorities which support the doctrine do so on the
basis of equity; that in order to avoid the purported harsh
effects of the Workers' Compensation Act, the doctrine would
allow the claimants to sue. Part of Appellants' argument is
premised on the fact that if they are not allowed to sue on
the theory of product liability, they will be unjustly
denied their day in court. They also argue that the rule of
exclusivity should yield to contemporary developments in the
area of product liability law.
 
While we sympathize with Appellants, we are
unpersuaded by their argument.
 
In view of the unequivocal expressed language of the
statute 'to exclude all the liability of the employer,' to
invoke equity to circumvent the clear intent of the
legislature would require an unprincipled application of the
law by this court. We have in the past rejected other
challenges to the exclusivity of the Workers' Compensation
Act, and we see no reason to change our position. 
Costa
 
Minors v. Flintkote, Co., 42 Haw. 518 (1958). There are
 
sound social and economic policy reasons which support the
exclusivity of the Workers' Compensation Act, and it remains
 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the legislature to reexamine those reasons in light of
contemporary circumstances and to amend the Act if it
chooses to do so.
 
Id. at 362-63, 791 P.2d 1259-60 (some citations omitted; emphasis
 
added).
 
In Zemis v. SCI Contractors, Inc., 80 Hawai' i 442, 911 
P.2d 77 (1996), an employee was physically assaulted and 
seriously injured by a fellow employee at their place of 
employment during the work day. Id. at 444, 911 P.2d at 79. The 
supreme court held that the claimant's injuries were not compensable under the workers' compensation statute because the 
assault was related to an automobile accident involving the 
claimant and his co-employee's wife and did not arise out of and 
in the course of employment. Id. The court began its discussion 
with the well-settled principle that: 
For an injury to be compensable under a workers'
compensation statute, there must be a requisite nexus
between the employment and the injury. The nexus requirement is articulated in Hawai' i, as in the majority of
jurisdictions, on the basis that, to be compensable, aninjury must arise out of and in the course of employment. 
Id. at 445, 911 P.3d at 80 (citations and brackets omitted).
 
The supreme court analyzed the circumstances under
 
which a willful act, in that case an assault, is covered by the
 
workers' compensation statute:
 
Under HRS § 386-3, where an employee is injured by the
wilful act of a third person, a causal connection between
the employment and the resulting injury may be found if the
wilful act of the third person was directed against the
employee because of the employee's employment. See 1 A.
 
Larson, The Law of Workmen's Compensation § 11.00, at 3-178
(1995) ('Assaults arise out of the employment either if the
risk of assault is increased because of the nature or
 setting of the work, or if the reason for the assault was a
quarrel having its origin in the work. . . .').
 
Id. at 446, 911 P.2d at 81 (internal quotation marks, brackets, 
& some parenthetical material omitted).
 
After analyzing the facts before the court, the supreme
 
court repeated and further explained the circumstances under
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which an intentional act, such as an assault, is covered by the
 
Workers' Compensation Law:
 
[Un]der HRS § 386-3, where an employee is intentionally
assaulted on the job site by a third person, the resulting
injury is not causally connected to the employment unless
the assault itself was directed against the employee because
of the employee's employment. A personally motivated
assault of an employee by a third person may be considered
as having occurred 'because of the employee's employment,'
if the animosity or dispute which culminated in the assault
was 'exacerbated by the employment.' 
Id. at 447, 911 P.2d at 82 (citation omitted). 
In Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 919 P.2d 263 
(1996), the Hawai' i Supreme Court dealt with the scope and 
requirements of the willful and wanton misconduct exception to 
co-employee immunity under the Workers' Compensation Law. In 
doing so, the supreme court drew a sharp distinction between the 
broad immunity granted to employers by HRS § 386-5, and the more 
limited immunity granted to co-employees by HRS § 386-8, which 
permits civil suits against co-employees who have caused a 
personal injury by willful and wanton misconduct. Id. at 15, 
919 P.2d at 277. The supreme court firmly rejected the argument that a supervisory employee should be treated as an "employer" 
for the purpose of determining whether he or she could be sued 
for willful and wanton misconduct. Id. 
Finally, in Furukawa, an employee filed an employment 
discrimination suit against his employer, alleging violation of 
HRS Chapter 378, the Hawai' i statute making it unlawful, inter 
alia, for an employer to discriminate based on race and/or 
gender. Furukawa, 85 Hawai' i at 9, 936 P.2d at 645. The Hawai' i 
Supreme Court held that the circuit court erred in holding that 
the exclusivity provision in HRS § 386-5 barred Furukawa from 
making a claim for damages against his employer under either HRS 
§ 368-17 (which allows legal remedies, including damages, to be 
awarded for discriminatory practices) or HRS § 378-5 (the 
remedies provision in Chapter 378). Id. at 16-19, 936 P.2d at 
652-55. The holding of the supreme court was clearly directed at 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
upholding the power of the Civil Rights Commission and the courts
 
to award compensatory damages pursuant to the "remedial statutes
 
designed to enforce civil rights protections and remedy the
 
effects of discrimination[.]" Id. at 18-19, 936 P.2d at 654-55
 
(citations omitted). In the course of its discussion of the
 parties' argument, the supreme court stated:
 
We agree with the Society that the workers'
compensation scheme serves to bar a civil action for
physical and emotional damages resulting from work-related
injuries and accidents. However, Furukawa's claims are not
based on any such accident, but rather on the alleged
intentional conduct of members of the Society. Cf. Wharton
 
v. Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 80 Hawai' i 120, 123 n. 2, 906
P.2d 127, 130 n. 2 (1995) (affirming denial of workerscompensation stress claim because injury arose out ofworker's suspension for misconduct, but noting that '[i]f anemployer's actions constitute unlawful discrimination ...,an injured employee may invoke rights in other forums. See,
e.g., HRS §§ 378-2 and 378-32.'). Most states recognize that'all or virtually all intentionally tortious acts committedby an employer against an employee in the course ofemployment are excluded from the workers' compensationsystem.' Fermino v. Fedco, Inc., 7 Cal.4th 701, 30 Cal.Rptr.2d 18, 21, 872 P.2d 559, 562 (1994); see also Van Bienev. ERA Helicopters, Inc., 779 P.2d 315, 318 (Alaska 1989);
Medina v. Herrera, 927 S.W.2d 597, 600 (Tex. 1996).
 
Id. at 18, 936 P.3d at 654.
 
The mandate issued by the supreme court, however, was
 
to give full effect to Hawai' i's civil rights statutes, which 
provide remedies that are not subject to the workers'
 
compensation bar:
 
Compensatory and punitive damages are generally
available in employment discrimination cases, as remedies
from a court or an agency, or both. . . . Furukawa properly
filed his discrimination complaint with the commission[.]
 
. . . The law is explicit that 'a workers' compensation
claim or remedy does not bar relief on claims filed with the
commission.'
  HRS § 368-17(b). [ 4
]
4/
 HRS § 368-17(b), which concerns the remedies that may be ordered
by the Civil Rights Commission or a court, provides:
 
(b) Section 386-5 notwithstanding, a workers'
compensation claim or remedy does not bar relief on claims
filed with the commission.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The [Civil Rights] Commission points out that the 1992
amendment [to the Workers' Compensation Law] was responding
to concerns 'that victims of sexual harassment were often so
 traumatized by the occurrence' that they might fail to file
with the commission within 180 days. The legislature at the
same time added HRS § 378-3(10), which excepts victims of
sexual harassment and sexual assault from having to file
discrimination complaints with the commission under HRS §
378-4. Because the exemption in HRS § 368-17(b) would no
longer apply to these cases, as no complaint would have been
filed with the commission, the legislature amended HRS §
386-5 to make clear that such claims were not barred by the
workers' compensation law. It would indeed be an awkward
 result to interpret the amendment to HRS § 386-5 to have
effected a repeal of the provision it sought to implement.
 
Furthermore, when the legislature passed the 1992
amendment to the workers' compensation exclusivity
exemption, it did not repeal HRS § 368-17(b). 
To rule that
 
the 1992 amendment effectively bars compensatory and
punitive damages for all discrimination complaints filed
with the commission would serve implicitly to repeal that
section. Repeals by implication are disfavored.
International Savings & Loan, Ltd. v. Wiig, 82 Hawai' i 197,
200, 921 P.2d 117, 120 (1996).
 
Id. at 18-19, 936 P.2d at 654-55 (some citations omitted;
 
emphasis added).
 
C. Application of the Exclusivity Provision
 The plain language of HRS § 386-5, and the harmonious 
reading of the Workers' Compensation Law as a whole, mandates the conclusion that the workers' compensation remedies granted to 
Yang exclude all other liabilities of A&F to Yang on account of 
the personal injuries she allegedly suffered arising out of and 
in the course of her employment. As the supreme court discussed 
in Iddings, HRS § 386-8 clearly limits the immunity provided to a 
co-employee who has caused an injury by willful and wanton 
misconduct, which includes intentional and reckless acts. 
Iddings, 82 Hawai' i at 12, 919 P.2d at 274.
5 Neither HRS § 386­
5/
 The supreme court held, inter alia, that:
 
the term 'wilful and wanton misconduct,' as used in HRS
§ 386-8, includes conduct that is either: (1) motivated by
an actual intent to cause injury; or (2) committed in
circumstances indicating that the injuring employee (a) has
knowledge of the peril to be apprehended, (b) has knowledge
that the injury is a probable, as opposed to a possible,
(continued...)
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 nor HRS § 386-8 include any such limitation for the immunity
 
provided to the employer. Nor do these provisions allow, as Yang
 
seeks to pursue, suit against the employer for the alleged
 
willful and wanton misconduct of a complainant's fellow employee. 
In amending HRS § 386-5 in 1992, the Legislature
 
created an exception for sexual harassment, which would have been
 
wholly unnecessary if the broader tort of harassment was excluded
 
because it falls within the category of intentional torts. The
 
same is true of the exceptions created for infliction of
 
emotional distress and invasion of privacy related to sexual
 
harassment or sexual assault. The adoption of Yang's argument
 
would render the entire 1992 amendment to be superfluous and
 
would erase the distinction drawn by the Legislature.
 
For the last fifty years (and more), the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has steadfastly deferred to the Legislature 
concerning any limitations to the exclusivity of the workers' 
compensation remedy against employers, refusing to undermine the 
clarity and consistency of the carefully crafted balance of 
Hawai'i's workers' compensation scheme. The only arguable 
exception has been when the Legislature itself provided additional statutory remedies for employment discrimination, as 
discussed in Furukawa. The clear implication of Zemis, which 
disallowed workers' compensation benefits for injuries arising 
from an intentional act of assault because it did not occur 
"because of the employee's employment," is that an intentional 
act of assault that does occur "because of the employee's 
employment" does fall within the benefits, and related 
limitations, of the Workers' Compensation Law. 
5/(...continued)
result of the danger, and (c) consciously fails to avoid the
peril.
 
Iddings, 82 Hawai' i at 12, 919 P.2d at 273. 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this light, we cannot read Furukawa's recognition of 
decisions in other states as creating an exception to the 
exclusivity provision; that language did not expressly adopt the 
position of the other states, nor was it essential to the holding 
in that case. Indeed, a brief examination of the three cases 
referenced by the supreme court in Furukawa demonstrates the 
folly of placing undue emphasis on the court's comment. See 
Furukawa, 85 Hawai' i at 18, 936 P.2d at 654. 
The Alaska case cited in Furukawa, Van Biene v. ERA
 
Helicopters, Inc., 779 P.2d 315 (Alaska 1989), reveals, inter
 
alia, that the Alaska workers' compensation statute provides an
 
identical immunity to employers and fellow employees, and does
 
not include the type of statutory distinctions made in HRS § 386­
8, which allows suit against co-employees for their willful and
 
wanton misconduct. Id. at 318. In the absence of such
 
legislative distinctions, the Alaska courts have allowed suits to
 be brought against both, if a claimant can meet the "stiff
 
burden" to demonstrate a genuine "intent to harm", not merely a
 
claim that can be construed as an intentional tort. Id. at 319.
 
The Texas case cited in Furukawa, Medina v. Herrera,
 
927 S.W.2d 597 (Tex. 1996), in fact held that "petitioner's claim
 
against his employer is barred as a matter of law by his election
 
of the workers' compensation remedy, but his claim against his
 
co-worker is not barred." Id. at 598-99. While the decision
 
rested on Texas jurisprudence stating that an employee's workers'
 compensation claim is mutually exclusive with an intentional tort
 
remedy, the court also noted that Texas's workers' compensation
 
statute "covers employees for intentional assaults committed by
 
co-workers if the dispute underlying the assault is employment
 
related." Id. at 600, 602 (citations omitted). The court's
 
discussion evidenced a willingness by the Texas courts to allow
 intentional tort claims against employers, in limited instances
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and as an alternative to the workers' compensation remedy, but
 
upheld the dismissal of the employee's suit. Id. at 600-02.
 
The California case cited in Furukawa, Fermino v.
 
Fedco, Inc., 30 Cal. Rptr.2d 18 (Cal. 1994), reversed the
 
dismissal of the employee's intentional tort claim, which had
 
been dismissed as barred by the exclusivity provision of
 
California's workers' compensation statute. Id. at 20. A
 
careful reading of that case reveals that (what the California
 Supreme Court described as) the "complicated" place of
 
intentional torts in the workers' compensation system is
 
complicated because of the complex overlay of judicial exceptions
 
and distinctions created in California case law. The California
 
court did not, however, create a wholesale exception for all
 
intentional tort claims or even all allegations of false
 
imprisonment, the tort at issue in that case. Id. at 30. The
 
court stated: "What we hold today, rather is that those classes
 of intentional employer crimes against the employee's person by
 
means of violence and coercion [] violate the employee's
 
reasonable expectations and transgress the limits of the
 
[workers'] compensation bargain." Id. at 30 n.7.
 
As discussed above, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
steadfastly declined to impose a complicated overlay on the 
legislative structure of Hawai' i's Workers' Compensation Law, 
even when it recognized sound arguments for doing so. The Hawai'i Legislature has created exceptions to the exclusivity 
provision in HRS § 386-5 for specific intentional acts, but not for others. As the Hawai' i Supreme Court opined in Estate of 
Coates, and other decisions, "[t]here are sound social and economic policy reasons which support the exclusivity of the 
Workers' Compensation Act, and it remains for the legislature to 
reexamine those reasons in light of contemporary circumstances 
and to amend the Act if it chooses to do so." 71 Haw. at 363, 
791 P.2d at 1260. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Accordingly, we conclude: (1) the exclusivity
 
provision in HRS § 386-5 bars Yang's suit against A&F for alleged
 
injuries suffered because of her employment, which were caused by
 
the alleged willful acts of her co-employees acting in the course
 
and scope of their employment; (2) Furukawa does not create an
 
exception to the exclusive remedy provision under HRS § 386-5 for
 
all intentional torts; (3) an intentional tort committed by a co­
employee acting in the course and scope of his or her employment
 
may be considered an "accident," as defined in the HRS § 386-3,
 
if the intentional act was directed against the employee because
 
of the employee's employment; and (4) a co-employee may be
 
considered a "third person" as used in HRS § 386-3(a).
 
This conclusion, however, does not dispose of all of 
the claims in Yang's complaint. We cannot conclude, based on the 
record and the arguments made, that Yang's claim for wrongful 
termination in violation of public policy, as alleged in Count 5 
of her complaint, seeks redress for an injury arising out of and 
in the course of Yang's employment with A&F. See Parnar v. 
American Hotels, Inc., 65 Haw. 370, 652 P.2d 625 (1982) (holding that employer may be held liable in tort where the discharge of 
an at-will employee violates a clear mandate of public policy). 
We express no opinion as to the merits of this claim or whether 
this claim might be subject to dismissal, after further 
proceedings, on grounds not argued to the Circuit Court or this 
court. However, it does not appear "beyond doubt" that Yang can 
prove "no set of facts in support of her claim" for wrongful 
termination that would entitle her to relief. See Wong v. 
Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006). 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court's May 20,
 
2008 Order Denying Dismissal is affirmed in part, with respect to
 
Yang's claim for wrongful termination in violation of public
 
policy, and vacated with respect to Yang's other claims against
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A&F. This case is remanded for further proceedings consistent
 
with this Opinion
 
Phillip A. Li
(Li & Tsukazaki, LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant
(Matt A. Tsukazaki, with
him on the briefs)
 
Peter C. Hsieh
 
for Plaintiff-Appellee
on the brief
 
20
 