NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29430
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
RAQUEL N.K. FERNANDEZ, Appellant-Appellant, v. HAWAIIAN
HOMES COMMISSION; JOBIE MASAGATANI, in her
capacity as chairperson of the Hawaiian Homes
Commission and the Director of the Department of
Hawaiiian Home Lands;
1
 IMAIKALANI P. AIU, PERRY
ARTATES, LEIMANA K. DAMATE, JEREMY K. HOPKINS,
MICHAEL P. KAHIKINA, IAN LEE LOY, HENRY K.
TANCAYO, and RENWICK V.I. TASSILL, in their
capacities as members of the Hawaiian Homes
Commission;
2
 and the DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME
LANDS, Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-1780)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Appellant Raquel N.K. Fernandez (Fernandez) filed this
 
secondary appeal from the October 8, 2008 judgment of the Circuit
 
1
 When the appeal to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
court) was filed on October 13, 2006, Micah A. Kane was the Chairperson of the
Hawaiian Homes Commission (the Commission) and the Director of the Departmentof Hawaiian Home Lands (DHHL). The current Chairperson and Director is JobieMasagatani who began her term on May 16, 2012. Pursuant to Hawaif i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1), Jobie Masagatani has beensubstituted as a party in place of Micah A. Kane. 
2
 When the appeal to the circuit court was filed on October 13,
2006, Billie Baclig, Donald S.M. Chang, Stuart Hanchett, Malia Kamaka, Francis
Lum, Mahina Martin, Trish Morikawa, and Milton Pa were members of the
Commission. The current members of the Commission are Imaikalani P. Aiu,
Perry Artates, Leimana K. Damate, Jeremy K. Hopkins, Michael P. Kahikina, Ian
Lee Loy, Henry K. Tancayo, and Renwick V.I. Tassill, and pursuant to HRAP Rule
43(c)(1) are substituted as named parties in this case.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3
Court of the First Circuit  affirming the September 13, 2006
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order of the
 
the Commission, which cancelled DHHL Residential Lease No. 3443
 
(the Lease) on the basis of a loan default. Although Fernandez's
 
siblings and co-successors to the Lease, Sonia V. Dudoit (Sonia)
 
and Juanito W. Dudoit (Juanito), were named as respondents in
 
hearings before the Commission, they did not appeal from the
 
Commission's decision and are not parties to this appeal.
 
Fernandez raises two points on appeal: 
(1) that the
 
circuit court erred in finding that the Commission did not abuse
 
its discretion by cancelling Fernandez's lease; and (2) that the
 
circuit court erred by finding that the Commission and DHHL did
 
not violate their trust obligations and duties by cancelling
 
Fernandez's lease.
 
The Commission acted within its statutory authority
 
under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920 (HHCA) when it
 
cancelled the Lease. HHCA § 216 (2009) authorizes DHHL to
 
"enforce any lien by declaring the borrower's interest in the
 
property subject to the lien to be forfeited, any lease held by
 
the borrower canceled, and . . . order such leasehold premises
 
vacated[.]" By assignment of a loan and mortgage from
 
Countrywide in 2002, DHHL had a lien on the property. Pursuant
 
to HHCA § 209(a) (2009) and § 215(1) and (3), Fernandez, Juanito
 
and Sonia assumed their mother's outstanding loan as successors
 
to the Lease upon her death. A condition of every loan made by
 
DHHL states that the loan "shall be repaid in periodic
 
installments, such installments to be monthly, quarterly,
 
semiannual, or annual as may be determined by the department in
 
each case." See HHCA § 215(2) (2009). The hearing officer and
 
Commission found, and Fernandez does not dispute, that loan was
 more than $98,000 in arrears and "the Siblings were unable and/or
 
unwilling to satisfy the loan delinquency or meet the monthly
 
3
 The Honorable Eden Elizabeth Hifo presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
loan obligation." Given that the loan was in default, DHHL had
 
the authority to enforce it.
 
Central to the Commission's decision and the decision 
of the circuit court was the fact that the three co-successors to 
the Lease could not agree how to share or divide the rights to 
the property. Despite an attempt by the Commission to facilitate 
an agreement among the siblings, apparently none was reached. 
Fernandez does not challenge the circuit court's findings that 
she and her siblings "failed to achieve a compromise which would 
satisfy their debt." Nor does Fernandez dispute the dispositive 
fact in this case -- that Juanito was unwilling to pay on the 
debt without being allowed access or without assuming the Lease 
in his name alone. "Findings of fact . . . that are not 
challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court." Okada 
Trucking Co., Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawaif i 450, 458, 
40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). The amount owing on the loan, disputed 
only by Fernandez, is irrelevant to Juanito's position. As 
explained in the successorship designation signed by their 
mother, as joint tenants, the siblings "are equally entitled to 
an undivided interest in a specific piece of real property." 
Without a resolution of the joint tenant's dispute, DHHL acted 
within its discretion in cancelling the Lease. 
In her second point on appeal, Fernandez tries to
 
recast her situation as one in which DHHL breached its fiduciary
 
duty to keep her on Hawaiian Home Lands. The Commission is
 
charged with the obligation to administer the program solely in
 
the interests of the beneficiaries and to use reasonable skill
 
and care to make the property under its care productive, that is
 
to say, "to act as an ordinary and prudent person would in
 
dealing with his own property." Ahuna v. Dept. of Hawaiian Home
 
Lands, 64 Haw. 327, 340, 640 P.2d 1161, 1169 (1982). However,
 Fernandez also admits that DHHL's fiduciary duties are controlled
 
by the trust document, the HHCA. Under the HHCA, the actions
 
that Fernandez alleges DHHL failed to take are discretionary, a
 
conclusion which Fernandez concedes. Nevertheless, Fernandez
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that DHHL and the Commission breached their fiduciary
 
duties when they (1) did not collect debt from the original co­
borrowers, her mother and stepfather; (2) did not assess her
 
ability to pay and reduce the amount owing on the loan
 
accordingly; (3) charged 8.5 percent interest, rather the minimum
 
2.5 percent allowed by statute; and (4) did not adequately inform
 
her about the loan.
 
First, DHHL was not required by statute to pursue the 
original borrowers for the delinquency. Section 216 grants DHHL
 
the discretion to accelerate payments of any loan upon
 
delinquency. See HHCA § 216(b) ("the department may declare all
 
principal and interest of the loan immediately due and payable")
 (emphasis added). From the record, it appears that DHHL first
 
learned of the delinquency in December 2000. Soon after, DHHL
 
warned Fernandez's mother, the leaseholder, that the delinquency
 
needed to be addressed or she faced cancellation of the Lease. 
Fernandez's mother and stepfather, two months later, filed for
 
bankruptcy. DHHL does not dispute that it did not pursue
 
Fernandez's mother for payments after the bankruptcy proceedings
 
ended, but offers no reason why it did not. However, in light of
 
her circumstances--eighty years old, bankrupt, and living on
 
Social Security payments--DHHL's decision not to pursue her for
 
the delinquency was not unreasonable.
 
The terms and conditions of the mortgage state that the
 
responsibility for repayment extends to the borrowers' successors
 
and that the borrowers' liability is joint and several. 
Inasmuch as the Commission and the circuit court found that one
 
successor, Juanito, could pay the delinquency if he wished, the
 
department had no need to pursue the stepfather. Although his
 
liability on the debt was not extinguished by his stepchildren's
 
succession to the Lease, as a practical matter DHHL's ultimate
 
recourse--cancelling the Lease and evicting the tenants–-has no
 
effect on him, because he did not live on the property and, as he
 
is not Hawaiian, could never be a leaseholder.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second, DHHL was not violating its trust duties when it
 
pursued payment by the successors at the interest rate set in the
 
original loan. Although HCCA § 215(3) allows DHHL, at its
 
discretion, to write off or delay interest payments on a loan
 
once it has performed an appraisal, the Act does not require DHHL
 
to evaluate the financial position of each co-successor
 
individually before it refuses to write-off the debt. Here, at
 
least one successor was found to be able to meet the loan
 
obligations as demanded by DHHL. Accordingly, DHHL did not
 
violate the HHCA by not writing off debt based on another
 
successor's professed inability to pay.
 
4
Furthermore, HHCA § 215(2)  allows for interest rates
higher than two and one-half percent on loans not made from the
 
Hawaiian home loan fund, i.e., loans assigned to DHHL. Given
 
that Juanito admitted to being able to assume the debt, even at
 
the 8.5 percent interest, DHHL did not violate the terms of its
 
trust by failing to reduce those interest rates.
 
Lastly, Fernandez's argument that DHHL and the
 
Commission failed to adequately inform her about the mortgage
 
debt attached to the Lease is not supported by the record. 
Although the circuit court negated the hearing officer's finding
 
that DHHL had mailed a letter to the successors regarding the
 
amount outstanding on the loan, the Commission found that a DHHL
 
staff member met with the siblings shortly after Dudoit's death
 
and informed them of their successorship to the Lease and the
 
4 HHCA § 215(2)(2009) states:
 
All unpaid balances of principal shall bear interest at the
rate of two and one-half per cent a year for loans made
directly from the Hawaiian home loan fund, or at the rate of
two and one-half per cent or higher as established by law
for other loans, payable periodically or upon demand by the
department, as the department may determine. The payment of
any installment due shall be postponed in whole or in part
by the department for such reasons as it deems good and
sufficient and until such later date as it deems advisable. 
Such postponed payments shall continue to bear interest on
the unpaid principal at the rate established for the loan.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
debt associated with it. Fernandez's own testimony indicates
 
that a DHHL employee attempted to notify her of the amount due
 
and that she contacted a DHHL office and was told that the
 
monthly payment owing on the loan was $800. Fernandez does not
 
dispute the adequacy of the notice of contested case hearing,
 
which provided a statement of the delinquent amount, principal
 
balance, and interest owing on the account. Although Fernandez
 
argues on appeal that DHHL and the Commission lead her "to
 
believe that her one hundred dollar monthly payments were
 
sufficient to remedy a debt[,]" neither Fernandez's testimony
 
before the Commission nor the record supports a conclusion that
 
DHHL or its agents had made such an agreement.
 
Even assuming that the DHHL and Commission provided
 
Fernandez with inadequate information on the amount of the loan
 
obligation between 2002 and 2006, any error would be harmless
 
based on the unchallenged findings that a co-successor, who does
 
not allege inadequate notice or dispute the amount in default on
 
the loan, refused to surrender his claim to the Lease, to which
 
he is equally entitled. The Commission did not violate its trust
 
responsibilities in cancelling the Lease.
 
VI. Conclusion
 
The October 8, 2008 judgment of the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, May 31, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Anthony F. Quan, Jr. and
Alan T. Murakami,Native Hawaiian Legal Corp.
for Appellant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Diane K. Taira,
Clayton Lee Crowell, and
Lisa C. Oshiro,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Appellees-Appellees.
 
6
 