NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29792
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JASON KIESE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 09-1-1136)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jason Kiese (Kiese) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on April 1, 2009 in
 
the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court).1 The
 
family court found Kiese guilty of Harassment, in violation of

 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2008).
 
On appeal, Kiese contends:

 
(1) The family court erred when it found Minor 
competent to testify pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 603 and 603.1 and, by so finding, violated Kiese's rights 
to due process and fair trial under the Fifth, Sixth, and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution. 
(2) The State of Hawai 'i (State) failed to adduce 
sufficient evidence to sustain Kiese's conviction. In connection 
1
 Per diem Family Court Judge Wilson M.N. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
therewith, Kiese contends that in the family court's "Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment of Conviction" (FOF/COL/
 
Judgment), Findings of Fact (FOFs) 1, 4, 13, and 16 are erroneous
 
and Conclusion of Law (COL) 5 is wrong.
 
(3) Kiese's right to a fair trial was violated by the
 
misconduct of the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (Prosecutor).
 
(4) The family court failed to exercise reasonable
 
control over the presentation of evidence. 
(5) The family court erred as a matter of law in
 
denying Kiese's request to stay the sentence pending appeal.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On February 11, 2009, the State filed a complaint,
 
charging Kiese with Harassment, in violation of HRS § 711­
1106(1)(a). After a bench trial, the family court found Kiese
 
guilty of Harassment and sentenced him to six months of probation
 
and ordered him to attend parenting classes and pay court fees
 
and fines.
 
On April 28, 2009, Kiese timely filed a notice of
 
appeal from the April 1, 2009 judgment.
 
On June 30, 2009, the family court filed its FOF/COL/
 
Judgment.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Competency of Witness
 
The competency of a minor to testify is reviewed under
 
the right/wrong standard of review. State v. Kelekolio, 74 Haw.
 
479, 527 n.23, 849 P.2d 58, 80 n.23 (1993).
 
B. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
The standard of review on appeal for sufficiency of the
 
evidence is substantial evidence. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on
 appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed,
even if it could be said in a bench trial that the
 conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long as
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
there is substantial evidence to support the requisite
findings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed.
 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931
(1992).
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007). 
C. Findings of Fact/Conclusions of Law
 
A trial court's findings of fact are reviewed under the 
"clearly erroneous" standard of review. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai 'i 
423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994). "A finding of fact is 
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence 
to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in 
support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left 
with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made." State v. Locquiao, 100 Hawai 'i 195, 203, 58 P.3d 1242, 
1250 (2002) (quoting State v. Harada, 98 Hawai 'i 18, 22, 41 P.3d 
174, 178 (2002)). 
"An appellate court may freely review conclusions of 
law and the applicable standard of review is the right/wrong 
test. A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's 
findings of fact and that reflects an application of the correct 
rule of law will not be overturned." Dan, 76 Hawai 'i at 428, 879 
P.2d at 533 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
D. Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
 requires an examination of the record and a determination of
 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
 
complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State
 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State
 
v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai 'i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 
(1998)). 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a 
fair trial." State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai
'i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 
782, 792 (1994). "In order to determine whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error, 
[the appellate court considers] the nature of the alleged 
misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and 
the strength or weakness of the evidence against defendant." 
State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The family court did not err when it found Minor
competent to testify.
 
Kiese contends the family court erred when it found
 
2
 Minor competent to testify pursuant to HRE Rules 603 and 603.1. 
Kiese also contends that allowing Minor to testify violated 
Kiese's right to due process and a fair trial under the Fifth, 
Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution and article I, section 5 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution. Kiese argues that Minor "was incapable of expressing himself, he did not fully understand the difference 
between a truth and a lie, and he was either unable to take the 
oath and/or he did not understand the duty to tell the truth." 
Kiese further argues that the State failed to establish Minor's 
competency to testify. 
2
 HRE Rule 603 provides:
 
Rule 603 Oath or affirmation.  Before testifying, every
witness shall be required to declare that the witness will testify
truthfully, by oath or affirmation administered in a form
calculated to awaken the witness'[s] conscience and impress the
witness'[s] mind with the witness'[s] duty to do so.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
Under HRE Rule 601,  every witness is deemed to be
competent unless disqualified. Witness disqualification is
 
governed by HRE Rule 603.1, which provides: "A person is
 
disqualified to be a witness if the person is (1) incapable of
 
expressing oneself so as to be understood, either directly or
 
through interpretation by one who can understand the person, or
 
(2)
 incapable of understanding the duty of a witness to tell the
 
truth." 
"[T]he competency of a witness is a matter for
 
determination by the court." HRE Rule 603.1 cmt. "[T]he
 
question of testimonial competency must be determined on a case
 
by case basis." Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 528, 849 P.2d at 80. The
 
trial judge "views the demeanor of the proposed witness and
 weighs his manner and responses as well as his words." State v.
 
Gonsalves, 5 Haw. App. 659, 666, 706 P.2d 1333, 1339 (1985). 
"The best approach in borderline cases is to admit the testimony,
 
rely on adversary presentation and cross-examination, and
 
exercise judicial control in testing the sufficiency of the
 
evidence." Kelekolio, 74 Haw. at 526, 849 P.2d at 79 (quoting
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 603.1-2A, at 214 (1990)).
 
In the instant case, the family court held a competency
 
hearing prior to allowing Minor, who was six years old, to
 testify. After direct examination, the family court stated: "I
 
think it's a borderline case, but the Court finds that he's
 
competent." The defense then cross-examined Minor, after which
 
the family court again found Minor to be a competent witness and
 
stated that "all other objections regarding the weight of this
 
testimony are -- will be addressed at pretrial."
 
During much of the competency hearing, Minor either
 
nodded his head, shook his head, or shrugged his shoulders in
 
response to questions. Counsel or the family court generally
 
3
 HRE Rule 601 provides:
 
Rule 601 General rule of competency.  Every person is
competent to be a witness except as otherwise provided in these
rules.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acknowledged the non-verbal response in the next question or
 
verbally stated the response for the record. Kiese argued
 
against finding Minor competent: "Sometimes he's shrugging his
 
shoulders. Sometimes he's nodding his head, Your Honor. He has
 
to be able to state in sentences what transpired." The family
 
court stated that Minor need only "communicate effectively."
 
On appeal, Kiese argues that Minor was incapable of
 
expressing himself "so as to be understood." Kiese suggests that
 
when Minor responded non-verbally, "the family court merely
 
guessed at what [Minor] was trying to communicate. . . . While
 
the State characterized and interpreted [Minor's] 'nodding' as an
 
affirmative response, nothing in the record indicates what
 
[Minor] intended such a gesture to signify."
 
We disagree. Nothing in the record indicates a dispute
 
or objection to the interpretation of what Minor intended when he
 
nodded, shook his head, or shrugged his shoulders. During the
 
competency hearing, both counsel struggled with Minor's inaudible
 
responses. Often, counsel asked that the record reflect that
 
Minor was nodding his head up and down or shrugging his
 
shoulders.
 
There appears to be no disagreement that a "nod up and
 
down" was viewed as an affirmative answer and a "shake" was
 
viewed as a negative answer. For example:
 
Q.	 [Prosecutor]: . . . [D]o you understand what's the
difference between the truth and a lie?
 
A.	 [Minor]: (No audible response).
 
Q.	 You have to say yes or no.
 
A.	 Yes.
 
Q.	 Yes. Okay.
 
THE COURT: Let the record reflect that [Minor] was
nodding his head up and down. 
* * *
 
Q.	 [Defense Counsel]: [Minor], what day is Christmas on?
Do you know the date that Christmas is on?
 
A.	 [Minor]: No.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q.	 Okay. Is it on -- is Christmas on December 23rd?
 
A.	 I don't know.
 
Q.	 You don't know.
 
Your Honor, let the record reflect that the Minor
shrugged his shoulders and also indicated that he did
not know. 
* * *
 
Q. 	[Prosecutor]: What's your father's name?
 
A.	 [Minor]: Jason.
 
Q.	 Jason. And does he have the same last name as you?
 
A.	 (No audible response).
 
Q.	 Okay. Let the record reflect the witness is nodding
 yes. 
* * *
 
Q.	 [Prosecutor]: So, [Minor], where did Daddy hit you
with the stick?
 
A.	 [Minor]: Arm.
 
Q.	 Arm. Okay. Anywhere else?
 
A.	 Butt.
 
Q.	 Where?
 
A.	 Butt?
 
Q.	 Butt. Okay.
Did he hit you anywhere else?
 
A.	 (No audible response).
 
Q.	 No. 
Your Honor, if the record will reflect the witness is
shaking his head.
 
* * *
 
Q.	 [Prosecutor]: Do you remember anything else that
happened on that day?
 
A.	 [Minor]: (No audible response).
 
Q.	 No. Okay. Your Honor, let the record reflect the
witness is shaking his head.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Under HRE Rule 603.1, a witness must be able "to be
 
understood, either directly or through interpretation by one who
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
can understand the person." There is no competency requirement
 
that a witness speak in sentences or even that the witness speak
 
aloud. Nothing in the record indicates that Minor's responses
 
were not understood by either counsel or the family court.
 
Kiese also contends Minor "failed to take or respond in
 
any way -- verbal or non-verbal -- to the oath." Before
 
testifying, every witness must declare, by oath or affirmation,
 
that he will testify truthfully. HRE Rule 603. The family court
 
had to determine first if Minor understood what it meant to tell
 
the truth and second if Minor could affirm that he would tell the
 
truth.
 
During the competency hearing, defense counsel
 
questioned Minor regarding the difference between the truth and a
 
lie in the following exchange:
 
Q. 	[Defense Counsel]: Okay. Can you tell me what it
means to tell the truth?
 
A.	 [Minor]: Don't lie.
 
Q.	 Don't lie. Okay. So then what is a lie?
 
A.	 Like a -­
Q.	 You don't know what a lie is?
 
A.	 (No audible response).
 
Q.	 You know what it means to lie?
 
A.	 (No audible response).
 
Q.	 Okay. Can you explain to me?
 
THE COURT: Let the witness [sic] reflect the witness
is nodding his head up and down.
 A.	 [Minor]: Just tell the truth.
 
Q.	 [Defense Counsel]: Okay. So to tell the truth means
 
to don't lie and not tell -- and to not lie means to
 tell the truth?
 
A:	 (No audible response).
 
Q.	 Your Honor, let the record reflect that he is nodding
his head up and down. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on this exchange, we conclude the family court
 
did not err in finding that Minor understood the difference
 
between the truth and a lie.
 
A witness must also promise to testify truthfully. HRE
 
Rule 603. In the following exchange, Minor makes that promise:
 
Q.	 [Prosecutor]: And so if I was to ask you to tell us
what happened on January 29th when you got in trouble,
will you be able to tell the truth?
 
A.	 [Minor]: Yes.
 
Q.	 Okay. And that's because that's the right thing to
do, right?
 
A.	 (No audible response).
 
Q.	 Okay. May the record reflect the witness is nodding
his head up and down.
 
At the conclusion of the competency hearing, the family
 
court found Minor competent to proceed. At that point, the court
 
clerk asked Minor to stand where the clerk could see Minor and
 
asked Minor to raise Minor's hand. The clerk asked Minor, "Will
 
you tell the truth today and not lie?" The record indicates that
 
there was no audible response, to which the clerk responded,
 
"Okay. Thank you." Presumably, had Minor not responded at all
 
or responded in the negative, the clerk would not have said,
 
"Okay." 
We conclude that Minor was competent to testify,
 
understood his duty to tell the truth, and took an oath to tell
 
the truth. Therefore, the family court did not err in allowing
 
Minor to testify.
 
Even if the family court had erred in admitting Minor's
 
testimony, the appellate court follows the rule that in a bench
 
trial, "if there is sufficient competent evidence to support the
 
judgment or finding below, there is a presumption that any
 
incompetent evidence was disregarded and the issue determined
 
from a consideration of competent evidence only." State v.
 
Gutierrez, 1 Haw. App. 268, 270, 618 P.2d 315, 317 (1980). 
In the instant case, several other witnesses testified
 
as to Kiese's alleged actions. A police officer (the Officer)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testified that he responded to a call from Minor's school;
 
interviewed Minor; saw "red marks" across Minor's arm, hand, and 
face; and took photos of the red marks. The Officer also stated
 
that Minor told him, "Daddy spanked [me] with a yellow stick." 
Minor's mother testified that Minor told her Kiese had spanked
 
Minor, Kiese told her that he had spanked Minor with a stick, and
 
she told police that Kiese had said he spanked Minor twenty
 
times.4
 
Kiese testified that he hit Minor with a stick on
 
Minor's buttocks and arms and hit Minor once in the face with his
 
hand. Thus, even if the family court did err in finding Minor
 
competent to testify, there was sufficient competent evidence to
 
support the judge's findings without considering Minor's
 
testimony.
 
B.	 The family court did not err in finding there was
sufficient evidence to prove the basic elements of
Harassment, as proscribed by HRS § 711-1106(1)(a).
 
Kiese contends the family court's FOFs 1, 4, 13, and 16
 
were erroneous and its COL 5 was wrong.
 
The relevant FOFs provide:
 
1.	 On January 29, 2009, [Minor's mother] was notified by
school officials at [Minor's] school that [Minor], who
was six years old on the date of the incident, had
misbehaved earlier that day, acting in a manner
described as being "playful" and not in a dangerous
 manner.
 . . . .
 
4.	 Upon arriving home later that evening, [Minor's
mother] found out that [Minor] was already in a
"timeout" and was crying. [Minor's mother] did not
talk to [Minor] nor [Kiese] as to the extent of the
interaction between the two that evening and told
[Minor] to get ready for bed.
 . . . .
 
13.	 For three consecutive days prior to January 29, 2009,
[Kiese] and [Minor's mother] had been informed that
[Minor] had been too "playful" and "misbehaved" during
school, but none of the reports indicated that [Minor]
was a danger to self or others.
 
4
 At trial, Minor's mother testified that although she told the police
that Kiese said he spanked Minor twenty times, Kiese actually never said to
her how many times he spanked Minor.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
16.	 [Minor] was under four feet tall and based on
fact-finder's own visual observations, [Minor] was a
thin, slight boy and much smaller in comparison to
[Kiese].
 
The relevant COL provides:
 
5.	 Based on the credible evidence presented and the
justifiable inferences of fact, this Court finds that
[Kiese] is guilty of the offense of Harassment in
violation of HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) as the State has
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the force
employed by [Kiese] was done WITHOUT "due regard for
the age and size" of [Minor].
 
Reviewing the FOFs under the "clearly erroneous"
 
standard, we conclude that the findings were not clearly
 
erroneous. Kiese also contends COL 5 is wrong because it is
 
based on the aforementioned alleged erroneous FOFs. Having
 
concluded that the FOFs are not erroneous, we further conclude
 
that COL 5 is not wrong.
 
Kiese contends the State "failed to adduce sufficient
 
evidence to sustain the [harassment] conviction because it failed
 
to establish any evidence that Kiese possessed the requisite mens
 
rea" to harass, annoy, or alarm Minor, as required under HRS
 
§ 711-1106(1). He argues that his only intent was to discipline
 
Minor.
 
HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) provides:
 
§711-1106 Harassment.  (1) A person commits the
offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or
alarm any other person, that person:
 
(a)	 Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches
another person in an offensive manner or
subjects the other person to offensive physical
contact[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Kiese acknowledged at trial that he hit Minor. He does 
not argue on appeal that the force was not applied in an 
offensive manner; therefore, he concedes that element. Hawai 'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). The issue on appeal is whether 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there was sufficient evidence to prove Kiese had the intent to
 
harass, annoy, or alarm when he hit Minor.
 
At trial, the State bore the burden of providing 
sufficient evidence to establish the elements of the offense 
beyond a reasonable doubt, including that Kiese acted with the 
requisite intent. As a matter of law, "[a] defendant may not be 
convicted except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every 
fact necessary to constitute the crime with which he is charged." 
State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai 'i 87, 108, 997 P.2d 13, 34 (2000) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see HRS § 701­114 (1993). 
On appellate review for sufficiency of the evidence, 
the evidence must be considered in the strongest light for the 
prosecution. Matavale, 115 Hawai
'i at 157, 166 P.3d at 330. 
"The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to 
support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Id. at 157-58, 166 
P.3d at 330-31. 
"Substantial evidence" as to the material elements of
 
an offense is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality
 and probative value to enable [a person] of reasonable caution to
 
support a conclusion." Batson, 73 Haw. at 248-49, 831 P.2d at
 
931. In a bench trial, the trial judge, as the trier of fact, 
"is free to make all reasonable and rational inferences under the 
facts in evidence, including circumstantial evidence." Id. at 
249, 831 P.2d at 931. "Given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, 
proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences 
arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is 
sufficient." State v. Agard, 113 Hawai
'i 321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 
805 (2007) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Kiese testified that he told Minor that if Minor
 
misbehaved again, "[Y]ou'll get punished, Daddy going to spank
 you." Kiese further testified that after Minor misbehaved again
 
at school, Kiese told Minor:
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I told you yesterday, and that means you don't listen, you
don't listen to Daddy, you don't listen to the teachers and
Daddy told you yesterday that if you don't listen, Daddy
going to spank you, right. 
He concurred. And then that's what I did. I . . .
 
did use the -- a stick to spank [Minor] on the buttock. 
In State v. Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i 85, 87-88, 976 P.2d 
399, 401-02 (1999), the family court convicted Stocker of 
harassment for slapping his eleven-year-old son across the face 
when the son refused to obey Stocker's repeated instruction to 
come to him. "With regard to the requisite state of mind, 
Stocker argue[d] that, because the slap was meted out for 
purposes of discipline, he could not have acted with 'intent to 
harass, annoy, or alarm' [his son]." Id. at 91, 976 P.2d at 405. 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court noted that "HRS § 711-1106 is concerned 
with the offensive nature of the touching to one's sensibilities. 
The impact of harassment is on one's psyche and mental well­
being . . . ." Stocker, 90 Hawai 'i at 91, 976 P.2d at 405 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The supreme court observed that there was "substantial
 
evidence that, after becoming angry and 'yelling' at [his son],
 Stocker slapped him in the face." Id. at 92, 976 P.2d at 406. 
Although the slap was considered to be "mild" and Stocker's son
 testified that it "didn't hurt . . . only hurt a little" and left
 
no mark or bruise, the supreme court nonetheless held that the
 
family court could reasonably infer that the father intended his
 
conduct to "annoy" or "alarm" his son. Id. at 92 & 96, 976 P.2d
 
at 406 & 410.
 
In the instant case, Kiese attempts to distinguish the 
holding in Stocker by arguing that in order to find intent, the court must find that Kiese was angry or yelling. "Although Kiese 
was mad and disappointed that [Minor] had lied and misbehaved, 
unlike the situation in Stocker, there was no evidence that Kiese 
was angry, yelling, or struck out with the intent to harass, 
annoy, or alarm [Minor]." OB at 20  In Stocker, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court's holding that the father intended to "annoy" or 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"alarm" his son relates to the slap on the face and not on his
 
"becoming angry and 'yelling.'" The subsequent discussion in
 
Stocker regarding the parental discipline defense referred only
 
to the slap, making no further reference to other behaviors as
 
necessary elements. Id. at 95-96, 976 P.2d. at 409-10. Kiese
 
admits to the evidence that he "slapped [Minor] in the face for
 lying and spanked him with a stick for his continuous and
 
escalating misbehavior."
 
There was substantial, uncontroverted evidence that
 
Kiese hit Minor with a stick and his open hand. We conclude that
 
the family court could have reasonably inferred, based on actual
 
and circumstantial evidence, that Kiese intended his conduct to
 
harass, annoy, or alarm Minor.
 
C.	 The family court did not err in concluding that
sufficient evidence was adduced to negate Kiese's
parental discipline defense pursuant to HRS § 703­309(1).
 
Kiese contends that, even if there was sufficient
 
evidence to establish commission of the offense of Harassment,
 
his use of force upon Minor was justified pursuant to the
 
parental discipline defense under HRS § 703-309(1) (1993), 
which provides:
 
§703-309 Use of force by persons with special
responsibility for care, discipline, or safety of others.
The use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable under the following circumstances:
 
(1)	 The actor is the parent or guardian or other
person similarly responsible for the general
care and supervision of a minor . . . and:
 
(a)	 The force is employed with due regard for
the age and size of the minor and is
reasonably related to the purpose of
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
the minor, including the prevention or
punishment of the minor's misconduct; and
 
(b)	 The force used is not designed to cause or
known to create a risk of causing
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
substantial bodily injury,[5]
 
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental
distress, or neurological damage.
 
To invoke the parental discipline defense, Kiese must 
prove there was sufficient evidence to support the four elements 
of the defense. State v. Crouser, 81 Hawai 'i 5, 10-11, 911 P.2d 
725, 730-31 (1996). The parental discipline defense was available "so long as some evidence was adduced, no matter how 
weak, inconclusive, or unsatisfactory it might be, which was 
probative of [the elements in HRS § 703-309(1)]." Stocker, 90 
Hawai
'i at 95, 976 P.2d at 409 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted; emphasis in original). 
The first element of the defense is that the defendant 
must be a parent, guardian, or other person as described in HRS 
§ 703-309(1). Crouser, 81 Hawai 'i at 10, 911 P.2d at 730. 
Second, the force used must be against a minor for whose care and supervision the defendant is responsible. Id. Third, the force 
used must be with due regard for minor's age and size and reasonably related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting 
the minor's welfare, including the prevention or punishment of 
misconduct. Id. at 10-11, 911 P.2d at 730-31. Finally, the 
force used by the defendant must not be designed to cause, or known to create a risk of causing substantial bodily injury, 
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or neurological 
damage. Id. at 11, 911 P.2d at 731. 
Kiese testified at trial that (1) he was Minor's
 
parent; (2) he hit Minor with a thin, fifteen-inch bamboo stick
 
5
 HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2010) defines "substantial bodily injury" as
bodily injury which causes:
 
(1) A major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the skin; 
(2) A burn of at least second degree severity; 
(3) A bone fracture; 
(4) A serious concussion; or 
(5) A tearing, rupture, or corrosive damage to the esophagus,
viscera, or other internal organs. 
15   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and with his hand; (3) his use of force was with due regard to
 
Minor's age and size ("I wasn't hitting that hard because he's
 
just a kid"); and (4) he hit Minor to punish Minor for lying, for
 
disrespect, and for not following the rules -- in other words, to
 
discipline him. Based on this testimony, Kiese met the initial
 
burden of proof to invoke the defense.
 
Once the parental discipline defense burden of 
production is met, the burden shifts to the State, which has "the 
burden of disproving beyond a reasonable doubt the justification 
evidence that was adduced, or proving beyond a reasonable doubt 
facts negativing the justification defense." Crouser, 81 Hawai 'i 
at 11, 911 P.2d at 731. 
"Because the requirements of HRS § 703-309(1) are set 
out in the conjunctive, rather than the disjunctive, the prosecution needed only to disprove one element beyond a 
reasonable doubt to defeat the justification defense." Crouser, 
81 Hawai
'i at 11, 911 P.2d at 731. The State maintains the third 
element was disproved, arguing that Kiese "failed to give due 
regard to [Minor's] age and size" and the force used by Kiese 
"was not reasonably related to the purpose of safeguarding or 
promoting [Minor's] welfare." 
To disprove the third element, the evidence must show
 
that the defendant used force without due regard for the age and
 
size of the minor or the force was not reasonably related to the
 
purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the minor. 
HRS § 703-309(1)(a).
 
Based on the record, Kiese, approximately 5'11" and 140
 
pounds, struck Minor, who was six years old and under four feet
 
6
tall, in the face with Kiese's open hand once or twice  and on
Minor's butt more than five times with a bamboo stick
 
approximately 15 inches to 24 inches long and slightly thicker

 
than a ballpoint pen. Kiese said he struck Minor in the face
 because Minor blamed a classmate for Minor's misbehavior at
 
6
 Minor testified that Kiese hit him in the face "two or one" times.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
school. Kiese attempted to "spank [Minor's] butt," but struck
 
Minor's hands and arms when Minor "covered his butt" with them. 
Minor cried "because it hurt." The State submitted photos
 
showing "red-like slash marks" across Minor's knuckles and left
 
inner arm. Another photo showed a red mark across the left side
 
of Minor's face.
 
In Matavale, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court explained that 
the legislature recognized a parent's right to discipline a 
child, "but such discipline must be with due regard as to the 
amount of force utilized and must be directed to promote the 
welfare of the child." Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i at 164, 166 P.3d at 
337 (emphasis in original omitted). "The force used must (1) reasonably be proportional to the misconduct being punished and 
(2) reasonably be believed necessary to protect the welfare of
 
the recipient." Id. The maximum degree of justifiable force is
 
defined in HRS § 703-309(1)(b) as force that "is not designed to
 cause or known to create a risk of causing substantial bodily
 
injury." 
In Crouser, the supreme court noted that even if a 
particular physical discipline does not rise to the level 
described in subsection (b), it "may be so excessive that it is 
no longer reasonably related to safeguarding the welfare of the 
minor." 81 Hawai
'i at 12, 911 P.2d at 732. 
In Matavale
, the supreme court noted that courts have a
 
large amount of discretion . . . to determine whether the
actions of a parent fall within the parameters of parental
discipline . . . . [T]he permissible degree of force will
vary according to the child's physique and age, the
misconduct of the child, the nature of the discipline, and
all the surrounding circumstances. It necessarily follows
that the question of reasonableness or excessiveness of
physical punishment given a child by a parent is determined
on a case-by-case basis and is dependent upon the particular
circumstances of the case.
 
115 Hawai 'i at 165, 166 P.3d at 338. 
The State provided evidence as to the age and size of
 
the Minor. Kiese acknowledged that a hand spank on Minor's
 
bottom would probably have been effective. The State argues that
 
when Kiese hit Minor in the face with his hand and used a stick
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
instead of his hand in purportedly attempting to hit Minor on the
 
buttocks, he was not giving "due regard to the age and size" of
 
Minor or using force that was reasonably related to the purpose
 
of safeguarding or promoting Minor's welfare. The State
 
solicited testimony that Minor's infractions at school were
 
related to playfulness rather than dangerous behavior from which
 
Minor need to be safeguarded.
 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 
State, we hold that there is substantial evidence to support the
 
conclusion of the trier of fact. The family court indicated in
 
its FOFs that it considered testimony regarding (1) Minor's age
 
and size and (2) the "red-like slash marks" on Minor's left
 
knuckles and "red marks" on his left inner arm and left side of
 
his face that were visible the day after the episode. It also
 
considered that a spank with the hand had been effective in the
 
past.
 
Based on its findings, the family court concluded that
 
the force of the physical discipline was not employed with due
 
regard for Minor's age and size.
 
"An appellate court will not pass upon the trial 
judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses 
and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of 
the trial judge." State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 
P.2d 57, 65 (1996). "As the trier of fact, the judge may draw all reasonable and legitimate inferences and deductions from the 
evidence, and the findings of the trial court will not be 
disturbed unless clearly erroneous." Id. "Under the clearly 
erroneous standard, a trial court's decision will not be reversed unless, based upon the entire evidence in the record, the 
appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction 
that a mistake has been made." Crouser, 81 Hawai
'i at 10, 911 
P.2d at 730. 
In the instant case, we hold that the family court did
 
not err when it concluded that the force employed was without due
 regard to Minor's age and size. 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
D.	 The Prosecutor's conduct did not deprive Kiese of
his right to a fair trial.
 
Kiese contends the Prosecutor "repeatedly engage[d] in
 
a line of improper questions in which [the Prosecutor] not only
 
asserted his personal knowledge in the questions, but for which
 
he also provided answers to the questions that [Minor] failed to
 
answer." Kiese also argues, without citing to the record, that
 
"[t]he record is beset with numerous instances of misconduct."
 
Kiese specifically cites to an exchange between the
 
Prosecutor and Minor about a conversation earlier that morning
 
among Minor, defense counsel, and the Prosecutor. During the
 
trial, defense counsel objected to this line of questioning on
 
the grounds of hearsay or leading questions, but not on the
 
grounds of prosecutorial misconduct. The family court sustained
 
some of defense counsel's objections, but not all.
 
The Prosecutor's questions related to whether Minor
 
remembered saying earlier that morning that Kiese had hit him
 
with a stick and his hand. Testimony regarding these same facts
 
was later elicited from Minor's mother and Kiese, and these facts
 
were not in dispute. Kiese asks this court to recognize plain
 
error, arguing that the cumulative effect of the alleged
 
misconduct deprived him of a fair trial.
 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the 
prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a 
fair trial." McGriff, 76 Hawai 'i at 158, 871 P.2d at 792. We 
review allegations of prosecutorial misconduct under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, examining the record and 
determining "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the 
error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." 
State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai
'i 38, 47, 79 P.3d 131, 140 (2003) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
We conclude that the specific line of questioning cited
 
to in the record does not indicate error that "might have
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contributed to the conviction" because the answers elicited from
 
Minor were later confirmed by Kiese. 
Kiese also asserts that the Prosecutor "provided
 
answers to questions that [Minor] failed to answer." This issue
 
has been addressed previously in part III.A., where we held that
 
Minor's inaudible answers were clearly understood by both sides
 
and the family court. The verbalizations by counsel or the
 
family court of Minor's inaudible answers (shake or nod of head,
 
shrug of shoulders) were accepted as accurate representations of
 
Minor's answers and were not viewed as providing answers where
 
Minor did not answer.
 
Finally, "[i]t is well established that a judge is
 
presumed not to be influenced by incompetent evidence." State v.
 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 353, 615 P.2d 101, 107 (1980). Therefore,
 even if the Prosecutor's line of questioning was improper, the
 
family court is presumed to have disregarded it. A review of the
 
FOFs/COLs/Judgment supports the conclusion that the family court
 
disregarded any incompetent evidence, as no mention is made of
 
evidence from Minor's testimony.
 
E.	 The family court did not fail to exercise
reasonable control over the presentation of
evidence.
 
Kiese raises arguments similar to those he made in his
 
contention that Minor was incompetent to testify. On the same
 
basis as the analysis in part III.A., we conclude that his
 
arguments are without merit.
 
F.	 The family court erred as a matter of law in
denying Kiese's request to stay the sentence
pending appeal.
 
Kiese's point on appeal in regards to the family
 
court's denial of his motion to stay his sentence is moot, and we
 
do not address it.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed on
 
April 1, 2009 in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 25, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
21
 