NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29461
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
RUTH RYAN, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee, v.
JOHN HERZOG, Defendant/Counterclaimant/Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
LAHAINA DIVISION
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 08-1-0948)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Counterclaimant/Appellant John Herzog
 
(Herzog) appeals from the May 6, 2008 Judgment for Possession and
 
Writ of Possession granted in favor of Plaintiff/Counterclaim
 
Defendant/Appellee Ruth Ryan (Ryan), the September 19, 2008
 
Judgment for Attorney's Fees and Costs, and a November 18, 2008
 
Garnishee Order, entered by the District Court of the Second
 
Circuit, Lahaina Division (district court).1
  
Herzog raises five points on appeal. Herzog claims the
 
district court erred when it (1) entered the Judgment of
 
Possession and Writ of Possession after the return proceeding; 
(2) factually found that a copy of a notice of termination of
 
tenancy was delivered to Herzog on or about March 4, 2008,
 
factually found that as a result of the delivered notice, the
 
month-to-month tenancy expired on April 18, 2008, and concluded
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the tenancy expired on April 18, 2008, in issuing a Judgment
 
for Possession and Writ of Possession; (3) awarded interim
 
attorney's fees to Ryan with respect to the summary possession;
 
(4) issued the Garnishee Order; and (5) struck Herzog's Answer
 
and Motion to Dismiss, which contained a counterclaim for
 
damages.
 
After careful review of the issues raised, arguments
 
advanced, applicable law, and record in the instant case, we
 
resolve Herzog's points of errors as follows:
 
(1) and (2) As Herzog's month-to-month tenancy has now 
expired, whether notice was given on the date found by the 
district court or on the date of service of the complaint for 
summary possession, and because Herzog has surrendered possession 
of the subject property, his challenge to the entry of the 
judgment and writ of possession is rendered moot. See Queen Emma 
Found. v. Tatibouet, 123 Hawaif i 500, 508, 236 P.3d 1236, 1244 
(App. 2010). "[T]his court does not have jurisdiction to decide 
abstract propositions of law or moot cases." Id., at 506, 236 
P.3d at 1242 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Therefore, we decline to review the district court's decision to 
enter the Judgment of Possession and Writ of Possession. 
(3) and (4) The interim attorney's fees award and
 
garnishment order based thereon will stand. While
 
a dispute over attorney's fees and costs does not permit
adjudication of an otherwise moot controversy[,] . . . the
question of attorney's fees and costs must be decided based
on whether the recipient of the attorney's fees and costs
award can be considered to be the prevailing party in the
underlying action, "without regard to whether we think the
[trial] court's decision on the underlying merits is
correct."
 
Id., at 510, 236 P.3d at 1246 (quoting Bishop v. Comm. on Prof'l
 
Ethics & Conduct of the Iowa State Bar, 686 F.2d 1278, 1290
 
(1982)). "'In general, a party in whose favor judgment is
 
rendered by the district court is the prevailing party in that
 
court,' . . . for purposes of costs and attorneys' fees." MFD
 
Partners v. Murphy, 9 Haw. App. 509, 514, 850 P.2d 713, 716
 (1992) (brackets omitted) (quoting 6 J. Moore, W. Taggart & J.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wicker, Moore's Federal Practice ¶ 54.70[4], at 54-323 to 54-324
 
(2d ed. 1992)). Ryan's complaint asked for a judgment granting
 
Ryan possession and a writ of possession to enforce the judgment. 
As the district court entered a Judgment of Possession and issued
 
a Writ of Possession in favor of Ryan, Ryan was the prevailing
 
party. As the attorney's fees award and consequent garnishment
 
order was based on Hawaii Revised Statutes § 666-14 (1993) which
 
authorizes the award of costs and fees in proceedings to obtain a
 
writ of possession, we affirm the award and garnishment order.
 
(5) The district court improperly struck Herzog's
 
Answer and Motion to Dismiss. It appears from the transcript of
 
the return hearing that Ryan moved to strike the document because
 
Ryan's counsel represented that he had not received a copy of the
 
Answer and Motion to Dismiss. The record reflects that Herzog's
 
Answer and Motion to Dismiss was filed with the district court on
 
April 30, 2008, and the attached certificate of service, dated
 
April 30, 2008, attested that a copy of said document was served
 
on Ryan's counsel at his office address, by certified mail. 
Rule 5(b) of the District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP)
 
provides that service on a represented party shall be upon the
 
party's attorney and can be effected by personal service or mail. 
The Rule also provides that "[s]ervice by mail is complete upon
 
mailing." Thus, it appears that Herzog's document was properly
 
served and it should not have been stricken on the basis that
 
Ryan's counsel had not yet received the Answer and Motion to
 
Dismiss.
 
On appeal, Ryan also argues that the "pleading" was
 
untimely under DCRCP Rule 6 and that the district court had the
 
authority to strike it, based on DCRCP Rule 12(f). Ryan admits
 
that no hearing date had been set at the time the Answer and
 
Motion was filed. DCRCP Rule 6 provides for a motion filing
 
deadline based on the date of the hearing. ("A written motion .
 
. . shall be served not later than 14 days before the time
 
specified for the hearing[;] . . . pleadings, memoranda and
 
affidavits may be served not later than 72 hours preceding the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
hearing[.]"). As no motion hearing date had been set for
 
Herzog's Answer and Motion to Dismiss, it could not have been
 
untimely at that juncture. 
DCRCP Rule 12(f) provides for a motion to strike from a
 
pleading made within 20 days after the service of the pleading
 
"any insufficient defense or any redundant, immaterial,
 
impertinent or scandalous matter." Ryan did not move to strike
 
on this basis. Even if she had, as the record indicates the
 
district court had not yet read the Answer and Motion to Dismiss
 
before it ruled, it could not have determined that the document
 
contained any matter that could be stricken under the rule. Ryan
 
makes no argument that Herzog's Answer and Motion to Dismiss
 
contained any "insufficient defense or any redundant, . . .
 
impertinent, or scandalous matter." Rather, she argues, ipse
 
dixit, that as the document was untimely and unserved, it was
 
"immaterial" under the Rule. We find no support for and
 
therefore reject this construction.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that (1) the challenge to the
 
May 6, 2008 Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession and
 the June 30, 2009 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
is dismissed as moot; (2) the September 19, 2008 Judgment for
 
Attorney's Fees and Costs and November 18, 2008 Garnishee Order
 
are affirmed; and (3) the May 2, 2008 oral order striking the
 
Answer and Motion to Dismiss issued by the District Court of the
 
Second Circuit, Lahaina Division is vacated and this case is
 
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this summary
 
disposition order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, December 16, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Mitchell S. Wong,
for Defendant/Counterclaimant/
Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Douglas J. Sameshima,
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant/Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
4
 