FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TIMOTHY A. WALSH, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. 29790 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-0418(3))
 
MAY 26, 2010
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, AND REIFURTH, J.;
AND FUJISE, J., CONCURRING SEPARATELY
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Timothy A. Walsh (Walsh) appeals
 
from the March 31, 2009 Judgment, entered in the Circuit Court of
 
the Second Circuit (circuit court),1
 finding him guilty of
Assault in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes § 707-711(1)(b) (Supp. 2009), sentencing him to five
 years of incarceration with a mandatory minimum of one year and
 eight months, and ordering him to pay restitution of $1,137.10
 and a Crime Victim Compensation fee of $105.00. 
On appeal, Walsh contends that (1) his rights under the 
Hawai
'i Constitution were violated by the prosecutor's comments 
during closing argument that Walsh was able to tailor his testimony because he was present during jury voir dire and while other witnesses testified, (2) the circuit court's failure to instruct the jury that Walsh had a right to be present during the trial proceedings constituted plain error, and (3) the circuit court's order of restitution was invalid. 
For the reasons discussed below, we reverse the
 
judgment and remand the case to the circuit court.
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The Incident
 
The charge against Walsh stems from a May 31, 2008
 
altercation between Walsh and several individuals in the town of
 
KIhei, Maui.
 
Walsh and his sister, Stephanie, were arguing in the
 
Kukui Mall (Mall) parking lot outside of the Oceans Bar and
 Grille (Oceans) at approximately 1:30 a.m. when a group of men in
 a truck parked in a nearby parking stall interrupted, cursed at,
 and began arguing with Walsh. Walsh cursed back at the men and
 told them to mind their own business. Four or five of the men
 advanced on Walsh and a fight ensued.
 
The confrontation went on for some time, with Walsh
 
getting battered, kicked, and pushed around the parking lot. At
 some point, Walsh curled up on the ground because he was being
 kicked and stepped on. After some time, Walsh was able to crawl
 and stumble up. 
According to Walsh, once he stood up, he stumbled 
toward the complainant, Kapena Kramer (Kapena), whereupon Walsh
 punched Kapena in the face. Walsh testified, "And then I got up
 . . . I just swung blindly, . . . I was trying to hit whoever was
 around me because I was getting attacked." 
John Cooprider (Cooprider), Oceans' general manager,
 
however, testified that he observed Walsh approaching Kapena in a
 "calm, cool, collective (sic)," manner and without any apparent
 injuries. Cooprider said that he "wasn't alarmed by [Walsh] by
 any means." He saw Walsh look to his left, observe Kapena,
 pause, and then "turn[] with everything he had and hit [Kapena]". 
According to Cooprider, Kapena was positioned so that he could
 not see Walsh approaching. Walsh's punch knocked Kapena
 unconscious and fractured his jaw in two places. 
Maui Police Officers arrived and arrested Walsh for
 
Assault in the Second Degree. On June 27, 2008 Walsh was charged
 via Felony Information with "recklessly caus[ing] serious or
 substantial bodily injury to Kapena Kramer, thereby committing
 the offense of Assault in the Second Degree in violation of
 
2
   (1) The circuit court erred in allowing the prosecutor
 
to make constitutionally impermissible arguments during closing
 
argument that because Walsh was present during trial, he heard
 the testimony of all other witnesses and the voir dire of the
 jury, and tailored his testimony to match the evidence and appear
 more credible; 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I R
 EPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Section 707-711(1)(b) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes."
B. Closing Arguments
 
During closing argument, the prosecutor stated, in
 
relevant part:
 
Some of you during voir dire and jury selection were
asked about what you would look at, and the defense went
into great detail. Remember one thing that was asked by me
to the Defendant? You know, the Defendant, first of all, is
entitled, since he's on trial here, is entitled to hear and
see all the witnesses. But with that becomes [sic] the
 
facts [sic] that he's benefitted from seeing all these
 
witnesses. Before he got up on that stand, he saw each and
 
every one of the witnesses, heard what they were going to
 say.
 
What's important about that is not only that, he heard
 
the voir—diring [sic] your questions, which some of you had
 
mentioned, I believe you said, well, you know, if they
 looked me in the eye. Okay, so he gets up here and looks
 each one of you in the eye. See how sincere I am? Does
 that mean you're sincere?
 
(Emphasis added).  Walsh did not object to the prosecutor's
 
argument.
C. Restitution Order in Judgment
 
In addition to incarceration, the circuit court ordered
 
Walsh to pay restitution of $1,137.50 and a Crime Victim
 
Compensation fee of $105.00. The manner of the restitution
 payment was "to be determined by the Director of the Department
 of Public Safety."
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Walsh raises four points of error:
 
(2)  The prosecutor's statements during closing
 
argument constituted prosecutorial misconduct, and deprived Walsh
 
of his right to due process and a fair trial; 
(3) The circuit court plainly erred in failing to
 
instruct the jury on Walsh's constitutional right to be present
 during the voir dire of the jury and the testimony of the
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witnesses, and that the jury must not draw any unfavorable
 
inference based on his presence throughout the trial; and
 
(4) 
The circuit court's order of restitution was
 
invalid because it delegated the decision of the "method and
 manner of payment" to the Director of the Department of Public
 Safety.
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Constitutional Violations In Criminal Proceedings
 
The appellate court reviews questions of constitutional 
law de novo under the "right/wrong" standard and, thus, exercises its "own independent judgment based on the facts of the case." State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 87, 100, 997 P.2d 13, 26 (2000) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Prosecutorial Misconduct
 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
 requires an examination of the record and a determination of
 whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
 complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State
 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 637, 641 n.6 
(1998)). 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a fair trial." State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai
'i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 
782, 792 (1994). "In order to determine whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error, [the appellate court considers] the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence against defendant." State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992).
Unobjected To Closing Argument - Plain Error
 
The appellate court "will apply the plain error
 
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial 
proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 
327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998)). 
"Where defense counsel failed to object to the 
statements made during the Prosecutor's closing argument, we . . . determine whether the statements were improper and, if so, whether they constituted plain error that affected [Defendant's] substantial rights." State v. Suan, 121 Hawai
'i 169, 174, 214 
P.3d 1159, 1164 (App. 2009) (citing State v. Clark, 83 Hawai 'i 
289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996)).
Jury Instructions
 
The standard of review for jury instructions that were
 
not objected to at trial was clarified in State v. Nichols, 111
 Hawai
'i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), where the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that:
 
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under [Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in thecase of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of reviewis effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmlesserror standard of review because it is the duty of the trialcourt to properly instruct the jury. As a result, onceinstructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, withoutregard to whether timely objection was made, if there is areasonable possibility that the error contributed to the
defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984. Thus, the appellant must first 
demonstrate instructional error by rebutting the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct." Id. at 337 
n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v. Eberly  , 107 Hawai
'i 
239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005). If the appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden shifts to the State to prove that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because: 
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.
However, error is not to be viewed in isolation and
considered purely in the abstract. It must be examined in
 the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect
which the whole record shows it to be entitled.
 
Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (brackets in 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
original omitted) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai 'i 289, 
293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005)). If the State cannot demonstrate 
that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, the conviction must be vacated. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i at 337, 141 
P.3d at 984. The "harmless beyond a reasonable doubt" standard applies, whether the appellant failed to object to an improper instruction, or failed to request a proper instruction. State v. 
Stenger, 122 Hawai
'i 271, 281, 226 P.3d 441, 451 (2010).
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Walsh contends that the "Prosecutor's comments during 
closing argument that Walsh's presence during trial enabled him to tailor his testimony to match the evidence and to appear more credible violated [his] state constitutional rights." Specifically, Walsh argues that "[t]hese comments impermissibly infringed on [his] constitutional right to be present during the trial as guaranteed by article I, section 14 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution, and had a chilling effect on [his] right to testify on his own behalf as guaranteed by article I, sections 5, 10 and 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution." 
The State contends that Walsh's rights were not
 
violated because Walsh put his credibility at issue by testifying
 during the trial.
2 In support, the State in large part relies on
 
the United States Supreme Court decision Portuondo v. Agard, 529
 U.S. 61 (2000). 
In Portuondo, the Supreme Court held that the
 
defendant's Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights were not violated by
 the prosecutor's statements during closing argument: 
You know, ladies and gentlemen, unlike all the other
witnesses in this case the defendant has a benefit and the
 
benefit that he has, unlike all the other witnesses, is he
gets to sit here and listen to the testimony of all the
other witnesses before he testifies.
 
2
 The State contends that the portion of Walsh's claim relating to
the prosecutor's comment concerning Walsh's presence at jury voir dire is not
 
properly before this court because "[t]he voir dire is not part of the record
on appeal, such that the allegation of improper comment . . . should be
disregarded as beyond the scope of appeal." The issue, however, is not the
jury voir dire itself, but the prosecutor's comment during closing argument
regarding Walsh's right to witness jury voir dire. Therefore, it is not
necessary that the transcript of the jury voir dire be part of the record on
appeal.
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . .
 
That gives you a big advantage, doesn't it. You get
to sit here and think what am I going to say and how am I
going to say it? How am I going to fit it into the
evidence?
 
. . . . .
 
He's a smart man. I never said he was stupid. . . .
He used everything to his advantage.
 
Id. at 64 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court based
 
its decision, in part, on the premise that "[a]llowing comment
 upon the fact that a defendant's presence in the courtroom
 provides him a unique opportunity to tailor his testimony is
 appropriate - and indeed, given the inability to sequester the
 defendant, sometimes essential - to the central function of the
 trial, which is to discover the truth." Id. at 73.
 
Justice Ginsburg, with whom Justice Souter joined,
 
dissented, contending that the majority's holding "transform[ed]
 a defendant's presence at trial from a Sixth Amendment right into
 an automatic burden on his credibility." Id. at 76. The dissent
 reasoned that, under the majority's holding, every defendant who
 testified would be susceptible to tailoring accusations and
 "[t]he prosecutorial comment at issue, tied only to the
 defendant's presence in the courtroom and not to his actual
 testimony, tarnishes the innocent no less than the guilty." Id.
 at 77-78. Justice Ginsburg posited that the generic accusations
 of the prosecutor were of no value to the truth finding function
 of a trial, and that prohibiting such accusations "would rein in
 a prosecutor solely in situations where there is no particular
 reason to believe that tailoring has occurred . . . ." Id. at 78­79. 
Since submission of the briefs in this case, the 
Hawai
'i Supreme Court has addressed the application of Portuondo 
and considered prosecutorial accusations of tailoring in closing argument under the Hawai
'i Constitution in the case of State v. 
Mattson, 122 Hawai 'i 312, 226 P.3d 482 (2010). In Mattson, the 
prosecutor stated during closing argument that: 
[The defendant] told you he lied before. He had a
 
chance to sit through the evidence. He had to make his
 
story gibe with what you've heard. What is in evidence. 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
What [Kumia] even had to admit to, because she-.... He sat
 
through the evidence. There is a 911 tape. [Kumia's]
 
statement. [Hayashi's] statement. Based on all that, he is
 
not telling the truth. All of a sudden he remembered that
 
he grabbed that knife.
 
This case is about credibility. In order to believe
 
the defendant, you have to be able to answer why didn't
[Kumia] just give him the key? Why did [Kumia] lock him out
of the house that night? Why lie the day after the event?
Thank you.
 
Id. at 326-27, 226 P.3d at 496-97. 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court looked to Portuondo for 
guidance and concluded that the majority's holding did not 
adequately protect the defendant's rights guaranteed by article I, section 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution (the "confrontation 
clause"). Id. at 325, 226 P.3d at 495. Rather, the court agreed 
with Justice Ginsburg's dissent, that "generic accusations of tailoring during closing argument that are based only on a defendant's presence throughout the trial burden the defendant's constitutional right to be present at trial and could discourage a defendant from exercising his constitutional right to testify on his own behalf." Id. at 326, 226 P.3d at 496. 
In sum, the Mattson court adopted the reasoning of 
Justice Ginsburg's dissent and concluded that it would be improper "under article I, section 14 of the Hawai
'i 
Constitution, for the prosecutor to make generic accusations during closing argument that a defendant tailored his testimony based solely on the defendant's exercise of his constitutional right to be present during the trial." Id. The court, however, 
found that the prosecutor's specific statements were not impermissible because the prosecutor incorporated in his argument evidence adduced at trial to controvert the defendant's testimony. 
In Mattson, the prosecutor's tailoring argument was not
 
impermissible because "the prosecutor also referred to specific
 evidence adduced at trial that was directly contradictory to
 Mattson's testimony." Id. at 327, 226 P.3d at 497. The court
 
stated that since "the prosecution referred to specific evidence
 presented at trial in addition to referring to Mattson's presence
 at trial, it cannot be said that the prosecutor's remarks during
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
closing argument constituted a 'generic accusation' that Mattson
 
tailored his testimony based solely on his presence at trial."
  
Id.
 
This case, however, reflects a generic accusation
 
because the prosecutor's argument does not reference any 
evidence and relates only to Walsh's presence in the courtroom. 
The prosecutor's argument drew attention to Walsh's presence
 during witness testimony and jury voir dire, emphasized that
 Walsh had heard all of the testimony prior to testifying himself,
 and implied that Walsh tailored his testimony to appear more
 credible.
 Contrary to Walsh's argument, the prosecutor did not
 
state that Walsh tailored his testimony. The implication of the
 prosecutor's argument, however, was such that the jury was left
 with the inescapable conclusion that because Walsh exercised his
 right to be present during jury voir dire and other witnesses'
 testimony, he was tailoring his testimony.
 
Moreover, and unlike the Mattson case, the offending
 
portion of the prosecutor's closing argument did not refer to
 specific evidence adduced at trial which controverted Walsh's
 testimony. Rather, the statement addressed only the possible
 nefarious consequences associated with Walsh exercising his
 constitutionally protected rights. 
Walsh's failure to object to the closing argument at 
trial does not prevent us from addressing the issue on appeal. We "will apply the plain error standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." Nichols, 111 
Hawai
'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (quoting Sawyer, 88 Hawai 'i at 
330, 966 P.2d at 642). 
"Where defense counsel failed to object to the 
statements made during the Prosecutor's closing argument, we . . . determine whether the statements were improper and, if so, whether they constituted plain error that affected [Defendant's] substantial rights." Suan, 121 Hawai
'i at 174, 214 P.3d at 1164 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citing Clark, 83 Hawai 'i at 304, 926 P.2d at 209). 
Whereas the prosecutor's remarks during closing 
argument constituted a "generic accusation" that Walsh tailored 
his testimony based solely on his presence at trial, whereas we conclude that the evidence against Walsh was not overwhelming, and whereas, as a result, "the pivotal issue [in the case] was the credibility of the witnesses[,]" Walsh's rights under article I, section 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution were violated. See 
State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 661, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986) (because credibility was a central issue in the case, the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court could not "conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the prosecutor's remarks had little likelihood of influencing this critical choice"). We cannot conclude that the prosecutor's conduct did not contribute to Walsh's conviction, and we therefore reverse and remand to the circuit court for a new trial. 
V. CONCLUSION
 
Although we note the agreement of the State and Walsh 
concerning the impropriety of the restitution order, we need not 
reach this or any of the other issues raised on appeal in light of our decision. Accordingly, the circuit court's March 31, 2009 Judgment is vacated and the case is remanded for a new trial. State v. Smith, 91 Hawai
'i 450, 460, 984 P.3d 1276, 1286 (App. 
1999) ("In situations where prosecutorial misconduct caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a fair trial, however, a new trial must be ordered.") 
On the briefs:
 
Craig W. Jerome,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
10
 