 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29779
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
GENYA SCROGGIN and DAVID JAMES SCROGGIN, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. MANDARIN ORIENTAL MANAGEMENT (USA) INC. dba
KAHALA MANDARIN ORIENTAL HAWAII, Defendant-Appellee,
and JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0110)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Genya Scroggin and David Scroggin
 
(collectively "the Scroggins") appeal from the Amended Judgment
 
filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court),
 
on April 15, 2009, in favor of Defendant-Appellee Mandarin
 
Oriental Management (USA) Inc. dba Kahala Mandarin Oriental
 
Hawaii (the Mandarin), against the Scroggins.1
 
The Scroggins raise four points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The jury verdict was incomplete because the
 
Circuit Court failed to instruct the jury on strict liability and
 because the Special Verdict Form erroneously instructed the jury
 
to stop deliberating if the jury found Mandarin was not
 
negligent;
 
1
 The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The trial court's refusal to take judicial notice
 
of the regulations governing restaurants prevented the jury from
 
considering the appropriate standards of care;
 
(3) Inadmissible character evidence was admitted
 
against the Scroggins causing extreme prejudice, confusion of the
 
issues, and creating the risk that the jury would "punish" the
 
Scroggins; and
 
(4) The Circuit Court erroneously prohibited the
 
Scroggins from admitting photographs of Mrs. Scroggins injuries
 
and from showing properly authenticated photographs to the jury.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve the Scroggins' points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Scroggins filed a four-page, three-count,
 
complaint stemming from purported injuries allegedly suffered
 
after eating certain food (later identified as chicken wings) at
 
the Mandarin. Two of the three counts were based on "strict
 
liability" and the third count asserted a claim based on
 
negligence. No counts were dismissed or otherwise disposed of
 
prior to the jury trial that was conducted in February of 2009. 
As plaintiffs' counsel had withdrawn and/or was fired by the
 
Scroggins, the Scroggins were self-represented at trial.
 
Although mindful that this court's ability to address 
plain error is to be exercised sparingly (see Okada Trucking Co., 
Ltd. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai' i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 
(2002)), we must conclude that the Circuit Court plainly erred in failing to provide the jury with any instruction whatsoever 
concerning the Scroggins' strict liability claims. 
The Scroggins did not propose any jury instructions or
 
additions to the special verdict form, and did not raise an
 
objection to the Circuit Court's omission of instructions or
 
interrogatories concerning strict liability. Instead, when asked
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
if the special verdict form was acceptable, Mr. Scroggin informed
 
the court, "[w]e're going with whatever the Court recommends on
 
these items." 
We are mindful, however, that the "function served by 
jury instructions is to inform the jury of the law applicable to 
the current case." Tittle v. Hurlbutt, 53 Haw. 526, 530, 497 
P.2d 1354, 1357 (1972). It has been often stated that "[t]he boundaries of the trial judge's discretion in performing this 
function are defined by the obligation to give sufficient 
instructions and the opposing imperative against cumulative 
instructions." See id. "[E]ven the complete failure to object to 
a jury instruction does not prevent an appellate court from taking cognizance of the trial court's error if the error is 
plain and may result in a miscarriage of justice." Montalvo v. 
Lapez, 77 Hawai' i 282, 288, 884 P.2d 345, 351 (1994) (quoting 
Turner v. Willis, 59 Haw. 319, 324, 582 P.2d 710, 714 (1978)). 
Similarly, trial courts are vested with "complete discretion" in 
determining the use and form of interrogatories to the jury, 
"provided that the questions asked are adequate to obtain a jury 
determination of all factual issues essential to judgment." Id. 
at 292, 884 P.2d at 355 (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Plain error may be noticed as follows: 
In civil cases, the plain error rule is only invoked
when 'justice so requires.' We have taken three factors into
account in deciding whether our discretionary power to
notice plain error ought to be exercised in civil cases: (1)
whether consideration of the issue not raised at trial
 requires additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will
affect the integrity of the trial court's findings of fact;
and (3) whether the issue is of great public import.
 
Id. at 290, 884 P.2d at 353 (citations omitted).
 
The first factor in considering whether to address
 
plain error "is based on the tenet that an appellate court should
 
not review an issue based upon an undeveloped factual record." 
Id. at 290-91, 884 P.2d at 353-54. Here, the Scroggins raised
 
the strict liability claim in their complaint. Under the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances of this case, we reject the assertion that the 
Scroggins knowingly and voluntarily waived this claim by failing 
to object to the court's instructions on the applicable law. 
Although not particularly well articulated, the Scroggins' 
arguments at trial could be viewed as arguing in favor of the 
application of a strict liability theory, had the jury been 
instructed on the law. While there was substantial lay and 
expert testimony to the contrary, the Scroggins presented 
circumstantial evidence from which it was possible for a 
reasonable jury to logically infer that the allegedly tainted, 
and therefore dangerously defective, chicken wings caused the 
purported injury to Mrs. Scroggin. See Acoba v. Gen. Tire, Inc., 
92 Hawai' i 1, 17, 986 P.2d 288, 304 (1999) (citing Wagatsuma v. 
Patch, 10 Haw. App. 547, 566, 879 P.2d 572, 584 (1994)) (proof of 
defect and causation may be provided either by expert testimony 
or by circumstantial evidence); see also Am. Broad. Co., Inc. v. 
Kenai Air of Haw., Inc., 67 Haw. 219, 227, 686 P.2d 1, 6 (1984) 
(citing Stewart v. Budget Rent-A-Car Corp., 52 Haw. 71, 77, 470 
P.2d 240, 244 (1970)). 
In this case, like in Montalvo, the error "affects the 
integrity of the jury's findings" because "[o]nce all the 
evidence has been presented, it becomes the court's fundamental 
duty to properly instruct the jury on the law on the precise 
issues of fact it is to decide." See Montalvo, 77 Hawai' i at 
291, 884 P.2d at 354. Here, the Circuit Court failed to instruct the jury on the law concerning strict liability, a legal concept 
that is unfamiliar to most non-lawyers. See id. 
Regarding the third factor, the supreme court has
 
deemed preserving the integrity of our jury system to be of great
 
public import. Id. The complete failure to instruct the jury on
 
the Scroggins' strict liability claims, which had not been
 dismissed, totally eliminated the jury's role as the trier-of­
fact, without otherwise properly disposing of the claims, and
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
thus threatened the integrity of the jury system. See id. at
 
291-92; 884 P.2d at 354-55.
 
Thus, we conclude that it was plain and reversible
 
error for the Circuit Court not to provide any instructions to
 
the jury on strict liability.
 
With regard to the negligence count, the special
 
verdict form correctly directed the jury to consider the question
 of Mandarin's negligence. Once the jury found that Mandarin was
 
not negligent, it was unnecessary for them to deliberate any
 
further on the issue. See, e.g., Hubbell v. Iseke, 6 Haw. App.
 
485, 487-88, 727 P.2d 1131, 1132-33 (finding a nearly identical
 
special verdict form for a claim of negligence to be sufficient). 
As such, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
utilizing the special verdict form.
 
(2) Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 202(b) and 
(c), governing the judicial notice of law, states: 
(b) Mandatory judicial notice of law. The court shall
take judicial notice of (1) the common law, (2) the
constitutions and statutes of the United States and of every
state, territory, and other jurisdiction of the United
States, (3) all rules adopted by the United States Supreme
Court or by the Hawaii Supreme Court, and (4) all duly
enacted ordinances of cities or counties of this State.
 
(c) Optional judicial notice of law. Upon reasonable
notice to adverse parties, a party may request that the
court take, and the court may take, judicial notice of (1)
all duly adopted federal and state rules of court, 
(2) all
duly published regulations of federal and state agencies,
 
(3) all duly enacted ordinances of municipalities or other
governmental subdivisions of other states, (4) any matter of
law which would fall within the scope of this subsection or
subsection (b) of this rule but for the fact that it has
been replaced, superseded, or otherwise rendered no longer
in force, and (5) the laws of foreign countries,
international law, and maritime law.
 
HRE Rule 202 (b), (c) (1993) (emphasis added).
 
At trial, the Scroggins attempted to admit the "rules 
and regulations for restaurants in the State of Hawai' i," 
apparently referring to Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
chapter 11-22 (Supp. 2007), into evidence. The DOH issued 
regulations governing food establishment sanitation in HAR 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
chapter 11-12. Judicial notice of HAR chapter 11-12 is governed
 
by HRE Rule 202(c) as "duly published regulations of . . . state
 
agencies," thus optional, upon reasonable notice to adverse
 
parties. See HRE Rule 202(c). Here, despite repeated reminders,
 
the Scroggins failed to submit any exhibits to the Circuit Court
 before the pre-trial submission deadline. Instead, in the midst
 
of trial, without prior notice to the Mandarin, the Scroggins
 
attempted to offer the regulations as an exhibit. Under the
 
circumstances of this case, we reject the contention that the
 
Circuit Court's refusal to take judicial notice resulted in an
 
unfair trial. Among other things, the concept that a restaurant
 
has a duty to provide food that is safe for human consumption is
 
not of such a technical nature that lay persons are unable,
 
without reference to regulations, to apply the applicable
 
standard of care. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion
 
when it denied admission of the regulations into evidence.
 
(3) HRE Rule 404 provides that character evidence is
 
not admissible for the purpose of proving action in conformity
 
therewith on a particular occasion. However, HRE Rule 404(a)(3)
 
allows "[e]vidence of the character of a witness, as provided in
 
rules 607, 608, 609, and 609.1."
2 In addition, character
 
evidence is admissible for other purposes such as "proof of
 motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge,
 
identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident." 
HRE Rule 404(b).
 
At a pre-trial hearing, held on February 19, 2009, the
 
Circuit Court marked for identification Exhibit D, the Scroggins'
 
2
 Pursuant to HRE Rule 607, "[t]he credibility of a witness may be
attacked by any party." HRE Rule 608(b) allows evidence of "specific
instances of conduct" on cross-examination for the purpose of attacking the
witness' credibility "if probative of untruthfulness." Additionally, HRE Rule
609.1 provides that the credibility of a witness may be attacked by evidence
of bias, interest, or motive. HRE Rule 609.1(a). Extrinsic evidence of a
 witness' bias, interest, or motive is admissible only if on cross-examination
"the matter is brought to the attention of the witness and the witness is
afforded an opportunity to explain or deny the matter." HRE Rule 609.1(b). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Petition for Ex Parte Temporary Restraining Order (TRO Petition). 
The Circuit Court did not admit Exhibit D into evidence, but
 
rather ruled that the Mandarin would be able to use Exhibit D for
 
impeachment purposes, to attack Mrs. Scroggin's credibility. As
 
allowed at the pre-trial hearing, at trial, the TRO Petition was
 
used on the cross-examination of Mrs. Scroggin for the purpose of
 
impeaching her statements as to the cause of her physical
 
condition.
 
During Mrs. Scroggin's cross-examination Mr. Estes
 
asked her:
 
Was there anything else going on in your life that's caused
you to have physical difficultly or emotional strain other
than the physical symptoms that you attribute to your
consumption of the chicken wings? Anything else going on
that's causing you to be upset?
 
Mr. Estes then began questioning Mrs. Scroggin about
 
the incidents she described in the TRO Petition that allegedly
 
caused her distress. During cross-examination, Mr. Estes further
 questioned Mrs. Scroggin, asking
 
Do you recall saying for the past five-and-a-half years you had
been extremely anxious, you were suffering from distress and
depression?
 
He further questioned Mrs. Scroggin about the
 
statements made in the TRO Petition with regard to "unbearable
 
smoke" that was coming into her apartment from her neighbors'
 
apartment. The specific instances alleged in the TRO Petition
 
were properly used in order to discredit Mrs. Scroggin's
 
contention that the chicken wing incident was the sole or
 
contributing cause to her physical and emotional distress. 
Because Mrs. Scroggin's health and physical condition were at
 
issue in the trial, the cross-examination regarding the TRO
 
Petition was proper in attacking Mrs. Scroggin's contention that
 
the Mandarin was responsible for her health problems. The
 
Circuit Court did not err when it allowed the cross-examination
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Mrs. Scroggin regarding the TRO Petition in order to attack
 
her credibility with regard to the cause of her health problems. 
Similarly, the Mandarin's use of Exhibit E (a motion which
 
included as an exhibit a handwritten note on the Scroggins'
 
letterhead and describing, inter alia, headaches, nausea,
 
sleeplessness, and affects on the taste of food, purportedly
 
caused by smoke from the Scroggins' neighbor's apartment) on Mrs.
 
Scroggin's cross-examination, which exhibit was not admitted into
 
evidence, was properly allowed to attack her credibility
 
regarding the cause of her health problems.
 
On direct examination, Mrs. Scroggin testified, "I've
 
been going to Kahala Mandarin for many years, we've eaten over
 
there a lot. I have never complained about it even though I've
 
heard it was said that I did. I'm sure there are absolutely no
 
records of any kind of sign or anything." It appears that, on
 
cross-examination, counsel for the Mandarin followed the
 
requirements of HRE Rule 613(b), first asking Mrs. Scroggin if
 
she recalled making a claim for food poisoning at the Mandarin in
 
June of 2004 after a dinner at the Plumeria Café buffet, then
 
asking her if she denied making that claim. There was no abuse
 
of discretion in allowing those questions. Nor was there an
 
abuse of discretion in allowing Mrs. Scroggin to be examined
 
about notes in a physician's report, which report was not
 
admitted into evidence, and which stated in part:
 
Patient is a 49-year-old female who claims to be ill after
eating spicy wings at the Kahala Mandarin. She apparently
got ill after eating something there previously and when she
went for claims, she was told that she had no claim as she
had not seen a physician.
 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
allowing questioning in cross-examination with reference to this
 
report to challenge the credibility of the statements made by
 
Mrs. Scroggin on direct examination. 
(4) Although we conclude that it was harmless error,
 
it appears that through Mrs. Scroggin's testimony the proper
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
foundation was laid for photograph 1.4, as well as photograph 1.3
 
(which was admitted), to satisfy the identification and
 
authentication requirements of HRE Rule 901. Pursuant to Hawai' i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 61, before a judgment will
 
be set aside – in this case, the jury's verdict on the Scroggins'
 
negligence claim – it must be shown that any error made is
 
prejudicial. See Bank of Hawaii v. Shinn, 120 Hawai' i 1, 20, 200 
P.3d 370, 389 (2008) (quoting Jensen v. Pratt, 53 Haw. 201, 202,
 491 P.2d 547, 547 (1971)). Rule 61 provides that
 
[n]o error in either the admission or the exclusion of
evidence and no error or defect in any ruling or order or in
anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the
parties is grounds for granting a new trial or for setting
aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying, or otherwise
disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such
action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial
justice. The court at every stage of the proceeding must
disregard any error or defect in the proceeding which does
not affect the substantial rights of the parties.
 
An appellate court may act pursuant to HRCP Rule 61 where it is 
necessary to set aside a judgment in order to do "substantial 
justice" or to safeguard "substantial rights." Bank of Hawai' i 
v. Shinn, 120 Hawai' i at 20, 200 P.3d at 389. 
Here, the failure to admit photograph 1.4 is not a
 
defect that is inconsistent with substantial justice and was
 harmless error. Mrs. Scroggin testified as to the extent and
 
duration of her injuries, stating that her lip was "profusely
 
bleeding" and "[b]etween January 27th and February 11th . . . I
 
had blood streaming from my - from my mouth." Furthermore, the
 
only difference between photograph 1.4 and 1.3 is that photograph
 
1.4 shows blood dripping further down Mrs. Scroggin's chin. Any
 
information the Scroggins attempted to convey from introducing
 
photograph 1.4 was presented to the jury through photograph 1.3
 
and through her testimony. Because the substantial rights of the
 
Scroggins were not affected, the Circuit Court's refusal to admit
 
photograph 1.4 into evidence was harmless error and does not
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
warrant reversal. The Circuit Court did not err in excluding the
 
other photographs, as they were not properly authenticated.
 
In light of the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate
 
in part the Circuit Court's April 15, 2009 Amended Judgment and
 
remand this case to the Circuit Court for a retrial, consistent
 
with this Summary Disposition Order, of the Scroggins' strict
 
liability claims.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 21, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Long H. VuFrederick J. Arensmeyer(Dubin Law Offices)for Plaintiffs-Appellants Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
James T. Estes, Jr.
Devin L. Choy(Burke McPheeters Bordner
& Estes)
for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge
10
 