FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
JOSEPH PAVSEK and IKUYO PAVSEK,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 
vs.
 
TODD W. SANDVOLD; JUILIANA C. SANDVOLD;
KENT SATHER; JOAN SATHER; WAIALUA OCEANVIEW LLC;
HAWAII BEACH HOMES, INC.; HAWAII BEACH TRAVEL, INC.;
AND HAWAII ON THE BEACH, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees,
 
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10 and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants.
 
NO. 29179
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0131)
 
JUNE 13, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FUJISE and REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
This case arises out of a dispute over the alleged
 
illegal rental and use of residential properties as bed and
 
breakfast homes or transient vacation units. Plaintiffs­FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Appellants Joseph Pavsek and Ikuyo Pavsek (collectively, the 
Pavseks) live on Papailoa Road on the North Shore of O' ahu. The 
Pavseks filed a lawsuit in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) against the owners of three residential properties on Papailoa Road and companies involved in managing and arranging rentals for those properties. In their complaint, the Pavseks alleged that the three properties were being used for short-term rentals in violation of the Land Use Ordinance (LUO) of the City and County of Honolulu (City), and sought injunctive relief and damages. The Circuit Court dismissed the complaint with prejudice.
1 
This appeal presents the question of whether Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 46-4(a) (Supp. 2011)  creates a private
right of action that authorizes a "directly affected" private
 real estate owner to seek judicial enforcement of the LUO,
 without first bringing his or her claim before the administrative
 agency charged with enforcing the LUO. We hold that: (1) HRS 
§ 46-4(a) does create a private right of action in favor of a
 real estate owner directly affected by an alleged LUO zoning
 violation, but that the owner's action is subject to the doctrine
 of primary jurisdiction; (2) under the doctrine of primary
 jurisdiction, the Pavseks are required to seek an administrative
 determination of their claim that their neighbors have been
 violating the LUO before proceeding with their suit to obtain 
1 The Honorable Victoria A. Marks presided.
 
2 HRS § 46-4(a) provides in relevant part:
 
The council of any county shall prescribe
rules, regulations, and administrative procedures
and provide personnel it finds necessary to
enforce this section and any ordinance enacted in
accordance with this section. The ordinances may
be enforced by appropriate fines and penalties,
civil or criminal, or by court order at the suit
of the county or the owner or owners of real
estate directly affected by the ordinances.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judicial enforcement of the LUO; (3) the nuisance claims raised
 
by the Pavseks in their complaint were derived from their claim
 of the LUO violation and therefore are also subject to the
 primary jurisdiction doctrine; (4) the Circuit Court properly
 dismissed the claims alleging breach of fiduciary duty and unjust
 enrichment for failure to state a claim for relief; and (5) the
 Circuit Court's remedy of dismissal with prejudice of the claims
 subject to the primary jurisdiction doctrine is not consistent
 with the remedies applicable to that doctrine. Accordingly, we
 vacate the Circuit Court's dismissal of the claims that are
 subject to the primary jurisdiction doctrine; we remand the case
 with instructions that as to those claims, the Circuit Court
 consider the appropriate remedy under the primary jurisdiction
 doctrine; and we affirm the Circuit Court's dismissal of the
 claims for breach of fiduciary duty and unjust enrichment. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The Pavseks are owner-occupants of a residence on
 
Papailoa Road. Papailoa Road runs parallel to the beach and is
 near two tourist attractions, Laniakea Beach, known for the
 presence of sea turtles, and the beach that served as the set of
 the ABC television show "Lost." Defendants-Appellees Todd W.
 Sandvold and Juliana C. Sandvold (Sandvolds), Kent Sather and
 Joan Sather (Sathers), and Waialua Oceanview LLC (Waialua
 Oceanview) (collectively, Owner Defendants) own residences on
 Papailoa Road. In their complaint, the Pavseks alleged that
 Defendant-Appellee Hawaii Beach Homes, Inc. (HBH) "acts as a
 booking agent and/or property manager for rentals" of the
 Sandvolds' and the Sathers' properties, and that Defendants-
Appellees Hawaii Beach Travel, Inc. (HBT) and Hawaii on the
 Beach, Inc. (HOB) act, respectively, as "a booking agent for
 rentals" and "a booking agent and property manager for rentals"
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of Waialua Oceanview's property.3 The Pavseks' property is near,
 
but not adjacent to, Owner Defendants' properties. The Pavseks,
 
the Sandvolds, and certain other lot owners on Papailoa Road are
 co-tenants in a private right of way that provides beach access
 from Papailoa Road. 
II.
 
The lots on Papailoa Road owned by the Pavseks and
 
Owner Defendants are located in a residential district and are
 zoned "R-5." LUO § 21-3.30, Zoning Map 17. Under the LUO,
 properties zoned R-5 are generally limited in use to detached
 one-family dwelling, detached two-family dwellings, and public
 uses and structures. LUO Table 21-3. 
Property that is zoned R-5 cannot be used as a bed and
 
breakfast home or a transient vacation unit unless a non­conforming use certificate has been obtained. See LUO §§ 21­
4.110-1, 21-4.110-2.
4 The LUO defines a "bed and breakfast home"
 
as "a use in which overnight accommodations are provided to
 guests for compensation, for periods of less than 30 days, in the
 same detached dwelling as that occupied by an owner, lessee,
 operator or proprietor of the detached dwelling." LUO § 21-10.1. 
The LUO defines a "transient vacation unit" as "a dwelling unit
 or lodging unit which is provided for compensation to transient
 occupants for less than 30 days, other than a bed and breakfast
 home." Id. Owner Defendants do not claim that they have a
 
nonconforming use certificate that authorizes them to use their
 properties as a bed and breakfast home or a transient vacation
 
3 We will collectively refer to the Sandvolds, the Sathers,
Waialua Oceanview, HBH, HBT, and HOB as "Defendants." 
4 With respect to properties zoned R-5, LUO §§ 21-4.110-1
and 21-4.110-2 provide that failure to obtain a nonconforming use
certificate within nine months of December 28, 1989, shall mean
that as of December 28, 1989, the use of the property as a
transient vacation unit or bed and breakfast home is an illegal
use. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unit.
 
III.
 
The Pavseks filed a complaint against Defendants in the
 
Circuit Court. In Count I, which sought enforcement of the LUO
 
against all Defendants, the Pavseks alleged that Defendants have
 been advertising and renting Owner Defendants' properties as
 transient vacation units or bed and breakfast homes in violation
 of the LUO. The Pavseks stated that the "illegal" rentals have
 caused irreparable injury to them in the form of 
increased traffic noise and congestion in this residential
neighborhood; negatively affected the value of [their] property;
prevented or interfered with [their] use and enjoyment of [their]
lot for residential purposes; imperiled and/or destroyed the
residential character of the neighborhood in violation of the
intent of the zoning ordinances; overburdened a private right of
way easement providing beach access for [their] lot; and has
created increased noise levels, trash, litter, discarded cigarette
but[t]s, beer bottles and drug paraphernalia in this residential
neighborhood and the beach in front of this neighborhood.
 
The Pavseks further asserted in Count I that they have
 
complained about the "illegal activities" to the City's
 
Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) on numerous occasions
 "to no avail." Based on the DPP's investigations arising out of
 their complaints, the Pavseks alleged "upon information and
 belief" that the DPP had issued one citation to the Sathers and
 two citations to Waialua Oceanview, and the Pavseks indicated
 that the DPP apparently had not issued any citations to the
 Sandvolds. The Pavseks cited HRS § 46-4 as the basis for their
 entitlement to bring their lawsuit to enforce the LUO, and they
 requested injunctive relief to permanently bar Defendants from
 any further and continued violation of the LUO. 
In addition to Count I, the Pavseks asserted the
 
following counts: 
Count II -- Nuisance against Owner Defendants for
allowing their properties to be used for illegal
rentals;
 
Count III -- Conspiracy and/or Aiding and Abetting
a Nuisance against HBH, the Sandvolds, and the
Sathers;
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count IV -- Conspiracy and/or Aiding and Abetting a
Nuisance against HBT, HOB, and Waialua Oceanview;
 
Count V -- Breach of Fiduciary Duty against the
Sandvolds for overburdening the right of way jointly
owned with the Pavseks as a result of the Sandvolds'
 illegal rentals;
 
Count VI -- Aiding and Abetting a Breach of Fiduciary
Duty against HBH; and
 
Count VII -- Unjust Enrichment against all Defendants
for profiting at the expense of the Pavseks from the
illegal rentals of Owner Defendants' lots.
 
The Pavseks filed a motion for preliminary injunction
 
to prohibit Defendants from advertising and renting Owner
 Defendants' properties as transient vacation units or bed and
 breakfast homes. Defendants filed memoranda in opposition to the
 motion for preliminary injunction. Owner Defendants denied that
 they were illegally using their properties as bed and breakfast
 homes or transient vacation units. They asserted that they were
 in compliance with the LUO because they rent their properties for
 thirty days or more, even though the renters may not occupy the
 property for a full thirty days.
 
Defendants also filed motions to dismiss the complaint,
 
in which they argued, among other things, that: (1) that the
 Circuit Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over Count I
 because HRS § 46-4(a) does not grant the Pavseks a private right
 of action to sue to enforce the LUO; (2) the Circuit Court lacked
 subject matter jurisdiction over Count I under the doctrines of
 exhaustion of administrative remedies and primary jurisdiction;
 (3) the complaint should be dismissed for failure to name the
 City, which is an indispensable party as to Count I; (4) the
 nuisance counts (Counts II, III, and IV) are dependent on proof
 of the LUO violation alleged in Count I and fail to state a claim
 upon which relief can be granted; and (5) the breach of fiduciary
 duty counts (Counts V and VI) and the unjust enrichment count
 (Count VII) fail to state a claim upon which relief can be
 granted. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court held a consolidated hearing on the
 
Pavseks' motion for preliminary injunction and Defendants'
 
motions to dismiss. At the hearing, the Sandvolds' counsel
 argued that HRS § 46-4(a) did not establish a private right of 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
action for the Pavseks to file suit to enforce the LUO, and that
 
even if it did, the primary jurisdiction doctrine would require
 that the Pavseks first "go through the administrative process." 
The Circuit Court orally granted Defendants' motions to
 
dismiss. The Circuit Court stated that it found the arguments of
 the Sandvolds' counsel persuasive, and it indicated that it was
 dismissing Count I for lack of subject matter jurisdiction based
 on its interpretation of HRS § 46-4 and the doctrines of
 exhaustion of administrative remedies and primary jurisdiction. 
The Circuit Court noted:
 
And I think the scheme of things is that it's best for
the county to enforce its zoning regulations or to look at
its zoning regulations at least in the first instance rather
than the parties coming to court.
 
As to Counts II, III, and IV, the Circuit Court stated:
 
When I go to the other counts of the complaint,
the nuisance count, the aiding and abetting a
nuisance, I think that all of those are premised on or
dependent upon the alleged violation of the zoning
ordinance. The language in those counts talks about
how the Defendants allegedly "illegally rented" their
homes. 
So I think all of those counts are dependent on a
finding that there is illegal rental going on. And because
 that needs to be decided by the administrative agency in the
first instance, I think those counts would fail as well.
 
The Circuit Court also found as to Counts V and VI, that the
 
Pavseks had not made a sufficient showing of the alleged breach
 of fiduciary duty. As to Count VII, the Circuit Court found that
 the Pavseks had not alleged that they conferred any benefit upon
 Defendants to support their unjust enrichment claim. 
The Circuit Court subsequently issued a written "Order
 
Granting Defendants' Motions to Dismiss as to All Claims and All
 Parties" (Dismissal Order). The Dismissal Order states that
 "[a]ll of Plaintiffs' claims as to all parties are . . .
 dismissed with prejudice for the reasons stated in the
 [Defendants' motions to dismiss] and on the record in open
 court." On May 22, 2008, the Circuit Court entered a "Final 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judgment" (Judgment) in favor of Defendants and against the
 
Pavseks as to all claims raised in the Pavseks' complaint. This
 
appeal followed.
 
IV.
 
On appeal, the Pavseks argue that the Circuit Court
 
erred in dismissing their complaint because: (1) the Pavseks have
 
a private right of action under HRS § 46-4(a) to file suit to
 enjoin Defendants' alleged violation of the LUO as set forth in
 Count I; (2) the Pavseks' failure to join the City in their
 lawsuit did not justify dismissal of Count I; (3) the Pavseks'
 complaint stated a claim for nuisance; (4) the Pavseks' complaint
 stated a claim for breach of fiduciary duty; and (5) the Pavseks
 have a valid claim for unjust enrichment. 
For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that: (1)
 
with respect to Count I, the Pavseks have a private right of
 action under HRS § 46-4(a) to enforce Defendants' alleged LUO
 violation, but the Pavseks' enforcement action is subject to the
 doctrine of primary jurisdiction; (2) the Pavseks' failure to
 join the City did not provide a basis for dismissing Count I; (3)
 the Pavseks' nuisance claims (Counts II, III, and IV) were
 dependent on the alleged LUO violation and therefore also subject
 to the primary jurisdiction doctrine; and (4) the Pavseks'
 complaint failed to state a claim for breach of fiduciary duty
 (Counts V and VI) and unjust enrichment (Count VII). We vacate
 the Judgment with respect to the claims subject to the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine (Counts I, II, III, and IV), and we remand
 the case with instructions that the Circuit Court consider
 whether a stay or dismissal without prejudice of Counts I, II,
 III, and IV is the appropriate remedy under the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine. We affirm the Judgment with respect to
 Counts V, VI, and VII. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
A.
 
The Pavseks rely on HRS § 46-4(a) as the basis for
 
their entitlement to file suit to enforce the LUO. The Pavseks
 assert that HRS § 46-4(a) establishes a private right of action
 permitting them to seek judicial enforcement of the LUO, and
 therefore, the Circuit Court erred in dismissing their zoning
 enforcement claim for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. 
We conclude that HRS § 46-4(a) establishes a private
 
right of action to seek judicial enforcement of the LUO and
 accordingly, that the Circuit Court had subject matter
 jurisdiction over the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim. 
However, we further conclude that the Circuit Court's exercise of
 jurisdiction is subject to the doctrine of primary jurisdiction. 
Under this doctrine, the Circuit Court was justified in requiring 
the Pavseks to first pursue an administrative determination of
 their claim that Defendants have been violating the LUO before
 proceeding with judicial enforcement of the LUO.
5
 
B.
 
We review a trial court's dismissal for lack of subject
 
matter jurisdiction de novo. Norris v. Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.,
 
74 Haw. 235, 239, 842 P.2d 634, 637 (1992). Our review is 
5 The Pavseks did not argue in the Circuit Court or on
appeal that they have a private right of action pursuant to
article XI, section 9 of the Hawai' i Constitution to enforce HRS 
§ 46-4 or the LUO. Accordingly, we do not address that issue.We note that after this appeal was filed, the Hawai' i Supreme
Court, in County of Hawai' i v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai' i 
391, 235 P.3d 1103 (2010), held that article XI, section 9 of theHawai'i Constitution created a private right of action to enforce
HRS Chapter 205 in the circumstances of that case. Id. at 394, 
235 P.3d at 1106. The court, however, specifically stated thatit was not addressing whether the doctrines of primaryjurisdiction or exhaustion of administrative remedies would beapplicable to limit or restrict this private right of action.Id. at 418, 235 P.3d at 1130. Accordingly, Ala Loop does notcontrol or conflict with our analysis in this case. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
based on the contents of the complaint, the allegations of
which we accept as true and construe in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff. Dismissal is improper unless 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set
of facts in support of his claim which would entitle him to
relief." 
Id. at 239-240, 842 P.2d at 637 (internal block quote format and
 
citation omitted) 
HRS § 46-4, entitled "County zoning," concerns the
 
zoning power granted to the counties. HRS § 46-4(a) states that
 
[z]oning in all counties shall be accomplished within the
framework of a long-range, comprehensive general plan
prepared or being prepared to guide the overall future
development of the county. Zoning shall be one of the tools
available to the county to put the general plan into effect
in an orderly manner. 
HRS § 46-4(a) provides that the zoning power granted to the
 
counties "shall be exercised by ordinance which may relate to"
 matters, including:
 
(2)	 The areas in which residential uses may be regulated
or prohibited;
 
. . . 
(4)	 The areas in which particular uses may be subjected to
special restrictions; [and]
 
(5)	 The location of buildings and structures designed for
specific uses and designation of uses for which
buildings and structures may not be used or altered[.]
 
Of particular importance to this appeal, HRS § 46-4(a) 
provides:
 
The council of any county shall prescribe rules,
regulations, and administrative procedures and provide
personnel it finds necessary to enforce this section and any
ordinance enacted in accordance with this section. The
 
ordinances may be enforced by appropriate fines and
penalties, civil or criminal, or by court order at the suit
of the county or the owner or owners of real estate directly
affected by the ordinances.
 
Any civil fine or penalty provided by ordinance under
this section may be imposed by the district court, or by the
zoning agency after an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to
chapter 91. The proceeding shall not be a prerequisite for
any injunctive relief ordered by the circuit court.
 
. . . .
 
The powers granted herein shall be liberally construed
in favor of the county exercising them, and in such a manner
as to promote the orderly development of each county or city
and county in accordance with a long-range, comprehensive
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
general plan to ensure the greatest benefit for the State as
a whole. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
C.
 
Defendants contend that HRS § 46-4(a) does not create a
 
private right of action, but is simply an enabling statute that
 
gives the City a range of enforcement options, including private
 enforcement, which the City may choose to select or reject. 
Defendants observe that the City has not chosen to enact an
 ordinance creating a private right of action to enforce the LUO,
 and therefore they argue that no such private right of action
 exists. The Pavseks counter that HRS § 46-4(a), by its plain
 language, creates a private right of action that entitles them to
 bring suit to enforce the LUO. We agree with the Pavseks that
 HRS § 46-4(a) creates a private right of action. 
We apply the following principles when interpreting a
 
statute:
 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous
statute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning.
 
Hawaii Gov't Emps. Ass'n, AFSCME Local 152, AFL–CIO v. Lingle, 
124 Hawai' i 197, 202, 239 P.3d 1, 6 (2010) (internal block quote 
format and citation omitted). 
HRS § 46-4(a) provides that zoning ordinances enacted
 
by the counties "may be enforced . . . by court order at the suit
 of the county or the owner or owners of real estate directly
 affected by the ordinances." We conclude that the plain language
 of the statute clearly manifests the Legislature's intent to
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
create a private right of action for "directly affected" real
 
estate owners to sue to enforce zoning ordinances. Defendants do
 not cite to anything in the legislative history of HRS § 46-4(a)
 that supports their contention that the language at issue was
 merely intended by the Legislature to provide the counties with
 enforcement options that the counties could select or reject. We
 decline to adopt Defendants' interpretation, which relies on
 conjecture and hidden meaning that are not supported by the
 statute's legislative history. Instead, we adopt what we
 consider to be the most natural and straightforward reading of
 the statute and construe it as creating a private right of
 action.
 
As Defendants acknowledge, other states have enacted 
statutes which establish a private right of action to enforce zoning laws. E.g., Minn. Stat. § 366.16 (authorizing any 
adjacent or neighboring property owner to institute any appropriate action to enforce zoning laws); Neb. Rev. Stat. § 23-114.05 (authorizing owners of real estate within the district affected by the regulations to institute any appropriate action to prevent or restrain the unlawful use of property); N.J. Stat. Ann. § 40:55D-18 (authorizing an interested party to institute any appropriate action to prevent or restrain the unlawful use of property). The enactment by other states of statutory private rights of action to enforce zoning laws supports our conclusion that the Hawai' i Legislature intended to 
do the same in enacting HRS § 46-4(a). 
We reject Defendants' argument that the Pavseks lack
 
standing to sue under HRS § 46-4(a). This argument is based on
 Defendants' contention that the phrase "the owner or owners of
 real estate directly affected by the ordinances" only permits
 suit by landowners "whose property had been the subject of a
 zoning ordinance and who wish[] to contest the applicability of
 that ordinance to [their] own property or petition for a change
 to the ordinance." Defendants' interpretation of HRS § 46-4(a)
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as only providing a private right of action to landowners who
 
seek to contest zoning ordinances affecting their own property is
 inconsistent with the statute's specific authorization of actions
 to enforce zoning ordinances. We are not persuaded by the
 equivocal inferences Defendants attempt to draw from a provision
 dealing with the establishment of boundaries for forest and water
 reserve zones, which was enacted at the same time as HRS § 46-4,
 that the Legislature intended the term "enforce" to mean
 "contest" in enacting HRS § 46-4(a). We conclude that if the
 allegations of the Pavseks' complaint are taken as true, the
 Pavseks have standing as a "directly affected" owner to bring
 their lawsuit to enforce the LUO.
 
II.
 
The conclusion that the Pavseks have a private right of
 
action under HRS § 46-4(a) to seek enforcement of the LUO does
 not end our inquiry. Defendants argue on appeal, as they did in
 the Circuit Court, that even if "[HRS] § 46-4[(a)] authorizes a
 private right of action with original jurisdiction in the circuit
 court, the doctrine of primary jurisdiction mandates that the
 Director of the DPP, and then the ZBA, be allowed to enforce the
 zoning [ordinance] before it can be considered by a court." We
 agree that the doctrine of primary jurisdiction applies to the
 Pavseks' claim for enforcement of the LUO.
 
In Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Group v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81, 
734 P.2d 161 (1987), the Hawai' i Supreme Court explained the 
doctrine of primary jurisdiction and the related doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies: 
Courts have "developed two principal doctrines to enable the
question of timing of requests for judicial intervention in the
administrative process to be answered: (1) primary jurisdiction;
and (2) exhaustion of administrative remedies." B. Schwartz,
Administrative Law § 8.23, at 485 (2d ed. 1984). "Both are
essentially doctrines of comity between courts and agencies." Id.
 
(footnote omitted).
 
"'Primary jurisdiction' applies where a claim is
originally cognizable in the courts, and comes into play
whenever enforcement of the claim requires the resolution of
issues which, under a regulatory scheme, have been placed
within the special competence of an administrative body."
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
United States v. Western Pac. R.R., 352 U.S. 59, 63-64, 77
S.Ct. 161, 164-65, 1 L.Ed.2d 126 (1956). When this happens,
"the judicial process is suspended pending referral of such
issues to the administrative body for its views." Id. at
 
64, 77 S.Ct. at 165 (citation omitted). In effect, "the
courts are divested of whatever original jurisdiction they
would otherwise possess." B. Schwartz, supra, § 8.24, at
 488 (emphasis omitted). And "even a seemingly contrary
statutory provision will yield to the overriding policy
promoted by the doctrine." Id.
 
"Exhaustion," on the other hand, comes into play
"where a claim is cognizable in the first instance by an
administrative agency alone; judicial interference is
withheld until the administrative process has run its
course." United States v. Western Pac. R.R., 352 U.S. at
63, 77 S.Ct. at 164. "The exhaustion principle asks simply
that the avenues of relief nearest and simplest should be
pursued first." Moore v. City of East Cleveland, 431 U.S.
494, 524, 97 S.Ct. 1932, 1948, 52 L.Ed.2d 531 (1977)
(Burger, C.J., dissenting). "Judicial review of agency
action will not be available unless the party affected has
taken advantage of all the corrective procedures provided
for in the administrative process." B. Schwartz, supra, §
 8.30, at 502. 
Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 92-93, 734 P.2d at 168-69 (brackets and
 
ellipsis points omitted).
 
Thus, under the primary jurisdiction doctrine, a court
 
has original subject matter jurisdiction over a claim, but 
"suspends" the judicial process so that issues pivotal to the
 claim's resolution can first be determined by an administrative
 body with responsibility for, and special competence in, deciding
 the issue. Id. In contrast, the exhaustion of administrative
 
remedies doctrine applies in situations where the court lacks
 original subject matter jurisdiction over a claim, and the court
 can only exercise jurisdiction after the administrative process
 for resolving the claim has been completed. Id. 
In Kona Old, the Hawai' i Supreme Court addressed the 
6
issue of whether HRS § 205A-6  vested the circuit court with
6 HRS § 205A-6 (2001) currently provides, as it did when
construed in Kona Old, in pertinent part as follows:
 
§ 205A-6 Cause of action. (a) Subject to chapters
661 and 662, any person or agency may commence a civil
action alleging that any agency: 
(continued...)
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jurisdiction over an action brought by a private party to enforce
 
agency compliance with the Costal Zone Management Act (CZMA), HRS
 Chapter 205A. HRS § 205A-6 authorizes "any person or agency [to]
 commence a civil action alleging that any agency" has breached or
 failed to comply with the CZMA in some respect. The supreme
 court acknowledged that the cause of action created by HRS 
§ 205A-6 "seemingly describes a claim 'originally cognizable in
 the courts.'" Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 93, 734 P.2d at 169 (quoting
 
Western Pac. R.R., 352 U.S. at 64, a case applying the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine). Nevertheless, the supreme court required
 the plaintiff to first present the issues underlying its CZMA
 enforcement claim for resolution by the administrative agency
 with special competence to decide such issues, reasoning as
 follows:
 
[Plaintiff's] claim, however, involves the issuance of
a special management area minor permit, and its enforcement
"requires the resolution of issues which, under the
regulatory scheme, have been placed within the special
competence" of the county planning department. [Western Pac.
R.R., 352 U.S. at 64]. Thus, the request for judicial
intervention in the administrative process should not have
 
6(...continued)
 
(1) Is not in compliance with one or more of the
objectives, policies, and guidelines provided
or authorized by this chapter within the
special management area and the waters from
the shoreline to the seaward limit of the
 State's jurisdiction; or 
(2) Has failed to perform any act or duty
required to be performed under this chapter;
or 
(3) In exercising any duty required to be
performed under this chapter, has not
complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
. . . .
 
(c) A court, in any action brought under this
section, shall have jurisdiction to provide any relief
as may be appropriate, including a temporary
restraining order or preliminary injunction.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
preceded the resolution by the Board of Appeals of the
question of whether the planning director's action in
issuing the minor permit was proper. For it is
 
now firmly established, that in cases raising issues
of fact not within the conventional experience of
judges or cases requiring the exercise of
administrative discretion, agencies created by the
legislature for regulating the subject matter should
not be passed over. This is so even though the facts
after they have been appraised by specialized
competence serve as a premise for legal consequences
to be judicially defined. Uniformity and consistency
in the regulation of business entrusted to a
particular agency are secured, and the limited
functions of review by the judiciary are more
rationally exercised, by preliminary resort for
ascertaining and interpreting the circumstances
underlying legal issues to agencies that are better
equipped than courts by specialization, by insight
gained through experience, and by more flexible
procedure.
 
Far East Conference v. United States, 342 U.S. 570, 574-75,
72 S.Ct. 492, 494, 96 L.Ed. 576 (1952).
 
Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 94, 734 P.2d at 169 (brackets omitted).
 
Based on this reasoning, the supreme court affirmed the circuit
 court's dismissal of the plaintiff's complaint. Id.
 
We read Kona Old as applying the primary jurisdiction
 
7
doctrine,  and we conclude that Kona Old controls our decision in
this case. Here, similar to the situation in Kona Old, there is
 a statutory private right of action set forth in HRS § 46-4(a),
 which gives the Circuit Court original subject matter
 jurisdiction over the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim. In
 addition, the rationale and justification articulated in Old Kona
 for invoking the primary jurisdiction doctrine fully applies to
 this case.
 
7 In Kona Old, the supreme court did not specifically state
 
that it was applying the primary jurisdiction doctrine. However,
we infer from its analysis that it did. As noted, the supreme
court acknowledged that the cause of action created by HRS §
205A-6 "seemingly describes a claim 'originally cognizable in the
courts.'" Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 93, 734 P.2d at 169. The
 exhaustion of administrative remedies doctrine does not apply to
claims originally cognizable in the courts. 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The adjudication of the Pavseks' zoning enforcement 
claim requires the resolution of whether Defendants violated the 
LUO. The Hawai' i Legislature has granted to the City the power 
to establish and enforce zoning laws, and the City, in turn, has placed determinations of zoning violations within the special competence of the Director of the DPP and the ZBA. See HRS § 46­
4(a); Revised Charter of Honolulu (RCH) §§ 6-1501, 6-1503, 6-1516 (2000 ed. & Supp. 2003).
8 Thus, the Pavseks' zoning enforcement 
claim satisfies the conditions for applying the primary jurisdiction doctrine. See Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 92-94, 734 P.2d 
at 168-69; Jou v. Nat'l Interstate Ins. Co. of Hawaii, 114 Hawai'i 122, 128, 157 P.3d 561, 567 (App. 2007). Furthermore, 
the policy of promoting uniformity and consistency in the regulatory process, which underlies the primary jurisdiction doctrine, would be served by applying the doctrine to the Pavseks' enforcement claim. 
By requiring the Pavseks to first pursue resolution of
 
their claim that Defendants have been violating the LUO with the
 Director of the DPP and the ZBA, 
[u]niformity and consistency in the regulation of business
entrusted to a particular agency are secured, and the
limited functions of review by the judiciary are more
rationally exercised, by preliminary resort for ascertaining
and interpreting the circumstances underlying legal issues
to agencies that are better equipped than courts by
specialization, by insight gained through experience, and by
more flexible procedure.
 
Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 92-93, 734 P.2d at 168-69. Based on Kona
 
Old, we conclude that the Pavseks were required to first present
 their claim regarding Defendants' alleged violation of the LUO to
 the Director of the DPP, and to appeal any adverse decision of
 
8 The Director of the DPP is "charged with the
administration and enforcement of the zoning . . . ordinances[.]"
RCH § 6-1503. The ZBA is responsible for "hear[ing] and
determin[ing] appeals from the actions of the director in the
administration of the zoning ordinances[.]" RCH § 6-1516
(footnote omitted). The ZBA is organizationally part of the DPP.
RCH 
§ 6-1501.
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Director to the ZBA, before proceeding with their suit to
 
obtain judicial enforcement of the LUO. 
The DPP Rules of Practice and Procedure (DPP Rules) 
§ 3-1 (1993) authorize "[a]ny interested person" to petition the
 Director of the DPP "for a declaratory ruling as to the
 applicability of any statute or ordinance relating to the [DPP],"
 which includes the LUO. The Director's decision on a declaratory
 ruling regarding the applicability of the LUO may be appealed to
 the ZBA. RCH § 6-1516; Rules of the Zoning Board of Appeals of
 the City and County of Honolulu (ZBA Rules) § 22-1 (1998). The
 Pavseks do not dispute that they did not petition the Director of
 the DPP for a declaratory ruling regarding the alleged LUO
 violations by Defendants. We conclude that under the primary
 jurisdiction doctrine, the Pavseks were required to first
 petition the Director of the DPP for a declaratory ruling on the
 alleged LUO violations, and appeal an adverse determination by
 the Director to the ZBA, before proceeding with their private
 right of action to enforce the LUO in the Circuit Court.
 
III. 
In addition to the primary jurisdiction doctrine, the 
Circuit Court appeared to rely upon the purported absence of a private right of action under HRS § 46-4(a) and the purported failure to exhaust administrative remedies in dismissing the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim set forth in Count I. We have already concluded that the Pavseks have a private right of action under HRS § 46-4(a) to bring their zoning enforcement claim in the Circuit Court. Our conclusion means that the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim was originally cognizable in the Circuit Court and therefore the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies is inapplicable. See Kona Old, 69 Hawai' i at 93, 734 
P.2d at 169. Accordingly, the Circuit Court could not justify its dismissal of the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim on the absence of a private right of action under HRS § 46-4(a) or on the doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies. 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. 
In their motions to dismiss, Defendants argued that the 
Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim should be dismissed on the 
alternative ground of their failure to join the City as an indispensable party. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred to the extent that it relied upon this ground in dismissing the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim. Even assuming arguendo that the City qualifies as an indispensable party under Hawai' i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 19 (2000), dismissal would only be an available remedy if the City "cannot be made a party[.]" HRCP Rule 19(b). There is no basis in the record to conclude that the City could not be joined as a party to the Pavseks' lawsuit. Accordingly, the fact that the City had not yet been made a party did not provide a basis for dismissing the Pavseks' zoning enforcement claim. See id.; UFJ Bank Ltd. v. Ieda, 109 Hawai' i 
137, 142-43, 123 P.3d 1232, 1237-38 (2005); Life of the Land v. Land Use Comm'n, 58 Haw. 292, 298, 568 P.2d 1189, 1194 (1997). 
V.
 
In its oral ruling on Defendants' motions to dismiss,
 
the Circuit Court appeared to apply the doctrine of primary
 jurisdiction in dismissing the Pavseks' nuisance claims, Counts
 II, III, and IV. We conclude that the doctrine of primary
 jurisdiction applies to the Pavseks' nuisance claims. This is
 because the Pavseks' nuisance claims are predicated on
 Defendants' alleged violation of the LUO through illegal rentals. 
In Count II for nuisance against Owner Defendants, the Pavseks
 alleged that the actions of Owner Defendants "in allowing their
 properties to be used for illegal rentals" constituted a
 nuisance. Counts III and IV alleged that various Defendants
 conspired to create, or aided and abetted other Defendants in
 creating, the nuisance attributable to the alleged illegal
 rentals. 
We agree with the Circuit Court's assessment that the
 
Pavseks' nuisance claims "are dependent on a finding that there
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
is illegal rental going on" which "needs to be decided by the
 
administrative agency in the first instance[.]" Because the
 basis for the Pavseks' nuisance claims are Defendants' alleged
 "illegal rentals," a determination of whether Defendants have
 been violating the LUO is a necessary predicate to deciding the
 nuisance claims. Accordingly, the primary jurisdiction doctrine
 applies to the nuisance counts.
9
 
VI.
 
Where the doctrine of primary jurisdiction applies, the
 
court has the "discretion either to retain jurisdiction [and stay
 the proceedings] or, if the parties would not be unfairly
 disadvantaged, to dismiss the case without prejudice." Rieter v.
 
Cooper, 507 U.S. 258, 269-69 (1993); see Jou, 114 Hawai' i at 128, 
157 P.3d at 567 (stating that when primary jurisdiction applies,
 "the court may stay the proceedings while an administrative
 agency decides predicate issues necessary to adjudicate . . .
 [the] claim"); Fratinardo v. Emps. Ret. Sys., 121 Hawai' i 462, 
468-69, 220 P.3d 1043, 1049-50 (App. 2009). 
In Jou, we held that 
[s]taying the proceedings conserves scarce judicial
resources by allowing an administrative agency with
expertise to decide the predicate issues. The agency's
resolution of the predicate issues may reveal that there is
no basis for . . . [the] claim or may satisfy the plaintiff
and obviate his or her need to further pursue the . . .
claim. . . .
 
A trial court has discretion in fashioning an appropriate
remedy when applying the primary jurisdiction doctrine. As an
 alternative to staying the proceedings pending administrative
resolution of predicate issues, the court has the discretion to
 
9 Based on the Circuit Court's oral ruling on Defendants'
motions to dismiss, we do not believe that the Circuit Court
relied upon HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) (2000) in dismissing the Pavseks'
nuisance counts. Thus, we decline to address whether these
claims are subject to dismissal under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6). We
 note that the Circuit Court will be in a better position to
evaluate whether the nuisance counts state valid claims for
 relief under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), by virtue of the application of
the primary jurisdiction doctrine, after it receives the benefit
of an administrative determination of the issue of whether
 Defendants have been violating the LUO.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
dismiss the case without prejudice. However, dismissal is an
appropriate remedy only "if the parties would not be unfairly
disadvantaged."
 
Jou, 114 Hawai' i at 128-29, 157 P.3d at 567-68 (citation omitted; 
emphasis added). 
Based on the record, we are unable to determine whether 
the Circuit Court considered whether any "unfair disadvantage" 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would result from the dismissal of the Pavseks' zoning 
enforcement and nuisance claims, Counts I, II, III, and IV. The Circuit Court also dismissed these counts with prejudice, a remedy that is not generally applicable under the primary jurisdiction doctrine. See Rieter, 507 U.S. at 268-69; Jou, 114 
Hawai'i at 128-29, 157 P.3d at 567-68; Flo-Sun, Inc. v. Kirk, 783 
So.2d 1029, 1041 (Fla. 2001) (concluding that dismissal with prejudice was improper when primary jurisdiction applies). Accordingly, we vacate the portions of the Judgment that dismissed Counts I, II, III, and IV with prejudice, and we remand the case with instructions that the Circuit Court consider whether a stay or dismissal without prejudice is appropriate as to these counts. 
VII.
 
The Pavseks argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
dismissing, pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6), Count V, which
 alleged that the Sandvolds had beached their fiduciary duties as
 co-tenants in a private right of way, and Count VI, which alleged
 that HBH had aided and abetted the Sandvolds' breach of their
 fiduciary duties. 
We review de novo a trial court's ruling on a motion to 
dismiss under HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim. Wright v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 111 Hawai' i 401, 406, 142 P.3d 
265, 270 (2006). "A complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him or her to relief." In re Estate of 
Rogers, 103 Hawai' i 275, 280, 81 P.3d 1190, 1195 (2003) (block 
quote format and citation omitted). "[O]ur consideration is strictly limited to the allegations of the complaint, and we must deem those allegations to be true." Id. at 281, 81 P.3d at 1196 
(block quote format and citation omitted). 
24
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"However, in weighing the allegations of the complaint
 
as against a motion to dismiss, the court is not required to
 
accept conclusory allegations on the legal effect of the events
 alleged." Marsland v. Pang, 5 Haw. App. 463, 474, 701 P.2d 175,
 
186 (1985).
 
While a complaint attacked by a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to
dismiss does not need detailed factual allegations, a
plaintiff's obligation to provide the "grounds" of his
"entitlement to relief" requires more than labels and
conclusions, and a formulaic recitation of the elements of a
cause of action will not do. Factual allegations must be
enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative
level on the assumption that all of the complaint's
allegations are true (even if doubtful in fact).
 
Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555 (2007) (construing
 
federal rule that is analogous to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6)) (citation
 and footnote omitted). We conclude that the Pavseks failed to
 state a sufficient claim for relief in Counts V and VI. 
The Supreme Court of the Territory of Hawai' i in De 
Mello v. De Mello, 24 Haw. 675, 676 (Haw. Terr. 1919), stated that 
since the possession of one joint tenant, or tenant in
common, is the possession of all, and all are equally
entitled to the use and enjoyment of the property, it
follows as a general rule that one tenant cannot maintain an
action at law against his cotenant in respect of the common
property unless he has been disseized or ousted therefrom.
 
Where the commonly-owned property is a private right of way, such
 
as a privately-owned roadway, one co-owner may use the property
 "to its fullest extent as a roadway so long as he [or she] does
 not interfere with his [or her] co-tenant's use of the roadway
 for the same purposes" and the co-owner's use "does not result in
 disseisen or ouster" of the other co-tenants. Hewitt v. Waikiki
 
Shopping Plaza, 6 Haw. App. 387, 395, 722 P.2d 1055, 1061 (1981).
 
Here, the Pavseks allege in their complaint that the
 
Sandvolds have "overburden[ed] the private right of way [in which
 the Pavseks and Sandvolds are joint owners] through the increased
 traffic and use associated with [the Sandvolds'] illegal 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rentals." The bare and conclusory allegation that the right of
 
way was "overburdened" is insufficient to raise a right to relief
 above the speculative level. The Pavseks do not allege that the
 increased traffic related to the Sandvolds' rentals interfered
 with, prevented, or ousted the Pavseks from using the right of
 way for its intended purpose. We conclude that the Circuit Court
 properly dismissed Count V for failure to state a claim. Count
 VI, which alleged that HBH aided and abetted the Sandvolds in the
 breach of their fiduciary duties, was dependent upon Count V and
 was therefore also properly dismissed for failure to state a
 claim. 
VIII.
 
The Pavseks argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
dismissing Count VII for unjust enrichment, which was asserted 
against all Defendants, for failure to state a claim. 
To prove unjust enrichment, a plaintiff must show that 
"he or she conferred a benefit upon the opposing party and that the retention of that benefit would be unjust." Porter v. Hu, 
116 Hawai' i 42, 55, 169 P.3d 994, 1007 (App. 2007) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). The allegations in Count VII of the Pavseks' complaint are insufficient to support a valid claim that they conferred a benefit upon Defendants. Accordingly, we conclude that Count VII failed to state a claim for relief and that the Circuit Court properly dismissed Count VII. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we: (1) vacate the portions
 
of the Circuit Court's Judgment dismissing Counts I, II, III, and
 IV of the complaint with prejudice; (2) affirm the portions of
 the Judgment dismissing Counts V, VI, and VII of the complaint
 with prejudice; and (3) remand the case to the Circuit Court with
 instructions to consider whether a stay or dismissal without
 prejudice of Counts I, II, III, and IV would be an appropriate 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remedy under the primary jurisdiction doctrine and for further
 
proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
On the briefs
 
and argument:
 
Paul Alston
 
Thomas E. Bush
 (Altson Hunt Floyd & Ing)
Ken T. Kuniyuki
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
Gregory W. Kugle
Noelle B. Catalan
 (Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
for Defendants-Appellees
TODD W. SANDVOLD, JULIANA C. SANDVOLD,
and HAWAII BEACH HOMES, INC.
 
David B. Rosen
 
(The Law Office of David B. Rosen, ALC)
for Defendants-Appellees
WAIALUA OCEANVIEW, LLC,
HAWAII BEACH TRAVEL, INC., and
HAWAII ON THE BEACH, INC.
 
Rosemary T. Fazio
Francis P. Hogan
Zachary J. Antalis
(Ashford & Wriston)
for Defendants-Appellees
KENT SATHER and JOAN SATHER
 
27
 