NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29719
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RAYMOND KIM, Claimant/Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES,
Employer/Appellee-Appellee,
and
 
LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
Insurance Carrier/Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2006-372 (2-04-13128))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Claimant/Appellant-
Appellant Raymond Kim (Kim), pro se, appeals from the February 5,
 
2009 Decision and Order (Decision and Order) of the Labor and
 
Industrial Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) and LIRAB's March 2,
 
2009 Order Denying Request for Reconsideration of LIRAB's
 
Decision and Order (Order Denying Reconsideration).
 
In its Decision and Order, LIRAB affirmed the May 17,
 
2006 Decision (Director's Decision) of the Director (Director) of
 
the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations. The Director's
 
Decision denied, in part, Kim's vocational Rehabilitation Plan
 
dated December 29, 2005, as supplemented by reports dated
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
January 23, 2006 and February 10, 2006, (collectively, VR Plan)
 
wherein the goal of a four-year college degree was proposed.
 
On appeal, Kim contends:
 (1) LIRAB abused its discretion in its Decision and
 
Order when it affirmed the Director's Decision denying the VR
 Plan.
 
(2) LIRAB erred when it denied Kim's February 23,
 
1
2009 Request to Reconsider Decision and Order (Request for
Reconsideration).
 
(3) He is entitled to further vocational
 
rehabilitation services, including the services outlined in the
 VR Plan.
 
Underlying all of Kim's points on appeal is his
 
contention that the VR Plan should have been approved. 
Kim asks 
this court to reverse the Director's Decision and LIRAB's
 Decision and Order and approve Kim's VR Plan.
 
Before addressing Kim's arguments, we note that his 
opening brief and points on appeal fail to comply with Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b).
2 The failure to 
1 Kim's letter is dated February 20, 2009, but we use LIRAB's filing
date of February 23, 2009.
2 Kim's noncompliance includes the failure to provide record references
to the facts, a concise statement of the points of error and where in the
record the alleged errors occurred and were objected to, and, insofar as the
points of error involved Findings of Fact (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law
(COLs), the specific FOFs and COLs involved and objected to. HRAP 28(b)(3)
and (4). 
HRAP Rule 28 provides in relevant part:
 
(b) Opening brief. Within 40 days after the filing of the
record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening brief,
containing the following sections in the order here indicated:
 
. . . .
 
(3) A concise statement of the case, setting forth the
nature of the case, the course and disposition of proceedings in
the court or agency appealed from, and the facts material to
consideration of the questions and points presented, with record
references supporting each statement of fact or mention of court
or agency proceedings. In presenting those material facts, all
supporting and contradictory evidence shall be presented in
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) is sufficient to affirm LIRAB's
 
Decision and Order and Order Denying Reconsideration. O'Connor
 
v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 385, 885 P.2d 361, 363 
(1994) ("points not presented in accordance with [HRAP 28(b)(4)] 
will be disregarded"). However, we recognize that the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court "has consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on 
the merits, where possible." Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 
Hawai'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995) (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted). Therefore, we now consider Kim's 
appeal on the merits. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Kim's
 
points of error as follows:
 
LIRAB did not abuse its discretion when it affirmed the 
Director's denial of the VR Plan. Hawai' i Administrative Rules 
2(...continued)
summary fashion, with appropriate record references. Record
references shall include page citations and the volume number, if
applicable. 
References to transcripts shall include the date of
the transcript, the specific page or pages referred to, and the
volume number, if applicable. Lengthy quotations from the record
may be reproduced in the appendix. There shall be appended to the
brief a copy of the judgment, decree, findings of fact and
conclusions of law, order, opinion or decision relevant to any
point on appeal, unless otherwise ordered by the court.
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set forth in
separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall state: (i) the
alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii) where in the
record the alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in the record
the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the
alleged error was brought to the attention of the court or agency.
Where applicable, each point shall also include the following:
 
. . . .
 
(C) when the point involves a finding or conclusion of the
court or agency, either a quotation of the finding or conclusion
urged as error or reference to appended findings and
conclusions[.]
 
Kim is warned that future non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28(b) may result in
sanctions against him.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
(HAR) ยง 12-14-5(a)  requires the vocational rehabilitation
counselor to follow a four-step process for the development of a
 
vocational rehabilitation plan. 
In this mixed question of fact
 
and law regarding whether the facts as presented by Kim meet the
 criteria for a vocational rehabilitation plan under the
 
administrative rules, "the courts should not substitute their own
 
judgment for that of the administrative agency." 
Camara v.
 
Agsalud
, 67 Haw. 212, 216, 685 P.2d 794, 797 (1984).
 
The Director determined that the VR Plan was premature
 
because "efforts to pursue the more cost-effective alternatives
 of direct placement [Step 3] or a short-term training program
 
[Step 4] have not been adequately explored." On appeal, LIRAB
 
reviewed the VR Plan and affirmed the Director's determination
 
that Kim failed to comply with the four-step process for
 
developing the VR plan.
 
LIRAB noted that Kim's vocational rehabilitation
 
counselor, Preston Jones (Jones), conducted a labor market survey
 
on December 15, 2005 and reported that Kim considered a position
 
3 HAR ยง 12-14-5 provides in relevant part:
 
ยง12-14-5 Criteria for an approved vocational rehabilitation
plan. (a) A provider shall file the employee's plan with the
director for review and approval. The plan shall be subject to
the approval of the employee. Upon receipt of the plan from the
provider, an employee has ten days to review and sign the plan.
The plan shall be submitted to the employer and employee and be
filed with the director within two working days from the date of
the employee's signature. A plan shall include a statement of the
feasibility of the vocational goal, using the process of:
 
(1)	 [Step 1] First determining if the employee's usual and
customary employment represents suitable gainful employment;
should it not,
 
(2)	 [Step 2] Next determining if modified work or other work
with the same employer represents suitable gainful
employment; should it not,
 
(3)	 [Step 3] Next determining if modified or other employment
with a different employer represents suitable gainful
employment; should it not, and finally,
 
(4)	 [Step 4] Providing training to obtain employment in another
occupational field.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
as a computer systems engineer to be suitable gainful employment,
 
even though the salary range was $36,000-$60,000/year, which is
 
less than what Kim had been earning prior to his injury. LIRAB
 
credited the report by vocational rehabilitation counselor Donald
 
Kegler (Kegler), who identified several jobs for which Kim
 
qualified and could perform given his work limitations and
 
without further training. These jobs were in a similar salary
 
range as Kim's desired job as a computer systems engineer, but
 
could be pursued as part of Step 3 of the VR Plan assessment
 
process. Kegler identified two-year programs at community
 
colleges that would qualify Kim for jobs at wages similar to what
 
he could earn after a four-year program. These training programs
 
could be pursued under Step 4 of the assessment process. In its
 
Decision and Order, LIRAB stated that even though the jobs did
 
not pay as much as Kim had been earning prior to his injury,
 
IBM's obligation under the law was only to restore Kim's earning
 
capacity "as nearly as possible" to his pre-injury level. Also,
 
IBM's obligation was to return Kim to the labor force "as quickly
 
as possible in a cost effective manner." We note that LIRAB did
 
not deny Kim vocational rehabilitation services in general, but
 
required that Step 3, direct placement, be explored before moving
 
to Step 4, retraining in another field.
 
We conclude there is substantial evidence to support
 
LIRAB's determination that Kim did not adequately explore Step 3
 
or Step 4 of the vocational rehabilitation process. Because
 
those steps had not been taken, LIRAB did not abuse its
 
discretion when it affirmed the Director's denial of the VR Plan.
 
LIRAB did not err when it denied Kim's Request for
 
Reconsideration. Kim argued that his Request for Reconsideration
 
should have been granted because many of the facts pertinent to
 
his case were not presented at the August 24, 2007 hearing
 
because Jones was not able to attend. The record does not show
 
that Jones was subpoenaed to appear. Kim does not point to any
 
place in the record where he objected to the hearing going
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
forward without Jones, and he did not raise the issue in his 
October 19, 2007 Post-Hearing Memorandum. Kim failed to raise 
any issue regarding Jones's absence until Kim filed his Request 
for Reconsideration. "As a general rule, if a party does not 
raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have 
been waived on appeal[.]" Kemp v. State of Hawai' i Child Support 
Enforcement Agency, 111 Hawai' i 367, 391, 141 P.3d 1014, 1038 
(2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Labor and Industrial
 
Relations Appeals Board's Decision and Order filed on February 5,
 2009 and Order Denying Request for Reconsideration filed on
 
March 2, 2009 are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 28, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Raymond Kim
Claimant/Appellant-Appellant pro se. 
Clyde UmebayashiMuriel M. Taira Ryan M. Johnson(Kessner Umebayashi Bain& Matsunaga)for Employer/Appellee-Appellee and InsuranceCarrier/Appellee-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
6
 