NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29970
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ASUNCION R. GARCIA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HONDA KAIHATSU KOGYO KABUSHIKI KAISHA
 
dba PEARL COUNTRY CLUB, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE ROES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10;
and DOE ASSOCIATIONS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0985)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Asuncion R. Garcia (Garcia) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on June 30, 2009 in the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit  (circuit court).
Pursuant to the (1) "Order of Dismissal (Rule 12(c) and
 
Rule 12(q))" (Order of Dismissal) filed on January 7, 2008 and
 
(2)
 "Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Order of Dismissal and to
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over the case; however the
Honorable Karl S. Sakamoto signed the Judgment.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Reinstate Case and Motion to Allow Substitution of Counsel Filed
 
on June 13, 2008" (Order Denying Reinstatement) filed on
 
August 7, 2008, the circuit court entered judgment in favor of
 
Defendant Honda Kaihatsu Kogyo Kabushiki Kaisha dba Pearl Country
 
Club and against Garcia.
 
In the Order of Dismissal, the circuit court dismissed 
without prejudice Garcia's case because she failed to schedule a 
status conference within 60 days of the filing of her initial 
pretrial statement, as required by Rules 12(c) and 12(q) of the 
Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai' i (RCCH). 
Garcia then filed a Motion to Set Aside Order of Dismissal and to Reinstate Case (Motion to Reinstate), which was denied by the 
circuit court in its Order Denying Reinstatement. 
2
On appeal,  Garcia presents seven points of error,
contending that the circuit court erred as a matter of law and/or
 
abused its discretion in one or more of the following ways:
 
(1) failed to afford Garcia's counsel procedural and
 
substantive due process by not giving counsel reasonable notice
 
of the intent to dismiss Garcia's case and a meaningful
 
opportunity to respond and object;
 
(2) failed to consider the procedural and substantive
 
due process violations by refusing to reinstate Garcia's case;
 
(3) failed to consider the specific reasons (i.e.,
 
good cause) presented for reinstatement;
 
(4) failed to allow the substitution of counsel to
 
reflect the firm with which Garcia's counsel was practicing at
 
the time the motion was filed;
 
2
 Garcia's Opening Brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) in that each point of error does not
state "(ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii) where inthe record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which thealleged error was brought to the attention of the court or agency." Garcia's counsel is warned that future non-compliance with HRAP 28(b)(4) may result insanctions against him. 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5) made an erroneous finding of fact in the Order
 
Denying Reinstatement that Garcia's counsel failed to move for an
 
extension of the ten-day period for submission of objections to
 
the dismissal, which finding was not expressed during oral
 
argument;
 
(6) made an erroneous finding of fact in the Order
 
Denying Reinstatement that Garcia's counsel filed the Motion to
 
Reinstate more than six months after the dismissal; and
 
(7) failed to consider that the law favors
 
adjudication on the merits.
 
Garcia asks this court to (1) vacate the Order of
 
Dismissal and remand the case for further proceedings, (2) allow
 
substitution of counsel, and (3) strike misleading findings in
 
the Order Denying Reinstatement.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Garcia's
 
points of error as follows:
 
(1) Garcia's first point of error is without merit. 
On June 15, 2007, Garcia filed her pretrial statement. After
 
being warned by the circuit court and as required by RCCH Rule
 
12(c), Garcia did not schedule the trial setting status
 
conference within 60 days of the filing of her initial pretrial
 
statement. The record indicates that (1) Garcia's attorney
 
received notice on March 24, 2008 that an Order of Dismissal had
 
been filed in the case; (2) after receiving the Order of
 
Dismissal, Garcia's attorney filed his Motion to Reinstate more
 
than two months later on June 13, 2008; and (3) on July 14, 2008,
 
when the circuit court inquired as to why, after learning of the
 
dismissal, it took Garcia's attorney two and a half months to
 
file his Motion to Reinstate, Garcia's attorney responded that he
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"just absolutely could not do it. I didn't know how to do it, 
and . . . I couldn't get to it." After receiving the Order of 
Dismissal, Garcia's attorney did not (1) file a motion to extend 
the RCCH Rule 12(q) ten-day deadline, or (2) file his Motion to 
Reinstate within ten days after receiving the Order of Dismissal. 
Therefore, Garcia's first point of error is without merit because 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it (1) 
dismissed Garcia's action for failure to comply with RCCH Rule 
12(c) and (2) denied Garcia's Motion to Reinstate. Webb v. 
Harvey, 103 Hawai' i 63, 67, 79 P.3d 681, 685 (App. 2003) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted) ("An abuse of 
discretion occurs when the trial court has clearly exceeded the 
bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.") 
(2) Garcia contends the circuit court erred as a
 
matter of law in failing to consider the lack of due process by
 
refusing to reinstate the case. Garcia was on notice that RCCH
 
Rule 12(q) required the circuit court to dismiss Garcia's case if
 
Garcia did not file a motion "not later than ten (10) days from
 
the date of the order of dismissal." Therefore, Garcia's second
 
point of error is without merit.
 
(3) Garcia contends the circuit court did not consider
 
the good cause or specific reasons as to why he failed to
 
schedule a trial setting status conference. Garcia argues that
 
"[t]he case was in CAAP. An arbitration hearing was scheduled
 
and was pending. There appears to be no practical reason to
 
schedule a trial setting status conference when the case is in
 
CAAP and an arbitration hearing is pending." Garcia's counsel
 
was warned by the circuit court that counsel was required to
 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
follow RCCH Rule 12(c) while Garcia's case was in CAAP.3
 
Garcia's third point of error is without merit. 
(4) Garcia contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying the motion for substitution of counsel to
 
reflect the firm with which Garcia's counsel was practicing at
 
the time the Motion to Reinstate was filed. Garcia's fourth
 
point of error is moot. Furthermore, assuming arguendo the
 
circuit court erred, the error was harmless.
 
(5) Garcia contends the circuit court's finding in its
 
Order Denying Reinstatement "that no extensions to the ten-day
 
objection period, as set forth by Rule 12(q) of the Rules of the
 
Circuit Courts, were sought by" Garcia's counsel is misleading
 
and should be stricken. After receiving the Order of Dismissal,
 
Garcia's counsel did not file for an extension of the ten-day
 
deadline; therefore, the statement in the Order Denying
 
Reinstatement was not erroneous.
 
(6) Garcia contends the finding in the Order Denying
 
Reinstatement, which states that the Motion to Reinstate was
 
filed "more than six (6) months" after the Order of Dismissal had
 
been filed, is a misleading finding that should be stricken. The
 
circuit court did not err when it found that Garcia had not filed
 
the Motion to Reinstate until more than six months after the
 
Order of Dismissal was issued because the Order of Dismissal was
 
filed on January 7, 2008 and Garcia filed the Motion to Reinstate
 
on June 13, 2008. Therefore, Garcia's sixth point of error is
 
without merit.
 
3
 Hawai'i Arbitration Rules Rule 7 provides in relevant part: 
Rule 7. RELATIONSHIP TO CIRCUIT COURT JURISDICTION AND RULES;
FORM OF DOCUMENTS.
 
. . . . 
(E) Circuit Court Rule 12(q), and all rules of court or of
civil procedure requiring the filing of pleadings, remain in
effect notwithstanding the fact that a case is under [CAAP].
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(7) Garcia contends the circuit court failed to
 
consider that the law favors adjudication on the merits. The
 
circuit court gave Garcia on opportunity to have her case
 
adjudicated on the merits. Despite this, Garcia still did not
 
comply with the rules of court. Therefore, Garcia's seventh
 
point of error is without merit. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
June 30, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 13, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Robin R. Horner 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Dean E. Ochiai 
Brenda E. Morris Presiding Judge 
Randall Y. KayaAdrian Y. Chang(Law Offices of Dean E.Ochiai)for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
6
 