NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28378
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI rI 
PROBATE NO. 6664
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE
 
OF
 
SAMUEL M. DAMON, Deceased
 
and
 
EQUITY NO. 2816-A
TRUST CREATED UNDER THE WILL
 
OF
 
SAMUEL M. DAMON, Deceased
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Christopher Damon Haig (Haig)
 
appeals from (1) the "Judgment on Order Granting Petition for
 
Approval of 2005 Income and Principal Accounts and Trust
 
Termination Status Report" (Judgment) filed on September 27, 2006
 
1
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (probate court) and
(2)
 the deemed denial, pursuant to Hawai ri Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3), of Haig's October 9, 2006
 
1
 The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"Petition for Reconsideration of and Relief from: 1) Order
 
Granting Petition for Approval of 2005 Income and Principal
 
Accounts and Trust Termination Status Report, filed on 27 Sep
 
2006 and 2) Judgment on Order Granting Petition for Approval of
 
2005 Income and Principal Accounts and Trust Termination Status
 
Report, filed 27 Sep 2006 and 3) Notice of Entry of Judgment on
 
Order Granting Petition for Approval of 2005 Income and Principal
 
Accounts and Trust Termination Status Report, filed on 28 Sep
 
2006" (Petition for Reconsideration) on January 8, 2007 by the
 
probate court's failure to enter a timely written order.
 
In its September 27, 2006 "Order Granting Petition for
 
Approval of 2005 Income and Principal Accounts and Trust
 
Termination Status Report" (Order Granting Petition), the probate
 
court granted the "Petition for Approval of 2005 Income and
 
Principal Accounts and Trust Termination Status Report"
 
(Petition) filed on May 12, 2006 by Petitioners-Appellees David
 
M. Haig, Fred C. Weyand, Paul Mullin Ganley, and Walter A. Dods,
 
Jr., as the Trustees under the Will and of the Estate of Samuel
 
Mills Damon, Deceased (collectively, Trustees).
 
On appeal, Haig contends the probate court erred by (1)
 
approving the 2005 Income and Principal Accounts and Trust
 
Termination Status Report (2005 Report), (2) instructing the
 
Trustees to distribute to Haig monies held in an FBO account,2
 
and (3) denying Haig's Petition for Reconsideration.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Haig challenges the probate court's approval of the
 
2005 Report submitted to the court by the Trustees of the
 testamentary trust established by Haig's great-grandfather,
 
Samuel Mills Damon (the Trust). 
2
 In Haig's points of order, he incorrectly refers to the account as an
"FDO Account." In the Order Granting Petition, the probate court refers to an
"FBO Account" (FBO is the abbreviation for "for the benefit of").
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based upon the holding of the Hawai ri Supreme Court,3 
the Trust terminated on November 9, 2004, when Joan Damon Haig, 
Damon's last surviving grandchild, died. In December 2004 and 
January 2005, roughly $704 million (more than 80 percent of the 
value of the trust on the day it terminated) was distributed to 
the Trust's beneficiaries. 
During 2005, the Trustees continued to wind up the
 
4
termination of the Trust. Among other actions taken in 2005,  the
Trustees sold the Trust's Kam aroa pasture lands on the Island of 
Hawairi for approximately $3 million and an industrial parcel in 
San Leandro, California, for approximately $5.6 million and received $178,240 for access rights to a previously sold 
industrial parcel on Sand Island Access Road in Honolulu. The 
Trustees continued to oversee two investment accounts maintained 
by Goldman Sachs: (1) the so-called Per Stirpes account, valued 
at $230.6 million, which the Trustees held awaiting the outcome 
of litigation over where to set the stirpital root when 
distributing the remainder of Damon's estate, 
see In re Estate of 
Damon, 109 Hawai ri 502, 128 P.3d 815, reconsideration denied, 110 
Hawairi 281, 132 P.3d 390 (2006), cert. denied, Haig v. Damon, 549 
U.S. 883, 127 S. Ct. 209 (2006), and (2) the "Reserve Pool," a
 portfolio of fixed-income securities intended to cover expenses
 
incurred in the winding up of the estate.
 
Prior to petitioning the probate court for approval of
 
the accounting, the Trustees met with some of the beneficiaries
 
of the Trust on March 14, 2006. Attorney Jeffery Niebling
 
(Niebling), who had been appointed by the probate court as the
 
3
 In 1994, the Hawair i Supreme Court instructed the Trustees that the
trust was to terminate upon the death of the last survivor of Damon's three
then-living grandchildren. Trust Created Under Will of Damon, 76 Hawair i 120,
869 P.2d 1339 (1994).
4
 In 2005, the Trustees sold two notes receivable, authorized the
auction of the Estate's coin collection, planned for the sale or othertransfer of the Trust's Moanalua Valley property (including Moanalua Gardens)and the Kahuku Main Ranch Camp on the Island of Hawair i, and prepared for the
donation of artifacts to the Bishop Museum and Iolani Palace. Haig does notchallenge these actions on appeal. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pre-petition master, Haig, and Haig's advisers were among those
 
who attended the meeting.
 
On May 12, 2006, the Trustees petitioned the probate
 
court for approval of the 2005 Report. On May 22, 2006, Niebling
 
was again appointed Master to examine and report on the Petition.
 
On July 26, 2006, Niebling filed his report on the
 
Petition (Master's Report) with the probate court. Niebling
 
stated that to the best of his knowledge, no response or
 
objection to the Petition had been filed. Niebling recommended,
 
among other things, that the probate court approve the Trustees'
 
accountings, Trust Termination Status Report, and some principal
 
distributions, which had been made on January 31, 2006. Niebling
 
also recommended that the probate court instruct the Trustees to
 
transfer to Haig's personal account the money held in an FBO
 
account in Haig's name.
 
On August 7, 2006, Haig filed his "Response and 
Exceptions to Report of Master on Petition for Approval of 2005 
Income and Principal Accounts and Trust Termination Status 
Report" (Response to the Master). In addition to other claims 
not relevant on appeal, Haig alleged that the Master's Report was 
deficient because (1) it omitted "any review or opinion of the 
reasonableness and propriety" of three real estate transactions 
and (2) Niebling approved the securities portfolio management of 
approximately $383 million in investments without reviewing a 
report commissioned by the Trustees from Mercer Investment 
Consulting (the Mercer Report) or consulting another expert. 
Haig also asked the probate court to "designate, by written 
Order, that the objections made by [Haig] in paragraphs II.A, B, 
C, D.I, D.II and E, in [Haig's] Petition filed on 21 April 2006 
are contested matters in accordance with Rule 19 of the Hawaii 
Rules of Probate Procedure"; assign the contested matters to the 
civil trial calendar; and designate that the Hawai ri Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) and the Rules of the Civil [sic] Courts apply to the contested matters. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The April 21, 2006 "Petition" referenced by Haig was
 
not a petition, but rather a "Motion for Reconsideration of 1)
 
Order Granting Petition for Approval of Post-Termination
 
Distributions, Actions, and Plans, and 2) Order Granting the
 
Remainder of the Petition For Approval of 2004 Income and
 
Principal Accounts Excluding Post-Termination Distributions." 
The referenced paragraphs allege that the Trustees were liable
 
for financial losses the Trust sustained when BancWest
 
Corporation acquired First Hawaiian Inc. because the Trust owned
 
a large block of First Hawaiian Inc. stock; the Trustees failed
 
to obtain fair market value for two properties; and the then-
Master James Kawachika (Kawachika) should have been disqualified
 
because of multiple conflicts of interest.5 Following a June 9,
 
2006 hearing, the probate court denied this motion for
 reconsideration on August 16, 2006. Haig filed an appeal from
 
the denial, and this court dismissed the appeal because it had
 
not been timely filed. In re Estate of Damon, No. 28147 (App.
 
Dec. 22, 2006).
6
 
On August 15, 2006, the Trustees filed an objection to
 
Haig's Response to the Master. Niebling filed a response on
 August 17, 2006.
7 Following a hearing on August 25, 2006, the
 
probate court approved the 2005 Report and entered the Judgment
 on September 27, 2006.
 
5
 Haig had challenged Kawachika's impartiality in an earlier lawsuit.
The Hawair i Supreme Court agreed with Haig, holding that Kawachika, who was
employed by the law firm representing the Trustees in two lawsuits, had a
conflict of interest that should have precluded him from serving as Master inreviewing the 1999-2003 accountings. In re Estate of Damon, 119 Hawair i 500,
199 P.3d 89 (2008) (hereinafter, Damon I).
6
 Haig also appealed the probate court's approval of the 2006
accounting and Trust Termination Status Report, and the ICA again dismissedthe appeal because Haig failed to file his notice of appeal by the deadline.In re Estate of Damon, No. 29049, 2008 WL 2955826 (Hawair i App. July 29,
2008).
7
 Although the Master's Response appears in Volume 24 at page 64 of
Probate No. 6664, it is not listed on the computerized index to Volume 24; it
is listed in the index for Equity No. 2816-A.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Haig filed the Petition for Reconsideration on
 
October 9, 2006. The probate court held a hearing on
 
December 22, 2006. However, the probate court failed to file an
 
order granting or denying the motion within 90 days after the
 
October 9, 2006 filing date. Therefore, under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3),
 
Haig's Petition for Reconsideration was deemed denied on
 
January 8, 2007.8
 
Haig timely appealed.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
To the extent that a court adopts the findings of a 
master, the findings are considered the findings of the court. Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai
ri 438, 456, 164 
P.3d 696, 714 (2007) (citing to HRCP Rule 52(a) (2007)). A master's factual findings are reviewed under the clearly 
erroneous standard, with deference to the "superior position" of 
the master "to consider credibility and to draw inferences from 
the testimonial evidence." Hawaii Ventures, 114 Hawai
ri at 456, 
164 P.3d at 714 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). A master's "conclusions of law, however, are not entitled to any 
special weight." Id. at 457, 164 P.3d at 715. To the extent 
that a master's conclusions of law are adopted by the circuit court, they are treated as the conclusions of the circuit court 
and are freely reviewed for their correctness, applying the 
right/wrong standard. Id. 
The appellate court reviews a "trial court's ruling on 
a motion for reconsideration . . . under the abuse of discretion 
standard." Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea 
Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai
ri 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002). 
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly 
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles 
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party 
8
 The probate court entered a written order on January 24, 2007 denying
Haig's Petition for Reconsideration.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw.
 
85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 HAIG OFFERS NO SUPPORT FOR HIS CLAIMS OF
 
NONFEASANCE BY NIEBLING AND BREACH OF FIDUCIARY
 DUTY BY THE TRUSTEES. 
Haig's primary point on appeal is that the probate 
court erred in granting the Trustees' Petition. Haig did not 
file any objection or response to the Petition itself, but rather 
filed his Response to the Master. The Trustees contend that 
Haig's argument should be disregarded because Haig did not oppose 
the Petition, as required under Hawai
ri Probate Rules (HPR) 
Rule 3(b), and therefore could not point to "where in the record the alleged error was objected to," as required under HRAP Rule 
28(b)(4). 
While noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) is 
sufficient cause to deny a point of error, the appellate courts 
have a policy of "affording litigants the opportunity to have 
their cases heard on the merits, where possible." Damon I, 119 
Hawai
ri at 505, 199 P.3d at 94 (internal quotation marks and 
citation omitted). Given this policy and the fact that it is 
possible to discern Haig's points of error, we address his 
argument below. See Lesser v. Boughey, 88 Hawai ri 260, 261 n.1, 
965 P.2d 802, 803 n.1 (1998). 
The issue here is whether we should disregard this
 
point of error, given that Haig's complaints below are styled as
 a "response and exception" to the Master's Report, rather than as
 
an "objection" to the Trustees' Petition.
 
In 2006, HPR Rule 3(b) provided that "[o]pposition to
 
any or all of the relief prayed for in a petition or to a
 
master's . . . report shall be in the form of a written
 
objection." The probate rules then in effect also allowed
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
parties to submit a "response" to petitions or master's reports.9
 
HPR Rule 3(a) (2006). The rules committee had considered
 
combining the concepts of "objection" and "response," but instead
 
kept the distinction because it "felt that an objection is
 
clearly and unequivocally in opposition to a pleading, while a
 
response may not necessarily oppose all relief requested in a
 
petition, and could raise additional issues related to the
 
petition." HPR Rule 3(a) cmt. Furthermore, HPR Rule 3(c) (2006)
 
and its Commentary call for petitions to be "construed liberally"
 
so as to "dispose of matters quickly without delay caused by
 
failure to follow technical rules of pleading."
 
Considering the intent of the HPR to construe pleadings 
broadly, the complaints in Haig's Response to the Master can be 
fairly read as opposition to the Trustees' Petition. Haig's 
Response to the Master both opposes relief requested in the 
Petition and raises related issues (e.g., Haig questions why the 
Trustees selected a particular real estate broker for the Kahuku 
Ranch sale instead of one previously retained for other sales). 
Although this court has dismissed claims not properly raised 
below under the reasoning that it would be "unfair to the 
opposing party, who might have met the argument not made below," 
Royal Kunia Cmty. Ass'n ex rel. Bd. of Dirs. v. Nemoto, 119 
Hawai'i 437, 446, 198 P.3d 700, 709 (App. 2008) (quoting Price v. 
AIG Hawai ri Ins. Co., 107 Hawai ri 106, 111, 111 P.3d 1, 6 (2005)), 
that concern is not applicable here. Both the Trustees and Niebling replied to Haig's Response to the Master: Trustees did 
so by filing an "objection" on August 15, 2006, and Niebling 
filed a "response" on August 17, 2006. See Damon I, 119 Hawai
ri 
at 511 n.10, 199 P.3d at 100 n.10 (Hawai ri Supreme Court 
concluding that Damon Trustees and Master rebutted Haig's 
argument when they replied to Haig's "responses" to the master's 
report). 
9
 The Commentary to HPR Rule 3(a) stated that a response to a petition
or a master's report "should state in its title clearly to what other pleading
it is responding."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. Errors alleged against Niebling
 
The few specific complaints in Haig's Opening Brief 
speak largely to the conduct of Niebling and the probate court's 
unconditional approval of the Master's Report. Haig contends 
"[t]he Probate Court did not make a meaningful review of the 
Master's Report before the Probate Court adopted Master's 
Report." Haig, however, does not cite as a point of error the 
probate court's approval and adoption of the Master's Report -­
thereby violating HRAP 28(b)(4)(ii), which requires that Haig's 
opening brief point to "where in the record the alleged error 
occurred." Nevertheless, deferring to the policy of reviewing 
cases on the merits when possible, Damon I, 119 Hawai ri at 505, 
199 P.3d at 94, we address Haig's complaints. 
Haig challenges the Master's Report on the ground that 
it omits "any review or opinion of the reasonableness and propriety" of three real property transactions conducted by the 
Trustees in 2005. In the Master's Report, Niebling concluded 
that he was "satisfied" that the Trustees' actions in regards to 
the Trust Termination Status Report, which included mention of 
the real property transactions, were "consistent with the 
faithful performance of their fiduciary duties." In Niebling's 
response to Haig's Response to the Master, Niebling noted that he 
had reviewed minutes of the 2005 Trustees' meetings where the 
Kam
aroa and San Leandro sales were discussed; the Agreements of 
Purchase and Sale for the properties; a "Counseling Study and Appraisal Report" of the Kam
aroa land dated May 17, 2004, and an 
update dated May 20, 2005; an appraisal of the San Leandro property dated April 3, 2002; other environmental assessments of 
the San Leandro property; and the conveyance and closing 
documents for both properties. In his response, Niebling 
concluded that the Trustees' actions regarding the two properties 
"have been reasonable and proper under the circumstances." 
Additionally, Haig asserts, without support, that
 
Niebling lacked the expertise to review the performance of
 
Goldman Sachs as the investment manager of the Trust's securities
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
portfolios, valued at roughly $383 million, without reviewing the
 
Mercer Report or consulting another expert. Haig offers no
 
authority for his position that Niebling was required to review
 
property appraisals and the Mercer Report or hire an outside
 
expert with more specialized knowledge. Under HPR Rule 29 (2006)
 
and the Commentary thereto, a master's role as "the eyes and ears
 
of the court" requires him to review the trust's operations and
 
grants him "unlimited access to the books and records of the
 
fiduciary with respect to the trust or estate that are not
 
protected by privilege, including minutes of all meetings." In
 
the Master's Report, Niebling stated that he had access to the
 
Trust's financial documents, meeting minutes, and staff. In
 
Niebling's response to Haig's Response to the Master, Niebling
 
stated that he had reviewed a previous Mercer Report;
 
correspondence among Trustees, Mercer, and Goldman Sachs; and
 
minutes of Trustees' meetings when actions were taken in response
 
to previous recommendations from Mercer regarding the Trust's
 
investments. The Mercer Report, which Haig implies the Trustees
 
withheld, had not been completed at the time Niebling reviewed
 
the Petition.10
 
Other than Haig's unsubstantiated allegations, there is
 
no suggestion that Niebling performed his job in a less-than­
diligent manner. Haig has failed to demonstrate that the probate
 
court erred by adopting the Master's Report. 
2. Errors alleged against the Trustees
 
Haig contends the Trustees have a duty to obtain the
 
best price available for Trust property sold, implying that they
 
10
 According to Niebling, the updated Mercer Report was due on or about
August 26, 2006 -- a month after the Master's Report was filed. At the
 
December 22, 2006 hearing on Haig's Motion for Reconsideration, Haig's
attorney complained that the Mercer Report still had not been produced. The
 Trustees did not offer an explanation for the delay. It bears noting that the
Trustees hired Mercer to do periodic reviews of the Trust's investments,
although the Trustees were under no statutory obligation or fiduciary duty to
do so.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
did not do so with the three real estate transactions in 2005.11 
Haig argues that the Trustees' approach in arriving at sales 
prices for the Kam aroa and San Leandro properties was inadequate 
because it lacked a "thorough investigation of local conditions," did not contain proper written appraisals or a study of 
comparable properties, and did not consider the "highest and best 
use" of the properties as required under appraisal industry best 
practice standards. 
Contrary to Haig's assertion that he filed timely 
vigorous objections to the methodology and value of these sales, 
he did not raise the issues below. Haig challenged Niebling's 
review of the property sales, but not the Trustees' actions 
regarding the transactions. "As a general rule, if a party does 
not raise an argument at the circuit court level, that argument 
will be deemed to have been waived on appeal; this rule applies 
in both criminal and civil cases." Hawaii Ventures, 114 Hawai
ri 
at 500, 164 P.3d at 758 (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted); see also HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(iii) and HRS 
§ 641-2 (Supp. 2009). 
Even if this court were to read Haig's Response to the
 
Master broadly enough to deem Haig's claim regarding the
 
properties' valuations properly preserved on appeal, Haig still
 
must present evidence to overcome a "presumption of regularity
 
and good faith" favoring the Trustees. In re Estate of Campbell,
 
42 Haw. 586, 607-08 (Haw. Terr. 1958) ("[T]he person questioning
 the trustees' action has the burden of producing evidence to
 
overcome the presumption, and that, upon the production of such
 
evidence, the trustees have the ultimate burden of establishing
 
the regularity and good faith of the questioned action by a
 
preponderance of evidence.").
 
11
 Haig offers no argument regarding the third transaction, which the
Trustees claim was the release of funds from the 2004 sale of the Sand Island
 
industrial property, which sale had been approved previously by the probate
court.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
It is presumed that the Trustees' methods for setting 
and accepting purchase prices for the properties were acceptable. 
Buttressing this presumption is the Master's Report conclusion 
that the Trustees' actions were "consistent with the faithful 
performance of their fiduciary duties." Given the presumption 
favoring the Trustees, "the inquiry that logically follows 
concerns the steps, if any, that the [appellant] took to overcome 
it." In re Estate of Campbell, 42 Haw. at 608. Haig's position 
altogether ignores the appraisals done on the Kam aroa and San 
Leandro properties in 2004 and 2002, respectively. Haig does not 
question the appraised values nor does he offer an independent 
appraiser's assessment. Haig provides no proof that the final 
purchase prices obtained by the Trustees fell below fair market 
value. As in Campbell, "there is nothing in the record of this 
case to overcome the presumption of regularity and good faith in 
favor of the trustees." 42 Haw. at 609. 
B.	 HAIG'S CLAIM OF LACK OF DUE PROCESS IS WITHOUT
 
MERIT.
 
Haig contends the probate court failed "to either 
approve or deny [his] request for an evidentiary hearing or 
assignment of the matter to the civil trial court," thereby 
depriving him of his right to due process under the United States 
and Hawai ri Constitutions. 
It appears that Haig's constitutional claim relates to
 
a redaction in the Judgment, although the connection between the
 
redaction and Haig's due process argument is unclear. Haig
 
appears to interpret the redaction as the probate court's refusal
 
"either to grant or to deny by written Order [Haig's] request for
 
either a Circuit Court civil trial or a Probate Court evidentiary
 
hearing" and therefore "a violation of the Probate Court's
 
mandatory exercise of its jurisdiction."
 
Haig argues that the probate court's failure to respond
 
to his request, as made in his Response to the Master, was a
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violation of HPR Rules 19 (2006) and 20 (2006).12 While it is
 
true that the probate court did not put the issues on the civil
 
trial calendar, the probate court was not required to do so; the
 
assignment of any issue designated as contested under HPR Rule 19
 
is at the probate court's discretion. HPR Rule 20(a). The
 
probate court must have determined that it could handle Haig's
 
claim "more efficiently and effectively" than the civil trials
 
court. See HPR Rule 20(b). Haig offers nothing to show that the
 
probate court abused its discretion by retaining jurisdiction
 over the case.
 
Further, Haig's argument that he has been denied an
 
opportunity to be heard on the complaints he raised in Haig's
 
Response to the Master is meritless. On August 25, 2006, the
 
probate court held a hearing on the Trustees' Petition. Haig had
 
the opportunity to present and prove his complaints at that
 
hearing. Therefore, Haig's due process claim is without merit.
 
C.	 HAIG WAIVES POINTS OF ERROR RELATED TO THE PROBATE
 
COURT'S INSTRUCTION TO DISBURSE FUNDS FROM HAIG'S
 FBO ACCOUNT AND HIS MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION.
 
Haig cites as error the probate court's instruction
 
that the Trustees release funds held in a FBO account in Haig's
 
name. Haig provides no argument on this point in his Opening or
 
Reply Briefs. Haig also provides no argument as to how the
 
probate court abused its discretion in denying his motion for
 
reconsideration. An opening brief before this court must include
 
"[t]he argument, containing the contentions of the appellant on
 
the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to
 
the authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on." 
12
 HPR Rule 19 defined a contested matter as "any one in which an
objection has been filed." The Commentary to the rule recognized that "a
contested issue can be separated from the normal progress of the estate,
guardianship, or trust, and dealt with separately" so that the remaining
proceeding "is not completely put on hold because of a dispute about one
issue." 
HPR Rule 20 authorizes the Probate Court's retention or assignment to
the civil trials calendar of contested matters.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI rI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). Haig provides none of these, so accordingly,
 
these points are deemed waived.
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The "Judgment on Order Granting Petition for Approval 
of 2005 Income and Principal Accounts and Trust Termination 
Status Report" filed on September 27, 2006, and the deemed 
denial, pursuant to Hawai ri Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
4(a)(3), of the "Petition for Reconsideration of and Relief from: 1) Order Granting Petition for Approval of 2005 Income and 
Principal Accounts and Trust Termination Status Report, filed on 
27 Sep 2006 and 2) Judgment on Order Granting Petition for 
Approval of 2005 Income and Principal Accounts and Trust 
Termination Status Report, filed 27 Sep 2006 and 3) Notice of 
Entry of Judgment on Order Granting Petition for Approval of 2005 
Income and Principal Accounts and Trust Termination Status 
Report, filed on 28 Sep 2006" filed on October 9, 2006, in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
ri, February 18, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Frederick G. Riecker 
John L. McDermott for Respondent-AppellantChristopher James Damon Haig. Chief Judge 
J. Thomas Van Winkle Katherine G. Leonard Melissa H. Lambert (Carlsmith Ball LLP)for Petitioners-AppelleesThe Trustees of the Estate of Samuel M. Damon, Deceased.Associate Judge 
 
Associate Judge
 
14
 