NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29768
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PAUL J. MATTES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05-1-1092)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Paul J. Mattes timely appeals from
 
the Final Judgment and Sentence, which was entered on June 3,
 
2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court),1
 
convicting him of one count of perjury in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 710-1060 (1993).
2
 
Mattes asserts the following seventeen points of error:
 
(1) the Circuit Court erred by denying his oral motion to
 
introduce the audio tape of his interview with Special Agent
 
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2
 HRS § 710-1060 states,
 
(1) A person commits the offense of perjury if in any
official proceeding the person makes, under an oath required
or authorized by law, a false statement which the person
does not believe to be true.
 
(2) No person shall be convicted under this section
unless the court rules that the false statement is a
 "materially false statement" as defined by section
710-1000(9). It is not a defense that the declarant
mistakenly believed the false statement to be immaterial.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gregory Gonsalves (Gonsalves), an investigator from the state
 
attorney general's office who interviewed Mattes, because the
 
tape should have been admitted for impeachment purposes under the
 
"best evidence" rule; (2) Mattes lacked the mens rea necessary
 
for conviction because, at trial, he argued that he believed the
 
challenged statements were true and, according to examining
 
physicians, he was not insane; (3) there was a clear lack of
 
proof beyond a reasonable doubt; (4) Mattes's defense was
 
prejudiced when the Circuit Court would not admit his requested
 
evidence; (5) Mattes orally objected to Gonsalves's statements
 
that Mattes viewed the alleged harassment as being tied to the
 
placement of his children into foster custody and Mattes had
 
never met the foster parents; (6) the Circuit Court erred by
 
denying Mattes's motion to strike Gonsalves's testimony; (7) at
 
the trial, after Mattes asked Gonsalves if the petition had a
 
swirl by the signature that, according to Mattes, meant that the
 
name was a pseudonym, Mattes objected on the basis that "[n]ot
 
everything in the petition was mentioned;" (8) Mattes objected
 
that the whole petition was being kept from the jury and that his
 
proposed Exhibit 41 was denied; (9) the transcript of the
 
proceedings from March 23, 2009 indicates that Gonsalves did not
 
write the indictment or transcript of the interview with Mattes;
 
(10) again, the Circuit Court erred by denying Mattes's oral
 
motion to introduce the audio tape of his interview with
 
Gonsalves because the tape should have been admitted for
 
impeachment purposes under the "best evidence" rule; (11) Mattes
 
objected to the jury instruction's omission of the "swirl" from
 
the pseudonym; (12) Mattes objected to the jury instruction's use
 
of the term "defendant" without brackets because, according to
 
Mattes, an entity called the Citizens for Justice Center should
 
have been the defendant; (13) again, Mattes objected to the jury
 
instruction's omission of the "swirl;" (14) yet again, Mattes
 
objected to the jury instruction's omission of the "swirl;" (15)
 
Mattes objected to language in the jury instructions and special
 
verdict form that used the term "official proceeding;" (16) the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court did not instruct the jury that statements made in
 
the ex parte temporary restraining order petition could not be
 
construed as part of an "official proceeding;" and (17) the
 
Circuit Court erred by refusing all of Mattes's proposed jury
 
instructions.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Mattes's points of
 
error as follows:
 
(1) Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) 28(b)(7), Mattes is deemed to have waived his fourth, 
fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, twelfth, thirteenth, 
fourteenth, and seventeenth points of error because he did not 
present discernible arguments in support of these points of 
error;3 
(2) Mattes's remaining points of error are without
 
merit.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the June 3, 2009 Final
 
Judgment and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 14, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 André S. Wooten,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Christopher D.W. Young and
Vince S. Kanemoto,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
3
 Mattes's counsel, André S. Wooten, is cautioned to comply with
HRAP 28(b) in the future. Additionally, in that the reply brief impermissibly
attempted to assert new points of error, Wooten is cautioned to comply with
HRAP 28(d) in the future.
 
3
 