 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29980
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSEPH ANDREW BRUNER, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-1707)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge and Ginoza, J.,
with Leonard, J., dissenting separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joseph Andrew Bruner (Bruner)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on
 
July 2, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court).1
 
Bruner pled guilty to Operating a Vehicle After License
 
and Privilege Have Been Suspended or Revoked for Operating a
 
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-62(a)(2) (Supp. 2009). 
After a jury trial, Bruner was found guilty of Habitually
 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant
 
(Habitual OVUII), in violation of HRS §§ 291E-61.5(a)(1) and
 
(a)(2) (Supp 2009).
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Bruner contends (1) the charge of Habitual
 
OVUII was deficient because it failed to state that he committed
 
the offense on a public way, street, road, or highway, (2) the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion by allowing a police officer
 
to testify about a field sobriety test administered to Bruner
 
because the State failed to lay the proper foundation for the
 
officer's testimony, and (3) there was insufficient evidence to
 
convict Bruner of Habitual OVUII. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties,
 
Bruner's points of error are resolved as follows:
 
(1) In the Circuit Court, Bruner did not object to the
 
sufficiency of the Habitual OVUII charge for failure to state the
 
offense was committed on a public way, street, road or highway,
 
and instead raises this issue for the first time on appeal. 
Therefore, the liberal construction standard applies, which means 
"we will not reverse a conviction based upon a defective
 
indictment unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the
 
indictment cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime." 
State v. Tominiko, No. SCWC-29535, 2011 WL ____, at 16 (Haw.
 
Aug. 26, 2011) (quoting State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d
 
1019, 1019 (1983)).
 
Here, Bruner makes no contention that he has been
 
prejudiced by the charge. 
Further,
 
in determining whether a defendant has been adequately
informed of the charges against him, the appellate court can
consider other information in addition to the charge that
may have been provided to the defendant during the course of
the case up until the time defendant objected to the
sufficiency of the charges against him.
 
State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 396, 219 P.3d 1170, 1183 
(2009). See also, State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai' i 312, 318-21, 
55 P.3d 276, 282-85 (2002) (court reviewed record and information 
provided to defendant prior to challenge of the charge in 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determining defendant's right to be informed was not violated);
 
State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 120, 680 P.2d 250, 251 (1984)
 
(dismissal of indictment reversed because, prior to consideration
 
of dismissal motion, defendant "had been supplied with the grand
 
jury transcript which clearly established the details of the
 
crime, [and] he had been fully informed of the nature and cause
 
of the accusation against him.").
 
In this case, witness David Parker (Parker) testified
 
that Bruner was operating a vehicle on Mokapu Saddle Road. 
Officer Hamrick testified that Mokapu Saddle Road was a public
 
road. Officer Moszkowicz's declaration to establish probable
 
cause stated that "Mokapu Saddle Road is a public way, street,
 
road, or highway." All of this information was provided to
 
Bruner during the Circuit Court proceedings and prior to his
 
raising sufficiency of the charge as an issue on appeal. 
Therefore, the charge was not deficient under the liberal
 
construction standard.
 
(2) Bruner claims that Officer Hamrick's testimony
 
regarding Bruner's field sobriety testing should have been
 
excluded for lack of foundation. Bruner's motion in limine
 
objected to testimony about the field sobriety testing, inter
 
alia, on grounds there needed to be qualified expert testimony. 
Officer Hamrick's testimony was not expert testimony. As to
 
foundation issues, during the hearing on Bruner's motion in
 
limine, the Circuit Court stated that Bruner would need to make
 
objections based on lack of foundation at trial. This was
 
appropriate as the Circuit Court would need to base its rulings
 
as to foundation upon the testimony that was elicited. At trial,
 
Bruner's counsel did not make a timely objection to Officer
 
Hamrick's extensive testimony regarding Bruner's performance on
 
the field sobriety tests. Rather, no objection based on
 
foundation was raised until after the close of evidence and just
 
prior to settling of jury instructions. Therefore, the point of
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
error is waived. Hawaii Rules of Evidence, Rule 103(a); see also 
Lee v. Elbaum, 77 Hawai' i 446, 452-53, 887 P.2d 656, 662-63 (App. 
1993); State v. Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i 282, 290, 12 P.3d 873, 881 
(2000). The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
allowing Officer Hamrick to testify regarding the field sobriety 
testing results. 
(3) There was sufficient evidence to convict Bruner of
 
Habitual OVUII. Bruner stipulated that he had been convicted
 
three times of operating a vehicle under the influence of an
 
intoxicant within ten years of the instant offense, which
 
satisfied HRS §§ 291E-61.5(a)(1) and (b). Parker testified that
 
on October 26, 2008 he had been cut off by a vehicle while
 
driving on Mokapu Saddle Road which caused him to veer into the
 
shoulder of the road. Parker stated that he followed the vehicle
 
that cut him off and saw Bruner exit from the driver's seat. 
Officer Hamrick testified that Mokapu Saddle Road is a public
 
road. Parker testified that he smelled alcohol on Bruner's
 
breath. Officer Hamrick also testified that he smelled alcohol
 
on Bruner's breath. Officer Hamrick stated that after
 
administering the horizontal gaze nystagmus test, Bruner appeared
 
not to have a smooth gaze. Officer Hamrick also stated while
 
performing the walk-and-turn test, Bruner lost his balance, could
 
not touch his heel to his toes in a straight line, and took too
 
many steps which indicated that Bruner's blood alcohol content
 
was 0.10 or more. Bruner also could not complete the one-leg
 
stand test which indicated to Officer Hamrick that Bruner's blood
 
alcohol content was 0.10 or above. There was thus sufficient
 
evidence that Bruner operated or assumed actual physical control
 
of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 
sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or ability to
 
care for himself and guard against casualty. 
Therefore,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on July 2, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 16, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant 
Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
5
 