 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29408
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JONATHAN FONTES, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0295)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Jonathan Fontes (Fontes) appeals 
from the Judgment filed on September 16, 2008, in the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 Fontes was charged
 
by complaint with one count of robbery in the second degree, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-841(1)(a) and/or
 (1)(b) (Supp. 2010).
2 A jury found Fontes guilty as charged. 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 708-841 provides, in relevant part:
 
ยง 708-841 Robbery in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the
course of committing theft . . . :
 
(a)	 The person uses force against the person of anyone
present with the intent to overcome that person's
physical resistance or physical power of resistance;
[or]
 
(b)	 The person threatens the imminent use of force against
the person of anyone who is present with intent to
compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with
the property[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court sentenced Fontes to five years of probation
 
subject to the special conditions that he serve a one-year term
 of imprisonment and pay a crime victim compensation fee of $205
 and a probation services fee of $150.
 
On appeal, Fontes argues that his trial counsel
 
provided ineffective assistance by eliciting and failing to
 object to evidence that Fontes "shoplifted a package of beef
 jerky" shortly before the alleged robbery. Fontes also argues
 that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing
 to object to cumulative testimony about the robbery. For the
 reasons discussed below, we conclude that Fontes has failed to
 meet his burden of showing that his trial counsel provided
 ineffective assistance, and we affirm the Circuit Court's
 Judgment.
 
I.
 A.
 
Fontes's theory of defense at trial was mistaken
 
identity. Evidence of Fontes's involvement in a shoplifting
 incident, which occurred shortly before the robbery and was
 witnessed by the complaining witness (CW) for the robbery, was
 integral to Fontes's mistaken-identity defense. Fontes contended
 that the CW remembered Fontes's face from the shoplifting
 incident and because the CW associated Fontes's face with
 criminal activity, the CW later mistakenly identified Fontes as
 one of the two robbers. 
B.
 
In opening statement, defense counsel told the jury
 
that "this is a case of misidentification." Defense counsel
 acknowledged the shoplifting incident, stating that Fontes and a
 friend went to a gas station mini mart, that Fontes was fooling
 around and took a package of beef jerky, but that Fontes put it
 back and ran out of the mini mart when the mini-mart clerk
 starting yelling at him. While leaving, Fontes saw a "young 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Caucasian kid" (later identified as the CW) standing on the
 
sidewalk. The CW looked at Fontes and his friend, and Fontes and
 the CW made eye contact with each other. 
According to defense counsel, Fontes did not rob the CW
 
but left the scene. Later that day, Fontes happened to get on 
the same bus that the CW was riding. Fontes was arrested when
 the police boarded the bus and apprehended him. Defense counsel
 stated that none of the items taken from the CW were in Fontes's
 possession. Defense counsel further noted that the CW described
 the two males who robbed the CW, the first of whom was described
 as having a crew cut and could not have been Fontes who had long
 hair.
3 Defense counsel then stated that the CW described the
 
second male as being huskier than Fontes and that the CW did not
 mention the second male as having any facial hair, whereas Fontes
 had a "bushy goatee." Defense counsel argued that the CW was
 mistaken in identifying Fontes as one of the robbers and only
 recognized Fontes from seeing Fontes at the mini mart minutes
 before the CW was robbed. 
C.
 
At trial, the prosecution offered the testimony of the
 
mini-mart clerk and the CW. The mini-mart clerk identified
 Fontes as the person who came into the mini mart shortly after
 2:00 a.m. The clerk saw Fontes put a package of beef jerky into
 his jacket and attempt to leave without paying. The clerk
 confronted Fontes who denied taking the beef jerky and left the
 store. The clerk opened the mini-mart door and told Fontes that
 if he did not return the beef jerky she would call the police. 
Fontes eventually returned the beef jerky. The clerk saw Fontes
 and his companion leaving the mini-mart parking lot headed in the
 direction of a "white, fair" male with short hair.
 
The CW testified that as he approached the mini mart,
 
he noticed Fontes and another male leaving the mini mart and
 
3
 Defense counsel also recited the CW's description of the first male's
height and weight in support of counsel's assertion that this male could not
have been Fontes.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
heard the store clerk yell that she saw them take something and
 
to give it back or she would call the police. To avoid the
 commotion, the CW walked away. Fontes and the other male 
followed the CW. According to the CW, Fontes stepped in front of
 the CW and demanded money. Fontes grabbed the CW's arm and
 threatened to "put [the CW] to sleep" if he tried to escape. 
Fontes and his companion took a bag the CW was carrying and other
 belongings. The CW testified that he got a good look at Fontes's
 face under the street lamps before Fontes and the other male
 forced him to a darker area.
 
After the robbery, the CW ran back to the mini mart and
 
asked the clerk to call the police. When the police arrived, the
 CW gave the police a description of the two robbers. The CW
 acknowledged at trial that his description of the robber he later
 identified as Fontes did not indicate that the robber had facial
 hair. Later that day, the CW saw Fontes as they both boarded the
 same bus. The CW testified that he recognized Fontes's beard,
 hair, eyes, and nose. While on the bus, Fontes kept looking back
 at the CW. The CW borrowed a cell phone and called the police.
 
D.
 
Fontes testified in his own defense at trial. Fontes
 
stated that he and his friend went to the mini mart. According
 to Fontes, the clerk at the mini mart was giving him "attitude"
 so he pretended as if he was going to steal a bag of beef jerky
 and was asked to leave. As Fontes and his friend left the mini
 mart, they walked passed the CW. The CW kept looking at them
 even after they crossed the street. Fontes denied robbing the
 CW. Fontes said that he was shocked when the police stopped the
 bus and the CW pointed Fontes out to the officers. Fontes stated
 that he sported a goatee on the day in question.
 
II.
 
A defendant who raises a claim of ineffective
 
assistance of counsel bears the burden of demonstrating that
 counsel's performance was not objectively reasonable, in that it
 was not within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
criminal cases. Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 462, 848 P.2d
 
966, 976 (1993). The defendant must show: (1) "specific errors
 
or omissions of defense counsel reflecting counsel's lack of
 skill, judgment or diligence" and (2) "that these errors or
 omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v.
 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 348-49, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980). "General
 claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and every action or
 omission is not subject to inquiry." Briones, 74 Haw. at 462,
 
848 P.2d at 976. In addition, "[s]pecific actions or omissions
 alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical basis for
 benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to further
 scrutiny." Id. at 462-63, 848 P.2d at 976 (emphasis in
 
original). 
A.
 
As noted, Fontes's theory of the case was mistaken
 
identity. In closing argument, trial defense counsel stated: 
When a crime has been committed, the first thing you want to
do is try to figure out who did it. And the reason for that
 is you want closure. Once we have closure, we can move on. 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, that's what happened in
this case. [The CW] was robbed that night or that morning.
. . . And picture him now waiting for the bus, okay, nine,
ten o'clock at night, still pretty much that same day still
under the stress of what had just happened that morning. So
 picture him at the bus stop when he sees a familiar face.
He sees the face of Jonathan Fontes. And, ladies and
gentlemen, that's the trigger. That's what triggered his
memory right there. He recognized [Fontes's] face because
he saw [Fontes]. He saw [Fontes] minutes before or moments
before - I'm sorry - a few minutes before he was robbed.
 
. . . . 
Now, how does - then how does [the CW] make this leap
from recognizing someone's face to then fingering him as a
person that robbed him? Well, think about it. In this
 case, it's pretty easy. [The CW] can already associate
Jonathan Fontes with something that went wrong, something
bad that happened because he -- when he realizes who
[Fontes] is, he can remember that, eh, these were the guys
that were going to steal the beef jerky, and he has this
image in his mind of these two guys coming out of the store
and the clerk saying she's going to call the police. . . .
So he can associate [Fontes's] face with something bad, and
that's how then he can go back and try to make [Fontes's]
face fit as the person that robbed him. 
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trial defense counsel's strategy was to argue that the
 
CW misidentified Fontes as one of the males who robbed him
 
because the CW associated Fontes with criminal activity, namely,
 the attempt to shoplift beef jerky from the mini mart, which 
occurred in close proximity to the robbery. Evidence of the
 shoplifting incident was integral to the mistaken-identify
 defense. Such evidence was necessary to explain how the CW
 recognized Fontes's face, why the CW would have associated Fontes
 with criminal activity, and how the CW could have mistakenly
 identified Fontes as one of the robbers. 
We conclude that the actions of trial defense counsel
 
in eliciting and failing to object to evidence of the shoplifting
 incident "had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the
 defendant's case" because such evidence supported Fontes's
 mistaken-identity defense. See Briones, 74 Haw. at 462-63, 848
 
P.2d at 976. Fontes has not shown that trial defense counsel's
 strategy was objectively unreasonable under the circumstances of
 this case.
 
B. 
Furthermore, contrary to Fontes's claim, we conclude
 
that evidence of the shoplifting incident was relevant and
 admissible to prove identity, pursuant to Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2010). Evidence that Fontes
 was identified by the mini-mart clerk as having been involved in
 a shoplifting incident in the same area and shortly before the CW
 was robbed was relevant to placing Fontes at the scene of the
 robbery. In addition, the CW testified that he saw the mini-mart
 clerk yelling at two males, one of whom the CW identified as
 Fontes, and that these same two males later robbed him. The
 mini-mart clerk's identification of Fontes as the person involved
 in the shoplifting incident therefore served to corroborate the
 CW's identification of Fontes as one of the robbers. 
Accordingly, evidence of the shoplifting incident was admissible
 under HRE Rule 404(b) to prove identity. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court gave a limiting instruction to the
 
jury that they could consider evidence that Fontes "may have
 
committed other crimes, wrongs, or acts . . . only on the issue
 of Defendant's motive, intent, identity, or state of mind[.]"
 (Emphasis added.) We conclude that trial defense counsel did not
 render ineffective assistance by failing to object to evidence of
 the shoplifting incident that was relevant and admissible under
 HRE Rule 404(b). In addition, the admissibility of the
 shoplifting evidence reinforces our view that trial defense
 counsel's strategy of incorporating the shoplifting evidence into
 Fontes's defense was not unreasonable.
 
C. 
We reject Fontes's claim that his trial counsel was
 
ineffective for failing to object to testimony regarding the
 robbery on the ground that the testimony was cumulative. Because
 Fontes's defense at trial was mistaken identity, he had no
 compelling reason to contest evidence regarding the details of
 the robbery. Fontes did not deny that the CW had been robbed;
 Fontes only denied that he had been one of the robbers. In any
 event, the CW was the only witness to testify regarding the
 robbery. Fontes does not provide any convincing argument that
 the CW's testimony regarding the robbery was cumulative or that
 an objection on that ground would properly have been sustained. 
III.
 
We affirm the September 16, 2008, Judgment of the
 
Circuit Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 28, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Clayton K. Kimoto
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
James M. Anderson
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 