 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28578
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KEVIN MAGSAYO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 07-1-1049)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin Magsayo (Magsayo) with one count of
 
second-degree terroristic threatening, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-717(1) (1993).
1 Magsayo's wife was
 
1
 HRS ยง 707-717(1) (1993) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the second degree if the person commits terroristic
threatening other than as provided in section 707-716.
 
HRS ยง 707-715 (1993) defines the offense of terroristic threatening, in
(continued...)
  3 Although Magsayo's notice of appeal was not timely filed, appellate
courts have overlooked such error in similar circumstances. See State v. 
Knight, 80 Hawai' i 318, 323-24, 909 P.2d 1133, 1138-39 (1996). We therefore 
will address the merits of Magsayo's appeal. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the complaining witness (CW) for the charge. A jury found
 
Magsayo guilty as charged. The Family Court of the First Circuit
 
2
(Family Court)  sentenced Magsayo to one year of imprisonment.
Magsayo appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence" (Judgment) filed in the Family Court on April 16,
 2007.
3 On appeal, Magsayo argues: (1) the Family Court violated
 
his right to a fair and impartial jury by reversing its ruling in
 limine to preclude the admission of a Beretta handgun and its
 magazine after Magsayo had begun exercising peremptory challenges
 during jury selection; (2) the Family Court abused its discretion
 
1(...continued)
pertinent part, as follows:
 
A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening if
the person threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury
to another person or serious damage to property of another or to
commit a felony:
 
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless disregard
of the risk of terrorizing, another person[.]
 
At the time relevant to this case, HRS ยง 707-716 (Supp. 2006) provided:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the first degree if the person commits terroristic
threatening:
 
(a)	 By threatening another person on more than one
occasion for the same or a similar purpose;
 
(b)	 By threats made in a common scheme against different
persons;
 
(c)	 Against a public servant arising out of the
performance of the public servant's official duties.
For the purposes of this paragraph, 'public servant'
includes but is not limited to an educational worker.
 'Educational worker' has the same meaning as defined
in section 707-711; or
 
(d)	 With the use of a dangerous instrument.
 
(2) Terroristic threatening in the first degree is a class C
felony.
 
2 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in admitting the Beretta handgun and its magazine into evidence;
 
(3) the Family Court committed plain error in failing to sua
 sponte give a limiting instruction regarding Officer Robert
 King's testimony of what Officer Philip White had told him; (4)
 the Family Court erred in failing to strike the testimony of
 Officer White, which Magsayo claims amounted to an improper
 bolstering of the CW's credibility; and (5) his trial counsel
 provided ineffective assistance. We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
At trial, the CW testified that she returned home from
 
work at about 12:30 p.m. and found Magsayo and their two
 
daughters, ages seven and eight, in the living room watching TV. 
Magsayo was yelling at the youngest daughter, who was crying. 
The CW told Magsayo to stop. Magsayo became upset, kept yelling
 and swearing, and threw the remote control hard against the TV,
 causing the remote control to break into several pieces. Magsayo
 then went into the bathroom and began hitting the bathroom door,
 causing the doorjamb to break.
 
The CW took the two girls to a back room and locked the
 
door. The CW could hear Magsayo in the adjacent room, moving
 things around as if he was looking for something. Magsayo asked
 the CW if she "wanted to see a crazy man." The CW replied, "[W]e
 already are seeing a crazy man." Magsayo continued swearing and
 then said, "[Y]ou want me put a hole in your head." The CW
 replied, "[W]hat?" and Magsayo repeated, "[Y]ou want me put a
 hole in your head." The CW knew that Magsayo stored his hunting
 rifle in the adjoining room and that he also had a handgun, but
 the CW did not know where the handgun was located. The CW
 understood Magsayo's statements to mean that he "might put a hole
 in [her] head" and this made her scared. Magsayo had also been
 acting irrationally for the prior two weeks.
 
The CW called 911, using a cordless phone, but the call
 
was disconnected. The CW heard Magsayo walk past the back room,
 so she opened the door and saw him in the kitchen. When the CW
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asked Magsayo why he was "acting like that," Magsayo picked up
 
the kitchen table and threw it down.
 
The CW heard the phone ringing and answered it in her
 
room. It was the 911 operator. The CW whispered when speaking
 to the 911 operator because she was scared and did not want
 Magsayo to hear. The CW was unable to complete her conversation
 because Magsayo placed his finger on the receiver.
 
B.
 
Magsayo testified in his own defense at trial. 
According to Magsayo, on the day of the charged incident, the CW
 returned home and they argued about Magsayo's failure to go to
 work, their finances, and Magsayo's burdening the CW with all the
 bills. Magsayo became upset. Magsayo threw the remote control
 against the TV, causing it to break. Magsayo explained that he
 was not angry, but that he threw the remote control against the
 TV because the children had been complaining that they could not
 find it. Magsayo used his head to break the bathroom doorjamb.
 
After the CW went to the back room and locked the door,
 
Magsayo was in the adjoining room looking for something to unlock
 the door. According to Magsayo, the CW asked, "What you doing? 
Looking for your gun?" Magsayo responded, "[N]o, what for?" to
 which the CW stated, "[You] might as well shoot . . . [yourself]
 in the head. That way [we] can get money." Magsayo replied that
 the CW would not get any money if he committed suicide.
 
The CW eventually opened the door and went upstairs. 
Magsayo saw the CW in the bedroom talking on the telephone. 
Magsayo asked the CW to whom she was talking, and when the CW did
 not answer, Magsayo hung up the phone. The police subsequently
 arrived. 
II.
 
We resolve Magsayo's arguments on appeal as follows.
 
A.
 
Magsayo argues that the Family Court violated his 
right to a fair and impartial jury by reversing its ruling in
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limine to preclude the admission of a Beretta handgun and its
 
magazine during jury selection. We disagree.
 
1.
 
Magsayo filed a motion in limine seeking to exclude
 
police officer's testimony that four firearms, including a
 Beretta handgun, were recovered at Magsayo's residence.
4 He also
 
moved in limine to exclude any statement he made to the police
 unless the prosecution established that the statement was
 voluntary. Immediately prior to jury selection, the Family Court
 held a hearing on Magsayo's motion and the prosecution's request
 for a voluntariness hearing. 
With respect to Magsayo's statements to the police, the
 
parties stipulated that Magsayo voluntarily informed Officer
 White, the first officer to arrive at the scene, that a handgun
 (the Beretta) was in the residence in an open fanny pack next to
 the microwave. Magsayo also clarified that his motion in limine
 regarding the firearms was limited to excluding police officer's
 testimony that the police recovered the firearms. Magsayo stated
 that he was willing to "stipulate that there were guns in the
 house." After being informed of Magsayo's willingness to
 stipulate regarding these matters, the Family Court granted
 Magsayo's motion in limine to exclude police officer's testimony
 about the recovery of the four guns.
 
Therefore, prior to jury selection, Magsayo was aware
 
that evidence that there were guns in the house and that he
 informed Officer White that a handgun was in a fanny pack next to
 the microwave would be admitted at trial. In addition, while the
 Family Court had ruled that police officer's testimony about the
 recovery of the guns would be excluded, the Family Court had not
 specifically been asked to rule on whether the Beretta handgun
 itself and its magazine could be admitted into evidence. 
4
 Specifically, the following firearms were identified in Magsayo's
motion in limine: 1) "P. Beretta Cal. 9 #27623"; 2) "Remington .22 short long
or long rifle #1ESS"; 3) "SKS 7.62x39 JCJASFLOMI #11-0728988"; and 4) "Markx
Cal.270 Interarms #defaced."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After Magsayo had exercised his second of three
 
peremptory challenges, a prospective juror referred to having no
 
problem with "gun ownership as long as [the gun is] registered
 and the person owning the weapon is following the law." Magsayo
 then orally moved in limine to exclude any evidence that 
Magsayo's guns were not registered. The State eventually agreed
 to this limitation, but argued that it should be permitted to
 admit the Beretta handgun into evidence. Magsayo objected,
 arguing that admitting the gun would be a "back door" way of
 showing that the gun had been recovered by the police and would
 be "unfairly prejudicial." Magsayo also argued that permitting
 the admission of the handgun would be unfair because his
 questioning of the potential jurors had been based on the Family
 Court's in limine ruling and his understanding that the handgun
 would not be admitted. The Family Court stated that it would
 "revisit the issue," and it allowed the State to admit the
 Baretta handgun and its magazine, as well as evidence of their
 recovery, because the admission of such evidence was more
 probative than prejudicial. 
After the Family Court's ruling, Magsayo did not seek
 
to re-question any of the prospective jurors. He also did not
 ask the Family Court to provide him with additional peremptory
 challenges.
 
At trial, Officer White testified that he found a
 
Beretta handgun loaded with a magazine containing bullets ("the
 handgun evidence") in a fanny pack next to a microwave in
 Magsayo's residence. The handgun evidence was admitted in
 evidence over Magsayo's objection. 
2.
 
We conclude that the Family Court's ruling regarding
 
the admission of the handgun evidence during jury selection did
 not violate Magsayo's right to a fair and impartial jury. Prior
 to jury selection, Magsayo was aware that evidence that there
 were guns in the house and that he advised Officer White of the
 location of a handgun would be admitted at trial. Accordingly,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he had the opportunity to question the prospective jurors about 
their attitude towards firearms. Magsayo has not shown that his right to an impartial jury was substantially prejudiced by any inability to additionally question the prospective jurors about their reaction to a firearm and its magazine being admitted as exhibits. See State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 499-502, 559 P.2d 
728, 734-35 (1997) ("'Absent abuse of his [or her] broad discretion, and a showing that the rights of the accused have been substantially prejudiced thereby, the trial judge's rulings as to the scope and content of voir dire will not be disturbed on appeal.'" (parentheses and citation omitted)). Moreover, after being apprised of the Family Court's ruling, Magsayo did not attempt to re-question any of the jurors or seek additional peremptory challenges. See Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 
24(a) (2000) (permitting parties to examine prospective jurors or to supplement the court's examination by requesting further inquiry); State v. Iuli, 101 Hawai' i 196, 205-06, 65 P.3d 143, 
152-53 (2003) (citing the defendant's failure to proffer that he would have used the peremptory challenge (which he claimed he was improperly forced to use) to excuse another juror or to request an additional peremptory challenge in concluding that the defendant failed to meet his burden of establishing that his right to exercise a peremptory challenge was denied or impaired). Magsayo's claim that the Family Court's ruling deprived him of a fair and impartial jury is without merit. See Altergott, 57 Haw. 
at 499-502, 559 P.2d at 734-35; Barcai v. Betwee, 98 Hawai' i 
470, 476-77,50 P.3d 946, 952-53 (2002) (concluding that plaintiffs were required to demonstrate prejudice to obtain relief on their claim that the trial court's reversal of its initial evidentiary ruling violated their right to a fair and impartial jury); Iuli, 101 Hawai' i at 205-06, 65 P.3d at 152-53. 
B.
 
We reject Magsayo's contention that the Family Court
 
abused its discretion in admitting into evidence the handgun
 evidence. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The handgun evidence was relevant to prove the "true
 
threat" requirement for the terroristic threatening offense. The
 
Hawai'i Supreme Court had stated: 
[T]he prosecution [must] prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that a remark threatening bodily injury is a "true threat,"
such that it conveyed to the person to whom it was
directed a gravity of purpose and imminent prospect of
execution. . . .
 
. . . .
 
[A]s a general matter, the prosecution must prove that the
threat was objectively susceptible to inducing fear of
bodily injury in a reasonable person at whom the threat was
directed and who was familiar with the circumstances under
 which the threat was uttered. Of course, one means of
proving the foregoing would be to establish . . . that the
threat was uttered under circumstances that rendered it "so
 unequivocal, unconditional, immediate, and specific as to
the person threatened, as to convey a gravity of purpose and
imminent prospect of execution." But another would be to
 establish that the defendant possessed "the apparent ability
to carry out the threat," such that "the threat would
reasonably tend to induce fear of bodily injury in the
victim." 
State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai' i 465, 476-77, 24 P.3d 661, 672-73 
(2001) (citations, ellipsis points, and brackets omitted; 
emphases added). 
The CW testified that she knew that Magsayo kept his 
hunting rifle in the residence and that he also possessed a handgun. The admission into evidence of the handgun evidence was highly probative of: (1) whether Magsayo's alleged threat to "put a hole in [the CW's] head" was "objectively susceptible to inducing fear of bodily injury" in a reasonable person in the CW's position "who was familiar with the circumstances under which the threat was uttered"; and (2) whether Magsayo "possessed 'the apparent ability to carry out the threat,' such that 'the threat would reasonably tend to induce fear of bodily injury in [the CW].'" Id. at 477, 24 P.3d at 673 (brackets omitted). In 
addition, the handgun evidence, by serving to demonstrate and underscore the accessibility of the handgun to Magsayo, was also relevant to showing his intent to terrorize or his reckless disregard of that risk. See State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai' i 493, 
505-06, 193 P.3d 409, 421-22 (2008) (upholding admission of 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
handgun in kidnapping-with-intent-to-terrorize prosecution to
 
prove the defendant's state of mind). We conclude that the
 Family Court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the
 probative value of the handgun evidence outweighed the risk of
 unfair prejudice and in admitting such evidence. 
C.
 
Magsayo contends that the Family Court committed plain
 
error in failing to sua sponte give a limiting instruction
 regarding Officer King's testimony, which related what Officer
 White had said about the CW's report of Magsayo's alleged threat. 
Assuming arguendo that the Family Court erred, we conclude that
 any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
The CW testified that Magsayo threatened her by twice 
asking whether she wanted Magsayo to "put a hole in [her] head." In addition, Officer White testified that the CW was crying hard and appeared fearful when she told him that Magsayo had "threatened to kill [her] . . . he had a gun and that he threatened to put a bullet in her head." Magsayo did not object to this testimony, and it was properly before the jury. See 
State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai' i 382, 410, 910 P.2d 695, 723 (1996) 
(concluding that evidence admitted without objection or motion to strike is to be treated as competent evidence); State v. Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i 282, 290, 12 P.3d 873, 881 (2000) 
(concluding that the defendant waived hearsay argument by failing to object at trial). We conclude that Officer King's testimony, which also referred to the CW's report of Magsayo's alleged threat, was cumulative of other evidence properly before the jury. Accordingly, any error in the Family Court's failure to sua sponte give a limiting instruction regarding Officer King's testimony was harmless. See Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i at 290, 12 
P.3d at 881 (holding that any error in admitting alleged hearsay statements was harmless where such statements were merely cumulative of other evidence properly admitted at trial); State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 298, 926 P.2d 194, 203 (1996) (holding 
that any error in admitting a witness's testimony was harmless 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
where it was merely cumulative of other admissible testimony
 
presented to the jury). 
D.
 
Magsayo argues that the Family Court erred in failing
 
to strike Officer White's testimony regarding how his evaluation
 of a person's credibility affected his decision regarding whether 
to make a police report. Magsayo contends that the Family Court
 should have stricken Officer White's testimony because it
 amounted to improper bolstering of the CW's credibility. We
 disagree.
 
It was Magsayo who first broached the subject of how
 
Officer White's evaluation of a person's credibility factored
 into the officer's decision on whether to make a report, in
 Magsayo's cross-examination of Officer White. Officer White
 acknowledged that people had lied to him before and that he may
 still generate a report in those instances. Officer White
 indicated that he attempts to take action based on information he
 believes is truthful, but that he may "have no idea" as to
 whether people are telling the truth. 
On redirect examination by the State, Officer White
 
again indicated that he may prepare a report even if he believes
 the person complaining is lying about the incident. He
 acknowledged that his "judgment of a person's credibility weighs
 upon [his] decision to make a report."
 
We conclude that Officer White's testimony did not
 
constitute improper bolstering of the CW's credibility. Officer
 White did not directly discuss or express his opinion regarding
 the CW's credibility or the truthfulness of her allegations. In
 responding to general questions about his decision on whether to
 make a report, Officer White simply articulated the rather
 unsurprising proposition that his judgment about a person's
 credibility is a factor he considers in deciding whether to make
 a report. We conclude that the Family Court did not err in
 failing to strike Officer White's testimony. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
Magsayo asserts that his trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance by: (1) broaching the subject of whether
 
Officer White considered a person's credibility in deciding to
 make a report, thereby opening the door to Officer White's
 testimony on redirect that his judgment of a person's credibility
 weighed upon his decision on whether to make a report; and (2)
 failing to specifically ask Magsayo at trial if Magsayo had
 threatened to put a hole in the CW's head. We disagree.
 
In her questioning of Officer White, Magsayo's trial 
counsel sought to elicit Officer White's acknowledgment that people lie to the police, that he cannot always tell if someone is lying, and that he has submitted police reports even when he did not know if the reports were based on truthful information. The evident tactical purpose of this line of questioning was to show that Officer White's making a police report based on the CW's complaint did not mean that the CW's report was truthful. That trial counsel may not have been completely successful in achieving her purpose with this line of questioning is not sufficient to show that she provided ineffective assistance. See 
State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 352, 615 P.2d 101, 106 (1980) ("Defense counsel's tactical decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a reviewing court.") Moreover, we have already concluded that the prejudice Magsayo claims resulted from his trial counsel's opening the door -- that is, the improper bolstering of the CW's credibility -- did not occur. Thus, Magsayo has not met his burden of showing that his counsel provided ineffective assistance in questioning Officer White. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 
(1998). 
We also conclude that Magsayo has not shown that his
 
trial counsel provided ineffective assistance as the result of 
counsel's failure to specifically ask Magsayo whether he
 threatened to put a hole in the CW's head. Through trial
 counsel's questioning, Magsayo testified to his version of the
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
incident, which did not include any threats to kill or injure the
 
CW. The clear import of Magsayo's version of the incident was
 that he did not threaten the CW. Magsayo cites no authority for
 the proposition that trial counsel provides ineffective
 assistance if counsel fails to specifically ask a defendant to
 deny making the alleged threat. Magsayo's ineffective assistance
 of counsel claim is without merit.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's
 
Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 30, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Linda C.R. Jameson 
(Law Office of Linda C.R.
Jameson)
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 