NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29525
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOE D. AKUNA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-1632)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise, and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Joe D. Akuna (Akuna) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed in the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 (circuit court) on
November 24, 2008.
 
A jury found Akuna guilty of Sexual Assault in the
 
Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 707-731(1)(a) (Supp. 2008) (Count I); Sexual Assault in the
 Fourth Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-733 (1993) (Count II);
 and Attempted Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation
 of HRS §§ 705-500 (1993) & 707-733 (Count III). 
The circuit
 
court sentenced Akuna to ten years of imprisonment, with a
 mandatory minimum of three years and four months for Count I, and
 one year of imprisonment for each of Counts II and III. The
 sentences were to run concurrently with each other.
 
On appeal, Akuna contends the circuit court erred and
 
violated his constitutional rights
 
(1) to a fair trial by denying his motion to exclude 
from evidence at trial additional statements made by the Complainant (Complainant) to the State of Hawai
'i (State) Deputy 
Prosecuting Attorney (Prosecutor), which statements Prosecutor failed to disclose to Akuna until the day of trial; 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) to confrontation, to present a defense, and to a
 
fair trial when the court denied his request for a mistrial after
 
he was precluded from impeaching Complainant's credibility
 through questioning of Prosecutor, who was the only witness to
 whom Complainant had made her prior inconsistent statements; and
 
(3) to confrontation, to present a defense, to a jury
 
trial, and to a fair trial, when the court conducted its own
 questioning of Complainant and read the court's own finding of
 fact (FOF) to the jury regarding Complainant's prior statement.
 
Akuna argues in the alternative that even if it were
 
proper for the circuit court to read the FOF to the jury, the
 court erred by failing to explain to the jury what is an FOF and
 how the jury should evaluate one.
 
Akuna requests that we vacate his conviction and remand
 
this case for a new trial.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Pretrial
 On July 28, 2008, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the motions in limine. Akuna's counsel (Defense Counsel) asked
 the circuit court to preclude from evidence at trial statements
 Complainant had made to Prosecutor the previous day. Prosecutor
 had disclosed the statements to Defense Counsel that morning. 
Prosecutor stated that she had interviewed Complainant in
 preparation for trial about ten days prior to the hearing on the
 motions in limine (first interview), but Complainant did not tell
 Prosecutor until the interview the previous day (second
 interview) that Complainant and Akuna had engaged in the
 following dialog at the time of the incident: Akuna asked
 Complainant, "Do you want to fool around with anyone?" 
Complainant told him, "No. I'm not like that." Akuna responded,
 "Your husband will cheat on you when he's deployed." Complainant
 said, "Our relationship isn't like that." Akuna said, "Whatever
 happens happens."
 
Prosecutor stated that she disclosed the statements to 
Defense Counsel, pursuant to the requirements of Hawai
'i Rules of 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16 ,2
 and the State intended to use
the statements at trial. No third party was present when
 
Complainant made the statements. Defense Counsel argued that the
 circuit court should exclude the statements from evidence because
 "at this point it's kind of late and [it] unfairly burdens the
 defense."
 
The circuit court orally ruled that it would not
 
exclude the statements from evidence.
 
Trial
 Complainant testified that on August 23, 2007, she 
spent the night with her friend, Fayne, at the house (the House) belonging to Fayne's mother, Auntie Ray. Complainant's fiancé (who was her husband at the time of trial) was at basic training in Georgia on August 23. 
He had left for basic training on 
August 16, 2007 and was to return to Hawai 'i in March 2007. 
Fayne invited Complainant to stay the night because Fayne did not want Complainant to be alone. Complainant had previously spent the night at Fayne's on August 18, 2007. 
After driving to Makaha, Complainant, Fayne, and
 
Fayne's girlfriend, Ali, returned to the House at around 11:00 or
 11:30 p.m. and hung out at the bus, where Fayne lived, that was
 parked next to the House. Fayne's brother, Fred, showed up with
 Akuna. At around 1:20 a.m., Complainant went to sleep on the
 couch in the House and Fayne went to sleep in her bus. 
Complainant chose to sleep in the House because there were
 
2 HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(i) and (vii) provides that 
[t]he prosecutor shall disclose to the defendant or the
defendant's attorney the following material and information within
the prosecutor's possession or control: 
(i) the names and last known addresses of persons whom
the prosecutor intends to call as witnesses in the
presentation of the evidence in chief, together with any
relevant written or recorded statements, provided that
statements recorded by the prosecutor shall not be subject
to disclosure; 
. . . .
 
(vii) any material or information which tends to
negate the guilt of the defendant as to the offense charged
or would tend to reduce the defendant's punishment
therefor[.]
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
roaches in the bus. In the House, Fayne's Uncle Milton was in
 
one bedroom; Fred and his brother, Patrick, in another bedroom;
 Auntie Ray and her boyfriend, Chico, in another bedroom; and
 Auntie Ray's friend, Rambo, in another bedroom.
 
Complainant slept on a couch in the living room. She
 
could not sleep in any of the bedrooms because they were all
 occupied. Adjacent to and behind the couch was a bed, on which
 Akuna slept. When Complainant had spent the night at the House
 on August 18, she, Akuna, and Rambo had slept in the living room
 in the same positions and nothing unusual had happened, so she
 trusted Akuna.
 
Complainant testified that from about 12:30 to 1:20
 
a.m., she and Akuna talked in the living room about Akuna's
 family, among other things. On direct examination, Prosecutor
 and Complainant engaged in the following discussion:
 
Q [Prosecutor] On the night that this happened, in
other words, the second time that you slept over, did
[Akuna] say anything to you about your husband being on
leave?
 
A [The Complainant] He told me that soldiers that
 
went to basic training would fool around and basically I
couldn't count on him to be faithful to me. So, you know,
whatever happens happens.
 
Q Did you say anything to [Akuna] when he said that
you couldn't count on your husband being faithful?
 
A I told him that our relationship wasn't at all like
that. And we had trust, you know, since we were friends
before we even went out. And our relationship was mature.
 
Q What did you mean by that?
 
A We could trust each other. We weren't, you know,
into playing games or anything. We were up-front with each
other. We told each other everything.
 
Complainant testified that she did not flirt with Akuna in any
 
way and he did not flirt with her. On cross-examination,
 Complainant testified that when she was talking with Akuna, he
 was sitting on a love seat next to the couch and she was sitting
 on the couch.
 
In the early morning, Complainant woke up because she
 
felt something tapping on her leg and found Akuna's hand "right
 on [her] leg going by [her] private [genital] area." Complainant
 was wearing loose-fitting shorts, a tanktop, underwear, and a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bra. Akuna's hand was underneath the leg area of her shorts, on
 
top of her underwear. As far as Complainant knew, Akuna was
 sleeping. His hand was over the back of the couch. Complainant
 was shocked and could not breathe, but she thought at first it
 might have been an accident and that Akuna just usually put his
 hand over the back of the couch when he slept.
 
Complainant pushed Akuna's hand away and covered
 
herself with her blanket. She wrapped herself in the blanket
 because if it happened again, she wanted to make sure she knew
 whether it was a mistake. First, Akuna's hand stayed where she
 had pushed it, but a couple of seconds later, it returned to
 where it was, only underneath her underwear, and his fingers were
 between her labia and by her clitoris, but not touching it. 
Complainant panicked and felt violated and helpless. She grabbed
 Akuna's hand to pull it out and he resisted, so she grabbed his
 hand with both of her hands, turned, and pulled out his hand.
 
Seconds later, Akuna climbed over the back of the couch
 
and tried to pin her down with his shoulder, using his weight. 
She knew it was Akuna because he had been wearing a white tank
 top, he had body odor, and his breath stank and she had noticed
 the body odor earlier that evening. Complainant testified that
 Akuna then "started to like feel me up." He tried to go
 underneath her bra and back into her underwear, to touch her
 genitals. Complainant was lying on her side. Akuna put his
 hands on her breasts and squeezed them.
 
Complainant testified that when Akuna was assaulting
 
her, she felt nasty, violated, dirty, and defiled. She had never
 initiated any type of sexual contact with him, had not kissed him
 that night, and had never wanted to have any kind of sexual
 relations with him. She had not given Akuna permission to put
 his fingers inside any part of her body, to sexually penetrate
 her in any way, to have any type of sexual contact with her, or
 to touch her. Complainant was menstruating that night and was
 wearing a sanitary pad.
 
Complainant could not slide off of the couch because
 
the blanket was wrapped around her. She was able to break free
 from Akuna after pushing harder against him. No one in the house
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ever came to the scene. Complainant did not scream because she
 
was caught off guard and panicked and could not breathe. 
Complainant walked outside to Fayne's bus and told them what
 happened. Fayne called Fred, and Fred called the police.
 
On cross-examination, Defense Counsel questioned
 
Complainant about the second interview with Prosecutor:
 
Q 
[Defense Counsel] Now, whenever you spoke with
[Prosecutor] Sunday, did you tell her anything else about
other statements that were made by [Akuna]?
 
A [Complainant] No. I just told her what I told her,
that those days previous before Sunday was just reclarifying
everything.
 
Q So you didn't tell [Prosecutor] anything else about
any other statements that [Akuna] made to you during that
night?
 
A No.
 
Q Did you tell her anything about that you said
[Akuna] said something to the effect that -– asked if you
wanted to hook up?
 
A No. 
Q Or get together or something like that? 
A No. 
The circuit court called a recess and questioned Prosecutor out
 
of the presence of the jury:
 
THE COURT: For the record, [Prosecutor], as best you
can recall, without getting a transcript out of what you
earlier said, on Sunday you had a conversation with
[Complainant] that you dutifully told the Court and [Defense
Counsel] about; correct?
 
[PROSECUTOR]: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: As best you can recall, what did this
witness tell you at that time?
 
[PROSECUTOR]: [Akuna] said to her, "Don't you want to
fool around."
 
THE COURT: Speak up a little bit.
 [PROSECUTOR]: I'm sorry, Your Honor. 
[Akuna] said to her, "Don't you want to fool around
with anyone." And she said, "No."
 
THE COURT: What else?
 [PROSECUTOR]: "Your husband will cheat on you in
basic training." And she said, "Our relationship isn't like
that, I'm not like that."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Anything else?
 
[PROSECUTOR]: And then he said, "Whatever happens
happens."
 
THE COURT: Is that satisfactory, [Defense Counsel]?
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: That's fine.
 [PROSECUTOR]: I'm not exactly sure the order anymore,
Your Honor. That's the best I can recreate it.
 
THE COURT: Be that as it may, it's always good to
have a third party there. I'm not going to get too excited
unless I need to.
 
After the bench conference, Defense Counsel resumed his
 
questioning of Complainant in open court regarding statements she
 
had allegedly made to Prosecutor:
 
Q [Defense Counsel] You never told [Prosecutor] that
[Akuna said something to the effect of, "Don't you want to
fool around with anyone?"].
 
A [Complainant]: It wasn't to where he said, "Don't
you want to fool around." It was like he was hinting where
he told me, "Things happen." But I was explaining to him
the relationship me and my husband had. He told me, "Things
happen."
 
Q Did you tell [Prosecutor] that [Akuna] told you or
asked you, "Don't you want to fool around"?
 
A Not those words.
 
Q Okay. But you are saying now that he hinted
something?
 
A That was after the event had occurred and I was
 
going back through all my -– what had happened. I told
 
[Prosecutor] that when we were having the conversation, me
and [Akuna], that's what he said.
 
Q When you were having the conversation with [Akuna]
between 12:30 and 1:20 in the morning, he said something or
insinuated something about fooling around?
 
A Yes. 
Q What were the words that he used then? 
A He said, "Things happen." 
Q "Things happen." 
And then I think you covered -– he made some comment
about your husband will cheat on you during basic training?
 
A Yes.
 
Q And you took that comment, "things happen," in
conjunction with your husband will cheat on you during basic
training as some sort of an implication about you wanting to
fool around?
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A Yes. But not with him. But just him saying, you
know, my husband is going to fool around, so I should -–
it's going to happen to me as well, I'm going to want to do
that.
 
Q So you took it as you –- something implicating that
-– about you fooling around, but not with him.
 
A: Yes.
 
Defense Counsel asked Complainant if she mentioned "anything
 
about these comments" in her police statement, her interview with
 the police, or her Grand Jury testimony, and Complainant answered
 that she had not. Complainant testified that she had told
 Prosecutor about the comments not only during the second
 interview, but during the first interview as well.
 
On redirect examination, Prosecutor asked Complainant
 
if Akuna had ever said he wanted to hook up or get together with
 Complainant or ever asked her, "Do you want to fool around?", and
 Complainant responded in the negative. Complainant testified
 that when Akuna told her, "Your husband will cheat on you during
 basic training," Complainant took that to mean that Akuna was
 "trying to tear me down." Complainant told Akuna that her then-
fiancé would not cheat on her because their trust and
 relationship were strong. Complainant did not in any way think
 that Akuna was attracted to her.
 
Fayne and Fred's Testimonies
 Fayne's testimony was substantially similar to 
Complainant's. She testified that she did not see Complainant
 and Akuna flirting on the night of the incident. Fred's
 testimony was also substantially similar. He testified he did
 not see Complainant flirt with Akuna or express any interest in
 being with Akuna as boyfriend-girlfriend.
 
Nadine T. Salle, M.D.'s Testimony
 Nadine T. Salle, M.D., (Dr. Salle) testified that on
 
August 24, 2007 she treated Complainant in connection with this
 incident. Dr. Salle stated that Complainant's findings were
 essentially normal and showed a young woman who was menstruating. 
Dr. Salle testified that a person could touch another person's
 labia and clitoris without creating any signs of trauma or
 transferring DNA.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9Testimony regarding evidence on Akuna's hands,
fingernails
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Crabbe 
testified that on August 24, 2007, he was dispatched to the
House, where he interviewed Complainant.  While at the House,
Officer Crabbe arrested Akuna for sexual assault.  The officer
inspected Akuna's hands and observed a reddish brownish substance
on Akuna's "fingernails where the fingernail and skin meet."
Hugh Okuba (Okuba), an HPD evidence specialist at the
time of the incident, testified that he swabbed Akuna's hands for
biological evidence and scraped Akuna's fingernails for trace
evidence.
Barrie Chua-Chiaco (Chua-Chiaco), a specialist in DNA
analysis, testified that he performed testing on reference buccal
swabs from Akuna's mouth (State's Exhibit 1) and Complainant's
mouth (State's Exhibit 2), scrapings from Akuna's right-hand
fingernails (State's Exhibit 3), and a swab sample from Akuna's
right hand (Exhibit 4).  Chua-Chiaco tested all of the exhibits
for DNA and also tested Exhibit 3 for blood.
Exhibit 4 .  Testing of Exhibit 4 showed the presence of
blood, but the blood could not be identified as human in origin. 
That meant there may have been no human blood present or that
human blood was present, but at too low a level to detect.  DNA
testing of the sample revealed two DNA components, or the DNA of
two individuals.  One of the DNA component profiles matched
Akuna's DNA profile.  No conclusions could be reached regarding
the origin of the other DNA component.
Exhibit 3 .  Chua-Chiaco testified that he did not test
the fingernail scrapings for blood because there was a very
limited amount of sample present and he had to choose between
testing it for blood and testing it for DNA.  The DNA test was
more important and showed a mixture of two individuals' DNA. 
Complainant could be included as a possible contributor to the
DNA profile obtained, and Akuna could not be excluded as being a
possible contributor to the profile.  Chua-Chiaco saw all the
same DNA characteristics in Exhibit 3 that he had seen when he
examined Complainant's characteristics in Exhibit 2.  When askedNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
how likely it was that the Complainant's DNA was present in
 
Exhibit 3, Chua-Chiaco said that conservatively, there was a 1 in
 1.2 million chance that it was not Complainant's. There was more
 female DNA than male DNA in Exhibit 3. On cross-examination,
 Chua-Chiaco stated he could not tell if Exhibit 3 contained blood 
and the sample could have been the result of something as small
 as a scrape along the skin. Chua-Chiaco testified that there
 would probably not be a transfer of DNA from a hug.
 
Sandra Tam's testimony
 Sandra Tam, a worker at the victim-witness assistance
 
division at the City and County of Honolulu Prosecutor's Office, 
testified that she was present at Prosecutor's interview of
 Complainant one or two weeks before trial commenced and she did
 not think that Complainant attributed any statements, including
 "Do you want to fool around with anyone?", to Akuna, during the
 interview.
 
Akuna's testimony
 Akuna testified that on August 23, 2007, he had been
 
living at the House for three weeks, helping around the house and
 with the pigs. That evening, he was reading in bed when he and
 Complainant began talking. While they were talking and looking
 at photographs of Akuna's children, Complainant told Akuna, "God,
 you got beautiful eyes." Akuna said, "Yeah. My children are
 Italian-Hawaiian-Chinese-Spanish."
 
Akuna testified that at some point, the generator shut
 
off and the lights went out. He told Complainant he was going to
 go to sleep. Akuna testified that he was sitting up in bed when
 Complainant "grabbed my right hand, put my [right] hand between
 her legs, and goes, 'Do you want some?'." Akuna testified that
 "she had [his] fingers on the . . . end of her shorts toward her
 vagina area." He testified that "it felt really awkward 'cause,
 God, it's like moving too fast, huh. It was a really fast move. 
And I kinda suddenly felt uncomfortable about where that led to." 
He had not touched Complainant at all that day, prior to the
 incident. Akuna testified that he said, "What?" And [he] was
 just really in shock." He stated that he "told her, 'This is not
 right. It's disrespectful for aunty and for her friends.'" 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Akuna pulled his arm away from Complainant, pushed her back, and
 
told her, "This is not good" and "You need to get out of the
 house." He told her he would tell Fayne and Aunty Rae about it
 in the morning. Complainant got up from the couch, heading
 toward the kitchen, and Akuna fell asleep. The next thing he
 remembered was being woken up and arrested.
 
Akuna could not tell if there was any blood because it
 
was too dark and the incident happened so quickly.
 
Akuna testified that prior to grabbing his hand,
 
Complainant had not really indicated that she was attracted to
 him. Akuna stated that he was not attracted to or sexually
 interested in the Complainant. When asked if he ever tried to
 touch Complainant's crotch area or put his hands inside of her
 panties, Akuna responded in the negative.
 
Akuna testified that at the time of the incident, he
 
did not know if Complainant was engaged, but only that she had a
 boyfriend.
 
Motion for Mistrial
 After Dr. Salle testified, Defense Counsel moved for a
 
mistrial, arguing the following with regard to Complainant's
 statements to Prosecutor regarding comments Akuna allegedly made
 to Complainant at the time of the incident:
 
The other issue which perhaps necessitates a mistrial
is from last week with the witness issue, [Prosecutor] being
a witness. I believe the issue with that and I –- if
 there's some other alternative to solve it without declaring
a mistrial, that's fine. But the problem is there's a
couple different problems on that. One, there were two
times at which [Prosecutor] put on the record before we
started trial and were read into the record, then they were
even read a second time during the trial on what they are,
statements attributable to my client that [Complainant] had
allegedly told [Prosecutor] Sunday when [Prosecutor] met
with [Complainant] on Sunday, whenever the witness was then
on the stand.
 
In one of those two statements, [Complainant]
basically flat out denied that she had told [Prosecutor]
that. Something to the extent of, well, it was -– this was
kind of a -– I forgot the term [Complainant] used, if it was
a perception or something, but it wasn't that.
[Complainant] said that [Akuna] said. That's the problem.
You know. That's why I didn't want these statements to come
in because this is the problem that explodes from these
statements. [Prosecutor] specifically said that was not a
feeling or something else. In an ordinary case had it been
a regular person other than [Prosecutor], I could put them
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on and say that was a statement. But [Prosecutor] is a
prosecutor. I can't say that.
 
The second problem, [Prosecutor] said [Complainant]
had told [Prosecutor] of that the first time. That's why I
had only learned about it. The second time [Prosecutor]
called me, Sunday night, I didn't get the message 'til
Monday morning on it. On the stand [Complainant] said not
only did I tell [Prosecutor] on Sunday, I had told her -– I
think [Prosecutor's] representation -– the court met with
her ten days ago or ten days prior. She never mentioned it. 
[Complainant's] representation was I think five days prior.
And [Complainant] had told [Prosecutor] about these
statements, the five or six days prior, whenever
[Complainant] talked to [Prosecutor]. That's another area
 that, you know.
 
I don't know that we asked [Prosecutor] if this [sic]
was a witness there for the earlier statement. I know
 [Prosecutor] said on the one on Sunday that she was the only
other person there, but, you know, that's a second issue
that I would definitely go into on cross-examination and
say, you know, she's not being honest. And this case is all
 about the credibility of [Complainant]. That's what it
 hinges on. That's everything in this case.
 
And any attack I can have on the credibility of
[Complainant] I'm going to use. And those are two attacks
 that I should be able to attack her credibility on. But
 because [Prosecutor] is the only witness that I can call to
impeach [Complainant], I think that would necessitate a
mistrial unless there's some other avenue, you know,
stipulate. I mean even if we stipulated, [Prosecutor] would
say that she is still a witness, so.
 
With regard to the first basis for moving for mistrial,
 
Defense Counsel explained that the inconsistency between what
 
Complainant allegedly told Prosecutor prior to trial and what
 Complainant testified to at trial was the following:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I believe what [Complainant]
testified to in court was that she never -– that [Akuna] -–
she never told [Prosecutor] that [Akuna] said "Don't you
want to fool around with anyone?" What [Complainant's]
testimony was was something to the effect of she got that
feeling or something, but he never said that. That's never
 a statement that he said because that was the main
 inconsistency here. 
Regarding the second basis, Defense Counsel explained:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: . . . My argument's going to be
none of that stuff was said. But at this point, yes,
[Complainant is] embellishing or making up additional things
or adding to her story to try to embellish her story. The
 second part of that and where I think there's an
inconsistency is that she has testified and her earlier
statements were that she never got any feeling that there
was any attraction. There was never any, you know, flirting
or anything going on between them. And then if that's the
 case though, if she's -– if her statement was in fact to
[Prosecutor] that he said "Don't you want to fool around
with anyone," then I think that could be argued as, you
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
know, being inconsistent with her statement that there was
not any flirting happening back and forth.
 
Prosecutor stated that she had no memory of Complainant telling
 
her about Akuna's comments in the first meeting.
 
The circuit court proposed having Prosecutor stipulate
 
to the statement made on July 27th to her by Complainant
 regarding Akuna's comments. Prosecutor stated she would have no
 problem doing so. However, Defense Counsel stated that he was
 opposed to such a stipulation because it would effectively
 bolster Complainant's testimony, since the jury would have the
 sense that despite inconsistencies in Complainant's testimony at
 trial and her statements to Prosecutor prior to trial, the State
 decided to prosecute. The circuit court proposed informing the
 jury that the court had made an FOF regarding what Complainant
 told Prosecutor during the second interview. The circuit court
 then questioned Complainant in camera:
 
Q [THE COURT] Okay. Do you remember what you told
[Prosecutor] about what [Akuna] said or didn't say on the,
uh, 24th day of August, 2007 when he was talking to you
about your husband in the National Guard? Do you remember
what he may have told you?
 
A [Complainant] I remember I told [Prosecutor] that
after the fact everything happened I went over what happened
that night and I told her that I remember him saying "What
happens, happens."
. . . .
 
Q Regarding when people are at boot camp or National
Guard camp; is that right?
 
A Yes.
 Q Um, did [Akuna] say anything that was close to
this, "Don't you want to fool around with anyone?" Do you
remember him saying that?
 
A Not that I remember. I can't remember.
 
Q You can't remember. You understand that I was told
 
that's what you said to [Prosecutor] that day? Would you be
surprised to know that she remembers you saying that?
 
A No.
 
Q What?
 A If she remembers me saying that –­
. . . . 
A -– then –­Q That's what she said; right?
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A Right. Yeah.
 
.  .  .  .
 
Q . . . But if [Prosecutor] told me in this very court
that Monday the 28th, not even a day after you talked to her
–- do you understand that -–
 
A Um-hmm.
 
Q –- [Prosecutor] told me that you told [Prosecutor]
words to the effect that [Akuna] said "Don't you want to
fool around with anyone?," that doesn't refresh your
recollection that's what you told [Prosecutor]?
 
A All I can remember is what I told you, not -– I
just told her what I know, what I remembered.
 
Q Okay. 
A That's all I can remember. 
Q And what do you remember? 
A When he said things happen. 
Q Things happen? 
A Yeah. 
Q "Whatever happens, happens"? 
A Yes. 
Defense Counsel argued that if the circuit court made its
 
proposed finding, it would bolster Prosecutor's credibility.
 
Just before the defense and State rested their cases, 
Defense Counsel and Prosecutor both objected to the circuit
 court's giving an FOF regarding what Complainant told Prosecutor
 at the second interview about Akuna's comments during the
 incident. Prosecutor stated that she would also object to being
 called as a witness to testify regarding what Complainant told
 her. The circuit court decided to give the FOF over both
 parties' objections and told Prosecutor, "I need to caution you,
 if not prevent you from arguing that conversation because you are
 the only witness." The circuit court then stated that Prosecutor
 was basically barred from making any argument regarding the FOF.
 
Just prior to instructing the jury, the circuit court
 
stated to the jury the following:
 
The Court has made the following finding of fact,
ladies and gentlemen of the jury. There was an oral
 
communication between [Complainant] and [Prosecutor] on
Sunday, July 27, 2008. [Complainant] stated to [Prosecutor]
that [Akuna] said to her on August 24, 2007, "Don't you want
to fool around with anyone," or words to that effect. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Judicial Misconduct
 
"Where judicial misconduct or bias deprives a party of 
the impartiality to which he or she is entitled, a new trial may 
be required. However, reversal on the grounds of judicial bias or misconduct is warranted only upon a showing that the trial was unfair." State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai
'i 38, 48, 79 P.3d 131, 141 
(2003) (brackets omitted) (quoting Aga v. Hundahl, 78 Hawai 'i 
230, 242, 891 P.2d 1022, 1034 (1995)).
B. Harmless Error
 
HRPP Rule 52(a) provides, in relevant part, that "[a]ny 
error, defect, irregularity or variance which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded." The Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court has stated that "[s]uch error, however, should not be viewed in isolation and considered purely in the abstract. It must be examined in light of the entire proceedings and given the effect to which the whole record shows it is entitled." State v. 
Sprattling, 99 Hawai
'i 312, 320, 55 P.3d 276, 284 (2002) 
(internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets in original omitted). Under the harmless error standard, the appellate court "must determine whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai
'i 356, 378, 60 P.3d 
306, 328 (2002) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the judgment of conviction on which it may have been based must be set aside." State v. Gano, 92 Hawai
'i 161, 176, 988 P.2d 1153, 
1168 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
"A constitutional error is harmless as long as the
 
court is able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a
 reasonable doubt." Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Hawaii
 
v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai
'i 217, 245, 953 P.2d 1315, 1343 (1998) 
(internal quotation marks, citation, brackets, and ellipsis omitted). 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III. DISCUSSION
 
Akuna contends the circuit court erred and violated his
 
constitutional rights to confrontation,3 to present a defense, 
4
to a jury trial, and to a fair trial when the court read its own 
FOF to the jury regarding Complainant's prior statement. 
Akuna
 
maintains that he was denied his right to have the jury, rather 
than a judge, find all of the facts and that the error was not
 harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because it relates to his
 inability to fully impeach Complainant's credibility, which was
 of paramount significance in this case.
 
Just prior to instructing the jury, the circuit court
 
stated to the jury the following:
 
The Court has made the following [FOF], ladies and
gentlemen of the jury. There was an oral communication
 
between [Complainant] and [Prosecutor] on Sunday, July 27,
2008. [Complainant] stated to [Prosecutor] that [Akuna]
said to her on August 24, 2007, "Don't you want to fool
around with anyone," or words to that effect. 
We agree that in reading the FOF to the jurors, the 
circuit court violated Akuna's rights to a fair trial and a jury 
trial, rights encapsulated in the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution (providing that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury"), and article I, sections 5 and 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution (providing respectively that 
"[n]o person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law" and "the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury"). 
HRE Rule 1102 provides: "The court shall instruct the
 
jury regarding the law applicable to the facts of the case, but
 
3 The right to confrontation is embodied in the Sixth Amendment of the
United States Constitution, which provides that "the accused shall enjoy the
right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against him[.]" That right isalso encapsulated in Article 1, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution, which
provides that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy theright to . . . be confronted with the witnesses against the accused."
4 The right to Due Process is encapsulated in the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution. The Fifth Amendment provides
that "[n]o person shall be . . . deprived of life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law." The Fourteenth Amendment provides that no "State
[shall] deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process
of law." 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shall not comment upon the evidence. It shall also inform the 
jury that they are the exclusive judges of all questions of fact and the credibility of witnesses." "The rationale behind the Rule is that judicial comment upon evidence risks placing the court in the role of an advocate." State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai
'i 
413, 417, 903 P.2d 718, 722 (App. 1995). "It is essential that the presiding judge endeavor at all times to maintain an attitude of fairness and impartiality." Id. (internal quotation marks, 
citation, and ellipsis omitted). 
In Stallworth v. Boren, 99 Hawai
'i 287, 54 P.3d 923 
(App. 2002), this court stated that 
[i]t is the jury, not the court, which is the fact-finding
body. It weighs the contradictory evidence and inferences,judges the credibility of witnesses, receives expertinstructions, and draws the ultimate conclusion as to thefacts. The very essence of its function is to select fromamong conflicting inferences and conclusions that which itconsiders most reasonable. 
Id. at 306, 54 P.3d at 942 (quoting Tennant v. Peoria & P.U. Ry.
 
Co., 321 U.S. 29, 35 (1944)).
 
"The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has adhered for over 140 
years to the fundamental principle, which lies at the foundation of jury trial in every country blessed with that institution, that the jury is to pass upon the facts and the court upon the law. Thus, the jury is the sole judge of witness credibility and the weight of the evidence." State v. Brown, 97 Hawai
'i 323, 
333, 37 P.3d 572, 582 (App. 2001) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
The instant case is similar to Hauge. There, during
 
closing argument, Hague's counsel discussed perceived
 inconsistencies between two witnesses' descriptions of a video
 camera and a Hard Rock Café bag:
 
The video camera itself. Mr. Khatib, in certainty, he
said that he was certain that the video camera Hauge brought
to him to pawn was tan and gold. That is his testimony.
There's no way around that. His testimony is that the video
camera that was attempted to be pawned was tan and gold.
 
How did the Ordways describe their video camera?
Black and silver. This is not the same camera that was
 taken from the Ordways. These are two totally separate
items. But what's happened here is that Mr. Hauge is being
blamed for something he did not take.
 
17
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mr. Khatib described this Hard Rock Café bag as being
brown and paper. The Ordways described their Hard Rock Café
bag as being white and plastic.
 
At this point, the circuit court interrupted [Hauge's
counsel]:
 
THE COURT: Counsel, she says it was paper, okay.
 
[Hauge's counsel]: And Mrs. Ordway said it was white
and paper, two totally separate descriptions of the
evidence.
 
[The State]: Excuse me.
 
THE COURT: He said tan and paper. Let's stick to the
 
facts, all right? The jury is asked to disregard that last
remark by counsel.
 
Id. at 46-47, 79 P.3d at 139-40 (ellipses omitted). Hauge was
 
convicted, id. at 41, 79 P.3d at 134, and on appeal, he argued
 that the court's comment, "He said tan and paper," had been
 improper because it violated HRE Rule 1102. Hauge, 103 Hawai
'i 
at 58, 79 P.3d at 151. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court agreed, but 
ultimately found that the court's instructions to the jury cured
 the impropriety.
5 Id. at 59, 79 P.3d at 152. 
Although the relevant issue in State v. Crail, 97
 
Hawai'i 170, 35 P.3d 197 (2001), was the circuit court's improper 
finding of facts in the jury's instructions, Crail provides
 guidance in this case. There, after a jury trial, Defendant
 Darrel M. Crail (Crail) was convicted of promoting a Dangerous
 Drug in the Third Degree and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia. 
Id. at 172, 35 P.3d at 199. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court summarized 
the following relevant background:
 
The court instructed the jury on August 18, 1999.
Instruction No. 18 read as follows:
 
As to Count I, in order for you to find [Crail] guilty
of the offense of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 
5
 The circuit court instructed the jury as follows:
 
You must disregard any remark I may have made unless the remark
was an instruction to you. If I have said or done anything which
has suggested to you that I am inclined to favor the claims or
positions of any party of if any expression or statement of mine
 has seem[ed] to indicate an opinion relating to which witnesses
are or are not worthy of belief, or what facts are or are not
 established, or what inferences should be drawn therefrom, I
 instruct you to disregard it.
 
Hauge, 103 Hawai' i at 59, 79 P.3d at 152 (emphases in original). 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third Degree, you must unanimously answer at least one
of the following questions with a "yes" response on
the special interrogatory form which will be provided
to you:
 
Did you unanimously find beyond a reasonable doubt
that [Crail] was in actual or constructive possession
 
of any one of the following:
 
1.	 State's Exhibit 1-methamphetamine found in the
glass cylindrical pipe located inside of jeans
 shorts in the bathroom of bedroom # 1.
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
2.	 State's Exhibit 2-methamphetamine found in five
ziploc packets that were in a larger ziploc bag,
located on the folding mattress in bedroom # 1.
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
3.	 State's Exhibit 3-methamphetamine found in four
ziploc packets that were in a plastic container
 located under the mattress near the small
 
refrigerator in bedroom # 1.
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
4.	 State's Exhibit 4-methamphetamine found on the
Calibron twin beam scale, located on the top of
 the refrigerator in bedroom # 1.
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
If you are not unanimous in finding beyond a
reasonable doubt that [Crail] was in either actual or
 constructive possession of at least one of the above
 
listed items, then you must find [Crail] not guilty of
the offense of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third
Degree.
 
(Emphases added.) In a similar vein, the court instructed
the jury regarding Count II as follows:
 
As to Count II, in order for you to find [Crail]
guilty of the offense of unlawful possession of drug
paraphernalia, you must unanimously answer at least
one of the following questions with a "yes" response
on the special interrogatory form which will be
provided to you:
 
Did you unanimously find beyond a reasonable doubt
that [Crail] was in actual or constructive possession
of any one of the following:
 
1.	 State's Exhibit 1-Glass cylindrical pipe
containing methamphetamine residue, found inside
of jeans shorts in the bathroom of bedroom # 1.
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
2.	 State's Exhibit 4-Calibron twin beam scale, dark
green in color, containing methamphetamine
residue, found on top of the small refrigerator
 
in bedroom # 1.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
3.	 State's Exhibit 40-One iron scraper with both
ends flattened, found on top of the circular
 table in bedroom # 1.
 
Yes_____ No_____
 
If you are not unanimous in finding beyond a
reasonable doubt that [Crail] was in either actual or
 constructive possession of at least one of the above
 
listed items, then you must find [Crail] not guilty of
the offense of unlawful possession of drug
paraphernalia.
 
Instruction No. 20 (emphases added).
 
In Instruction No. 5, the court provided the jury the
following definition of actual and constructive possession:
 
The law recognizes two kinds of possession: actual
 possession and constructive possession. A person who
knowingly has direct physical control over a thing, at
a given time, is then in actual possession of it.
 
A person who, although not in actual possession,
knowingly has both the power and the intention, at a
given time, to exercise dominion over a thing, either
directly or through another person or persons, is then
in constructive possession of it.
 
Id. at 176-77, 35 P.3d at 203-04 (footnote omitted).
 
Reviewing Crail's argument for plain error, id. at 180,
 
35 P.3d at 207, the supreme court found that the circuit court
 
harmfully erred by instructing the jury in Instructions 18 and 20
 as to the places from which the exhibits were recovered or
 located, as opposed only to the identification of the exhibits. 
Id. at 181, 35 P.3d at 208. At trial, Crail had put in issue the
 location of all the drugs recovered because he claimed to be
 unaware of the presence of any drugs in the residence. Id. at
 
180-82, 35 P.3d at 207-09. The supreme court vacated the
 judgment and sentence and remanded the case for disposition
 consistent with its opinion. Id. at 183, 35 P.3d at 210. 
In the instant case, by finding before the jury that
 
"[t]here was an oral communication between [Complainant] and
 [Prosecutor] on Sunday, July 27, 2008," and "[Complainant] stated
 to [Prosecutor] that [Akuna] said to her on August 24, 2007,
 'Don't you want to fool around with anyone,' or words to that
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
effect," the circuit court violated HRE Rule 11026
 and usurped
the jury's role as fact-finder. It was the jury's prerogative,
 
not the court's, to decide whether the State had proven that
 Complainant told Prosecutor that Akuna had made the subject
 statement. The circuit court's other instructions to the jury
 did not cure the error. There were no instructions regarding the
 FOF read, without explanation, to the jury. Moreover, the
 circuit court's instructions as given were irreconcilably
 inconsistent on how the jury was to treat the FOF. On the one
 hand, the jury was told that, "You are the exclusive judges of
 the facts of this case." On the other, they were also
 instructed:
 
You must also disregard any remark I may have made, unless
the remark was an instruction to you. 
If I have said or done anything which has suggested to
you that I am inclined to favor the claims or positions of
either party, or if any expression or statement of mine has
seemed to indicate an opinion relating to which witnesses
are, or are not, worthy of belief or what facts are or are
not established or what inferences should be drawn
 therefrom, I instruct you to disregard it.
 
Although the circuit court apparently intended to place before
 
the jury the substance of Complainant's statements to Prosecutor
 without placing Prosecutor on the stand, these instructions may
 have caused the jury to disregard the FOF and thereby undercut
 Ahuna's credibility argument and confused their consideration of
 the FOF.
 
Given the contradictory nature of the instructions and
 
because the FOF comprised evidence that may have cast doubt upon
 Akuna's and/or Complainant's credibility and because credibility
 was highly significant in this case, we cannot say that the
 circuit court's error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Given our holding on this issue, we need not address
 
the remaining points of error. 
6
 The prohibition against judicial comment on the evidence in HRE Rule
1102 is not limited to jury instructions. Hauge, 103 Hawai' i at 59, 79 P.3d
at 152 (citing to HRE Rule 1102). 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence filed
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on November 24, 2008
 
and remand this case for a new trial consistent with this
 opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 23, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Karen T. Nakasone,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
22
 