NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29218
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CIVIL NO. 04-1-0062K
 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KEAUHOU 
KONA SURF & RACQUET CLUB, INC. a Hawai 'i non-profit corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v. 
ANN SHANNON BOWERS, AS TRUSTEE OF THE ANN SHANNON BOWERS
REVOCABLE TRUST OF 1995, DATED DECEMBER 16, 1995,
JAMES AUSTIN BOWERS, and JOHN and MARY DOES 1-10, and
DOE CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS, or OTHER ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees. 
CIVIL NO. 06-1-0010K
 
ANN SHANNON BOWERS, AS TRUSTEE OF THE ANN SHANNON BOWERS
REVOCABLE TRUST OF 1995, DATED DECEMBER 16, 1995 and
JAMES AUSTIN BOWERS, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v. 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KEAUHOU 
KONA SURF & RACQUET CLUB, INC., a Hawai 'i non-profit corporation,
Plaintiff-Intervener, 
v. 
ROBERT A. SCHOOLEY and PHYLLIS J. SCHOOLEY, Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise, J., with

Foley, J., concurring and dissenting)
 
Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Ann Shannon
 
Bowers (Ann), as Trustee of the Ann Shannon Bowers Revocable
 
Trust of 1995, Dated December 16, 1995, and James Austin Bowers
 (collectively, the Bowers) appeal from the Amended Final Judgment
 (Amended Final Judgment) filed on September 9, 2008 in the
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court)  in
consolidated Civil Nos. 04-01-062K and 06-1-010K. Plaintiff­Appellee/Cross-Appellant Association of Apartment Owners of
 Keauhou Kona Surf & Racquet Club, Inc. (AOAO) cross-appeals from
 the Amended Final Judgment. The circuit court entered judgment
 in favor of AOAO and against the Bowers pursuant to AOAO's
 February 22, 2008, Motion for Summary Judgment (AOAO's MSJ) on
 AOAO's Complaint in Intervention (AOAO's Complaint in
 Intervention) filed in Civil No. 06-1-010K on May 2, 2006. The
 Amended Final Judgment provides the following:
 
In accordance with Rule 58 of the Hawaii Rules of
 
Civil Procedure [(HRCP)] and pursuant to the Stipulation for
Dismissal with Prejudice of All Claims and All Parties in
Civil 04-1-062K filed with this Court on February 1, 2008
[(Stipulation to Dismiss 04-1-062K)], which dismissed all
claims between [AOAO], a Hawaii non-profit corporation . . .
and [the Bowers] except for claims for attorneys' fees:
 
And further pursuant to the Findings of Facts [sic],
Conclusions of Law, and Order filed on April 22, 2008
("Order") and the Consolidated Order Granting [AOAO] and
[the Bowers'] Motion[s] for Award of Attorneys' Fees and
Costs filed July 10, 2008 [(Order Re Fees/Costs)], Judgment
is hereby entered in favor of [AOAO] and against the Bowers
as to [AOAO's] Complaint [in] Intervention in Civil Number
06-1-101K as follows:
 
1. Summary Judgment is hereby entered in favor of

[AOAO] and against all other Defendants as to [AOAO's MSJ]
seeking declaratory relief and that all identified
unauthorized and illegal alterations and additions made to
the common elements at the Project over the past thirty
years, as identified in Schedules "A" and "B" (attached as
Exhibit "F" to said motion), have been properly approved by
the owners at the Project through a Grandfathering Amendment
in accordance with [AOAO's] Restated Declaration and Amended
Bylaws, as well as Hawaii Statutory law.
 
2. [AOAO] shall amend the Restated Declaration and
Condominium Map(s), where appropriate, to accurately reflect
the alterations and amendments as identified on Schedule
 "B."
 
3. [AOAO] is entitled to an award of attorneys' fees
and costs in the amount of $3,744.00 in filing a reply
memorandum in support of [AOAO's MSJ] pursuant to the Order
filed on April 22, 2008.
 
4. [AOAO] substantiated its claims against the Bowers
as more fully set forth in the Order. . . . Accordingly,
[AOAO's] Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs is granted and
the Bowers shall pay [AOAO's] reasonable attorneys' fees in
the amount of $121,778.51 and costs in the amount of
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
$1,359.49 pursuant to the [Order Re Fees/Costs] filed on
July 10, 2008.
 
5. The Bowers substantiated their claims against
[AOAO] as more fully set forth in the Order. . . .
Accordingly, the Bowers' Motion for Award of Attorney's Fees
and Costs is granted and [AOAO] shall pay the Bowers
reasonable attorneys' fees in the amount of $122,593.00 and
costs in the amount of $7,026.62.
 
6. As both parties have substantiated their claims
pursuant to Section 514A-94 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes
[(HRS)] with a total of $123,138.00 in attorneys' fees and
costs awarded to [AOAO] and $129,691.62 in attorneys' fees
and costs awarded to [the Bowers];
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED; the difference in the awards
being $6,481.62 is GRANTED in favor of the Bowers. The
 award of $6,481.62 granted in favor of [the] Bowers is
hereby reduced by [AOAO's] award of attorneys' fees and
costs in the amount of $3,744.00 in filing a reply
memorandum in support of [AOAO's MSJ] on its Complaint in
Intervention. Accordingly, the difference in the awards
being $2,737.61 is GRANTED in favor of the Bowers.
 
This Court expressly directs that this Judgment is
entered as a final judgment pursuant to Rule 54(b) of the
[HRCP] as there is no just reason for delay and it resolves
all claims against all parties of this consolidated action
Civil No. 04-1-062K and Civil No. 06-1-010K.
 
On appeal, the Bowers contend the circuit court erred
 
in:
 
(1) denying their December 18, 2007, "Motion for
 
Summary Judgment as to Civil No. 04-1-0062K" (Bowers' 12/18/07
 
MSJ) based on a finding that a "scintilla of evidence" supporting 
AOAO's opposition to the motion was sufficient to deny the
 motion; 
(2) finding that certain emails submitted by them in
 
support of their July 2, 2007 "Motion for Summary Judgment as to
 Civil No. 04-1-062K" (Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ) were inadmissible for
 lack of foundation and in denying the motion; 
(3) issuing the April 22, 2008, "Findings of Facts,
 
Conclusions of Law and Order Granting [AOAO's MSJ]"
 (FOF/COL/Order); 
(4) denying their May 2, 2008, motion for
 
clarification of the FOF/COL/Order (Bowers' Motion to Clarify
 FOF/COL/Order); 
(5) issuing the Order Re Fees/Costs; 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(6) denying their July 15, 2008, motion for
 
reconsideration of the Order Re Fees/Costs (Bowers' Motion to
 
Reconsider Order Re Fees/Costs); 
(7) issuing the Amended Final Judgment; 
(8) making findings in the FOF/COL/Order regarding the
 
parties' "Settlement Agreement" in excess of the court's subject
 matter jurisdiction because the "Settlement Agreement" was not
 directly related to AOAO's Complaint in Intervention filed May 2,
 2006, in Civil No. 06-01-010K; 
(9) finding that the "Settlement Agreement" precluded
 
them from challenging the validity and enforceability of a
 "grandfathering amendment" (Grandfathering Amendment) to the
 "Restated Declaration of Condominium Property Regime of Keauhou
 Kona Surf & Racquet Club, Inc." (Restated Declaration) and the
 "Amended Bylaws of Association of Apartment Owners of Keauhou
 Kona Surf & Racquet Club, Inc., a Hawaii Nonprofit Corporation"
 (Amended Bylaws) (the Restated Declaration and Amended Bylaws are
 referred to collectively as the "governing documents"); 
(10) finding that the terms of the "Settlement
 
Agreement" precluded them from opposing AOAO's MSJ; 
(11) finding that they waived their legal right to
 
challenge the validity and enforceability of AOAO's Restated
 Declaration and Amended Bylaws by the terms of the "Settlement
 Agreement"; 
(12) assuming subject matter jurisdiction regarding the 
validity of the Restated Declaration and amendments to the
 Restated Declaration and Amended Bylaws; 
(13) finding that the Restated Declaration, amendments
 
to the Restated Declaration and Amended Bylaws and the
 Grandfathering Amendment are valid and were properly adopted; 
(14) retroactively applying HRS §§ 514A-11(11), 514A­
82(b)(2), 514B-22, 514B-23, 514B-109, 514B-140(b), and 514B­140(c); 
(15) authorizing AOAO to convert common elements to 
limited common elements, thereby altering AOAO's owners' undivided interest in the whole, contrary to Hawai
'i law. 
4
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(16) awarding attorney's fees to AOAO, including 
attorney's fees for preparing and filing a reply memorandum in
 
support of AOAO's MSJ; 
(17) reducing the amount of attorney's fees and costs
 
awarded to the Bowers and failing to provide an explanation for
 the reduction in the attorney's fees and costs requested by the
 Bowers; and
 
(18) denying their August 20, 2008, "Motion for
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law for Order Denying Motion
 for Reconsideration of [Order Re Fees]" (Bowers' Motion for
 FOF/COL Re Order Denying Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order Re
 Fees/Costs).
 
The Bowers request that we do the following:
 1. Remand this case for entry of an order granting
 
the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ;
2
 
2. Remand this case for entry of an order granting
 
the Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ;3
 
3. Remand this case for entry of an order denying
 
AOAO's MSJ;
 
4. Remand this case for entry of an order denying the
 
FOF/COL/Order; 
5. Remand this case for entry of an order granting
 
the Bowers their reasonable attorney's fees in the amount
 requested in their May 23, 2008, Motion for Award of Attorney's
 Fees and Costs (Bowers' Fees/Costs Motion); 
6. Reverse and vacate the Amended Final Judgment;
4
 
2
 The Bowers refer to a motion for summary judgment (MSJ) filed on
February 1, 2008, but no such motion was filed on that date. However, the
circuit court's "Order Denying [the Bowers'] Motion for Summary Judgment as to
Civil No. 04-1-0062K," filed on December 18, 2007 (Order Denying Bowers'
12/18/07 MSJ) was filed on February 1, 2008. We deduce that the Bowers mean
 to refer to the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ. 
3
 The Bowers refer to a motion for summary judgment filed on August 9,
2007, but no such motion was filed on that date. However, the circuit court's
"Order Denying [the Bowers'] Motion for Summary Judgment as to Civil No. 04-1­0062K Filed on 7/2/2007" (Order Denying Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ) was filed on
August 9, 2007. We deduce that the Bowers mean to refer to Bowers' 7/2/07
MSJ. 
4
 The Bowers mistakenly state the date of the Amended Final Judgment
as September 8, 2008, instead of the correct date of September 9, 2008. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7. Reverse the May 27, 2008, order denying their
 
Motion to Clarify FOF/COL/Order (Order Denying Bowers' Motion to
 
Clarify FOF/COL/Order);
 
8. Reverse the Order Re Fees/Costs; 
9. Reverse the August 11, 2008, order denying their
 
motion for reconsideration of the Order Re Fees/Costs (Order
 Denying Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order Re Fees/Costs); and
 
10. Reverse the September 8, 2008, order denying 
their Motion for FOF/COL Re Order Denying Bowers' Motion to
 Reconsider Order Re Fees/Costs (Order Denying Bowers' Motion for
 FOF/COL Re Order Denying Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order Re
 Fees/Costs). 
On cross-appeal, AOAO contends the circuit court erred
 
by awarding attorney's fees and costs to the Bowers and requests
 that we reverse the portions of the Order Re Fees/Costs and the
 Amended Final Judgment awarding such fees and costs. 
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate the portions
 
of the Amended Final Judgment that awarded attorney's fees and
 costs to AOAO and that awarded attorney's fees and costs to the
 Bowers, and we remand the case for further proceedings. We
 affirm the Amended Final Judgment in all other respects.
I. BACKGROUND
 
This appeal and cross-appeal arise out of two civil
 
cases, Civil Nos. 04-1-062K and 06-1-010K, which the circuit
 court consolidated. The circuit court summarized the factual
 background in this case in its FOF/COL/Order as follows:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . . . 
A. Parties
 
1. [AOAO] is a Hawaii nonprofit corporation
comprised of the apartment owners of the Keauhou Kona Surf &
Racquet Club (KKSRC) and existing under and by virtue of
Chapters 514A and 514B, [HRS], as amended, with its
principal place of business in the County and State of
Hawaii.
 
2. The KKSRC condominium project consists of 193
apartments in several buildings located in Keauhou, North
Kona, County and State of Hawaii (the "Project").
 
3. Defendants Bowers are the owners of three
 
apartments at the Project. Only Apartment Nos. 50 and 180
are relevant to the instant lawsuit.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. The Bowers purchased their first apartment
(Apartment No. 180) in June 1995 and purchased Apartment 50
in 2000.
 
5. Defendants Robert and Phyllis Schooley
(collectively, "the Schooleys") are the owners of Apartment
No. 6 in the Project.
 
B. Governing Documents
 
6. All apartments in the Project are subject to the
[Restated Declaration] and the [Amended Bylaws].
 
a. Restated Declaration, As Amended
 
7. The terms "Apartment", "Common Elements" and
"Limited Common Elements" are defined in Sections 4, 5 and 6
of the Restated Declaration in pertinent part as follows:
 
a. Apartment: "There are hereby established one
hundred ninety-three (193) freehold estates in the
spaces within the perimeter walls, floors and ceilings
of the 193 apartments in said buildings. The 193
 apartments shall not be deemed to include the
undecorated or unfinished surfaces of the perimeter
walls or of the interior load-bearing walls, the
floors and perimeter ceilings surrounding each
apartment . . . all of which are common elements as
provided in Paragraph 5 hereof."
 
b. Common Elements: "Common elements include,
among other things. 'All foundations, columns,
girders, beams, supports, main walls, roofs, entrances
and exists [sic] of said buildings."
 
c. Limited Common Elements: "[L]imited common
elements of KKSRC includes 'All other common elements
 
of the project which are rationally related to less
than all of said apartments shall be limited to use of
such apartments.'"
 
8. Section 9 of the Restated Declaration states in
 
part: 
The purposes for which said buildings and other
improvements and each of the apartments are intended
and shall be restricted as to use are as follows:
 
a. The common interest and easements appurtenant to
each apartment shall have a permanent character, shall
not be altered without the consent of all owners of
 apartments affected thereby and Lessor as expressed in
an amendment to this Declaration duly recorded . . . .
 
b. The common elements shall remain undivided, and
no right shall exist to partition or divide any part
thereof except as provided by said Condominium
Property Act.
 
c. Each apartment owner may use the common elements
in accordance with the purposes for which they were
intended without hindering or encroaching upon the
lawful right of the other apartment owners, subject to
the right of the board of directors, herein called
"Board," upon the approval of the owners of
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
seventy-five per cent of the common interests, to
change to use of the common elements . . . .
 
9. Section 10 of the Restated Declaration states in
 
part that "operation of the project and maintenance, repair,
replacement and restoration of the common elements, and any
additions and alterations thereto, shall be in accordance
with the provisions of said Condominium Property Act H.R.S.
Chapter 514A, this Declaration, and the Bylaws. . . ."
 
10. Section 16 of the Restated Declaration, states,
in pertinent part:
 
Restoration or replacement of the project or of any
building, swimming pool, or other facility or
construction of any additional building or structural
alteration or addition to any structure, different in
any material respect from said Condominium Maps of the
protect, shall be undertaken by the Association or any
apartment owners only pursuant to an amendment of the
Declaration, duly executed by or pursuant to the
affirmative vote or written consent of not less than
 seventy-five percent (75%) of the apartment owners,
provided, however, that any such restoration,
replacement, or construction shall not alter any
apartment owner's undivided interest in the common
elements of the project. Any such restoration,
replacement or construction shall be in accordance
with complete plans and specifications therefore first
approved in writing by the Board, and promptly upon
completion of such restoration, replacement or
construction, the Association shall duly record or
file of record such amendment together with a complete
set of floor plans of the project as so altered,
certified as built by a registered architect or
professional engineer.
 
b. Amended Bylaws
 
11. Sections 8.03 and 8.06 of the Amended Bylaws
provide in pertinent part:
 
Bylaw Section 8.03: No member or occupant of a
member's apartment shall: (1) Erect or place in the
project any building, structure, fence or walls, or
make any addition or alteration to any common element
of the project . . . except in accordance with plans
and specifications, including a detailed plot plan
prepared as required by the board of directors and
also approved by a majority of the apartment owners,
or by any larger percentage required by law or the
declaration and by all owners of apartments thereby
directly affected; (2) Place, store or maintain in the
hall, lobbies, stairways, walkways, grounds, parking
areas, recreational areas, or other common elements
any furniture, packages or objects of any kind or
otherwise obstruct transit through the common
elements.
 
Bylaw Section 8.06: No member shall do any work which
could jeopardize the soundness or safety of the
project, reduce the value thereof, impair any easement
or add any material structure without the prior
consent of 75 percent of the members, together with
the consent of all members whose apartments or
appurtenant limited common elements are directly
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
affected. Nonmaterial structural additions to the
 
common elements or additions to or alternations of an
 
apartment made within the apartment, or within a
limited common element appurtenant to and for the
exclusive use of the apartment, shall require approval
only by the board and the percentage of the members as
may be required by the declaration or bylaws.
 
C. Statutory Requirements
 
12. H.R.S. § 514A-88 provides in part that "each
apartment owner . . . shall comply strictly with the bylaws
and . . . the covenants, conditions, and restrictions set
forth in the declaration." In turn, H.R.S. § 514A-89 states
that:
 
(a) No apartment owner shall do any work which could
jeopardize soundness or safety of the property, reduce
the value thereof, or impair any easement or
hereditament.
 
(b) No apartment owner shall add any material
structure . . . without first obtaining in every such
case the consent of seventy-five percent of the
apartment owners, together with the consent of all
apartment owners whose apartments or limited common
elements appurtenant thereto are directly affected.
 
(c) Nonmaterial structural additions to the common
 
elements, including, without limitation, additions to
or alterations of an apartment made within the
apartment or within a limited common element
appurtenant to and for the exclusive use of the
apartment shall require approval only by the board of
directors of the association of apartment owners and
 
such percentage, number, or group of apartment owners
as may be required by the declaration or bylaws.
 
13. [AOAO] filed a law suit [Complaint for
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief, Breach of Covenants and
Damages (AOAO's 04-1-062K Complaint)] against the Bowers
arising out of the unauthorized and illegal alterations and
additions made to Apartments 50 and 180 . . . .
 
D. The Bowers['] Apartments
 
14. The Bowers made the following additions or
alterations to the common elements surrounding Apartment
No. 180: (a) poured a new cement foundation and expanded
the kitchen footprint by approximately 21 sq. ft.; (b) used
"6 X 6 structural posts for the new kitchen wall that is
approximately 14" thick; (c) changed the existing jalousie
Makai windows with vinyl double hung windows and storm
shutters with a coordinated lanyard operating system; (d)
rebuilt the Makai second floor wall so that it is
 "approximately 8" thick"; (e) used nonconforming exterior
siding for the rebuilt Makai wall; and, (f) constructed a
roof overhang over the expanded Makai kitchen wall.
 
15. The Bowers made the following additions or
alterations to the common elements surrounding Apartment 50:
(a) constructed a new roof overhang above the first floor
lanai sliding glass door; (b) extended the first floor
concrete lanai beyond its original size by approximately
67.5 square feet; and (c) constructed and placed a storage
cabinet outside their apartment within the common elements.
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
16. The Bowers admit that: (a) they performed
alterations and additions to Apartment Nos. 50 and 180; (b)
there [sic] alterations and additions involve converting
common elements to limited common elements; (c) they only
obtained approval of the [AOAO] Board of Directors [(the
Board or the AOAO Board)] concerning these alterations and
improvements; and (d) they never received the requisite
owner approval and consent required by [AOAO's] governing
documents and Hawaii law.
 
(Emphasis in original; footnotes, record references, and brackets
 
in original omitted; some ellipsis points added.)
A. AOAO'S 04-1-062K COMPLAINT
 
On May 6, 2004, AOAO filed AOAO's 04-1-062K Complaint.
 
5
AOAO alleged that the Bowers' Units 50 and 180,  like all units
in the Project, were subject to the governing documents. AOAO
 alleged that the Bowers had violated the terms of the governing
 documents and HRS §§ 514A-88 and 514A-89 by (1) "caus[ing]
 alterations and modifications to be made to the common elements,
 limited common elements, and to Apt. 50, including building a
 roof, pouring a concrete slab, and removing interior walls
 without building permits or approval of the Board of Directors
 [(the Board)] and apartment owners of KKSRC[;]" and (2)
 "caus[ing] alterations and modifications to be made to the common
 elements and to Apt. 180, including building a new roof, pouring
 a concrete slab, expanding the interior space of the apartment
 into the common area, and replacing windows with nonconforming
 windows, without approval of [the Board] and apartment owners of
 KKSRC[.]" AOAO requested, among other things, that the Bowers be
 ordered to remedy all violations of the governing documents by
 removing all non-conforming alterations and modifications to
 comply with the governing documents; that the circuit court issue
 an injunction restraining and enjoining the Bowers from continued
 and further breaches of the governing documents and applicable
 law; and that AOAO be awarded its attorney's fees and costs.
 
5
 The properties at the Keauhou Kona Surf & Racquet Club (KKSRC)
condominium project (the Project) owned by the Bowers are variously referred
to in the proceedings below as, e.g., "Apartment Nos. 50 and 180," and "the
 apartments owned by the Bowers." The properties at KKSRC owned by other
people are referred to as "apartment[s]," "units," and "apartment unit[s]."
For the sake of simplicity, in our background summary and discussion of this
case, we refer to the Bowers' properties as "Units 50 and 180" and other KKSRC
owners' properties as "units."
 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 25, 2004, the Bowers filed an answer to AOAO's
 
04-1-062K Complaint. As defenses to AOAO's 04-1-062K Complaint,
 
the Bowers alleged, among other things, that AOAO's failure to
 enforce the restrictions in the governing documents against other
 unit owners precluded AOAO from enforcing the restrictions
 against the Bowers based on the theories of estoppel,
 acquiescence, waiver, and abandonment. The Bowers also asserted
 a counterclaim against AOAO.
6
 
B.	 THE BOWERS' 06-1-010K COMPLAINT
 
On April 16, 2007, the Bowers filed a "First Amended
 
Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief in Civil No. 06­1-010K Filed January 13, 2006" (Bowers' 06-1-010K Complaint), 
against the Schooleys, who owned a unit in the Project, for
 converting common elements to limited common elements without the
 consent of KKSRC owners, in violation of the Restated Declaration
 and the HRS. 
C.	 AOAO'S MOTION TO INTERVENE AND COMPLAINT IN
 
INTERVENTION
 
On March 23, 2006, AOAO filed a motion to intervene in
 
Civ. No. 06-1-010K. The circuit court granted the motion. 
On May 2, 2006, AOAO filed a Complaint in Intervention, 
seeking, among other things, a global resolution and declaratory 
relief as to any identified improper alterations and additions made to the common elements at AOAO by KKSRC owners, including improper alterations and additions made by the Bowers and the Schooleys, in accordance with the laws of the State of Hawai
'i 
and the governing documents.7 AOAO also asked for attorney's 
6
 The counterclaim was subsequently dismissed pursuant to an October 25,
2006, "Settlement, Release, and Indemnity Agreement" entered into by the
parties. The counterclaim and its dismissal are not pertinent to this appeal
and will not be further discussed. 
7
 The changes the Bowers, the Schooleys, and other KKSRC unit owners
made to KKSRC units are variously referred to in the proceedings below as,
e.g., "alterations and additions," "alterations and modifications,"
"alterations and improvements," "improvements," and "alterations and rebuild."
For the sake of simplicity, we generally refer to the changes as "alterations
and additions" in our summary of the background and discussion of this case.
The Complaint in Intervention only referred specifically to alterations and
additions made by the Schooleys, but the alterations and additions by the
Bowers were included by the reference to "similarly situated modifications
caused by other KKSRC owners."
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fees and costs. On May 30, 2006, the Bowers filed a response
 
requesting that the Complaint in Intervention be dismissed and
 the relief requested be denied.
D. THE BOWERS' 7/2/07 MSJ
 
In the Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ, they argued, among other
 
things, that AOAO was estopped from maintaining its action as set
 forth in AOAO's 04-1-062K Complaint because (1) the Board
 approved the alterations and additions of Units 50 and 180, and
 (2) AOAO could not enforce against them provisions of the
 governing documents that it had failed to enforce against other
 owners of KKSRC units who had collectively committed over 1,000
 violations. In support of the Bowers' assertion that the Board
 had approved their alterations to Units 50 and 180, they attached
 as exhibits purported copies of email exchanges between Ann and
 "Tom/Barbara Koontz" (the Koontz e-mails). In an attached
 affidavit, Ann identified the e-mails and stated that they
 represented e-mail correspondence between her and Tom Koontz (the
 president of AOAO) regarding AOAO's approval of improvements to
 Units 50 and 180.
 
On July 17, 2007, AOAO filed a memorandum in
 
opposition. AOAO argued that the estoppel doctrine did not
 apply, there was no proof of reasonable reliance by the Bowers,
 statutory law did not support the Bowers' argument that the
 governing documents were unenforceable, the Bowers were
 judicially estopped from claiming that the governing documents
 were unenforceable, and there was no proof that the benefits of
 the governing documents had been abandoned. AOAO also argued
 that the copies of the Koontz e-mails the Bowers attached to
 their motion were inadmissible.
 
On July 20, 2007, the Bowers filed a reply to the
 
memorandum in opposition. They argued, among other things, that
 the Koontz e-mails were admissible because Ann had authenticated
 them by identifying them, Ann's name and e-mail address were on
 them, Tom Koontz's e-mail address appeared in them, and the e-
mails contained information known to Ann. The Bowers maintained
 that the Koontz e-mails were not hearsay because, among other
 things, Tom Koontz was dead and therefore unavailable, and the e­
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
mails constituted admissions because at the time Tom Koontz sent
 
them, he was President of AOAO and, as such, an agent of AOAO.
 
On July 25, 2007, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ and orally found: "[T]here's a genuine
 issue of material fact as to the scope of approval, if any, given
 in the Koontz e[-]mails. The Court certainly finds there's a
 genuine issue of material fact as to the foundation for the
 admission of the Koontz e-mails and also whether the Bowers'
 reliance on the Koontz e-mails [was] reasonable." The circuit
 court then denied the Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ.
 
On August 9, 2007, the circuit court filed its Order
 
Denying Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ.
E. CASES CONSOLIDATED
 
On July 28, 2006, by "Stipulation to Consolidate Cases;
 
Order," the circuit court consolidated Civil No. 04-1-062K with
 Civil No. 06-1-010K.
 
F. AOAO'S INVESTIGATION INTO KKSRC OWNER VIOLATIONS
 
The circuit court provided the following factual
 
background in the FOF/COL/Order regarding AOAO's Grandfathering
 Amendment:
 
E. [AOAO's] Investigation in Violations by KKSRC
Owners
 
17. Sometime during early spring 2005, [AOAO] began
informal discussions regarding alterations and additions
made to the common elements at the Project by other KKSRC
owners in violation of [AOAO's] governing documents and
statutory law. 
18. On or about July 7, 2005, the Bowers sent demand
letters to numerous apartment owners at the Project
requiring the removal of all unapproved alterations and
additions to the common elements at the Project or face
being identified in an enforcement action.
 
19. On or about July 11, 2005, the Bowers provided
[AOAO] with a spreadsheet listing approximately 117
apartments at the Project . . . that violate the provisions
relating to the common elements contained in the [governing
documents] (the "Initial List of Violations"). 
20. Based upon the Bowers' allegation of widespread
violations by other owners at the Project, [AOAO] instituted
the following formalized process(es):
 
(1) Identification of all alterations and additions
 
to the common elements that have occurred at [the
Project] over its approximate 30-year existence that
may be in violation of [AOAO's] governing documents
and/or statutory requirements;
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
14(2)Notification to apartment owners of the global
resolution process and that [AOAO] is offering amnesty
to owners for their participation and reporting of any
interior alterations and additions of the common
elements they have made or are aware of;
(3)Determination of whether any of the identified
alterations and additions to the common elements are
material or nonmaterial in nature, and whether any of
the alterations and additions jeopardize the
structural integrity of the project; and finally;
(4)Presentation of the identified alterations and
additions of the common elements to the owners at the
Project, and requesting that they vote on whether to
approve the alterations and additions to remain by
amending the governing documents, where appropriate.
21.In furtherance of the aforementioned process, a
series of lists were developed in accordance with the
approval criteria set forth in the [governing documents], as
well as all relevant statutory requirements, to be utilized
in evaluating every identified unauthorized and illegal
alterations and additions to the common elements at the
Project, including the apartments owned by the Bowers ("List
of Alterations").
. . . .
22.The Lists of Alterations were provided to the
Bowers for review and comment.  In response, the Bowers
provided an addendum to their initial list of 117
violations, which contained over eleven hundred alleged
violations at the Project (the "Addendum").
23.  [AOAO] performed at least three separate site
investigations as to every apartment identified by the
Bowers on their initial List of Violations and the Addendum
before finalizing the Lists of Alterations for submission to
all apartment owners.
F.Written Approval of the Grandfathering Amendment
by the KKSRC Owners
24.After categorizing the identified unauthorized
and illegal alterations and additions to the common elements
at the Project using the criteria set forth in the Lists of
Alterations, [AOAO] prepared two lists for submission to the
owners of the Project for approval of the Grandfathering
Amendment; one for non-material alterations and additions
that requires not less than 50% owner approval and another
for material alterations and additions that requires not
less than 75% owner approval (Schedules "A" and "B",
respectively). 
25.A Written Approval of Alterations/Additions,
including Schedules "A" and "B", was sent to every owner at
the Project in early December 2007 requesting that they vote
on whether to approve the identified unauthorized and
illegal alterations and additions and permit said
alterations and additions to remain by amending the
governing documents, where appropriate ("Consent Form"). 
26.[AOAO] through its managing agent, Certified
Management, Inc. ("CMI"), collected all Consent Forms turned
in by the owners at the Project and tabulated the percentage
approval for every apartment listed on Schedules "A" and "B"NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15by adding the common interest percentage ("CIP") for each
apartment unit that casted [sic] a vote.
27.Every apartment unit identified on Schedule "A"
received not less than 50% owner approval and every
apartment unit identified on Schedule "B" received not less
than 75% owner approval, including the apartments owned by
the Bowers, which are the subject of Civil No. 04-1-062K. 
More particularly, the alterations and additions made to
Apartment 50 (identified on Schedule "A") received not less
than 79% owner approval and the alterations and additions
made to Apartment 180 (identified on Schedule "B") received
not less than 77% owner approval.
 
(Record reference and citations omitted.)
G.BOWERS' 12/18/07 MSJ
In the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ, they argued that AOAO
should not be allowed to bring the claims in AOAO's 04-1-062K
Complaint because AOAO had abandoned and waived any right it may
have had to enforce the governing documents against them when
AOAO allowed or otherwise acquiesced in hundreds of alterations
and additions made to other KKSRC units in violation of the
governing documents.  The Bowers asserted that in bringing about
the Grandfathering Amendment, AOAO had admitted that at least 26 6
alterations and additions in violation of the governing document s
had been made to 126 KKSRC units since 1978.
On January 2, 2007, AOAO filed a memorandum in
opposition to the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ, arguing that the Bowers
failed to introduce 
any admissible evidence, let alone clear and convincing
evidence, to demonstrate that past violations have been so
substantial or of such magnitude that the restrictions
contained in the [governing documents] are [sic] no longer
have value or usefulness, or that they have become so
burdensome as to defeat the object and purpose of the
restrictive covenant.  On the contrary, the continued
existence of the restrictions is essential to the orderly
operation and governance of the KKSRC project and the
purpose of the restrictions of the [governing documents] can
still be accomplished and substantial benefit will inure to
the benefit of all apartment owners at the Project.  Lastly,
[the Bowers] have offered no explanation on how a
condominium project's [governing documents] can be abandoned
when they are required by statute.  Nor, have they offered
any argument on how the rights, obligations and protections
created by [HRS] Chapter 531A can be nullified by the facts
of this case.  Therefore, no abandonment has occurred, and
the governing documents and statutory law are enforceable
under appropriate circumstances.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
AOAO further argued that there was no evidence that it had waived
 
the benefits of the governing documents. AOAO maintained that
 there was nothing in the record to establish that it 
clearly knew about each and every past violation and, based
upon that knowledge, intentionally chose not to enforce the
[governing documents] as against the offending apartment
owners. In contrast, by [the Bowers'] own admission, there
are substantial and disputed factual issues pertaining to
the number and significance of other additions and
alterations of common elements existing at the Project
compared to the ones constructed by [the Bowers]. 
AOAO asserted that the Bowers failed to introduce any facts or
 
legal authority excusing their conduct from enforcement under HRS
 §§ 514A-88 and 514A-89 -- the statutes cited in AOAO's 04-1-062K
 Complaint as support for the complaint. Finally, AOAO argued
 that the Bowers were
 
judicially estopped from taking contradictory positions on
whether [AOAO's] governing documents are defective and
therefore unenforceable. . . . [the Bowers] have filed three
separate lawsuits against [AOAO] and [the Schooleys] for
claimed violations of the Restated Declaration. In these
 lawsuits, [the Bowers'] allegations that the terms of the
Restated Declaration can be enforced when violated are
 deemed judicial admissions. More particularly, [the Bowers]
admit that all apartment owners are subject to the Restated
Declaration. However in this lawsuit, [the Bowers] contend
that the Restated Declaration has been abandoned and thus,
unenforceable. Clearly, judicial estoppel precludes such
inconsistent positions.
 
The Bowers filed a reply to the memorandum in
 
opposition, in which they argued that AOAO had failed "to present
 
specific facts, backed by evidence, showing that a genuine issue
 of material fact exists." Specifically, the Bowers maintained
 that AOAO had not presented evidence refuting that it allowed
 substantial and general violations of the governing documents. 
The Bowers argued that AOAO waived its rights to enforce the
 governing documents against them and that AOAO had actual and
 constructive knowledge of non-conforming alterations and
 modifications by unit owners in violation of the governing
 documents through its agent, the Board, because the Board had
 actively discussed and approved numerous violations upon the
 written request of unit owners. The Bowers further argued that
 HRS §§ 514A-88 and 514A-89 did not prevent the circuit court from
 applying the doctrines of abandonment or waiver to the facts of
 the case. Last, the Bowers maintained that they were not
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judicially estopped from claiming that AOAO had abandoned or
 
waived the provisions it was attempting to enforce because the
 Bowers were not claiming that AOAO had abandoned the governing
 documents in their entirety, but only particular provisions of
 those documents.
 
On January 10, 2008, the circuit court held a hearing
 
on the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ. The Bowers' counsel clarified that
 allegedly some unit owners had gotten Board approval for
 alterations and additions to their units, but had not gotten
 owner approval as required by the governing documents. Counsel
 for AOAO responded that contrary to the Bowers' assertions, the
 Bowers were seeking wholesale invalidation of the governing
 documents with respect to alterations and additions. AOAO's
 counsel argued that there were at least genuine issues of
 material fact regarding the extent to which the Board had
 approved the Bowers' request to alter units 50 and 180. The
 circuit court orally denied the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ, finding:
 "[T]here's a genuine issue of material fact. As counsel know
 that credibility, even a scintilla of evidence raising a trivial
 dispute on a material issue is sufficient to deny a motion for
 summary judgment." 
On February 1, 2008, the circuit court filed the Order
 
Denying Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ.
H. SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT
 
In the FOF/COL/Order, the circuit court summarized the
 
following factual background regarding the settlement agreement
 reached by the parties in 2008 and the Stipulation to Amend Order
 Setting Pretrial Deadlines (Stipulation to Amend):
 
H. Settlement Agreement
 
a. Factual History
 
34. In late December 2007, counsel for the parties
initiated informal settlement discussions concerning Civil
No. 04-1-062K ("Consolidated Actions").
 
35. On or about January 22, 2008, counsel for the
Bowers stated that his clients were agreeable to the
following settlement proposal: (1) dismissal of Civil
No. 04-1-0062K with prejudice; (2) [the Bowers] would not
oppose [AOAO's] "grandfathering" proposal; (3) all parties
would dismiss their claims in Bowers v. Schooley; and (4)
claims for attorneys' fees and costs would be reserved,
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
subject to any previous agreement by stipulation of the
parties. 
36. Counsel for [the] Bowers never demanded or
placed any limitations and/or restrictions concerning
[AOAO's] motion pertaining to the "grandfathering" proposal. 
37. Counsel for [AOAO] revised the settlement offer
and, on or about January 24, 2008, sent all counsel a
binding letter of settlement containing the essential and
material settlement terms between the parties in the
consolidated action ("Settlement Letter").
 
38. In furtherance of the compromise and settlement
in the Consolidated Actions, the parties agreed, among other
things, that:
 
In furtherance of [AOAO's Complaint in Intervention]
seeking a global resolution of all listed
improvements/alterations constructed in violation of
[AOAO']s governing documents, including improvements/
alterations which are the subject of Civil No.
04-1-062K, [the] Bowers agree[] not to oppose or
otherwise obstruct [AOAO's] legal efforts to obtain
judicial approval of the owners' approval of the
alterations/additions and their consent to amendment
of the Declaration of Condominium Property Regime and
Condominium Map of KKSRC.
 
39. Although counsel for [the Schooleys] signed the
Settlement Letter, counsel for the Bowers did not. Instead,
counsel for the Bowers requested several material changes
and additions be made to the terms expressed in the
Settlement Letter.
 
40. Counsel for the Bowers never requested any
modifications, limitations, restrictions and/or revisions to
the settlement language concerning [AOAO's] "grandfathering"
motion nor did the Bowers demand that, as a condition of
settlement, they be entitled to review and approve [AOAO's]
motion pertaining to the Grandfathering Amendment.
 
41. The Bowers specifically agreed not to oppose or
otherwise obstruct [AOAO's] legal efforts to obtain judicial
approval of the Grandfathering Amendment. All requested
changes by the Bowers were incorporated into a revised
Settlement Letter that was sent to all counsel on
 January 25, 2008 (Revised Settlement Letter).
 
42. Counsel for the Bowers and Schooleys immediately
signed and faxed back the fully executed signature page that
same day.
 
43. In furtherance of the Revised Settlement Letter,
counsel for [AOAO] prepared a more detailed settlement
agreement and sent it to all counsel for review and approval
("Release and Settlement Agreement"). Although counsel for
the Schooleys signed the Release and Settlement Agreement,
counsel for the Bowers objected and demanded that certain
major and minor changes be made, including a provision
regarding "future action by [AOAO]" that was never agreed
upon by the parties and therefore, was deemed unacceptable.
 
44. Upon review of the requested changes, counsel
for [AOAO] revised the Release and Settlement Agreement to
incorporate only those changes that were consistent with the
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
terms and conditions set forth in the Revised Settlement
 
Letter.
 
45. Counsel for the Bowers sent a subsequent letter
on February 19, 2008 responding to [AOAO's] position
regarding the revised Release and Settlement Agreement. In
 that letter, counsel for [the] Bowers freely admits that his
clients agreed not the [sic] prepare an opposition to
[AOAO's MSJ] nor will they [the Bowers] "argue against your
motion or other pleading before the Court on the
grandfathering issue."
 
b.	 Procedural History Regarding Settlement in the
Consolidated Actions
 
46. In furtherance of the Settlement Agreement
between the parties, [the Stipulation to Amend] was
submitted to this Court for review and approval . . . . The
 Stipulation to Amend specifically states, as follows:
 
WHEREAS, the parties have agreed to settle and dismiss
Civil No. 04-1-062 with prejudice and to partially
dismiss Civil No. 06-1-010K with prejudice.
Accordingly, the only claims remaining in the
consolidated action are those claims asserted in
 [AOAO's Complaint in Intervention], which seeks a
global resolution of all prior improvements/
alterations constructed in violation of [AOAO's]
governing documents;
 
WHEREAS, [AOAO] intends to file a motion for
summary judgment as to [AOAO's Complaint in
Intervention] seeking approval of the owners'
approval of the alterations/additions and
consent to amendment of the Declaration of
 Condominium Property Regime and Condominium Map
of KKSRC . . . , which, in furtherance of the
settlement reached by the parties, shall not be
opposed by any of the Defendants to this
consolidated action.
 
47. In furtherance of the Stipulation to Amend, a
status conference was held on January 31, 2008 wherein this
Court indicated that the sole basis for signing, approving
and ordering the Stipulation to Amend is that, in
furtherance of the settlement reached between the parties,
[AOAO's MSJ] will not be opposed.
 
48. Counsel for the Bowers assured this Court that
 
the Bowers would not file an opposition to [AOAO's MSJ].
 
49. The Stipulation to Amend was signed and filed on
February 1, 2008 and the hearing date for [AOAO's MSJ] was
set for March 11, 2008 at 8:00 a.m. In furtherance of the
 settlement agreement, the [Stipulation to Dismiss 04-1-062K]
was filed.
 
50. A Stipulation for Partial Dismissal with
Prejudice of Civil No. 06-1-010K and Order was filed, which
specifically states that [AOAO's] Complaint in Intervention
shall remain. 
(Record citations omitted; emphasis in original; some brackets in
 
original and some added.)
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. AOAO'S MSJ
 
In AOAO's MSJ filed on February 22, 2008, AOAO asked
 
the circuit court to grant summary judgment in its favor in Civil
 
No. 06-1-010K. AOAO stated that in AOAO's Complaint in
 Intervention, it was seeking "a global resolution of the
 identified unauthorized and illegal alterations and additions
 made to the common elements at the Project by the KKSRC owners
 over the past thirty years, including those unauthorized and
 illegal alterations and additions made by the Bowers and
 Schooleys." AOAO asserted that the Bowers had made "unauthorized
 and illegal alterations and additions to" Units 50 and 180. AOAO
 argued that it was entitled to summary judgment on the basis that
 it had
 
achieved a "global resolution" concerning the unauthorized
and illegal alterations and additions made to the common
elements at the Project over the past thirty years . . . by
obtaining the requisite percentage owner approval and
consent necessary to approve the identified alterations and
additions in accordance with the laws of the State of
 Hawaii, and [the governing documents] ("Grandfathering
Amendment").
 
AOAO stated that there was "an actual case or controversy as to
 
whether [it was] entitled to the relief requested in its
 Complaint in Intervention" because the Bowers had contended that
 AOAO "failed to take any action to implement a 'global'
 resolution to resolve the illegal alterations and additions and
 therefore [was] estopped from doing so."
 
The Bowers filed a memorandum in opposition to AOAO's

 
MSJ, arguing the following:
 
1) while [the Bowers] agreed to allow the AOAO to pursue
court approval of its grandfathering proposal, [the Bowers]
did not contemplate that the AOAO would take an opportunity
to attack [the Bowers] and their position with regard to the
alleged alterations and modifications at [the Project]; 2)
given the nature of the allegations against [the Bowers],
[the Bowers] could not allow said assertions to stand
unchallenged; 3) in its Memorandum in Support of [AOAO's
MSJ], the AOAO failed to disclose the existence of adverse
legal authority to the Court, a violation of Rule 3.3(a) of
the Hawaii Rules of Professional Conduct, and failed to
advise the Court of relevant facts which bear on the outcome
 of the Motion, a violation of Rule 3.3(d) of the same Rules;
and 4) . . . the AOAO is seeking declaratory relief, yet the
AOAO's Complaint in Intervention . . . makes no prayer for
declaratory relief, another fact not mentioned by the AOAO. 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Bowers also argued that the circuit court was "without power
 
to render a declaratory judgment" because the claims against the
 Bowers in Civ. No. 04-1-062K had been dismissed pursuant to the
 Stipulation to Dismiss 04-1-062K and no case or controversy
 existed.
 
AOAO filed a reply memorandum, in which it argued that
 
the Bowers had failed to address the issues presented in AOAO's
 MSJ or to support their opposition memorandum with any legal
 authority. Further, AOAO argued:
 
• It is undisputed that the Settlement Agreement
expressly precludes the Bowers from filing any opposition to
[AOAO's MSJ] and therefore, the Opposition must be stricken
by the Court;
 
• By entering into the settlement agreement with all
parties, the Bowers waived any right to challenge the
validity and/or enforceability of the [governing documents];
 
• The Bowers have failed to introduce any admissible
evidence that [AOAO] has "attacked" the Bowers with regard
to the illegal alterations and improvements to Apartment
No[s]. 50 and 180;
 
• [AOAO's] Complaint in Intervention seeking declaratory
relief and the Bowers' Response has never been dismissed
and, therefore, an actual case and controversy remains as it
pertains to the Grandfathering Amendment;
 
• The Grandfathering Amendment is valid and enforceable
on the basis that the Restated Declaration and Amended
 
Bylaws were properly adopted in accordance with [AOAO's]
governing documents and Hawaii statutory law;
 
• Assuming the Court does not strike the Bower[s']
Opposition on the basis that the settlement agreed upon by
the parties in the consolidated action is not otherwise
enforceable, [AOAO] is entitled to an order from this Court
setting aside the [Stipulation to Dismiss 04-1-062] and,
therefore, [AOAO] requests this Court issue an immediate
trial setting on said matter.
 
• [AOAO] is entitled to an award of attorneys' fees and
costs in connection with [the] filing of this Reply
Memorandum on the basis that the Bowers violated the express
terms of the settlement agreed upon by the parties by filing
their Opposition.
 
On March 11, 2008, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
AOAO's MSJ. The Bowers' counsel argued that the Bowers had
 
agreed to not oppose AOAO's grandfathering proposal and
 grandfathering procedure; however, the Bowers were compelled to
 oppose AOAO's MSJ. This is because, according to the Bowers'
 counsel, in AOAO's MSJ, AOAO had made "unproven allegations
 relating to the Bowers" (apparently a reference to AOAO's
 
21

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
assertion that the Bowers had made unauthorized and illegal
 
alterations and additions to Units 50 and 180), and the Bowers
 had to state their opposition to the unproven allegations on the
 record. The circuit court indicated that it could interpret the
 Bowers' argument thusly: AOAO breached the settlement agreement
 by making the unproven allegations about the Bowers; therefore,
 even though according to the terms of the settlement agreement
 the Bowers were precluded from opposing AOAO's MSJ, they could
 oppose the motion because AOAO breached the settlement agreement. 
The circuit court went on to state that if the court found the
 settlement agreement had been breached and thereby rendered
 invalid, the parties would have to go to trial. The Bowers'
 counsel and the circuit court subsequently engaged in the
 following exchange:
 
THE COURT: Okay. What's the option, then, I'm asking
you.
 
[The Bowers' counsel]: Your option, frankly, is to -–
now that I've put these things on the record.
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 
[The Bowers' counsel]: Now your option now is, I
think, to say that –­
THE COURT: That settlement agreement wasn't violated.
 [The Bowers' counsel]: Right.
 THE COURT: Right? That's –­[The Bowers' counsel]: Right, right. That's right.
 THE COURT: And I'm not considering your opposition.
 [The Bowers' counsel]: As long as my opposition is on
the record.
 
THE COURT: Okay. I understand.
 [The Bowers' counsel]: Okay.
 
The Bowers' counsel later stated, "[I]f the Court is going to
 
grant [AOAO's MSJ], that's okay, I guess." 
AOAO's counsel, in addition to contending that the
 
Bowers' counsel was attempting to "blow hot and cold" with regard
 to the settlement agreement, stated that AOAO intended to request
 attorney's fees with regard to its reply in support of AOAO's
 MSJ. AOAO's counsel argued that were it not for the Bowers'
 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of the terms of the settlement agreement, which
 
precluded the Bowers from opposing AOAO's MSJ, AOAO would not
 have had to file the reply. The Bowers' counsel objected to
 AOAO's request for fees relating to its reply.
 
With respect to AOAO's MSJ, the circuit court ruled:
 
The Court finds there's no genuine issue of material
fact that the settlement agreement is valid.
 
Within the settlement agreement, the Bowers waived any
legal right to challenge the validity or enforceability of
the [governing documents]. Therefore, the Court will not
consider the opposition filed by the Bowers.
 
The movant in this matter has not attacked the Bowers
 
in the subject matter. An actual case of [sic] controversy
exists by virtue of [AOAO']s complaint in intervention
seeking relief. The grandfathering amendment is valid and
enforceable on the basis that the [governing documents] were
properly adopted.
 
So the motion for summary judgment sought in the
complaint in intervention is granted.
 
The circuit court also orally awarded AOAO attorney's fees for
 
preparing and filing the reply in support of AOAO's MSJ.
 
On April 22, 2008, the circuit court filed its
 
FOF/COL/Order, which provided in part:
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 
54. Settlement or compromise agreements are reviewed
under contact [sic] law. Dowsett v. Cashman, 2 Haw. App.
77, 83, 625 P.2d 1064, 1068 (Haw. App. 1981).
 
55. Like other contracts, a settlement agreement
"requires an offer and acceptance, consideration, and
parties who have the capacity and authority to agree as they
do." Id. It also requires the parties to agree on all
material elements or terms of the settlement agreement.
Honolulu Rapid Transit v. Paschoal, 51 Haw. 19, 26-27, 449
P.2d 123, 127 (1968).
 
56. Settlement agreements cannot be set aside except
on the grounds adequate to justify the rescission of a
contract. Dowsett, 2 Haw. App. at 83, 625 P.2d at 1068.
 
57. The Settlement Agreement as between [AOAO], the
Bowers and Schooleys is a valid and binding contract and
contains the essential and material terms and conditions of
 the settlement in the Consolidated Actions, which is set
forth in the Revised Settlement Letter.
 
58. Under the Settlement Agreement, the Bowers
agreed not to oppose or otherwise obstruct [AOAO's]
Grandfathering Amendment and further agreed not to oppose
[AOAO's MSJ].
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
59. Under the terms of the Settlement Agreement, the
Bowers waived their legal right to challenge the validity
and enforceability of the [governing documents] and
therefore, the Court could not consider the Bowers[']
opposition to [AOAO's MSJ].
 
60. [AOAO] did not "attack" the Bowers in [AOAO's
MSJ] with regard to the alterations and additions to
Apartment Nos. 50 and 180, but simply restates the factual
and procedural history of the Consolidated Actions,
including what the Bowers have previously admitted.
 
61. An actual case or controversy exists in [sic] by
virtue of [AOAO's Complaint in Intervention] seeking
declaratory relief that was filed by [AOAO] in connection
with Civil No. 06-1-010K and the Response filed by the
Bowers, which denied each and every allegation asserted,
including the declaratory relief sought by [AOAO].
 
62. [AOAO's] Complaint in Intervention along with
the Bowers['] Response was not dismissed nor was it in any
way affected by the partial dismissal filed in Civil No.
06-1-010K.
 
63. The operative document in the creation of a
condominium project is the project's declaration. State
 
Sav. & Loan v. Kauian Dev. Co., 50 Haw. 540, 548, 445 P.2d
109, 116 (Haw. 1968). The interests of all owners in the
 property are governed by [the] condominium's declarations.
See  Ass'n of Owners of Kukui Plaza v. City & County of
 
Honolulu, 7 Haw. App. 60, 70, 742 P.2d 974, 981 (Haw. App.
1987). Any amendment to a condominium's declaration and/or
bylaws, which is duly passed in accordance with the
provisions of those documents, are deemed valid and
enforceable under Hawaii law. See D'Elia v. Ass'n of
 Apartment Owners of Fairway Manor, 2 Haw. App. 347, 632 P.2d
296 (Haw. App. 1981).
 
64. [AOAO's] Restated Declaration, as amended, and
the Amended Bylaws were properly amended in accordance with
the provisions of those documents and are therefore deemed
valid and enforceable under Hawaii law.
 
65. Under Hawaii law, both material and non-material
alterations and additions caused to the common elements by
the owners are legal and valid; provided such alterations
and additions receive the requisite percentage approval of
the owners and the board of directors, if necessary, in
accordance with the declaration and/or bylaws. See H.R.S
 
§ 514A-89.
 
66. Structural alterations materially different from
KKSRC's Condominium Map(s) require (1) an amendment to the
Restated Declaration, (2) approval by the owners at the
Project pursuant to H.R.S § 514A-89 and Section 16 of the
Restated Declaration (which requires approval of not less
than 75% of the owners), and (3) approval of all owners
whose apartments are directly affected.
 
67. Nonmaterial structural alterations only require
approval by the Board under H.R.S. § 514B-140(c), and not
less than 50% of the owners pursuant to Sections 8.03(l) and
8.06 of the Amended Bylaws.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
68. Nonmaterial alterations do not require an
amendment to the Restated Declaration. See Sections 8.03
 
and 8.05 of the Amended Bylaws.
 
69. Minor alterations and additions to the use of
 
the common elements at the KKSRC Project do not require an
amendment to the Restated Declaration. See Restated
 
Declaration, as Amended.
 
70. Any alterations not covered by H.R.S.
§ 514B-38(3)(A) or (B), can be approved by the Board as
hindrance in the use, or the encroachments into, the common
elements under H.R.S § 514B-104(a)(9), and the owners at the
Project need only approve these types of alterations and
additions under Section 9(c) of the Restated Declaration.
 
71. The owners at the Project properly approved all
identified unauthorized and illegal alterations and
additions made to the common elements at the Project over
the past thirty years, as identified in Schedules "A" and
"B" . . . and [agreed] to permit said unauthorized and
illegal alterations and additions to remain by amending the
Restated Declaration and Condominium Map(s), where
appropriate, and waive any requirement to submit plans and
specifications for the alterations and additions that would
otherwise be required under Section 16 of the Restated
Declaration and Section 8.03(1) of the Amended Bylaws, in
accordance with the Restated Declaration, as amended, the
Amended Bylaws, as well as Hawaii statutory law.
 
72. [The Board] properly approved the alterations
and additions identified on Schedules "A" and "B".
 
73. The Grandfathering Amendment is valid and
enforceable on the basis that the Restated Declaration, as
amended, and the Amended Bylaws were properly amended.
 
74. The Grandfathering Amendment has achieved the
"global" resolution and declaratory relief sought by [AOAO]
in its Complaint in Intervention to avoid future litigation
over the identified unauthorized and illegal alterations and
additions made to the common elements at the Project.
 
75. [AOAO] shall amend the Restated Declaration and
Condominium Map(s) of the Project to accurately reflect the
alterations and amendments identified on Schedule "B" that
 were approved by the owners at the Project.
 
76. The Bowers filed their Opposition to [AOAO's
MSJ] in direct violation of the settlement agreement.
 
77. [AOAO] is entitled to an award of attorneys'
fees and costs in filing a reply memorandum in support of
[AOAO's MSJ], which would not have been necessary if the
Bowers complied with the Settlement Agreement.
 
ORDER GRANTING [AOAO'S MSJ] IN CIVIL NO. 06-1-010K

SEEKING DECLARATORY RELIEF AS ASSERTED IN
 
THE COMPLAINT FILED HEREIN
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED:
 
78. Summary Judgment is hereby entered in favor of
[AOAO] and against all other Defendants as to [AOAO's MSJ]
seeking declaratory relief and that all identified
unauthorized and illegal alterations and additions made to
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the common elements at the Project over the past thirty
years, as identified in Schedules "A" and "B" . . . ,have
been properly approved by the owners at the Project through
a Grandfathering Amendment in accordance with [AOAO's
governing documents], as well as Hawaii Statutory law.
 
79. [AOAO] shall amend the Restated Declaration and
Condominium Map(s), where appropriate, to accurately reflect
the alterations and amendments as identified on Schedule
 "B".
 
80. [AOAO] is entitled to an award of attorneys'
fees and costs in the amount of $3,744.00 in filing a reply
memorandum support of [AOAO's MSJ].
 
(Footnote omitted.)
 
On May 2, 2008, the Bowers filed the Motion to Clarify
 
FOF/COL/Order, in which they argued that a Finding of Fact (FOF)
 
and various Conclusions of Law (COLs) needed clarification to
 resolve questions that might be raised on appeal and to aid them
 in determining if an appeal would be appropriate. On May 12,
 2008, AOAO filed a memorandum in opposition to the motion,
 arguing the following, in sum:
 
• The Subject Motion is just another attempt by the
Bowers to reargue matters that have been before this court;
 
• It is undisputed that the parties entered into a binding
Settlement Agreement on January 25, 2008;
 • The Bowers waived their legal right to challenge the
validity of the Restated Declaration, as amended, and the Amended
Bylaws, including the manner in which they were previously
adopted; and
 
• The validity and enforceability of the Grandfathering
Amendment is preconditioned upon the Court's ruling that the
Restated Declaration, as Amended, and the Amended Bylaws were
properly adopted in 1998.
 
On May 15, 2008, the Bowers filed a reply memorandum,
 
in which they argued in sum that the settlement agreement was
 
never finalized and the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to make
 any FOFs or COLs not directly related to the Complaint in
 Intervention.
 On May 27, 2008, the circuit court filed its Order
 
Denying Bowers' Motion to Clarify FOF/COL/Order.
J. ATTORNEY'S FEES AND COSTS MOTIONS
 
On May 23, 2008, the Bowers filed their Fees/Costs
 
Motion, in which they requested an award of attorney's fees and
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
costs. On June 4, 2008, AOAO filed a memorandum in opposition to
 
the motion and the Bowers filed a reply on June 9, 2008. 
On May 23, 2008, AOAO filed its Fees/Costs Motion, in
 
which it requested an award of attorney's fees and costs. On
 June 4, 2008, the Bowers filed a memorandum in opposition. The
 Bowers argued that the circuit court should deny the motion
 because: (1) they, not AOAO, "were the prevailing parties in
 Civil No. 04-1-0062K, due to [AOAO's] voluntary dismissal with
 prejudice of its claims in said action"; (2) AOAO was barred in
 Civil No. 06-1-010K from "re-litigating the issue of any alleged
 violations by [the Bowers] of [AOAO's] governing documents based
 on the doctrine of collateral estoppel"; (3) the alleged
 settlement agreement was not before the circuit court and the
 circuit court must disregard it in ruling on the motion; and (4)
 AOAO did not provide an adequate foundation or evidentiary
 support for its factual allegations in the motion. On June 9,
 2008, AOAO filed a reply memorandum.
 
On June 27, 2008, AOAO filed a "Supplemental Briefing
 
as to the Reasonableness of Attorneys' Fees and Costs" (AOAO's
 Supplement Re Fees/Costs). AOAO argued that if the circuit court
 awarded fees and costs to the Bowers, the attorney's fees
 requested by the Bowers should be reduced by 50% to 60% and the
 requested taxable costs should also be significantly reduced. 
The Bowers filed a reply.
 
On July 10, 2008, the circuit court filed its Order Re
 
Fees/Costs. The circuit court granted AOAO's Fees/Costs Motion
 and awarded AOAO $121,778.51 in attorney's fees and $1,359.49 in
 costs. The circuit court also granted the Bowers' Motion for
 Fees/Costs and awarded them attorney's fees in the amount of
 $122,593 and costs in the amount of $7,062.62, but the amounts
 the circuit court awarded in attorney's fees and costs were
 significantly below the amounts the Bowers had requested.
 
The Bowers filed their Motion to Reconsider Order Re
 
Fees/Costs, to which AOAO filed a memorandum in opposition. On
 August 11, 2008, the circuit court filed an order denying the
 Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order Re Fees/Costs (Order Denying
 Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order Re Fees/Costs).
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 20, 2008, the Bowers filed a motion asking
 
the circuit court to issue FOFs and COLs for the Order Denying
 
Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order Re Fees/Costs. On August 28,
 2008, AOAO filed a memorandum in opposition. On September 8,
 2008, the circuit court filed its Order Denying Bowers' Motion
 for FOF/COL Re Order Denying Bowers' Motion to Reconsider Order
 Re Fees/Costs.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. SUMMARY JUDGMENT

 
"An award of summary judgment is reviewed de novo
under the same standard applied by the circuit court."
French v. Hawai� i Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 462, 466, 99
P.3d 1046, 1050 (2004) (citing Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki
 Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 104, 839 P.2d 10, 22
(1992)) (other citations omitted). The standard for
 granting a motion for summary judgment is well settled:
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and

admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004)
(quoting Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai' i 213, 221, 11
P.3d 1, 9 (2000) (citations, internal quotation marks, andsome brackets omitted)) (emphases added). 
Taniguchi v. Ass'n of Apt. Owners of King Manor, Inc., 114
 
Hawai'i 37, 46, 155 P.3d 1138, 1147 (2007) (emphasis in original 
omitted).
 
B. HARMLESS ERROR
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 61 
provides in relevant part:
 
No error in either the admission or the exclusion of
 
evidence and no error or defect in any ruling or order or in
anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the
parties is ground . . . for vacating, modifying, or
otherwise disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to
take such action appears to the court inconsistent with
substantial justice. The court at every stage of the
proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the
proceeding which does not affect the substantial rights of
the parties.
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 103(a) provides
 
in relevant part: "Error may not be predicated upon a ruling
 which admits or excludes evidence unless a substantial right of
 the party is affected[.]"
C. JURISDICTION
 
"The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law
 
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard. Questions
 regarding subject matter jurisdiction may be raised at any stage
 of a cause of action. . . . A judgment rendered by a circuit
 court without subject matter jurisdiction is void." Fisher v.
 Grove Farm Co., 123 Hawai
'i 82, 94, 230 P.3d 382, 394 (App. 2009) 
(quoting Lingle v. Hawai 'i Gov't Employees Ass'n, AFSCME, Local 
152, 107 Hawai 'i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005)).
D. FOFs/COLs
 
This court reviews the trial court's [FOFs] under the
clearly erroneous standard. Beneficial Hawai� i, Inc. v. 
Kida, 96 Hawai' i 289, 305, 30 P.3d 895, 911 (2001). 
[An FOF] is clearly erroneous when, despite evidence
to support the finding, the appellate court is left
with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the
entire evidence that a mistake has been committed. 
[An FOF] is also clearly erroneous when the record
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. We
 have defined substantial evidence as credible evidence
 which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion.
 
Id. (internal citations, quotation marks, brackets, and
block quotation format omitted). [COLs] are reviewed de
novo. Id.
 
Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100
 
Hawai'i 97, 112, 58 P.3d 608, 623 (2002).
E. STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
 
[The Hawai' i Supreme Court] has often stated that the
fundamental starting point for statutory interpretation is
the language of the statute itself. Where the statutory
language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty is to give
effect to its plain and obvious meaning. Where . . . the
 operative language . . . is undefined in a statute, we
presume that the words in question were used to express
their meaning in common language. 
Schmidt v. Bd. of Dirs. of Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Marco Polo
 
Apts., 73 Haw. 526, 531-32, 836 P.2d 479, 482 (1992) (internal 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
quotation marks, citations, and brackets and ellipsis in original
 
omitted).
 
F. ATTORNEY'S FEES AND COSTS AWARDS
 
"The trial court's rulings concerning the award of
 
attorneys' fees and costs are generally reviewed under the abuse
 of discretion standard." Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua,
 
100 Hawaii at 120, 58 P.3d at 631.
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. The Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ
 
The Bowers contend the circuit court erred by finding
 
that the Koontz e-mails submitted by the Bowers in support of the
 Bowers' 7/2/07 MSJ were inadmissible for lack of foundation and
 in denying their motion. The Bowers argue that Ann authenticated
 the Koontz e-mails and the e-mails were not hearsay.
 
However, in addition to finding that there was a
 
genuine issue of material fact as to the foundation for the
 admission of the Koontz e-mails, the circuit court found that
 there were genuine issues of material fact as to "the scope of
 approval, if any, given in the Koontz e[-]mails" and whether the
 Bowers' reliance on the Koontz e-mails was reasonable. 
Without addressing whether the Bowers laid a sufficient
 foundation for the admission of the Koontz e-mails, we conclude
 that the circuit court did not err in denying the Bowers' 7/2/07
 MSJ on the grounds that there were genuine issues of material
 fact regarding the scope of the approval given in the Koontz e-
mails and whether the Bowers' reliance on such e-mails was
 reasonable. Thus, any error by the circuit court in ruling on
 the admissibility of the Koontz e-mails was harmless.
B. The Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ
 
The Bowers argue the circuit court applied the wrong
 
legal standard in denying the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ. They contend
 that instead of applying the correct standard, which requires the
 existence of a genuine issue of material fact, the circuit court
 denied their 12/18/07 MSJ by applying a standard that only
 required a "scintilla of evidence" supporting AOAO's opposition
 to the motion. Citing Yoneda v. Tom, 110 Haw. 367, 133 P.3d 796
 (2006), the Bowers contend that their motion for summary judgment
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could not be defeated by the mere existence of a scintilla of
 
evidence supporting AOAO's opposition. 
We are not persuaded that the circuit court applied the
 
wrong standard in denying the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ. The circuit
 court began its ruling by referencing the correct standard: 
"[T]he Court finds there's a genuine issue of material fact." It
 then, however, went on to state, "[a]s counsel know that
 credibility, even a scintilla of evidence raising a trivial
 dispute on a material fact is sufficient to deny a motion for
 summary judgment." Although it is not clear what the circuit
 court meant by its "scintilla of evidence" comment, the reference
 to credibility suggests that it may simply have been noting that
 disputes over material facts that turn on credibility
 determinations are sufficient to defeat summary judgment. In any
 event, we conclude that AOAO's opposition to the Bowers' 12/18/07
 MSJ raised genuine issues of material fact sufficient to defeat
 the Bowers' motion, and accordingly, the circuit court did not
 err in denying the Bowers' 12/18/07 MSJ.
C. Jurisdiction over the Settlement Agreement
 
The circuit court concluded that the parties had
 
entered into a valid and binding settlement agreement, the
 material terms of which were set forth in the January 25, 2008,
 Revised Settlement Letter. See FOF/COL/Order FOF 41 and COL 57. 
The Revised Settlement Letter was prepared by AOAO's counsel and
 signed as "agreed and accepted" by counsel for the Bowers and the
 Schooleys. For purposes of our analysis, we will treat the
 Revised Settlement Letter as the parties' settlement agreement. 
The Bowers argue that in granting AOAO's MSJ, the
 
circuit court erroneously made findings regarding the settlement
 agreement and other issues concerning the validity and
 enforceability of the governing documents. The Bowers contend
 that the circuit court did not have subject matter jurisdiction
 over the settlement agreement because: (1) a stipulation for
 dismissal with prejudice of all claims and all parties was filed
 in Civil No. 04-1-062K and a stipulation for partial dismissal
 with prejudice was filed in Civil No. 06-1-010K (collectively,
 Stipulations for Dismissal); (2) the only remaining claims
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
related to AOAO's Complaint in Intervention in Civil No. 06-1­
010K; and (3) the settlement agreement was not related to AOAO's
 Complaint in Intervention. The Bowers further contend that
 because the circuit court lacked jurisdiction over the settlement
 agreement once the Stipulations for Dismissal had been filed, the
 circuit court erred in finding that: (1) the terms of the
 settlement agreement precluded the Bowers from opposing the
 Grandfathering Amendment and AOAO's MSJ; and (2) the Bowers
 waived their legal right to challenge the validity and
 enforceability of the governing documents under the terms of the
 settlement agreement. Based on these contentions, the Bowers
 assert that in the FOF/COL/Order, FOFs 47 and 48 are clearly
 erroneous and COLs 57, 58, 59, 64, 73, 76, and 77 are wrong.
 
We reject the Bowers' contention that the circuit court
 
lost jurisdiction over the settlement agreement once the
 Stipulations for Dismissal were filed. We conclude that the
 settlement agreement was binding on the Bowers and that the
 circuit court was entitled to make findings based on the
 settlement agreement in ruling on AOAO's MSJ. We further
 conclude that by virtue of the settlement agreement and the
 Stipulation to Amend, the Bowers waived the right to oppose the
 Grandfathering Amendment and AOAO's MSJ. As a result of 
that waiver, the Bowers are precluded from raising in this
 litigation claims that would attack the validity of the
 Grandfathering Amendment or AOAO's entitlement to summary
 judgment on its Complaint in Intervention.
 
1.
 
The Bowers cite to Amantiad v. Odum, 90 Hawai
'i 152, 
158, 977 P.2d 160, 167 (1999), in support of their claim that the circuit court lost jurisdiction over the settlement agreement once the Stipulations for Dismissal were filed. Amantiad, 
however, is distinguishable in that the dismissal in that case terminated the litigation. Id. at 159-60, 977 P.2d at 167-68. 
Here, the Stipulations for Dismissal did not terminate the litigation in the consolidated cases; the Complaint in Intervention still remained. Indeed, as part of the settlement agreement, the parties agreed that the "Complaint for 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Intervention will not be dismissed and therefore, remains part of
 
Civil No. 06-1-010K." Because the litigation had not been
 terminated by the Stipulations for Dismissal, the circuit court
 retained jurisdiction over the settlement agreement.
 
2.
 
Pursuant to the settlement agreement and the
 
Stipulation to Amend, the Bowers agreed not to oppose the
 Grandfathering Amendment or AOAO's MSJ. The settlement agreement
 provided in pertinent part that
 
in furtherance of [AOAO's Complaint in Intervention] seeking
a global resolution of all listed improvements/alterations
constructed in violation of [AOAO']s governing documents,
including improvements/alterations which are the subject of
Civil No. 04-1-062K, [the] Bowers agree[] not to oppose or
otherwise obstruct [AOAO's] legal efforts to obtain judicial
approval of the owners' approval of the alterations/
additions and their consent to amendment of the Declaration
 of Condominium Property Regime and Condominium Map of KKSRC. 
In addition, the Stipulation to Amend provided in pertinent part: 
WHEREAS, [AOAO] intends to file a motion for summary
judgment as to [AOAO's Complaint in Intervention] seeking
approval of the owners' approval of the alterations/
additions and consent to amendment of the Declaration
 of Condominium Property Regime and Condominium Map of
KKSRC . . . , which, in furtherance of the settlement
reached by the parties, shall not be opposed by any of
the Defendants to this consolidated action.
 
AOAO filed its MSJ seeking circuit court approval for
 
the Grandfathering Amendment and a declaratory judgment that the
 
Grandfathering Amendment was valid. Despite their agreement not
 to oppose the Grandfathering Amendment or AOAO's MSJ, the Bowers
 filed a memorandum in opposition to AOAO's MSJ. In their
 opposition, the Bowers contended that although they had agreed to
 allow AOAO to pursue court approval of the Grandfathering
 Amendment, they were compelled to oppose AOAO's MSJ because 
AOAO had "attack[ed] [the Bowers] and their position with regard
 to the alleged alterations and modifications at [the Project]
 . . . ." 
We conclude that the Bowers did not have a valid
 
justification for opposing the Grandfathering Amendment and
 AOAO's MSJ given their specific agreement to refrain from such
 action. As the circuit court found, AOAO did not "attack" the
 Bowers in AOAO's MSJ, but merely restated the "factual and
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
procedural history of the Consolidated Actions." Moreover, any 
alleged "attack" of the Bowers in AOAO's MSJ did not amount to a breach of the settlement agreement or provide a valid ground for the Bowers to rescind the settlement agreement. See, e.g., 
Bischoff v. Cook, 118 Hawai
'i 154, 163, 185 P.3d 902, 911 (App. 
2008) (concluding that the remedy of rescission of a real estate contract was not warranted where the trial court did not find that "Cook had committed a breach of contract, let alone a material breach, or identify any other ground for abrogating the contract"); Golf Carts, Inc. v. Mid-Pacific Country Club, 53 Haw. 357, 359, 493 P.2d 1338, 1339 (1972) ("A rescission is not warranted by a mere breach of contract not so substantial and fundamental as to defeat the object of the parties in making the agreement." (internal quotation marks omitted)). Indeed, at the hearing on AOAO's MSJ, counsel for the Bowers indicated that he did not want to rescind the settlement agreement, but merely wanted to place the Bowers' objection to AOAO's "attack" on the record. 
We conclude that AOAO did not breach the settlement
 
agreement by filing its MSJ. Therefore, the Bowers remained
 bound by their agreement not to oppose the Grandfathering
 Amendment or AOAO's MSJ. The circuit court did not err in
 enforcing the settlement agreement and in refusing to consider
 the Bowers' opposition to the Grandfathering Amendement or AOAO's
 MSJ. 
D.	 Challenges to the Grandfathering Amendment and the
Granting of AOAO's MSJ
 
The Bowers raise claims related to the validity of the
 
Grandfathering Amendment and the circuit court's granting of
 
AOAO's MSJ. They argue that: (1) the Grandfathering Amendment
 was invalid because it was adopted pursuant to prior amendments
 to the governing documents that were invalid; and (2) the prior
 amendments to the governing documents were invalid because they
 were based on the unlawful retroactive application of statutes
 passed by the Legislature. The Bowers also challenge the circuit
 court's granting of AOAO's MSJ on the ground that all necessary
 
34
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties for the relief ordered by the circuit court were not
 
present in the litigation.
 
We do not address the merits of these claims. Instead,
 
we reject the Bowers' claims on the basis that the Bowers waived
 the right to raise these claims in this case as the result of the
 Bowers' entry into the settlement agreement and the Stipulation
 to Amend.
 
E. Attorney's Fees and Costs Awards
 
The Bowers in their appeal and AOAO in its cross-appeal
 
challenge the attorney's fees and costs awarded by the circuit
 court. The circuit court determined, pursuant to HRS § 514A-94
 
8
(Supp. 2005),  that both the Bowers and AOAO had substantiated
their respective "claims" and therefore were entitled to recover
 their attorney's fees and costs. The circuit court ruled that

 
AOAO had substantiated its claim brought against the Bowers for
 additions and alterations made to Units 50 and 180 in violation
 of the governing documents and awarded AOAO $121,778.51 in

 
attorney's fees and $1,359.49 in costs. The circuit court also
 ruled that the Bowers had substantiated their claim brought
 against AOAO that there were widespread violations of the
 governing documents by other unit owners and awarded the Bowers
 $122,593 in attorney's fees and $7,026.62 in costs. The circuit
 court additionally awarded attorney's fees and costs of $3,744 to
 AOAO for having to file a reply to the Bowers' memorandum in
 opposition to AOAO's MSJ. The net effect of these awards was a
 
9
total of $2,737.62  in favor of the Bowers.
We conclude that the circuit court misapplied HRS 
§ 514-94 in awarding attorney's fees and costs to the Bowers and
 in awarding attorney's fees and costs to AOAO. We further
 conclude that the circuit court failed to make sufficient
 findings to support its award of attorney's fees and costs
 
8
 HRS § 514A-94 has been replaced by HRS § 514B-157 (2006) "with respect
to events and circumstances occurring on or after July 1, 2006." HRS § 514B­
22 (2006). For purposes of our analysis, there are no relevant differences
between HRS § 514A-94 and HRS § 514-157, and we will refer to the provisions
of HRS § 514A-94 in our analysis. 
9
  The Amended Final Judgment incorrectly states this figure as
$2,737.61.
 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relating to AOAO's reply. Accordingly, we vacate the circuit
 
court's awards of attorney's fees and costs and remand for
 further proceedings. 
1. 
As noted, the circuit court awarded attorney's fees and
 
costs pursuant to HRS § 514A-94, which provides in relevant part:
 
(a) All costs and expenses, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, incurred by or on behalf of the association
for:
 
. . . . 
(3) Enforcing any provision of the declaration,
bylaws, house rules, and the Condominium Property Act; or
the rules of the real estate commission; 
against an owner, occupant, tenant, employee of an owner, or
any other person who may in any manner use the property
shall be promptly paid on demand to the association by such
person or persons; provided that if the claims upon which
the association takes any action are not substantiated, all
costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees,
incurred by any such person or persons as a result of the
action of the association, shall be promptly paid on demand
to such person or persons by the association.
 
(b) If any claim by an owner is substantiated in any
action against an association, any of its officers or
directors, or its board of directors to enforce any
provision of the declaration, bylaws, house rules, or this
chapter, then all reasonable and necessary expenses, costs,
and attorneys' fees incurred by an owner shall be awarded to
such owner; provided that no such award shall be made in any
derivative action unless:
 
(1) The owner first shall have demanded and allowed
 
reasonable time for the board of directors to pursue such
enforcement; or 
(2) The owner demonstrates to the satisfaction
 
of the court that a demand for enforcement made to the
 board of directors would have been fruitless. 
If any claim by an owner is not substantiated in
any court action against an association, any of its
officers or directors, or its board of directors to
enforce any provision of the declaration, bylaws,
house rules, or this chapter, then all reasonable and
necessary expenses, costs, and attorneys' fees
incurred by an association shall be awarded to the
association, unless the action was filed in small
claims court or prior to filing the action in a higher
court the owner has first submitted the claim to
 mediation, or to arbitration under part VII of this
chapter, and made a good faith effort to resolve the
dispute under any of those procedures.
 (Emphases added.)
 
36
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this case, AOAO brought a claim to enforce the
 
governing documents against the Bowers by filing the 04-1-062K
 
Complaint, seeking, among other things, an order requiring the
 Bowers to remove all non-conforming alterations and additions to
 their Units 50 and 180 to comply with the governing documents. 
The Bowers asserted as a defense to AOAO's claim for enforcement
 that AOAO's failure to enforce the governing documents with
 respect to similar and widespread non-conforming alterations and
 additions by other unit owners precluded AOAO from enforcing the
 governing documents against the Bowers under the doctrines of
 estoppel, acquiescence, waiver, and abandonment. However,
 because the parties agreed to resolve their dispute through a
 settlement agreement, neither the merits of AOAO's enforcement
 claim nor the Bowers' defense to that claim was decided. 
Instead, the settlement agreement, which called for the adoption
 of the Grandfathering Amendment to legitimize all prior non­conforming alterations and additions, rendered AOAO's enforcement
 claim and the Bowers' defense to that claim moot.
 
In Schmidt v. Bd. of Dirs. of the Ass'n of Apt. Owners 
of the Marco Polo Apts., 73 Haw. 526, 836 P.2d 479 (1992), the Hawai
'i Supreme Court explained how HRS § 514A-94(b) was intended 
to apply in light of the statute's use of the term "enforce." The court reasoned as follows: 
Black's Law Dictionary (6th ed. 1990) defines "enforce,"
inter alia, to mean "[t]o put into execution, to cause to
take effect; . . . to compel obedience to." Id. at 528.
 
Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the English
Language (1989) defines "enforce," inter alia, to mean "to
. . . compel obedience to; . . . to impose (a course of
action) upon a person . . . . Id. at 473.
 
Thus, the "plain and obvious" application of HRS
§ 514A-94(b) is to an owner's substantiated claim against an
association or its board to impose an affirmative course of
 
action upon the association to put into execution -- or to
compel obedience to -- any provision of its declaration,
by-laws, house rules, or any enumerated provision of HRS
chapter 514A.
 
Id. at 532, 836 P.2d at 482-83 (brackets, ellipsis points, and
 
emphasis in original). 
In 
Schmidt, the owners of a condominium, the Schmidts,
 
had sued the association, alleging that it breached its duty,
 
37
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pursuant to the declaration and by-laws of the association, to
 
maintain the common areas, resulting in water leakage that caused
 damage to the Schmidts' unit. Id. at 528, 836 P.2d at 481. The
 
supreme court held that the Schmidts, who prevailed at trial,
 were not entitled to attorney's fees under HRS § 514A-94(b). Id.
 
at 533, 836 P.2d at 483. This is because 
the Schmidts did not seek to enforce any affirmative action
 
on the part of the [a]ssociation to comply with any
provision of the [a]ssociation's declaration, by-laws, house
rules, or HRS chapter 514A; rather, in their own words, they
were "seeking damages for the [a]ssociation's failure to
comply with the By-Laws and Declaration." 
Id. (brackets and ellipsis points in original omitted; emphasis
 
in original). 
2.
 
We conclude that the circuit court erred in awarding
 
attorney's fees and costs to the Bowers pursuant to HRS § 514A­94. The circuit court awarded attorney's fees and costs to the
 
Bowers on the basis that the Bowers had substantiated their claim
 that there were widespread violations of the governing documents
 by other unit owners. However, under Schmidt, for an owner to be
 entitled to attorney's fees and costs pursuant to HRS § 514A-94,
 the owner's claim must seek to enforce "affirmative action on the
 part of the association" to "compel obedience to" the
 association's declaration, by-laws, or house rules, or to HRS
 chapter 514A. See id. at 532, 836 P.2d at 482-83. The Bowers'
 
claim of widespread violations by other unit owners was not
 asserted to enforce or compel obedience to the governing
 documents, but rather was asserted as a defense to AOAO's
 enforcement action under the doctrines of estoppel and waiver. 
Indeed, the Bowers raised their claim of widespread violations to
 preclude AOAO from enforcing the governing documents against
 them. Thus, the Bowers were not entitled to attorney's fees and
 costs pursuant to HRS § 514A-94 based on their claim of
 widespread violations.
 
AOAO's 04-1-062K Complaint against the Bowers, which
 
sought to compel the Bowers to remove all non-conforming
 alterations and additions to their units, clearly qualified as a
 claim to enforce the governing documents. However, pursuant to
 
38
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the settlement agreement, the 04-1-062K Complaint was dismissed
 
with prejudice. Moreover, as a result of the Grandfathering
 Amendment, the Bowers were not required to remove the alleged
 non-conforming alterations and additions to their units. Under
 these circumstances, we conclude that AOAO did not substantiate
 its claim for enforcement of the governing documents against the
 Bowers under HRS § 514A-94. Therefore, the circuit court erred
 in awarding attorney's fees and costs to AOAO pursuant to HRS 
§ 514A-94. 
We note that HRS § 514A-94(a) provides that an owner is
 
entitled to recover the owner's attorney's fees and costs "if the
 claims upon which the association takes any action are not
 substantiated." We do not preclude the possibility that in a
 case where the association's enforcement claim is not resolved on
 the merits because of a settlement agreement, a court could
 determine that a claim for enforcement was neither
 "substantiated" nor "not substantiated." See Cunningham v.
 
Waford, 965 P.2d 201, 205-06 (Idaho Ct. App. 1998) (concluding
 that there was no prevailing party when litigation was resolved
 through a settlement agreement); Boxer Max Corp. v. Cane A.
 Sucre, Inc., 905 So. 2d 916, 918 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2005)
 (same); see also In re Estate of Wolf, 777 N.W.2d 119, 123-26
 (Wis. Ct. App. 2009) (indicating that there may be no prevailing
 party as the result of a settlement). We remand the case for the
 circuit court to consider whether the Bowers are entitled to
 attorney's fees and costs under HRS § 514A-94(a) on the theory
 that AOAO failed to substantiate its claim for enforcement.
 
3.
 
The circuit court apparently relied upon its inherent 
power to impose sanctions to control the litigation process in awarding attorney's fees and costs of $3,744 to AOAO for its preparation of the reply to the Bowers' memorandum in opposition to AOAO's MSJ. In Kaina v. Gellman, 119 Hawai
'i 324, 331, 197 
P.3d 776, 783 (App. 2008), this court held that a "court may not invoke its inherent powers to sanction a represented party without a specific finding of bad faith." Here, the circuit court did not make a specific finding of bad faith in connection 
39
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with its award of attorney's fees and costs to AOAO for AOAO's
 
preparation of the reply. Accordingly, we vacate the award of
 the $3,744 to AOAO. The circuit court may consider whether there
 is an appropriate basis for exercising its inherent power to
 impose sanctions and, if so, to make the necessary findings on
 remand. 
F. Other Matters
 
Points of error raised by the Bowers that have not been
 
specifically addressed are rejected as lacking merit.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the portions of the circuit court's September
 
9, 2008, Amended Final Judgment that awarded attorney's fees and
 costs to AOAO and that awarded attorney's fees and costs to the
 Bowers, and we remand the case for further proceedings consistent
 with this Memorandum Opinion. We affirm the Amended Final
 Judgment in all other respects. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 13, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Kenneth A. Ross 
(Law Offices of Kenneth A. Ross)Dana R.C. Lyons(Rush Moore LLP)for Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellee 
S. V. (Bud) Quitiquit
Danielle N. Degele-Mathews(Brooks Tom Porter &Quitiquit, LLP)for Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
40
 