 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. 29953 AND 29954
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CR. NO. 5P104-00072 (LC04-072)
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
STEVEN SCHAEFER, Defendant-Appellant. 
CR. NO. 5P104-00169 (LC04-169)
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
APRIL ESTHER SCHAEFER, aka APRIL ESTHER PAIVA,
Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise, J.;
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
 
In these consolidated appeals, Defendants-Appellants 
Steven Schaefer (Steven) and April Esther Schaefer (April), also 
known as April Esther Paiva, (collectively, Appellants), appeal from Judgments entered on June 18, 2009, by the District Court of the Fifth Circuit (District Court).
1 The Judgments were entered 
upon remand from a prior decision of this court in State v. Schaefer, 117 Hawai' i 490, 184 P.3d 805 (App. 2008) 
(Schaefer I). On appeal, Appellants argue that the District Court erred in: (1) finding that Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
1
 The Honorable Laurel K.S. Loo presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i (State) did not materially breach their plea agreements 
by opposing the preparation of a "full standard" presentence
 
investigation report (PSI); and (2) failing to permit Appellants
 to withdraw their no contest pleas as a remedy for the State's
 material breach of the plea agreements. We affirm the District
 Court's Judgments.
 
I.
 
Appellants were each charged with seventeen counts of
 
Theft in the Third Degree, two counts of False and Fraudulent
 Statements, and two counts of Willful Failure to File Return. 
Appellants entered into plea agreements with the State, in which
 Appellants each agreed to plead no-contest to seventeen counts of
 Theft in the Third Degree, one count of False and Fraudulent
 Statements, and one count of Willful Failure to File Return. In
 Schaefer I, we described the plea agreements as follows:
 
[Appellants] each executed a written change-of-plea
form to which was appended an addendum. Steven's
addendum stated, in relevant part:
 
I have entered into the following agreement with the
government: in exchange for my pleas of No-Contest to
the above listed counts: I stipulate that I will be
jointly and severally liable for restitution in the
amount of $31,202.00 to complainants, as well as
$2674.57 to the State in reference to Count Five, and
that I will sign a promissory note to this effect. I
 also agree to pay restitution in addition to this if
proper documentation is provided prior to sentencing.
The State agrees to exercise due diligence in
obtaining this documentation and agrees that it must
provide proof prior to sentencing or else be barred
from requesting such documentation, unless there is a
good faith basis as to why it is unable to provide
said documentation by such time. I agree that a [PSI]
2
will be completed prior to sentencing .[ ]  The State
 
acknowledges that I will be asking the court for a
deferred acceptance of my no-contest pleas (DANC), and
the State is free to object to my motion. The State
 agrees not to seek any further criminal charges
against me involving the complainants in these cases.
There are no other agreements as to sentencing.
 
(Emphasis added.) April's addendum was identical, except
that: (1) it did not include the sentence im The addendum to
 
2 The addendum to Steve's plea agreements stated: "I agree that a
presentence investigative report (PSI) will be completed prior to sentencing."
In Schaefer I, we substituted "[PSI]" for "presentence investigative report
(PSI)" in the block-quoted material. 
2
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Steve's plea agreements stated: "I agree that a presentence
investigative report (PSI) will be completed prior to
sentencing." In Schaefer I, we substituted "[PSI]" for
"presentence investigative report (PSI)" in the block-quoted
material. mediately following the underscored sentence
regarding deferral of the no-contest plea; and (2) in the
sixth line, reference is to Count Four instead of Count
Five. 
Schaefer I, 117 Hawai' i at 492, 184 P.3d at 807. 
The District Court accepted the no-contest pleas,
 
ordered PSIs for both Appellants, and continued sentencing until
 
July 2, 2004. Id. On or about June 29, 2004, Senior Probation
 
Officer Lynn A. Garcia submitted reports for Steven and April
 entitled "Partial Presentence Report" (Partial PSI) to the
 District Court. Id. at 493, 184 P.3d at 808. The Partial PSIs,
 
which each exceeded 200 pages, were apparently sent to Appellants
 sometime in July 2004. Id. Appellants requested a continuance
 
of the sentencing hearing until August 13, 2004, to review their
 PSIs, and further continuances were granted pursuant to
 stipulations between the parties. Id. 
Appellants did not challenge the scope or adequacy of
 
the Partial PSIs until the sentencing hearing held on October 1,
 2004. Id. At that time, Appellants moved the District Court "to
 
order the preparation of a full pre-sentence investigation
 report" (full PSI). Id. The District Court denied Appellants'
 
request, 
noting that Appellants had been given ample opportunity to
review the Partial PSIs but did not object to their content
or scope until the sentencing hearing. The district court
 also observed that Appellants, through their counsels, had
"the opportunity to compile any and all documentation they
wish[ed] for presentation to the Court for consideration at
the time of sentencing" and could make arguments as to any
of the probation factors set forth in HRS ยง 706-621. 
Id. at 495, 184 P.3d at 810 (brackets in original).
 
On appeal in Schaefer I, Appellants argued, among other
 
things, that the District Court "[v]iolated their procedural due-
process rights under HRS ยง 706-604 (1993) by denying their oral
 motion for preparation of a full PSI" and erroneously failed to
 obtain a valid waiver of their right to pre-sentence allocution. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 496, 184 P.3d at 811 (footnote omitted). We agreed that
 
the District Court had failed to obtain a valid waiver from
 Appellants of their right to allocution, and we remanded their
 cases for resentencing before a different judge as a remedy for
 that error. With respect to Appellants' claim concerning the
 adequacy of the Partial PSIs, we concluded as follows:
 
It is not clear from the docketed record on appeal
what Appellants and the State expected when they agreed that
a PSI would be completed prior to sentencing. It is also
 not clear whether the district court agreed to be bound by
the plea agreements, whether the district court ordered a
"full PSI" at the time it accepted Appellants' no-contest
pleas, and if so, what the district court expected to be
included in the "full PSI." When Appellants complained
about the Partial PSIs at sentencing, the district court
denied their requests for a "full PSI" without determining
the scope of the parties' plea agreements and whether the
Partial PSIs were a material breach of the plea agreements.
On remand, the district court shall make this determination.
 
If the resentencing judge determines that the Partial
PSIs materially breached the parties' plea agreements, the
resentencing judge shall either (1) allow Appellants to
withdraw their no-contest pleas, or (2) order the Partial
PSIs to be amended or supplemented to satisfy the parties'
plea agreements. See State v. Abbott, 79 Hawai' i 317, 321,
901 P.2d 1296, 1300 (App. 1995). If alternative 2 applies,
the district court shall duly consider the Partial PSIs, as
supplemented, in resentencing Steven and April.
 
Id. at 500-01, 184 P.3d at 815-16 (emphasis added).
 
II.
 
On remand, the State filed a "Motion for Order
 
Directing Supplementation of PSI & Setting Sentencing Hearing"
 
with respect to each Appellant (State's Motion on Remand), in
 which the State requested that the District Court order full PSIs
 for Appellants in light of this court's decision in Schaefer I
 and the ambiguity in the plea agreements. The State also
 asserted that if the Partial PSIs were a material breach of the
 plea agreements, the appropriate remedy was to resentence
 Appellants rather than allow them to withdraw their pleas. 
Appellants submitted a joint memorandum in opposition to the
 State's Motions on Remand, arguing that the State violated the
 plea agreements and that Appellants should be allowed to withdraw
 their pleas.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 24, 2009, the District Court entered orders
 
that (1) found that the State did not materially breach its plea
 
agreements with Appellants by opposing Appellants' requests for a
 full PSI, (2) denied Appellants' requests to withdraw their no
 contest pleas, but nevertheless, (3) directed that a "new, full
 PSI" be prepared prior to resentencing for each Appellant by a
 probation officer different than the one who prepared the
 original Partial PSIs. The District Court's orders
3
 provided in
pertinent part as follows:
 
THIS COURT HEREBY FINDS THAT the parties did not
actually contemplate, at the time [Appellants] entered
[their] No Contest pleas on March 19, 2004, whether
. . . full or partial PSI[s] would be prepared prior to
sentencing; and the State did not materially breach the plea
agreement[s] with [Appellants], or otherwise act in bad
faith, by opposing [Appellants'] October 1, 2004 oral motion
to supplement the June 30, 2004 Partial Presentence
Report[s], given that [Appellants] did not move prior to the
October 1, 2004 sentencing hearing to supplement the Partial
PSI[s].
 
THEREFORE, THIS COURT HEREBY ORDERS THAT:
 
1. Given that the State did not materially breach
the plea agreement[s] with [Appellants] and did not act in
bad faith, [Appellants'] request to withdraw [their] No
Contest pleas entered on March 19, 2004, is HEREBY DENIED.
 
2. Nevertheless, in order to make [Appellants]
whole, and give [Appellants] what [they] requested on
October 1, 2004, . . . new, full PSI[s] will be prepared
prior to resentencing. The PSI[s] will be completed by a
Probation Officer of the Fifth Circuit Court other than Lynn
Garcia, the Probation Officer who prepared the June 30, 2004
Partial PSI[s] . . . . 
(Emphases in original.) 
On June 18, 2009, the District Court held a joint
 
sentencing hearing for both Appellants. The record reflects that
 
a new PSI was prepared for each Appellant and considered by the
 District Court in imposing sentence. Appellants did not object
 to the scope or completeness of the new PSIs. The District Court
 sentenced Appellants to concurrent terms of one year of
 
3 The District Court entered a separate, but substantively identical,
order for Steven and April. We have edited the order to refer to both
 
Appellants. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incarceration for each count of conviction and ordered them to
 
jointly and severally pay restitution in the amount of $33,876.57
 as well as crime victim compensation fees.
 
On June 18, 2009, the District Court entered Judgments
 
against Appellants, with a separate Judgment entered against
 Appellants for each count of conviction. Appellants appeal from
 those Judgments. 
III.
 
On appeal, Appellants argue that the District Court
 
erred "by finding that the prosecutor's objection to a 'full
 standard' pre-sentence investigation report did not constitute a
 material breach of the parties' plea agreement." Appellants also
 argue that the District Court erred in resentencing them after
 ordering new, full PSIs because the appropriate remedy for the
 State's material breach of the plea agreements was to permit
 Appellants to withdraw their pleas. We reject Appellants'
 arguments.
 
A.
 
The District Court did not err in finding that the
 
State did not materially breach the parties' plea agreements by
 objecting to the preparation of full PSIs for Appellants at the
 original sentencing hearing. This finding was based in part on
 the District Court's subsidiary finding that the parties did not
 actually contemplate, at the time Appellants entered their no
 contest pleas, whether full or partial PSIs would be prepared. 
We conclude that there was substantial evidence to support these
 findings and that the findings were not clearly erroneous.
 
The plea agreements were silent as to the type of PSIs 
the Appellants agreed would be prepared -- whether the PSIs would be partial or full. No PSI was statutorily required for the offenses to which Appellants pleaded no contest. Shaefer I, 117 
Hawai'i at 499, 184 P.3d at 814. Appellants received their 
Partial PSIs, which were entitled "Partial Presentence Report," in July 2004. However, they did not move to supplement the Partial PSIs until the sentencing hearing on October 1, 2004, 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
even though several continuances had been granted and Appellants
 
had requested the initial continuance so they could review the
 Partial PSIs. The record supports a determination that the
 preparation of full PSIs was not a material term of the parties'
 plea agreements. We cannot say that the District Court erred in
 finding that the State did not materially breach the plea
 agreements.
 
B.
 
Despite ruling that the State did not materially breach
 
the plea agreements, the District Court ordered the preparation
 of new, full PSIs by a different probation officer than the one
 who had prepared the original Partial PSIs, prior to
 resentencing. Appellants do not challenge the adequacy or
 completeness of the new PSIs that were prepared prior to their
 resentencing. We reject Appellants' argument that the District
 Court erred in denying their requests to withdraw their pleas. 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the District Court erred 
in finding that the State had not materially breached the plea
 agreements, we conclude that the District Court did not err in
 ordering the preparation of new, full PSIs prior to resentencing
 Appellants, rather than permitting Appellants to withdraw their
 pleas. 
In Schaefer I, we held that if the District Court
 
determined on remand that the Partial PSIs materially breached
 parties' plea agreements, the District Court "shall either (1)
 allow Appellants to withdraw their no-contest pleas, or (2) order
 the Partial PSIs to be amended or supplemented to satisfy the
 parties' plea agreements." Id. at 501, 184 P.3d at 816. 
Therefore, the actions taken by the District Court were
 consistent with one of the specific options we held was available
 if the District Court determined that the State had materially
 breached the plea agreements.
 
A trial court's ruling on a motion for withdrawal of a 
plea is reviewed for abuse of discretion. State v. Adams, 76 
Hawai'i 408, 411, 879 P.2d 513, 516 (1994). When the State 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
breaches a plea agreement, either resentencing or withdrawal of a
 
plea may be the appropriate remedy. Id. at 414, 879 P.2d at 519.
 
Although considerable weight should be given to the defendant's
 choice, 
[o]ther factors to be considered include the timeliness of
the motion, the extent of the breach, the prejudice to the
parties, and which alternative will best serve the effective
administration of justice. Moreover, either alternative may
be unsuitable due to new information or changed
circumstances since the defendant entered into the plea
agreement.
 
Id. at 414-15, 879 P.2d at 519-20.
 
Here, the District Court cured any breach of the plea
 
agreements by ordering that new, full PSIs be prepared before
 
sentencing and that the new PSIs be prepared by a different
 probation officer than had prepared the original Partial PSIs. 
Appellants were resentenced by a different judge than had
 presided over the original sentencing. In addition, the record
 reflects that Appellants did not move to withdraw their pleas
 until the case was remanded and that the State cited a newspaper
 article indicating that a key witness for the State had died. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that even if the State had
 materially breached the plea agreement, the District Court did
 not err in denying their requests to withdraw their pleas.
 
IV.
 
We affirm all the Judgments entered by the District
 
Court on June 18, 2009, regarding Appellants' counts of
 conviction.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 27, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Hayden Aluli
for Defendant-Appellant
Steven Schaefer
 
Chief Judge
Mimi Desjardins
for Defendant-Appellant
April Esther Schaefer, aka
April Esther Paiva Associate Judge
 
Tracy Murakami
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kaua' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
9
 