 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29703
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI» I 
STATE OF HAWAI» I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CHESTER PACQUING, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0556)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai
» i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellee Chester Pacquing (Pacquing) by complaint with
 
a single count of unauthorized possession of confidential
 personal information, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
1
(HRS) ÿÿ 708-839.55  (Supp. 2010).  The alleged victim and 
1 HRS ÿÿ 708-839.55 provides as follows:
 
[§ 708-839.55] Unauthorized possession of confidential
personal information. (1) A person commits the offense of
unauthorized possession of confidential personal information if
that person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without
authorization, any confidential personal information of another in
any form, including but not limited to mail, physical documents,
identification cards, or information stored in digital form.
 
(2) It is an affirmative defense that the person who
possessed the confidential personal information of another did so
under the reasonable belief that the person in possession was
authorized by law or by the consent of the other person to possess
the confidential personal information.
 
(3) Unauthorized possession of confidential personal
information is a class C felony.
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complainant (Complainant) in this case was Pacquing's former
 
neighbor. 
Pacquing filed a motion to dismiss the charge as a de
 
2
minimis infraction pursuant to HRS ÿÿ 702-236 (1993).  The
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)3 granted
 
Pacquing's motion and dismissed the complaint. The Circuit
 
Court's dismissal was without prejudice to the State re-charging
 Pacquing with a different offense -- unsworn falsification to
 
4
authorities, in violation of HRS ÿÿ 710-1063(1)(b) (1993) -­
2 HRS ÿÿ 702-236 provides:
 
§ 702-236 De minimis infractions.  (1) The court may
dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the
conduct alleged and the nature of the attendant circumstances, it
finds that the defendant's conduct:
 
(a)	 Was within a customary license or tolerance, which was
not expressly refused by the person whose interest was
infringed and which is not inconsistent with the
purpose of the law defining the offense; or 
(b)	 Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense
or did so only to an extent too trivial to warrant the
condemnation of conviction; or 
(c)	 Presents such other extenuations that it cannot
 reasonably be regarded as envisaged by the legislature
in forbidding the offense. 
(2) The court shall not dismiss a prosecution under
subsection (1)(c) of this section without filing a written
statement of its reasons.
 
3 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
4 HRS ÿÿ 710-1063 provides in relevant part:
 
§ 710-1063 Unsworn falsification to authorities.  (1) A
person commits the offense of unsworn falsification to authorities
if, with an intent to mislead a public servant in the performance
of the public servant's duty, the person:
 
. . . 
(b) 	Submits or invites reliance on any writing which the
person knows to be falsely made, completed, or
altered; . . .
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 Unsworn falsification to authorities is a misdemeanor.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
within ninety days of the Circuit Court's dismissal order. 
The Circuit Court set forth its decision in its
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
 
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss for De Minimis Violation" (De
 Minimis Dismissal Order) filed on February 11, 2009. The State
 appeals from the De Minimis Dismissal Order.
 
On appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in dismissing the complaint against
 Pacquing as a de minimis infraction and challenges numerous
 conclusions of law issued by the Circuit Court in support of its
 decision. As set forth in greater detail below, we conclude that
 the Circuit Court was not presented with all the relevant
 circumstances necessary for it to properly exercise its
 
discretion in rendering its decision. We therefore vacate the De
 Minimis Dismissal Order and remand the case for further
 proceedings.
 
BACKGROUND FACTS
5
 
On March 23, 2008, Honolulu Police Department (HPD)
 
Officer Barry Danielson (Officer Danielson) observed a black
 Acura Integra with an expired vehicle tax emblem. Officer
 Danielson effected a traffic stop of the Acura Integra, and HPD
 Officer Darrin Lum (Officer Lum) arrived at the scene to provide
 assistance.
 
Officer Lum went to the driver's door where he saw
 
Pacquing seated in the driver's seat. Officer Lum asked Pacquing
 for his license, registration, and proof of no-fault insurance. 
Pacquing was unable to produce the requested documents, but he
 
verbally identified himself by name to Officer Lum as
 Complainant, who was Pacquing's former neighbor. In addition to
 using Complainant's name, Pacquing also gave Officer Lum 
5
 The Background Facts include evidence from a preliminary hearing held
on the complaint against Pacquing that was not presented to the Circuit Court
in connection with Pacquing's motion to dismiss the charge as a de minimis
infraction. We discuss infra  the significance of the failure to provide the
Circuit Court with evidence from the preliminary hearing. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complainant's date of birth and residence address as Pacquing's
 
own date of birth and residence address.
 
Officer Lum conducted a records check to verify the
 
information provided by Pacquing. Officer Lum confirmed that
 records of the Department of Motor Vehicles Licensing Division
 (DMV) showed that a person with Complainant's name and the date
 of birth and address provided by Pacquing had a valid driver's
 license. The physical description of Complainant from the DMV
 records also matched Pacquing. Through his records check,
 Officer Lum also obtained Complainant's driver's license number
 and Complainant's social security number. 
Officer Lum issued Pacquing a criminal citation for
 
driving without insurance and an infraction citation for
 
delinquent vehicle tax or fraudulent safety check. On both
 citations, Officer Lum wrote Complainant's name, date of birth,
 and street address. At the preliminary hearing on the complaint
 against Pacquing, Officer Lum testified that on both citations,
 he also wrote Complainant's driver's license number and the last
 four digits of Complainant's social security number. Officer Lum
 presented the citations to Pacquing for his signature, and
 Pacquing signed both citations in the name of Complainant. 
Officer Lum gave Pacquing a copy of the criminal
 
citation but neglected to give him a copy of the infraction
 citation. After Pacquing was allowed to leave, Officer Lum
 realized that he had failed to give Pacquing a copy of the
 infraction citation. Officer Lum went to the residence address
 provided by Pacquing to deliver the infraction citation. Upon
 
discovering that no one was home at that address, Officer Lum
 left the infraction citation in the mailbox.
 
The following day, March 24, 2008, Complainant went the
 
Kalihi Police Station. Complainant explained to HPD Officer Tish
 Taniguchi (Officer Taniguchi) that he had found the citation in
 
his mailbox. Complainant claimed that the citation had been
 
issued to him in error. Complainant stated that he did not own
 
or drive the Acura Integra listed on the citation and had not
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
been involved in the traffic stop identified in the citation. 
Officer Taniguchi prepared a report based on the information
 provided by Complainant and also notified Officer Lum of the
 information provided by Complainant. 
On April 7, 2008, Officer Danielson effected a traffic
 
stop of the same Acura Integra he had stopped on March 23, 2008.
 Officer Lum again arrived to provide back-up. Officer Danielson
 approached the driver's door and saw Pacquing seated in the
 driver's seat. Officer Danielson asked Pacquing for his license,
 registration, and proof of no-fault insurance. Pacquing replied
 that he did not have picture identification but that he recently
 received a citation for the same violation. Pacquing presented
 Officer Danielson with the March 23, 2008, criminal citation
 
issued to him by Officer Lum.
 
Officer Lum approached Pacquing and asked him to sit in
 
the back seat of Officer Lum's patrol car. Officer Lum also
 requested that the HPD locate Complainant and bring him to the
 scene. Upon arriving at the scene, Complainant identified
 Pacquing and stated that Pacquing used to be his neighbor. 
Complainant stated that Pacquing did not have permission to use
 any of Complainant's personal information. Pacquing subsequently
 admitted to Officer Lum that his name was "Chester Pacquing." 
Pacquing stated, "I was scared because I had some warrants and
 did not want to get arrested. I used to live by [Complainant]." 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
 
The State charged Pacquing by complaint with a single
 
count of unauthorized possession of confidential personal
 
information, in violation of HRS ÿÿ 708-839.55. The complaint
 alleged that on or about March 23, 2008 to and including April 7,
 2008, which were the two dates that Pacquing was stopped by the
 police, Pacquing intentionally or knowingly possessed, without
 authorization, the confidential personal information of
 
Complainant. 
Pacquing filed a "Motion to Dismiss, or in the
 
Alternative, Motion for Bill of Particulars," in which he argued
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the complaint should be dismissed because the State did not
 
have sufficient evidence to establish the charge. Pacquing also
 filed a "Motion to Dismiss for De Minimis Violation" (De Minimis
 Motion), in which he argued that the charge should be dismissed
 as a de minimis violation under HRS ÿÿ 702-236. In connection
 with these motions, the parties did not introduce the citations
 issued to Pacquing in Complainant's name or present evidence that
 Complainant's driver's licence number or the last four digits of
 Complainant's social security number appeared on the citations. 
Instead, the motions were argued on the basis that Complainant's
 name, birth date, and street address constituted Complainant's
 confidential personal information that Pacquing possessed without
 authorization. 
The Circuit Court denied Pacquing's Motion to Dismiss,
 
or in the Alternative, Motion for Bill of Particulars, concluding
 
that Pacquing's actions fell within the conduct prohibited by HRS
 ÿÿ 708-839.55 and that Pacquing had not demonstrated his
 entitlement to a bill of particulars. The Circuit Court granted
 Pacquing's De Minimis Motion and issued the De Minimis Dismissal
 Order. In granting the De Minimis Motion, the Circuit Court
 dismissed the complaint without prejudice to the State re­charging Pacquing with the offense of unsworn falsification to
 authorities under HRS ÿÿ 710-1063(1)(b) within 90 days of the
 filing of the De Minimis Dismissal Order. Otherwise, the
 Complaint was dismissed with prejudice. The State did not re­charge Pacquing with unsworn falsification to authorities and
 instead appealed the Circuit Court's De Minimis Dismissal Order.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
A.
 
Pacquing was charged with violating HRS ÿÿ 708-839.55,
 
which provides in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized
possession of confidential personal information if that
person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without
authorization, any confidential personal information of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
another in any form, including but not limited to mail,
physical documents, identification cards, or information
stored in digital form.
 
For purposes of HRS ÿÿ 708-839.55, the term
 
"confidential personal information" is defined as follows:
 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest,
including but not limited to a driver's license number, a
social security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, a bank account number, a password or
other information that is used for accessing information, or
any other name, number, or code that is used, alone or in
conjunction with other information, to confirm the identity
of a person.
 
HRS ÿÿ 708-800 (Supp. 2010).
 
B.
 
The State argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in granting Pacquing's motion to dismiss the charge
 
against Pacquing for unauthorized possession of confidential
 personal information as a de minimis infraction. We review a
 trial court's decision to dismiss a prosecution as de minimis
 under HRS ÿÿ 702-236 for abuse of discretion. State v. Rapozo ,
 
123 Hawai» i 329, 332, 235 P.3d 325, 336 (2010). 
HRS ÿÿ 702-236 provides in pertinent part:
 
(1) The court may dismiss a prosecution if, having
regard to the nature of the conduct alleged and the nature
of the attendant circumstances, it finds that the
defendant's conduct:
 
(a)	 Was within a customary license or tolerance, which was
not expressly refused by the person whose interest was
infringed and which is not inconsistent with the
purpose of the law defining the offense; or 
(b)	 Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense
or did so only to an extent too trivial to warrant the
condemnation of conviction; or 
(c)	 Presents such other extenuations that it cannot
 
reasonably be regarded as envisaged by the legislature
in forbidding the offense. 
C.
 
The Hawai» i Supreme Court has held that before a trial 
court can properly exercise its discretion in applying HRS ÿÿ 702­
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
236, it should be presented with
 
all of the relevant facts bearing upon the defendant's
conduct and the nature of the attendant circumstances
 
regarding the commission of the offense . . . . Such
 
a disclosure would then enable the [trial court] to
consider all of the facts on this issue, so that [it]
can intelligently exercise a sound discretion,
consistent with the public interest, whether to grant
the dismissal of a criminal case.
 
Rapozo, 123 Hawai» i at 343-44, 235 P.3d at 339-40 (emphasis in 
original; brackets in original omitted) (quoting State v. Park , 
55 Haw. 610, 616-17, 525 P.2d 586, 591 (1974)). In addition, the 
trial court should consider a number of factors that were outlined by the supreme court in Park  (the "Park factors"), 
including: 
(1) the background, experience and character of the
defendant; (2) knowledge on the part of the defendant of the
consequences of the act; (3) the circumstances surrounding
the offense; (4) the harm or evil caused or threatened by
the offense; (5) the probable impact of the offense on the
community; (6) the seriousness of the punishment; (7) the
mitigating circumstances; (8) possible improper motives of
the complainant or prosecutor; (9) "any other data which may
reveal the nature and degree of the culpability in the
offense committed by each defendant." 
Rapozo, 123 Hawai» i at 344, 235 P.3d at 340 (brackets omitted) 
(quoting and citing Park, 55 Haw. at 617, 525 P.2d at 591). 
In Rapozo, the Hawai» i Supreme Court stated that "it is 
the defendant's burden to place 'all' of the relevant attendant 
circumstances before the trial court, and to establish why dismissal [of the charge as a de minimis infraction] is warranted in light of those circumstances." Rapozo, 123 Hawai» i at 331, 
235 P.3d at 327. The supreme court further stated that "[i]n order to properly exercise its discretion under HRS ÿÿ 702-236, the trial court must consider all the relevant surrounding circumstances." Id. at 347, 235 P.3d at 343. The supreme court 
held that Rapozo's failure to meet her burden of placing all the relevant circumstances before the trial court meant that the trial court's order dismissing the charge as a de minimis infraction must be vacated. Id. at 331, 343-49, 235 P.3d at 327, 
339-45. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
In deciding Pacquing's De Minimis Motion, the Circuit
 
Court was not presented with the testimony from the preliminary
 
hearing held on the complaint against Pacquing. The preliminary
 hearing was held before a different judge than the judge who
 presided over the De Minimis Motion. At the preliminary hearing,
 Officer Lum testified that when he issued the citations to
 Pacquing on March 23, 2008, he included Complainant's driver's
 license number and the last four digits of Complainant's social
 security number on the citations. However, neither Pacquing nor
 the State cited this testimony in connection with Pacquing's De
 Minimis Motion. In addition, neither party introduced the
 citations issued to Pacquing in Complainant's name. Instead, the
 
parties argued the De Minimis Motion on the basis that
 Complainant's name, birth date, and street address constituted
 Complainant's confidential personal information that Pacquing
 possessed and used without authorization.
 
Evidence that Pacquing possessed and used Complainant's
 
driver's license number and the last four digits of Complainant's
 social security number constitutes evidence of relevant
 circumstances pertaining to the charged offense. If the Circuit
 Court had considered such evidence, it may have affected the
 Circuit Court's analysis. For example, Pacquing argues that
 because information regarding a person's name, birth date, and
 address is easily obtainable through lawful means, Complainant
 did not have a significant privacy interest in such information. 
The same argument would not apply to Complainant's driver's
 
license number or the last four digits of Complainant's social
 security number. 
In Rapozo , the Hawai» i Supreme Court held that the 
trial court should be presented with and must consider all the relevant surrounding circumstances in order to properly exercise 
its discretion under HRS ÿÿ 702-236. Rapozo , 123 Hawai» i at 343­
44, 347, 235 P.3d at 339-40, 343. It is the defendant's burden to place all the relevant attendant circumstances before the 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI » I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial court. Id. at 331, 235 P.3d at 327. Because the trial
 
court in 
Rapozo had failed to consider all the relevant
 
circumstances, the supreme court held that the trial court's
 
order dismissing the charge as a de minimis infraction must be
 vacated, and the supreme court remanded the case to the trial
 court for further proceedings. 
In light of Rapozo , we vacate the Circuit Court's De 
Minimis Dismissal Order and remand the case to permit the Circuit Court to consider all the relevant circumstances. On remand, "all of the relevant facts bearing upon [Pacquing's] conduct and the nature of the attendant circumstances regarding the commission of the offense" should be presented to the Circuit Court and made part of the record. See Rapozo, 123 Hawai» i at 
343-44, 235 P.3d at 339-40 (emphasis omitted). In addition, the 
Circuit Court should address and evaluate the Park factors in light of all the relevant circumstances in rendering its decision. 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's De Minimis Dismissal
 
Order, and we remand the case for further proceeding consistent
 with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai» i, January 25, 2012. 
Brian R. Vincent 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Craig Jerome
(James S. Tabe on the brief)
Deputy Public Defenders
for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 