FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
FREDDY NOBRIGA ENTERPRISES, INC., and
ALFRED NOBRIGA, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v.
STATE OF HAWAI' I, DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS,
MICAH KANE and LINDA CHINN, Defendants-Appellees
 
NO. 28805
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 03-1-0217)
 
JANUARY 30, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
This appeal stems from a dispute over cattle on the 
Island of Hawai
'i. Plaintiffs-Appellants Freddy Nobriga 
Enterprises, Inc. and Alfred Nobriga (collectively, Nobriga) 
appeal from the September 13, 2007 Final Judgment of the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court) dismissing all 
claims.1 In an order filed January 20, 2005, the Circuit Court 
1/
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
granted summary judgment against Nobriga, and in favor of 
Defendants-Appellees State of Hawai' i, Department of Hawaiian 
Home Lands (DHHL), Micah Kane (Kane), and Linda Chinn (Chinn) 
(collectively referred to as Defendants), on Nobriga's claims of 
conversion (Count III), intentional infliction of emotional 
distress (Count IV), civil conspiracy (Count VI), breach of 
contract/unjust enrichment (Count VIII), unconstitutional taking 
and denial of due process in violation of the Hawai' i 
Constitution (Count I), and punitive damages (Count VII). All remaining claims, including Nobriga's claims for trespass (Count 
II) and negligence (Count V) were dismissed by stipulation on 
September 13, 2007. 
On appeal, Nobriga contends that the Circuit Court
 
erred in: (1) granting summary judgment sua sponte with respect
 
to Nobriga's claim for conversion, which is set forth in Count
 
III of the First Amended Complaint; (2) granting Defendants'
 
motion for summary judgment and dismissing Counts I, IV, VI and
 
VII of the First Amended Complaint; and (3) refusing to consider
 
the deposition testimony submitted by Nobriga in opposition to
 
Defendants' motion.
 
As discussed below, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
did not err in refusing to consider Nobriga's unsworn,
 
unauthenticated deposition excerpts. However, the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting summary judgment on the conversion claim with
 
regard to DHHL. It also erred in granting summary judgment on
 
Nobriga's due process claim. Accordingly, we vacate its order
 
and judgment with regard to those claims, and remand for further
 
proceedings. In all other respects, we affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
The dispute between the parties arises from DHHL's
 
roundup and sale of roughly 115 head of Nobriga's cattle. Most
 
of the essential facts, as follows, are not in dispute.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DHHL manages several thousand acres of pastoral land in 
the Humuula-Piihonua area on the Island of Hawai' i. For many 
years, DHHL leased the land for income generation. In September 
of 1977, DHHL issued General Lease (GL) No. 199 to Parker Ranch. 
The lease covered approximately 5,000 acres of Hawaiian Home 
Lands in the Humuula area, and was set to expire on August 31, 
2002. That same month, DHHL issued GL No. 200 to Parker Ranch. 
This lease covered approximately 7,500 acres of Hawaiian Home 
Lands adjacent to GL 199, and it was also set to expire on August 
31, 2002. Parker Ranch later assigned GL 199 and subleased GL 
2
200 to Nobriga,  with DHHL's consent. 
In the late 1990s, DHHL adopted a master plan for the
 
Humuula-Piihonua area with the ultimate goal of converting the
 land to homesteads for its beneficiaries. 
It also pursued plans
 
for koa reforestation and gorse elimination. Gorse, a noxious
 weed, had been a long-standing problem in the area. Because
 
sunlight deprivation was apparently the best strategy for
 
eliminating it, DHHL began planting mamane and pine tree
 
seedlings. However, cattle stifled the seedlings' growth by
 
trampling and grazing on them. DHHL therefore structured its
 
planting windows around the expiration of the general leases. 
The expiration of Nobriga's leases roughly coincided with DHHL's
 
plans to convert the land to homestead use and expand its
 
planting projects. 
DHHL later granted Nobriga a one-year extension of GL
 
199. It demanded that Nobriga remove the remnants of his herd
 
that were trespassing on land previously encumbered by GL 200,
 which had since expired. Nobriga failed to remove all of those
 
cattle. 
In March of 2003, a protracted drought threatened
 
Nobriga's main herd on GL 199 lands. Nobriga urgently requested
 
2/
 Alfred "Freddy" Nobriga is the president and principal owner of
Freddy Nobriga Enterprises, Inc. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permission from DHHL to relocate the herd to a different parcel
 
in the Humuula area. That parcel abutted Saddle Road, which
 
Nobriga could use to truck in water for the cattle. It appears
 
that the parties reached an agreement after about a month of
 
negotiations. On June 16, 2003, DHHL executed Revocable Permit
 
(RP) No. 287, granting Nobriga access to about 5,000 acres next
 
to Saddle Road. In exchange, Nobriga posted a $100,000 bond,
 
prematurely terminated GL 199, and agreed that any cattle
 
remaining on GLs 199 or 200 lands after May 15, 2003 would become
 
the property of DHHL. 
DHHL subsequently extended the forfeiture deadline four
 
more times. The final deadline was July 26, 2003. By that time,
 
Nobriga had removed substantially all of his cattle from the
 
parcels subject to GLs 199 and 200. However, several head of
 
cattle apparently escaped while being relocated from GLs 199 and
 
200 lands to the RP 287 parcel. Others also subsequently escaped
 
from RP 287 lands. Those cattle remained in the areas
 
surrounding RP 287 lands, which were covered by GLs 155 and 201. 
In the meantime, DHHL entered into a month-to-month
 
agreement with Sonny Keakealani (Keakealani) to remove cattle
 
from certain Hawaiian Home Lands parcels. On July 21, 2003, DHHL
 
orally notified Nobriga of the upcoming roundups. Over the
 
weekends of July 27 and August 2, 2003, Keakealani conducted
 
roundups on GL 201, the Humuula and Piihonua parcel surrounding
 
RP 287. He rounded up and sold 181 head of cattle. Of that sum, 
at least 115 belonged to Nobriga. 
Nobriga filed a First Amended Complaint on January 13, 
2004. He raised eight counts: (1) unconstitutional taking and 
denial of due process in violation of the Hawai' i Constitution; 
(2) trespass; (3) conversion; (4) intentional infliction of
 emotional distress; (5) negligence; (6) civil conspiracy; (7)
 
punitive damages; and (8) breach of contract/unjust enrichment. 
DHHL filed counterclaims alleging trespass, conversion, and
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
breach of contract. On November 22, 2004, DHHL filed a motion to
 
dismiss or, in the alternative, for partial summary judgment on
 
Nobriga's counts I, IV, VI, VII, and VIII. On January 20, 2005,
 
the Circuit Court granted summary judgment on those counts and
 
granted summary judgment on count III sua sponte. All remaining
 
claims and counterclaims were dismissed by stipulation on
 
September 13, 2007. Nobriga filed a timely notice of appeal on
 
October 15, 2007.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Nobriga raises three points of error, contending that
 
the Circuit Court erred in: (1) granting summary judgment sua
 
sponte with respect to Nobriga's claim for conversion, which is
 
set forth in Count III of the First Amended Complaint; (2)
 
granting Defendants' motion for summary judgment and dismissing
 
Counts I, IV, VI and VII of the First Amended Complaint; and (3)
 
refusing to consider the deposition testimony submitted by
 
Nobriga in opposition to Defendants' motion.
 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. 
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai' i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 
71 (2004)). 
Accordingly,
 
[o]n appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed under
the same standard applied by the circuit courts. Summary
judgment is proper where the moving party demonstrates that
there are no genuine issues of material fact and it is
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. In other words,
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.
 
Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai' i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 267 (1996). 
It is well settled that a motion for summary judgment
 
may be decided "only on the basis of admissible evidence." 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Takaki v. Allied Mach. Corp., 87 Hawai' i 57, 69, 951 P.2d 507, 
519 (1998). "To be admissible, documents must be authenticated 
by and attached to an affidavit that meets the requirements of 
[Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e)] and the affiant 
must be a person through whom the exhibits could be admitted into evidence." Id. (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) 
(quoting 10A C. Wright, A. Miller & M. Kane, Federal Practice & 
Procedure: Civil § 2722, at 58-60 (2d ed. 1983)). 
In State v. West, 95 Hawai' i 452, 24 P.3d 648 (2001), 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court stated: 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to trial
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence,depending on the requirements of the particular rule ofevidence at issue. When application of a particularevidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, theproper standard for appellate review is the right/wrongstandard. However, the traditional abuse of discretionstandard should be applied in the case of those rules ofevidence that require a "judgment call" on the part of thetrial court. 
Id. at 456-57, 24 P.3d at 652-53 (quoting Kealoha v. County of
 
Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319-20, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993)). Here,
 
the trial court's refusal to consider unauthenticated deposition
 
transcripts, which transcripts were objected to by the opposing
 
party, is reviewed under the right/wrong standard.
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Nobriga's points of error as follows:
 
A. Nobriga's Conversion Claim
 Nobriga maintains that the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting summary judgment on Count III, the conversion claim, in
 contravention of the undisputed facts. With respect to the
 
claims against DHHL, we agree.
 
First, however, we address the Circuit Court's
 
conclusion that Kane and Chinn were "entitled to qualified
 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
immunity for any and all alleged acts performed as complained of
 
in Plaintiffs' First Amended Complaint." It granted summary
 
judgment in their favor on that basis. As set forth below in
 
conjunction with the discussion of Counts IV, VI, and VII, we
 
conclude that Defendants Kane and Chinn are entitled to qualified
 
immunity with respect to the tort claims asserted against them. 
As a result, the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary
 
judgment in their favor on Count III, the conversion claim.
 
The Circuit Court also granted summary judgment in 
favor of DHHL on the conversion claim, apparently concluding that 
summary judgment was appropriate because Nobriga failed to 
provide evidence controverting Defendants' sworn statements and 
certified documents, even though those statements and documents 
were not offered to support summary judgment on Count III. A 
party seeking summary judgment, however, bears an initial burden 
of showing that (1) there is no genuine issue of material fact, 
and (2) he or she is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of 
law. Pioneer Mill Co., Ltd. v. Dow, 90 Hawai' i 289, 296, 978 
P.2d 727, 734 (1999). Only when this burden is satisfied must the opposing party provide affidavits or specific evidence in 
rebuttal. Id.; Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 56, 65, 828 P.2d 
286, 292 (App. 1991). 
Although the essential facts were largely undisputed,
 
the record before the court did not establish that DHHL was
 entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law on Count III. 
Both parties agree that DHHL rounded up and sold cattle found on
 
DHHL lands subject to GL 201, not on the lands covered by the
 
forfeiture provision contained in RP 287. The Circuit Court's
 
finding that DHHL owned the cattle found on GLs 199 and 200 lands
 
therefore bears no relation to the conversion claim. It is
 
undisputed that the Defendants had no contractual claim of
 
ownership over the cattle they rounded up from GL 201 lands,
 
which are the subject of this dispute. 
7
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The sole evidence tending to establish DHHL's ownership
 
is the bare assertion of Chinn in her affidavit supporting
 
summary judgment on the other counts. However, the reasonable
 
inferences arising from these assertions favor Nobriga.
 
First, Chinn's affidavit alleges that DHHL owned the cattle as a
 
result of the forfeiture provision in RP 287. However, that
 
provision did not cover the lands from which the cattle were
 
taken. It was therefore inapplicable to the cattle at issue. 
Chinn's affidavit further alleges that DHHL owned the cattle
 
pursuant to HRS § 142-44 (1993).3 This statute concerns unmarked
 
or unbranded cattle over twelve years of age. When such cattle
 are running wild on another's land, the landowner may lay a valid
 
claim of ownership over them. Id. However, DHHL presented no
 
evidence that the cattle were unbranded or unmarked. To the
 contrary, it determined that 115 of the cattle belonged to
 
Nobriga, raising the inference that those cattle were branded or
 
marked. Finally, the affidavit asserts that DHHL owned "former
 
Parker Ranch cattle" pursuant to an agreement with Parker Ranch. 
Again, the undisputed facts indicate that at least 115 cattle
 
were not former Parker Ranch cattle, but rather belonged to
 
Nobriga. Therefore, we cannot conclude that there were no
 
genuine issues of material fact and that DHHL was entitled to
 
judgment as a matter of law, on the grounds stated by the Circuit
 
Court. 
The Circuit Court also concluded that Nobriga's claim
 
"fail[ed] to meet the essential elements of the cause of action."
 
Yet the undisputed facts fit the elements of conversion. 
Conversion encompasses the following acts: "(1) A taking from
 
3/
 HRS § 142-44 provides, in its entirety:
 
All cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, sheep, goats, and swine,
over twelve months of age, not marked or branded, which may
be running wild at any time on any lands in the State, shall
belong to and be the property of the owners or lessees of
the lands on which the animals are then running.
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the owner without his consent; (2) an unwarranted assumption of
 
ownership; (3) an illegal use or abuse of the chattel; and (4) a
 
wrongful detention after demand." Tsuru v. Bayer, 25 Haw. 693,
 
696 (1920). The evidence presented established a prima facie
 
case that DHHL committed acts (1) and (2) of this definition by
 
rounding up and selling Nobriga's cattle without his consent. 
DHHL emphasizes that it mistakenly believed its actions were
 
lawful. However, conversion does not require wrongful intent. 
18A Am. Jur. 2d Conversion § 3 (2010); Federal Ins. Co. v. Fries,
 
355 N.Y.S.2d 741, 744 (N.Y.City Civ. Ct. 1974). "[T]he
 
defendant's knowledge, intent, motive, mistake, and good faith
 
are generally irrelevant." Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S.
 
246, 253 (1952). "So long as he [or she] intends to deal with
 the property in a way which is in fact inconsistent with the
 
plaintiff's right, he [or she] is a converter." Fries, 355
 
N.Y.S.2d at 744. Thus, DHHL's mistaken belief is irrelevant. 
Finally, the Circuit Court noted that DHHL "acknowledged [its]
 
mistake and offered Plaintiff compensation for the sale of its
 
trespassing cattle." An offer to compensate after-the-fact does
 
not undo the underlying act of conversion. Conversion may result
 
from any wrongful exertion of dominion over another's property in
 
denial or inconsistent with the owner's rights therein, even for
 
an indefinite period of time. Tsuru, 25 Haw. at 697. A
 
subsequent return of the property or a substitute for it may
 mitigate damages, but it does not obliterate the conversion
 
itself. Id. at 698.
 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of DHHL on the
 
conversion claim set forth in Count III.
4
 
4/
 On appeal, DHHL argues that because defendants Kane and Chinn are
entitled to qualified immunity, DHHL must also be immune under the doctrine of
respondeat superior. In Hulsman v. Hemmeter Dev. Corp., 65 Haw. 58, 61-62,
647 P.2d 713, 717 (1982), the supreme court held that where a plaintiff seeks
(continued...)
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. Nobriga's Due Process and Tort Claims
 
Nobriga argues that the Circuit Court erred in granting
 
summary judgment on the civil rights claims in Count I and the
 tort claims in Counts IV, V, and VI. The Circuit Court granted
 
judgment as a matter of law in favor of Chinn and Kane, on all
 
claims, on the grounds that "they did not act maliciously towards
 
[Nobriga] and [were] not [motivated] by an otherwise improper
 
purpose and are entitled to qualified immunity to any and all
 
alleged acts performed as complained of in [the] First Amended
 
Complaint." We agree with the Circuit Court's qualified immunity
 
analysis and conclusion with respect to Nobriga's tort claims,
 
but not with respect to the civil rights claims.
 
1. Qualified Immunity and the Tort Claims
 
We consider the Circuit Court's entry of summary
 
judgment on Counts IV (intentional infliction of emotional
 distress or disturbance), VI (civil conspiracy), and VII
 
(punitive damages) on the basis of qualified immunity. As a
 
threshold matter, the parties agree that Chinn and Kane acted at
 
all times in their official capacities. To hold a public
 
official liable for torts committed in his or her official
 
capacity, the plaintiff must prove that the official "was
 
motivated by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose." 
Medeiros v. Kondo, 55 Haw. 499, 504, 522 P.2d 1269, 1272 (1974). 
Nobriga does not argue that Chinn and/or Kane were motivated by
 
an improper purpose; instead, he alleges that they acted with
 
malice. However, he failed to allege malice in the pleadings or
 
in conjunction with any admissible evidence in opposition to
 
summary judgment.
 
4/(...continued)
to impose liability on the State under the doctrine of 
respondeat superior,
that same theory precludes holding the State liable where its employees are
immune. Here, however, Nobriga has not premised DHHL's liability upon the
theory of respondeat superior. Instead, he raised the conversion claim
directly against DHHL. Hulsman is therefore inapplicable.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nobriga contends that various facts support a finding
 
of malice. First, he points to the Defendants' alleged failure
 
to promptly accommodate his urgent request to relocate his cattle
 
during the drought. The delay itself, however, is insufficient
 
to support a finding of malice. Nobriga failed to adduce any
 
evidence refuting the Defendants' valid reasons for the delay. 
His request to utilize a new portion of DHHL land implicated
 
numerous considerations: the ongoing planting projects, the
 
shift in land use goals from income generation to homestead use,
 
and the negotiation of terms for the permit, among others. 
Certainly the defendants had no duty, contractual or otherwise,
 
to immediately grant his request without working through those
 
considerations. Defendants spent several weeks negotiating with
 
Nobriga to reach a mutually agreeable solution. They ultimately
 
granted his request and four extensions, further undermining his
 
claim of malice.
 
Second, Nobriga references Defendants' refusal to allow
 
him to drive his cattle across lands subject to Revocable Permit
 
RP 155. Here again, Defendants had no duty to allow him any
 
access to RP 155 lands. As with RP 287, the record shows that
 
proper considerations informed their decision. Nobriga
 
acknowledges that Defendants' ultimate motive in denying his
 
request was to prevent his cattle from commingling with those of
 
a former tenant. The cattle on the RP 155 lands were the subject
 
of ongoing settlement negotiations with another lessee. 
Certainly, Defendants' desire to preserve those cattle in their
 
status quo was not an improper purpose. 
Nobriga also highlights Defendants' refusal to allow
 
him to enter the lands surrounding RP 287 lands to recover his
 
stray cattle. This fact alone does not lead to a reasonable
 
inference of malice, and Nobriga did not provide any evidence, in
 
opposition to summary judgment, supporting his claim that their
 
motives were malicious. 
11
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, the undisputed facts support the conclusion 
that the roundups were not motivated by malice. Defendants 
mistakenly believed they had the authority to round up and sell 
trespassing cattle. Such a mistake does not rise to the level of 
recklessness, ill will, or wickedness of heart necessary for 
malice. See Awakuni v. Awana, 115 Hawai' i 126, 141, 165 P.3d 
1027, 1042 (2007). Throughout their dealings with Nobriga, Defendants were motivated by a proper purpose: to remove the 
cattle in preparation for the planting projects associated with 
DHHL's master plan for the area. On appeal, Nobriga makes no 
separate argument of error concerning the entry of judgment in 
favor of DHHL on Counts IV, VI, and VII.
5 
Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to
 
Nobriga, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
granting summary judgment as to Counts IV, VI, and VII.
 
2. Qualified Immunity and the Constitutional Claims
 
Nobriga argues that the same analysis does not apply to
 
Nobriga's takings and due process claims and that the Circuit
 Court applied the wrong standard in determining that Kane and
 
Chinn were entitled to qualified immunity on the constitutional
 
claims set forth in Count I. Nobriga makes no factual or legal
 
argument, however, supporting a "takings claim" against Kane and
 
Chinn in their individual capacity and we find none. Therefore,
 
we examine the Circuit Court's conclusion that Kane and Chinn
 
were entitled to summary judgment with respect to alleged due
 
process violations on the grounds that "they did not act
 
maliciously towards [Nobriga] and [were] not [motivated] by an
 
otherwise improper purpose and are entitled to qualified immunity
 
5/
 Although not identified as a point of error, Nobriga argues that
the Circuit Court erred in entering summary judgment on Count VIII, the breach
of contract claim. However, Nobriga points to no evidence in the record
raising a genuine issue of material fact regarding the Circuit Court's
conclusion that this claim is moot because the DHHL in fact paid Nobriga the
one-third of the performance bond that was requested in this count.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to any and all alleged acts performed as complained of in [the]
 
First Amended Complaint."
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has recognized two different 
standards of qualified immunity for nonjudicial public officials. 
For tort claims, the plaintiff has the burden of proving, by 
clear and convincing evidence, that the public official "was 
motivated by malice and not by an otherwise proper purpose." 
Medeiros, 55 Haw. at 504, 522 P.2d at 1272. However, for claims 
alleging civil rights violations, Hawai' i courts have looked to 
the qualified immunity standard applicable to claims brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Brown v. Thompson, 91 Hawai' i 1, 14, 979 
P.2d 586, 599 (1999) (quoting Pele Defense Fund v. Paty, 73 Haw. 578, 595, 837 P.2d 1247, 1259 (1992), cert. denied, 507 U.S. 918 
(1993)). Under that standard, public officials in their 
individual capacities are "shielded from liability for civil 
damages insofar as their conduct does not violate clearly 
established statutory or constitutional rights of which a 
reasonable person would have known." Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 
U.S. 800, 818 (1982). Courts must analyze claims of qualified
 immunity under two prongs: (1) whether the facts show a violation
 
of a constitutional right; and (2) if the first step is
 
satisfied, whether that right was clearly established at the time
 
of the violation. Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 232 (2009)
 
(citations omitted). In conducting this analysis, we must view
 the facts in the light most favorable to Nobriga and draw all
 
reasonable inferences in his favor. Saucier v. Katz, 533 U.S.
 
194, 201 (2001), abrogated on other grounds by Pearson, 533 U.S.
 at 236.
 
Nobriga alleges that Chinn and Kane violated his right
 
to due process. "The basic elements of procedural due process of
 
law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful
 
time and in a meaningful manner before governmental deprivation
 
of a significant property interest." Sandy Beach Defense Fund v.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
City Council of City and County of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361, 378,
 
773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989). In determining the specific procedures
 
necessary to satisfy due process, we must balance several
 
factors: "(1) the private interest which will be affected; (2)
 
the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the
 
procedures actually used, and the probable value, if any, of
 
additional or alternative procedural safeguards; and (3) the
 
governmental interest, including the burden that additional
 
procedural safeguards would entail." Id.
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has discussed the contours of 
procedural due process in the analogous context of impounding a 
derelict vessel. Brown, 91 Hawai' i 1, 979 P.2d 586. In Brown, 
the State impounded the plaintiff's vessels pursuant to statutory authority. Id. at 4-7, 979 P.2d at 589-92. The State provided 
the plaintiff with prior written notice. Id. at 10, 979 P.2d at 
595. However, given the property interests at stake, the court
 
held that this alone was insufficient to meet the requirements of
 due process. Id. at 12-13, 979 P.2d at 597-98. It held that
 
before impounding the vessels, the state was required to provide
 more specific notice "inform[ing] affected parties of the action
 
about to be taken against them as well as of procedures available
 
for challenging that action." Id. at 10, 979 P.2d at 595. 
Additionally, it held that the State "must provide a hearing to
 owners of derelict vessels as soon as reasonably possible
 
following a vessel's impoundment." Id. at 12, 979 P.2d at 597.
 
Here, Defendants' actions in impounding Nobriga's
 
cattle are parallel to the State's impounding of derelict vessels
 
in Brown. Just as the State acted pursuant to statutory
 
authority in Brown, it appears that Defendants here mistakenly
 
believed they possessed legal authority to confiscate and sell
 
the trespassing cattle. As in Brown, Defendants did not merely
 
remove the cattle for a time. Instead, they permanently deprived
 
Nobriga of a significant property interest. Given the weight of
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15private interests at stake, the risk of erroneous deprivation,
and the governmental interests, the procedural requirements of
Brown are applicable in this case.  Nobriga was entitled to
adequate prior notice and an opportunity to be heard.  Brown, 91
Hawai#i at 12, 979 P.2d at 597.
Defendants provided Nobriga with prior oral notice that
roundups would soon be taking place.6  Under Brown, however, this
notice was inadequate.  Nobriga was entitled to prior written
notice stating with precision the actions to be taken and
procedures available for challenging them.  Id. at 12, 979 P.2d
at 597.  
Although Defendants ultimately offered to compensate
Nobriga, their offer came only after the cattle had already been
sold.  Moreover, their change of heart did not negate the
deliberate deprivation that occurred.  See Daniels v. Williams,
474 U.S. 327, 331 (1986) (recognizing that officials' actions
need only be "deliberate" under 18 U.S.C. § 1983).
We therefore conclude that the evidence before the
Circuit Court made out a claim that the Defendants violated
Nobriga's right to procedural due process.
Having determined that the facts make out a violation
of Nobriga's constitutional right, we now turn to whether the
right was clearly established.  Pearson, 555 U.S. at 232. 
Qualified immunity protects officials whose "actions could
reasonably have been thought consistent with the rights they are
alleged to have violated."  Anderson v. Creighton,  483 U.S. 635,
638 (1987).  This is an objective standard that pertains to the
law at the time the action was taken.  Id.  The unlawfulness of
the action must have been apparent.  Id. at 640.  However, it is
6/In its memorandum in support of its motion for summary judgment,
Defendants asserted they provided Nobriga with oral and written notice.  
However, the evidence in the record indicates they only provided him with oral
notice. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not necessary for the "very action in question" to have been
 
previously held unlawful. Id.
 
Although this standard provides "ample room for 
mistaken judgments," it protects only "reasonable error." Brown, 
91 Hawai' i at 16, 979 P.2d at 601 (emphasis added) (quoting 
Hunter v. Bryant, 502 U.S. 224, 229 (1991)). If an official 
"knew or should have known" that his or her action violated a 
constitutional norm, immunity is unavailable. Procunier v. 
Navarette, 434 U.S. 555, 562 (1978) (emphasis added). 
In assessing whether a right was "clearly established,"
 
we must frame the inquiry with particularity. Anderson, 483 U.S.
 
at 639-40. We must evaluate the right "in light of the specific
 
context of the case, not as a broad general proposition." 
Saucier, 533 U.S. at 201. The question so framed is whether Kane
 
and Chinn violated a clearly established procedural due process
 
right by depriving Nobriga of his trespassing cattle without
 
adequate prior notice or an opportunity to be heard.
 
Although we have found no Hawai' i case law regarding 
the confiscation of trespassing cattle, these facts closely 
correspond to cases involving the state's impoundment of personal 
property. Brown is therefore instructive. In that case, the 
State impounded the plaintiffs' watercraft in contravention of the requirements of due process. 91 Hawai' i at 10, 12-13, 979 
P.2d at 595, 597-98. The court held that the state's actions were nonetheless reasonable because the law regarding due process 
requirements for impounding derelict vessels had not been clearly 
established. Id. at 15, 979 P.2d at 600. At that time, no case 
law or statutes delineated the due process requirements for impounding property. Id. The plaintiff could not point to any 
"closely corresponding factual and legal precedent." Id. 
(internal quotation marks omitted). The court recognized that 
"[h]ad there been a clearly established body of case law 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding the right to a hearing," immunity would not have been
 
available. Id.
 
In the instant case, Brown had been decided well before
 
Defendants conducted the roundups. It should have been readily
 
apparent that the State cannot impound property, including
 
cattle, absent the due process requirements outlined in Brown. 
Moreover, in Brown, the governing statute was silent as to any
 
requirements for a hearing. Id. Here, by contrast, HRS §§ 142­
71 (1993) and 142-99 (1993) set forth procedural requirements for
 impounding cattle. Although broader in scope than the statutes
 
at issue in Brown, these statutes are directly applicable. 
Section 142-71 allows landowners to impound trespassing cattle
 
only if the owner refuses to pay the trespassing fees assessed or
 
if the owner is unknown.
7 Section 142-99 requires "any person
 
who exerts control over a lost animal" to "immediately notify the
 owner of the animal, if known."
8 No case law elaborates on these
 
provisions, but none is necessary to elucidate their
 straightforward requirements. Defendants' actions were in direct
 
contravention of the statutes' plain language. See Wong v. City
 
7/
 HRS § 142-71 provides:
 
§ 142-71. Procedure to recover animals; owner notified
before impounding.  Where any animals are taken up for
trespass, the owner, if known, shall be immediately
notified, if reasonably practicable, of the fact, and of the
amount of damage and trespass fees claimed, and if the owner
refuses or fails to pay the legal charges, or in case the
owner is unknown, then the animals shall be impounded
forthwith.
 
8/
 HRS § 142-99 provides, in part:
 
(a) Except as otherwise provided in section 143-10
[regarding stray dogs], any person who exerts control over a
lost animal shall immediately notify the owner of the
animal, if known, or an animal control officer of the local
humane society chapter of the county in which the animal is
found and release the animal to the owner, animal control
officer, or humane society chapter. For purposes of this
section, “exert control” means any act which constrains an
animal including leashing, chaining, or otherwise confining
an animal.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and County of Honolulu, 333 F. Supp. 2d 942, 956 n.29 (2004)
 
(noting that state actor's conduct would be unreasonable if in
 
direct contravention of statutory requirements). Defendants
 
Chinn and Kane should have known their actions violated statutory
 
requirements and due process. As a result, the Circuit Court
 
erred in concluding they were entitled to qualified immunity.
 
We therefore conclude that the individual Defendants
 
are not entitled to qualified immunity as to the due process
 
claim of Count I, and no other grounds in favor of summary
 
judgment having been presented, the Circuit Court erred in
 
granting summary judgment on that claim.
 
3. Nobriga's Takings Claim against DHHL
 
Thus, we turn to the Circuit Court's granting of 
summary judgment in favor of Defendants on Nobriga's claim that DHHL effected an unconstitutional taking. The Fifth Amendment of 
the United States Constitution, as well as Section 20, Article I 
of the Hawai' i State Constitution, prohibits the State from 
taking private property absent a public purpose and just compensation. Had Defendants complied with the statutory 
provisions for impounding cattle, their "taking" would have been 
a "lawful exercise of police power" unencumbered by the just 
compensation requirement. Brown, 91 Hawai' i at 13, 979 P.2d at 
598. Instead, Defendants acted pursuant to a mistaken belief
 
that they had legal authority to impound the cattle. Despite
 
this mistake, we must examine the purpose of the taking, "not its
 
mechanics." Kelo City of New London, Conn., 545 U.S. 469, 482
 
(2005) (quoting Hawaii Housing Auth. v. Midkiff, 467 U.S. 229,
 244 (1984)). 
The uncontested facts support the conclusion that
 
Defendants' purpose in clearing out the cattle was to advance
 
DHHL's goals in proceeding with its planting projects and
 
ultimately converting the land to homestead use. This was
 
certainly a public purpose sufficient to justify a taking. See
 
18
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Midkiff, 467 U.S. at 245 (law condemning real property and
 
transferring it to tenants satisfied public purpose requirement).
 
After the cattle had been sold, Defendants offered to 
compensate Nobriga. Although Nobriga disputed the value of the 
compensation, Defendants outlined a procedure for substantiating 
his claim. Nobriga failed to take advantage of that procedure. 
In opposing summary judgment, Nobriga did not produce any 
evidence that the proffered compensation or the procedure for 
verifying the value of the cattle were inadequate. There was no 
genuine issue of material fact on this issue. Nobriga failed to 
establish that the Defendants' actions violated his 
constitutional rights under the takings clause in either the 
Hawai'i Constitution or the United States Constitution. 
C. The Deposition Excerpts 
Nobriga contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
refusing to consider the unsworn deposition excerpts he offered in opposition to Defendants' partial summary judgment motion. 
Although Nobriga failed to request a transcript of the hearing on 
Defendants' motion, it otherwise appears from the record that 
Defendants objected to the admission of Nobriga's deposition 
excerpts on the grounds that they were unsworn and 
unauthenticated.  The Circuit Court therefore concluded they were 
inadmissible. See Kutcher v. Zimmerman, 87 Hawai' i 394, 398, 957 
P.2d 1076, 1081 (App. 1998) (recognizing that court may not 
consider unsworn and uncertified deposition excerpts over 
objection); Tradewind Ins. Co., Ltd. v. Stout, 85 Hawai' i 177, 
180, 938 P.2d 1196, 1199 (App. 1997) (same); Fuller v. Pacific Medical Collections, Inc., 78 Hawai' i 213, 224, 891 P.2d 300, 311 
(refusing to consider unauthenticated and unsworn documents); Wolfer v. Mut. Life Ins. Co., 3 Haw. App. 65, 68, 641 P.2d 1349, 
1352 (1982) (same); DeMund v. Lum, 1 Haw. App. 443, 445, 620 P.2d 
270, 272 (1980) (recognizing that Rule 56 requires documents to 
be sworn to or certified). The Circuit Court properly sustained 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants' objection and refused to consider the unauthenticated
 
deposition excerpts in ruling on the motion for summary judgment.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and vacate
 
in part the Circuit Court's September 13, 2007 Final Judgment. 
Consistent with this Opinion, we remand for further proceedings
 
on Nobriga's due process claim in Count I and Nobriga's
 
conversion claim against DHHL in Count III of the First Amended
 
Complaint, and affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment in all
 
other respects.
 
On the briefs:
 
Walter R. Schoettle
 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
Diane K. Taira
 
Deputy Attorney General
for Defendants-Appellees
 
20
 