 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29576
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DUSTIN CROSS and SANDI ADELE SCHNEIDERMAN,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellees, v.
THERESA ILENE HARDEN, Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellant,
and JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10; AND
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0263)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff-Appellant Theresa
 
Ilene Harden (Harden) appeals from the Judgment on Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Renewed
 
Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure as Against
 
All Defendants on Complaint Filed February 7, 2008, and for
 
Summary Judgment on Counterclaim Filed February 29, 2008, Filed
 
September 11, 2008, entered on December 12, 2008 (Judgment), in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On appeal, Harden raises three points of error: (1)
 
the Circuit Court erred in granting Plaintiffs-Appellees Dustin
 
Cross and Sandi Adele Schneiderman's (Plaintiffs') renewed motion
 
for summary judgment and decree of foreclosure because there were
 
1
 The Honorable Karen N. Blondin presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
genuine issues of material fact in dispute concerning Harden's
 
defense that Plaintiffs failed to make certain material
 
disclosures in violation of two Deposit Receipt Offer and
 
Acceptance (DROA) agreements and State law; (2) for the same
 
reasons, the Circuit Court erred in granting Plaintiffs' motion
 
for summary judgment with respect to Harden's counterclaim; and
 
(3) the Circuit Court erred by issuing insufficient findings of
 
fact in support of its conclusion.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Harden's contentions as follows:
 
(1) The Circuit Court did not err when it concluded
 
that Harden failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact in
 
opposition to Plaintiffs' renewed motion for summary judgment and
 
decree of foreclosure.
 
It is undisputed that, on or about May 1, 2006, 
Plaintiffs sold Harden two adjacent properties located at 47-235 
Okana Road (Residential Property) and 47-227 Okana Road (Vacant 
Lot) in Kaneohe, Hawai 'i. Harden purchased the Residential 
Property with cash and resold it to Donald Coley (Coley) on or 
about April 5, 2007. Harden purchased the Vacant Lot through a 
purchase money mortgage with Plaintiffs. The Vacant Lot is the 
subject of Plaintiffs' foreclosure action; the Residential 
Property is not the subject of Plaintiffs' foreclosure action 
and, therefore, alleged issues related to the Residential 
Property are not germane to Harden's defenses to the foreclosure. 
Plaintiffs' renewed summary judgment motion brought
 
forward competent evidence establishing, inter alia, the subject
 
note, mortgage, default, and notice of default. Harden's
 
opposition did not challenge this evidence, which was sufficient
 
to establish prima facie that Plaintiffs were entitled to summary
 
judgment and a decree of foreclosure. See Ocwen Federal Bank,
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
FSB v. Russell, 99 Hawai 'i 173, 184, 53 P.3d 312, 323 (App. 
2002). Instead, Harden argued that Plaintiffs failed to disclose 
material facts concerning the properties pursuant to Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 508D-15 and the terms of the DROA, and 
that the failure to disclose these facts constituted fraud in the 
inducement. 
HRS Chapter 508D applies only to the sale of
 
"residential real estate." See HRS §§ 508D-1 & 508D-2. There is
 
no evidence that the Vacant Lot was residential real estate. 
Chapter 508D did not apply to the sale of the Vacant Lot.
 
The remaining issue, therefore, is whether there was a 
genuine issue of material fact concerning whether the terms of 
the DROA required certain disclosures regarding the Vacant Lot 
such that the failure to make such disclosures constituted 
fraudulent inducement. "[T]he essential elements constituting 
fraudulent inducement sufficient to invalidate a contract . . . 
are (1) a representation of material fact, (2) made for the 
purpose of inducing the other party to act, (3) known to be false 
but reasonably believed true by the other party, and (4) upon 
which the other party relies and acts to [his] damage." Touche 
Ross Ltd. v. Filipek, 7 Haw. App. 473, 480, 778 P.2d 721, 726 (App. 1989) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted); see 
also Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai
'i 149, 
163, 73 P.3d 687, 701 (2003) (to prove fraudulent inducement, party must prove that reliance on the representation was 
reasonable). 
More specifically, Harden alleges that Plaintiffs'
 
"NTMK" (not to my knowledge) response to the following questions
 
constituted fraudulent inducement: (1) "Is there filled land on
 
this Property?" (2) "Has there ever been any settling, slippage,
 
sliding, subsidence, or other soil problem?" (3) "Has there ever
 
been any drainage, water infiltration, seepage, flooding or
 
grading problems?" and (4) "Are there any violations of
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
government regulations/ordinances related to this Property?" 
Harden further alleges that Plaintiffs "materially altered the
 
properties with the knowledge and consent of the State of
 
Hawaii," "made the subject properties a dumping site," "illegally
 
graded and grubbed the property," and "altered the properties
 
without first obtaining permits." 
In opposition to the renewed summary judgment motion 
and in support of her allegations, Harden submitted, inter alia, 
her declaration, the DROAs, Plaintiffs' disclosure statements, 
and a declaration from Coley. Harden's declaration contains 
various hearsay statements and unsupported factual allegations, 
which were timely objected to by Plaintiffs. See Hawai 'i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 56(e). With one possible exception, 
there is no competent evidence that Plaintiffs' "NTMK" 
representations concerning the Vacant Lot were false. There is 
no competent evidence, for example, that Plaintiffs withheld 
information regarding filled land, settling, slippage, sliding, 
subsidence, or other soil problems, drainage, water infiltration, 
seepage, or flooding problems on the filled lot. 
The record, however, includes evidence that Plaintiffs
 
did not disclose three past notices of violation for not
 
obtaining a permit from the City & County of Honolulu (Honolulu)
 
before grading, grubbing, and stockpiling of soil at the
 
properties. The record further includes evidence that these no-
permit violations were remedied, including copies of the permits
 
and the affidavit of Honolulu Construction Inspector Russell Ho
 
(Ho), the inspector who issued the three notices of violation. 
In his affidavit, Ho averred that required permit approvals had
 
all been obtained and the three violations were deemed corrected. 
No objections were made to Ho's affidavit and no competent
 
evidence was offered of any additional, continuing, or further
 
permit problems or ordinance violations. In addition, the
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
customized Addendum to the DROA, which appears to be initialed by
 
Plaintiffs and Harden, adopts only one "Special Term":
 
7. Public Records. This contract is subject to Buyer's
approval of public records including permits within 10 days
of acceptance. Written disapproval must be provided Seller
within that time frame or Buyer will have been deemed to
approve all such records.
 
The record is devoid of evidence of any representation
 
of material fact that was reasonably relied upon by Harden to her
 
detriment. Harden affirmatively undertook the duty to review and
 
approve all public records related to the Vacant Lot, including
 
the history of the grading permits. Thus, we reject Harden's
 
argument that the non-disclosure of the no-permit citations was a
 
material omission of a mandatory disclosure under the DROA. Even
 
assuming that Plaintiffs had a duty to disclose the notices of
 
violation, Harden has failed to demonstrate how the failure to
 
get permits before starting work, which was subsequently cured,
 
caused her any injury. As noted above, Harden failed to bring
 
forward any other evidence of any representation (or omission) of
 
material fact that was made by the Plaintiffs for the purpose of
 
inducing Harden to purchase the property, which was known by
 
Plaintiffs to be false, but reasonably believed by Harden to be
 
true. Accordingly, Harden failed to meet her burden in opposing
 
summary judgment on Plaintiffs' foreclosure claim. The Circuit
 
Court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of
 
Plaintiffs and against Harden on Plaintiffs' foreclosure claim.
 
(2) The Circuit Court did not err when it concluded
 
that Harden failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact in
 
opposition to Plaintiffs' renewed motion for summary judgment on
 
Harden's counterclaim.
 
For the same reasons as set forth above, to the extent
 
that Harden's counterclaim arises out of alleged material non­
disclosures, fraud, and misrepresentations regarding the Vacant
 
Lot, Harden failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact and
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs were entitled to judgment on the counterclaim as a
 
matter of law.
 
To the extent that Harden's counterclaim arises out of
 
alleged material non-disclosures, fraud, and misrepresentations
 
regarding the Residential Property, we have considered the
 
additional arguments of the parties. The disclosure requirements
 
set forth in HRS Chapter 508D applied to Plaintiffs' sale of the
 
Residential Property to Harden. Harden relies, however, on the
 
same inadmissible evidence and remedied no-permit citations as
 
described above. Moreover, assuming arguendo that HRS Chapter
 
508D imposes a heightened duty to disclose past, remedied,
 
permitting violations, Harden would not be entitled to rescind
 
her purchase of the Residential Property. See HRS § 508D-16(a)
 
(2006) ("After recordation of the sale of residential real
 property, a buyer shall have no right under this chapter to
 
rescind the real estate purchase contract despite the seller's
 
failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter."); see
 
also HRS § 508D-16.5. Nor did Harden bring forward the necessary
 
evidence to show that she suffered actual damages as a result of
 
Plaintiffs' alleged non-disclosures related to the Residential
 
Property. See HRS § 508D-16(c) ("[W]hen the seller negligently
 
fails to provide the disclosure statement required by this
 chapter, the seller shall be liable to the buyer for the amount
 
of the actual damages, if any, suffered as a result of the
 
seller's negligence."). Accordingly, Harden failed to meet her
 
burden in opposing summary judgment on the counterclaim. The
 
Circuit Court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor
 
of Plaintiffs and against Harden on the counterclaim.
 
(3) Harden argues that the Circuit Court reversibly
 
erred because it did not enter sufficient findings of fact and
 
conclusions of law in support of the order granting summary
 
judgment. This argument is without merit. See, e.g., Alexander
 
& Baldwin, Inc. v. Silva, __ P.3d __, 2011 WL 95146 at *4
 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Hawai 'i App., January 11, 2011); Dalton v. City & County of 
Honolulu, 51 Haw. 400, 403 n.2, 462 P.2d 199, 203 n.2 (1969); 
Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai 'i 213, 217 n.3, 
11 P.3d 1, 5 n.3 (2000). 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's December 12,
 
2008 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 10, 2011, 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Long H. VuFrederick J. Arensmeyer(Dubin Law Offices)for Defendant/CounterclaimPlaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Robert E. Chapman
Mary Martin(Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice
& Nervell)
for Plaintiffs/CounterclaimDefendants-Appellees Associate Judge 
7 