FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
JASON LANAKILA CABRAL; the Estate of JOSEPH PU KAIKALA;
LYNDA EVADNA KAIKALA, individually, as Special
Administratrix of the Estate of Shawn Kaikala, andas Guardian Ad Litem for minors: SHANTEL KAIUOLA CABRAL, MARK KALE CABRAL, and IOKEPA JOHN KAIKALA;JOHN E. KRAUSE, individually and as Guardian AdLitem for minors: KAHEKILI JOHN KRAUSE, KEANUKAIKALA KRAUSE, KAWENA KAIKALA KRAUSE, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v. STATE OF HAWAI' I, Defendant/Cross-
Claim Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee,JONI MARIE SCOTT, Defendant/Cross-ClaimDefendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff, and JOHN DOES 1­20, Defendants 
NO. 28669
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
HILO DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 01-1-0449)
 
JULY 28, 2011
 
FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ., WITH NAKAMURA, C.J. DISSENTING
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Jason Lanakila Cabral, the Estate
 
of Joseph Pu Kaikala, Lynda Evadna Kaikala, Shantel Kaiuola
 
Cabral, Mark Kale Cabral, Iokepa John Kaikala, John E. Krause,
 
Kahekili John Krause, Keanu Kaikala Krause, and Kawena Kaikala
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Krause (Plaintiffs) appeal from the judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, Hilo Division (circuit
 
1
court)  in favor of Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Appellee State of Hawai' i (State). 
I
.
 
This appeal stems from a July 20, 2000 fatal car 
accident, resulting in the death of Shawn Kaikala (Decedent) on 
Highway 11 in the County of Hawai' i. Plaintiffs are Decedent's 
boyfriend and family members. The accident occurred when the vehicle Decedent was operating was struck by another vehicle 
driven by Joni Marie Scott, Defendant/Cross-Claim 
Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff (Scott). The cause of the 
accident was allegedly the speed and condition of Scott's 
vehicle, oversteering by Scott, and wet road conditions. 
Plaintiffs filed a civil complaint against Scott and
 
the State on October 16, 2001. Plaintiffs' complaint asserted
 
claims against the State and Scott for negligence and wrongful
 
death. Plaintiffs settled their claims with Scott before trial,
 
however, Scott remained a nominal defendant for purposes of
 
apportioning fault.
 
A seven-day bench trial began on July 10, 2006, and on 
November 1, 2006, the circuit court entered its Findings of Fact 
and Conclusions of Law, ruling that Plaintiffs failed to prove 
the State was negligent in designing or maintaining Highway 11. 
The circuit court entered judgment in favor of the State and 
against Plaintiffs on April 20, 2007, and expressly dismissed all 
other claims. Ten days later, on April 30, 2007, Plaintiffs 
filed a motion for reconsideration pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 59 and 60(e). The circuit court denied Plaintiffs' motion on June 7, 2007. 
On July 6, 2007, the parties submitted a "Stipulation
 
to Extend Time to File Notice of Appeal" (July 6 Stipulation)
 
prepared by counsel for Plaintiffs. On the same day, the circuit
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court approved the parties' stipulation, which purported to
 
extend the time for Plaintiffs to file a notice of appeal by two
 
weeks. The stipulation did not assert grounds nor include
 
findings regarding the grounds for the extension of time.2
 
By way of a motion dated July 18, 2007, but not filed
 
until September 7, 2007, Plaintiffs presented their Ex-Parte
 
Motion to Extend Time to File Notice of Appeal (July 18 Ex-Parte
 
Motion).3 Grounds for the extension were contained in the
 
attached declaration of counsel: The parties were involved in
 settlement negotiations and a "motion to withdraw" was scheduled
 
to be heard on September 5, 2007.
4
 
On July 23, 2007, the due date of the purported two-
week extension deadline, Plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal
 
2	 The stipulation read, in its entirety:
 
STIPULATION TO EXTEND TIME TO FILE NOTICE OF APPEAL
 
Plaintiffs, above-named, by and through their
attorney, JOY A. SAN BUENAVENTURA; and the State of Hawaii,
by and through its attorney, Deputy Attorney General ROBIN
KISHI hereby stipulate to the extension of time to file a
notice of appeal of two weeks.
 
Dated: Hilo, Hawaii, July 6, 2007.
 
[Signature]	 JOY A. SAN BUENAVENTURA Attorney for Plaintiffs 
[Signature]
ROBIN KISHI 
Deputy Attorney General
Attorney for the State of Hawaii
 
APPROVED AND SO ORDERED:
 [Signature]
JUDGE OF THE ABOVE-ENTITLED COURT
 
3
 The July 18 Ex-Parte Motion was also stamped as received on
July 18, 2007.
4
 The declaration of counsel read, in pertinent part, 
3.	 The Plaintiffs are considering accepting the State's
offer and not appeal.
 
4.	 We are awaiting State's draft of the Stipulation.
 
5.	 There is a pending hearing on a Motion to Withdraw
scheduled on September 5, 2007.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the April 20, 2007 judgment.5 On September 7, 2007, having
 
found "[g]ood cause appearing from the motion," the circuit court
 
signed and filed the Order Granting Ex-Parte Motion, extending
 
the time to file the notice of appeal until August 8, 2007.6
 
II.
 
Although the State has not challenged this court's 
jurisdiction, "[i]t is axiomatic that we are 'under an obligation 
to ensure that [we have] jurisdiction to hear and determine each 
case and to dismiss an appeal on [our] own motion where [we] 
conclude [we] lack[] jurisdiction.'" Brooks v. Dana Nance & Co., 
113 Hawai' i 406, 412, 153 P.3d 1091, 1097 (2007) (quoting BDM, 
Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 73, 549 P.2d 1147, 1148 
(1976)). An untimely appeal is one such defect requiring 
dismissal for lack of jurisdiction "that can neither be waived by 
the parties nor disregarded by the court in the exercise of 
judicial discretion." Wong v. Wong, 79 Hawai' i 26, 29, 897 P.2d 
953, 956 (1995) (quoting Bacon v. Karlin, 68 Haw. 648, 650, 727 P.2d 1127, 1129 (1986)); HRAP Rule 26(b) ("[N]o court or judge or 
justice is authorized to change the jurisdictional requirements 
contained in Rule 4 of [the HRAP]"). 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-1(c) (1993),
 
provides that in civil matters, "[a]n appeal shall be taken in
 
the manner and within the time provided by the rules of court." 
Rule 4(a)(1), HRAP, requires civil litigants to file a notice of
 
appeal within thirty days after entry of an appealable final
 
judgment.
 
5
 On July 19, 2007, Joy A. San Buenaventura, attorney for
Plaintiffs, filed a Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for Plaintiff with regard to
her representation of Mark Kale Cabral. She filed a Second Amended Motion to
 Withdraw as Counsel for Plaintiff Mark Kale Cabral which was granted on
November 23, 2007. Ms. San Buenaventura remains counsel of record for the
 remaining plaintiffs.
 
6
 The new deadline set in the proposed order was September 19, 2007
but was amended by hand to August 8, 2007. However, a trial court isauthorized to extend the time for a notice of appeal for a maximum of thirtydays. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(4). The 
extension to August 8, 2007 would have been a thirty-two day extension. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
However, prior to expiration of the thirty-day
 
prescribed time period, appellants may request an extension of
 
time under the following terms:
 
The court or agency appealed from, upon a showing of good
cause, may extend the time for filing a notice of appeal
upon motion filed within the time prescribed by subsections
(a)(1) through (a)(3) of this rule. However, no such
extension shall exceed 30 days past such prescribed time. An
extension motion that is filed before the expiration of the
prescribed time may be ex parte unless the court or agency
otherwise requires.
 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(4)(A) (emphasis added).
 
In the instant case, the circuit court's April 20, 2007 
judgment in favor of the State and expressly dismissing all other 
claims, constituted an appealable final judgment under HRCP 
Rule 58. See Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 
Hawai'i 115, 119-20, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338-39 (1994) (holding that 
a final judgment in a case involving multiple claims "must, on 
its face, show finality as to all claims against all parties"). 
Plaintiffs timely filed their April 30, 2007 Motion for 
Reconsideration pursuant to HRCP Rule 59(e), and effectively 
extended the initial thirty-day period for filing their notice of 
appeal, until this motion was decided or 90 days elapsed, 
whichever came first. HRAP Rule 4(a)(3). When the circuit court 
denied this motion on June 7, 2007, it triggered a new thirty-day 
deadline, making Plaintiffs' notice of appeal due on July 7, 
2007. 
On July 6, 2007, one day prior the expiration of this
 
new deadline, the parties attempted to extend the deadline via
 
their submitted stipulation, which the circuit court approved. 
Plaintiffs filed their notice of appeal on July 23, 2007, forty-
six days after the denial of their motion for reconsideration,
 
and on the due date of the purported two-week extension.
 
In furtherance of our obligation to ensure jurisdiction
 
for this appeal exists, this court ordered the parties to file
 
supplemental briefs on the subject of jurisdiction. In their
 
supplemental brief, Plaintiffs argue that, although no reasons
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appear on the July 6 Stipulation, the reasons stated in their
 
July 18 Ex-Parte Motion, note 4 supra, support their position
 
that good cause supported the approval of the July 6 Stipulation. 
The State argues that consideration of the State's settlement
 
offer was not beyond Plaintiffs' control and thus does not
 
constitute good cause.
 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(4) clearly states that the court may
 
extend the deadline for a notice of appeal upon motion filed. 
The rule does not authorize the parties to make this decision but
 
requires a motion. This is sound procedure, if for no other
 
reason than a motion requires that the grounds for the requested
 
relief be stated. HRCP Rule 7(b). The parties thus utilized,
 
and the circuit court approved, an unauthorized procedural
 
device.
 
More importantly, the purported extension was 
substantively insufficient. HRAP 4(a)(4)(A) governs extensions 
of time to file a notice of appeal in a civil case. The rule 
requires that an appellant show, and the court find, "good cause" 
for granting a motion for extension of time to file a notice of 
appeal: "The court or agency appealed from, upon a showing of 
good cause, may extend the time for filing a notice of appeal 
upon motion filed within the time prescribed[.]" HRAP Rule 
4(a)(4)(A) (emphasis added). The Hawai' i Supreme Court has made 
clear that this good cause showing is a necessary prerequisite for the granting of an extension of time to file a notice of 
appeal. Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., 80 Hawai' i 345, 
352, 910 P.2d 116, 123 (1996) ("Thus, when considering a motion brought pursuant to HRAP Rule 4[], the trial court must first 
determine the cause of the delay in filing the notice of appeal 
. . . the motion may be granted upon a showing of 'good 
cause.'"). 
Moreover, the necessary good cause showing itself
 
"requires a cause that is 'beyond the movant's control.'" Hall
 
v. Hall, 96 Hawai' i 105, 110 n.3, 26 P.3d 594, 599 n.3 (App.), 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
aff'd in part, and vacated in part on other grounds, 95 Hawai' i 
318, 319, 22 P.3d 965, 966 (2001); see Enos, 80 Hawai' i at 352, 
910 P.2d at 123 ("If that cause is beyond the movant's control, 
the motion may be granted upon a showing of good cause.") 
(internal quotation marks omitted).7 
In the instant case, the July 6 Stipulation does not 
mention any justification for the extension, let alone one 
demonstrating good cause. Enos, 80 Hawai' i at 352, 910 P.2d at 
123. On its face, the Stipulation therefore fails to satisfy the 
good cause standard required for granting an extension of time. 
Plaintiffs maintain that the reasons supporting good cause are 
contained in their subsequent, ex-parte motion. However, there 
is nothing in the record that establishes the same reasons 
existed at the time the stipulation was proffered. Thus, the 
only justification for the July 6 Stipulation we can glean from 
the record is that the parties agreed to it. Mutual desire for 
an extension of time is insufficient, standing alone, to 
constitute the good cause showing required for granting an 
extension. See, e.g., Hall, 96 Hawai' i at 110 n.3, 26 P.3d at 
599 n.3 (concluding that parties' desire to carry on ongoing settlement negotiations did not constitute good cause for an 
extension of time to file a notice of appeal). In any event, the 
appellate courts of this state have already held that time to 
7 At the time of the Enos and Hall decisions, the governing 
procedural rule was HRAP Rule 4(a)(5), which differed from the current rule
insofar as it provided two standards for the granting of extensions prior tothe expiration of the initial time to file the notice of appeal, namely,excusable neglect and good cause. HRAP Rule 4(a)(5) (1985). In Enos, the Hawai'i Supreme Court held that whether the "good cause" standard or
"excusable neglect" standard applied depended not on when the motion forextension was filed, but upon the reason for the delay. 80 Hawai' i at 352,
910 P.2d at 123. 
The current HRAP Rule 4(a)(4) makes clear that the good cause standard
applies to motions brought before the expiration of the initial thirty-day
deadline and that the excusable neglect standard must be met where the motion
is brought after the expiration of the time to bring an appeal. HRAP Rule
 4(a)(4)(A) and 4(a)(4)(B). Despite the revised structure of the rules, the
language and standards governing extension requests prior to expiration of the
deadline for filing a notice of appeal -- requiring a good cause finding -­remains the same. Cases discussing the good cause standard under the previous
rules are thus equally relevant under the current HRAP provisions.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complete settlement negotiations is not "good cause" to grant an 
extension of time. Hall, 96 Hawai' i at 110 n.3, 26 P.3d at 599 
n.3 ("(1) a desire for more time to seek settlement before
 incurring the cost of filing an appeal is not 'good cause' for
 
extending the time to file a notice of appeal; and (2) rarely
 
will there be a situation where a motion based on that desire and
 
presented within the first 30 days will be validly granted.").
 
8
The circuit court erred  in approving the July 6
Stipulation without requiring a showing of good cause.
 
Next, we turn to consideration of the circuit court's 
September 7, 2007 order granting Plaintiffs' July 18 Ex-Parte 
Motion. 
This motion was proffered to the court after the July 7, 
2007 deadline for filing their notice of appeal had passed. The circuit court was authorized to grant an extension of up to 30 
days upon a showing of excusable neglect. HRAP Rule 4(a)(4)(B).
9 
The Enos court noted that the excusable neglect standard is applicable "[i]f the cause of the delay is some mistake or 
inadvertence within the control of the movant." Enos, 80 Hawai' i 
at 352, 910 P.2d at 123. So far, Hawai' i cases construing 
excusable neglect have dealt with misconstruction or 
misapplication of the law. See Enos, id., (misinterpretation of 
the law governing the appealable event); Hall, 96 Hawai' i at 112, 
8 While the determination of good cause is reviewed under an abuse
of discretion standard, the evaluation of the trial court's interpretation of
the law is reviewed de novo.  Enos, 80 Hawai' i at 349, 910 P.2d at 120. 
9 HRAP Rule 4(a)(4)(B) provides:
 
(B) Requests for extensions of time after expiration
of the prescribed time. The court or agency appealed from,
upon a showing of excusable neglect, may extend the time for
filing the notice of appeal upon motion filed not later than
30 days after the expiration of the time prescribed by
subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this rule. However, no
such extension shall exceed 30 days past the prescribed
time. Notice of an extension motion filed after the
 expiration of the prescribed time shall be given to the
other parties in accordance with the rules of the court or
agency appealed from.
 
We note that there was no certificate of service attached to the July 18 Ex-
Parte Motion.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
26 P.3d at 601 ("relying on the erroneous belief that the first
 
motion would be granted").
 
Here, Plaintiffs' July 18 Ex-Parte Motion was based on
 
the continued efforts at settlement and a pending motion to
 
withdraw. The circuit court did not decide whether these reasons
 
constituted excusable neglect but instead applied the good cause
 
standard to these reasons. However, the nature of these reasons
 
does not establish that mistake, inadvertence or neglect was
 
involved. Rather, these reasons merely involve a request that
 
the deadline be postponed while other events in the case are
 
attended to.
 
Plaintiffs cite Local Union No. 12004, United
 
Steelworkers of America v. Massachusetts, 377 F.3d 64 (1st Cir.
 
2004) in support of their argument that their reasons in this
 
case constitute excusable neglect. There, the First Circuit
 
found no abuse of discretion in the district court's grant of an
 
extension based on excusable neglect where the attorney prepared
 
but failed to timely file his client's notice of appeal because
 
he was "preoccupied by the need to care for his infant son, who
 
was severely ill." Id. at 72. However, that case is clearly
 
distinguishable as not only did the district court apply the
 proper standard, the reason cited by counsel there did involve
 
inadvertence or neglect.
 
Finally, Plaintiffs argue that in Enos, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has approved the more liberal interpretation of 
excusable neglect adopted by the United States Supreme Court in 
Pioneer Inv. Servs. Co. v. Brunswick Assocs. Ltd. P'ship, 507 
U.S. 380 (1993) and urges application of the four-part test 
constructed by Supreme Court. However, we do not read Enos to 
have gone so far, primarily because, as the Enos court observed, 
the concept of excusable neglect under the federal rules 
encompassed reasons that were in, and beyond, the movant's 
control. Enos, 80 Hawai' i at 352, 910 P.2d at 123 ("both 
intervening circumstances beyond the party's control and neglect on the part of the party are encompassed within the [Supreme] 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's interpretation of 'excusable neglect'.") The Hawai' i 
Supreme Court in Enos cited to Pioneer Investment, not for its 
four-part test for evaluating excusable neglect, but to 
illustrate the Supreme Court implicitly rejected the view of the 
majority of federal appellate courts that the choice of standard­
-good cause or excusable neglect--was dependent on the timing of 
the extension request. Furthermore, the reasons for the 
extension under consideration in Enos involved a misconstruction 
of the rules that, as a matter of law, did not rise to the level 
of excusable neglect. See Enos, 80 Hawai' i at 354, 910 P.2d 125 
("Nor does the United States Supreme Court's decision in Pioneer Investment, which is regarded as having relaxed the 'excusable 
neglect' standard, . . . suggest that 'excusable neglect' now 
encompasses ignorance of the rules.") and Hall, 95 Hawai' i at 
320, 22 P.3d at 967 ("we ruled in Enos that, as a matter of law, 'only plausible misconstruction, but not mere ignorance, of the 
law or rules rises to the level of excusable neglect.'"). 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed for
 
lack of jurisdiction.
 
On the briefs:
 Joy A. San Buenaventura,
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
 
Donna H. Kalama,
Deputy Attorney General,
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
10
 