NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29880
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
STATE OF HAWAI fI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
HOA VAN HUYNH, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 09-1-1011)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Hoa Van Huynh (Huynh) appeals from
 
the May 12, 2009 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by
 
1
the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court)  convicting
him of one count of Harassment, a violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 711-1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2010).2
 
On appeal, Huynh alleges three points of error: 
(1) admission of statements made by Huynh's wife to their
 
neighbor because insufficient foundation for these statements was
 
1
 The Honorable Darryl Y.C. Choy presided.
 
2
 HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) provides, as it did at the time of this offense,
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that
person: (a) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches
another person in an offensive manner or subjects the other
person to offensive physical contact.
 
(Formatting modified). Huynh was charged with two counts of Harassment and
acquitted on one count.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
laid; (2) insufficient evidence, absent these statements, to
 
support Huynh's conviction; and (3) insufficient findings to
 
support Huynh's one-year sentence of probation.
 
I.
 
On November 23, 2008, Honolulu Police Department
 
Officer Doreen Teramae (Officer Teramae) responded to a dispatch
 call reporting an argument at 2920 South King Street. She was
 
the first officer on the scene, and upon her arrival, she noticed
 
"a lot of commotion . . . located in Apartment 705." Officer
 
Teramae saw several people in the room, including a female
 
(complaining witness) who was crying and demonstrating a cable
 
wire around her neck. Although complaining witness was speaking,
 
Officer Teramae did not understand complaining witness, who spoke
 
in another language later determined to be Vietnamese.
 
Through complaining witness's neighbor, also present on
 
the scene, Officer Teramae learned that complaining witness
 
claimed her husband placed the cable around her neck, dragged her
 
to the ground with it when she attempted to intervene in his
 
discipline of their son, and left the apartment.
 
Police took pictures of red marks on complaining
 
witness's neck and the cable complaining witness used in her
 
demonstration to police.
 
At trial, complaining witness testified through an
 
interpreter that Huynh was her husband and on November 23, 2008,
 
they lived in apartment 705 at "2920." That night, at
 
approximately 10:00 p.m., she was washing dishes and Huynh was in
 
another room with their son, when she heard Huynh yell at their
 
son and heard "a noise." Upon entering the room, she saw her son
 
on the floor and "crying from falling down." Complaining witness
 
and Huynh argued and Huynh left the apartment. Complaining
 
witness testified that Huynh did not put the cable around her
 
neck. Complaining witness denied showing her neck to police
 
officers or telling anyone that Huynh wrapped the cable around
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
her neck and pulled her down. The defense declined the
 
opportunity to cross-examine complaining witness.
 
The prosecution also called Nick Nguyen (Nguyen), who
 
testified that he lived on the third floor of the same apartment
 
building as Huynh and on the night in question, could hear from
 
his apartment the sound of multiple voices yelling, perhaps three
 
times. Nguyen went to the seventh floor to see what was
 
happening and found the police were already there and that
 
complaining witness was standing in the kitchen of the apartment. 
Still standing outside of the apartment, Nguyen saw an officer
 
inside trying unsuccessfully to ask complaining witness questions
 
such as "How are you?" Nguyen testified that complaining witness
 
looked nervous because the police were there and also observed
 
that complaining witness was crying.
 
Nguyen testified that he grew up in Vietnam, is fluent
 
in Vietnamese as his first language and had come to the United
 
States in 1996, when he was twenty-three. When police asked if
 
anyone could help translate, Nguyen volunteered.
 
Nguyen testified that he saw complaining witness about
 
five minutes after he heard the yelling and was at the apartment
 
about two minutes before the police asked for help in
 
translating. When Nguyen spoke to complaining witness, she was
 
still crying and emotional. Nguyen asked complaining witness
 
what happened and she responded, "the husband attack her." At
 
this juncture, the defense objected, "lack of foundation due to
 
the fact that's a hearsay statement." After allowing the defense
 
an opportunity to voir dire, the family court ruled the
 
prosecution had established the elements of an excited utterance. 
Nguyen was then allowed to testify that complaining witness told
 
him her husband had attacked her neck from behind with the cable.
 
Nguyen testified that complaining witness did not
 
comply with requests to write her name or "anything else" for the
 
police. Nguyen testified that by the time she decided not to
 
write things down, complaining witness was calm.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Over a hearsay objection by the defense, Officer
 
Teramae testified that she was the first officer on the scene and
 
witnessed complaining witness crying and "demonstrat[ing] with a
 
cable wire around her neck." Officer Teramae also testified that
 
she observed redness to complaining witness's neck before
 
complaining witness demonstrated with the cable. The pictures of
 
complaining witness's neck and the cable were admitted into
 
evidence over objection.
 
The family court found Huynh guilty of Harassment and
 
sentenced Huynh to probation for one year, domestic violence
 
intervention classes, and fees in the total amount of $105. 
Huynh brought this timely appeal.
 
II.
 
1. Huynh argues on appeal that complaining witness's 
statements to Nguyen should not have been admitted as they were hearsay and that a sufficient foundation for Nguyen as a 
competent interpreter was not laid. Admission of evidence over a 
hearsay objection is reviewed under the "right/wrong" standard. 
State v. Delos Santos, 124 Hawai
fi 130, 136, 238 P.3d 162, 168 
(2010). 
a. Complaining witness's statement that Huynh
 
"attacked her" was properly admitted as an excited utterance.3
 
3 Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 803 provides exceptions to the
prohibition against admission of hearsay evidence contained in Rule 802, and
provides, in pertinent part, 
Rule 803 Hearsay exceptions; availability of
declarant immaterial.  The following are not excluded by the
hearsay rule, even though the declarant is available as a
witness:
 
. . . . 
(b) Other exceptions. 
. . . . 
(2) Excited utterance. A statement relating to a
startling event or condition made while the declarant
was under the stress of excitement caused by the event
or condition.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Delos Santos, the Hawai fi Supreme Court analyzed similar 
statements. As in Delos Santos, Huynh contests only that
 
complaining witness's statement to Nguyen was "made under the
 
stress of excitement caused by [Huynh's] physical altercation
 
with her." Id. at 137, 238 P.3d at 169.
 
The "ultimate question in these cases is 'whether the
statement was the result of reflective thought or whether it
was rather a spontaneous reaction to the exciting event.'"
[State v. Machado, 109 Hawaif i 445, 451, 127 P.3d 941, 947 
(2006) (quoting State v. Moore, 82 Hawaif i 202, 219, 921
P.2d 122, 139 (1996)]. The "time span between the
'startling event' and the statement to be admitted as an
excited utterance" is a factor in the determination, but a
 
short time period is not a foundational prerequisite. Id.
 
(quoting Moore, 82 Hawaif i at 221, 921 P.2d at 141). "Other 
factors that courts often look to in determining whether a
statement was the product of excitement include . . . the
nature of the event, the age of the declarant, the mental
and physical condition of the declarant, the influences of
intervening occurrences, and the nature and circumstances of
the statement itself." Id. (citing Moore, 82 Hawaif i at 
221, 921 P.2d at 141).
 
Delos Santos, 124 Hawai fi at 137, 238 P.3d at 169. 
The court went on to summarize the evidence presented
 
that supported the admission of the complaining witness's initial
 
statement to the police:
 
[T]he violent nature of the event, the short period of time
between the incident and Officer Kubo's arrival, and the
Complainant's physical and mental state support admitting
the Complainant's initial statement as an excited utterance.
There are three reasons that the Complainant's initial
statement is admissible as an excited utterance while her
 later statements are not: 1) her initial statement does not
summarize a longer conversation; 2) evidence that her
statement was made in response to a police officer's
question does not bar its admissibility as an excited
utterance; and 3) the totality of the circumstances
indicates that her statement was made under the stress of
 excitement.
 
Delos Santos, 124 Hawai fi at 140, 238 P.3d at 172 (internal 
citation omitted). Similarly, complaining witness's first
 
statement that Huynh attacked her was made shortly after her
 
argument with Huynh and while she was under the stress of
 
excitement caused by the altercation with Huynh. She was still
 
crying when Nguyen spoke to her, her statement did not seem to be
 
a summary of a longer narrative, and it was apparently made in
 
response to the first question posed to her in her own language. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on this record, we cannot say the family court erred in
 
ruling this first statement qualified as an excited utterance.
 
Huynh challenges the foundation for "each of those
 
statements" complaining witness made to Nguyen. However, we need
 
not reach this question, as assuming, without deciding, that the
 
balance of complaining witness's statements were improperly
 
admitted, they were cumulative of this first statement and the
 
observations of the police and Nguyen. Therefore, any error was
 
harmless.
 
Complaining witness testified that, on the night in
 
question, she had had an argument with her husband after which he
 
left their apartment. Nguyen testified that he heard voices
 
yelling and ascertained the sounds were coming from Huynh and
 
complaining witness's apartment. He arrived about five minutes
 
after the sounds, in time to see complaining witness
 
demonstrating to police inside her apartment the use of a cable
 
wire around her neck. Officer Teramae asked Nguyen to ask
 
complaining witness what happened and when he did, complaining
 
witness responded "husband attack her." Officer Teramae
 
testified that she saw red marks on complaining witness's neck
 
even before complaining witness conducted her demonstration with
 
the cable. This evidence amply established the offense of
 
Harassment and Huynh does not point to any subsequent statements
 
made by complaining witness that materially added to these basic
 
facts.
 
b. Huynh also argues that the family court erred in
 
not requiring proof of the accuracy or reliability of Nguyen's
 
translation of complaining witness's statements.4 However, Huynh
 
failed to object to Nguyen's testimony on this basis and
 
4
 Huynh also argues that the accuracy of Nguyen's translation of the
officer's questions to complaining witness was also not established. However,
Officer Teramae testified that she asked Nguyen to ask complaining witness
only one question, "what happened." There is nothing in the record to
indicate that Nguyen did not understand Officer Teramae's question, or that
Nguyen could not translate such a basic question to complaining witness.
Therefore, we reject this argument as without merit.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
therefore has waived the objection on appeal. Moreover, Huynh
 
had the opportunity to cross-examine both complaining witness and
 
Nguyen, and specifically asked Nguyen, "Are there some words that
 
are said in Vietnamese that you may not know the English
 
translation?" Nguyen replied, "I think at that time any words
 
[complaining witness] told me I know to translate to the
 
officer." Huynh does not claim to be surprised by Nguyen's
 
testimony, nor does he identify in what respect Nguyen's
 
translation was incorrect. Huynh either had the opportunity to,
 
or did cross-examine complaining witness and Nguyen. On this
 
record, we cannot say the foundation for Nguyen's testimony was
 
deficient.5
 
2. Sufficiency of the evidence. Huynh's sole basis
 
for this challenge rests on his previous arguments leading to the
 
exclusion of complaining witness's statements. However, as
 
previously discussed, even when limited to complaining witness's
 
initial response to Nguyen's question that her husband attacked
 
her the remaining evidence was sufficient to support the family
 
court's verdict of guilt for the offense of Harassment.
 
3. Finally, Huynh argues that the family court erred
 
in imposing a one-year term of probation for this offense, where
 
the family court did not make a finding of good cause. We agree. 
All sentences must comply with HRS chapter 706. HRS § 706-600
 
(1993). The offense of Harassment is a petty misdemeanor. HRS
 
§ 711-1106. Terms of probation for petty misdemeanors are for
 
"six months . . . provided that up to one year may be imposed
 
upon a finding of good cause." HRS § 706-623(1)(d) (Supp. 2006)
 
(unchanged through 2009). As the record is devoid of such a
 
finding by the family court, the sentence was contrary to the
 
5
 Nor does Huynh's reframing of this issue in his reply brief as a
violation of his constitutional rights to confrontation/due process/fair trial
change our analysis.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provisions of HRS chapter 706 and must be vacated and remanded
 
for resentencing.
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, the conviction is affirmed. 
The Family Court of the First Circuit's judgment dated May 12,
 2009 is vacated and the case is remanded to the family court for
 
resentencing.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, June 29, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Anne K. Clarkin,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
8
 