NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28977
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BONNIE MACLEOD KAKINAMI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AARON K.H. KAKINAMI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 

 (FC-D NO. 06-1-0040)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Aaron K.H. Kakinami (Aaron) appeals
 
herein from (1) the September 27, 2007 order of the Family Court
 
of the Fifth Circuit (Family Court) granting Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Bonnie Macleod Kakinami's (Bonnie) Motion to Bifurcate Divorce
 (Bifurcation Order), and (2) the October 1, 2007 Decree Granting
 Absolute Divorce (Divorce Decree) dissolving the parties'
 
marriage.
1/ Appearing pro se on appeal, Aaron maintains that the
 
Family Court erred in bifurcating the dissolution and property
 
division stages of the divorce proceeding. 
As a preliminary matter, we reject the contention that
 
this appeal should be dismissed for lack of appellate
 
jurisdiction. The October 1, 2007 Divorce Decree, which was
 
entered pursuant to and in conjunction with the Bifurcation
 
Order, was final and appealable because it finally determined
 
1/
 The Honorable Calvin K. Murashige presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bonnie's right to a dissolution of the parties' marriage. See 
Eaton v. Eaton, 7 Haw. App. 111, 118, 748 P.2d 801, 805 (1987). 
"An appeal from a final judgment brings up for review all 
interlocutory orders not appealable directly as of right which 
deal with issues in the case." Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai 'i 
386, 396, 114 P.3d 892, 902 (2005) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted); see also Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 3(c)(2); City & County of Honolulu v. 
Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275, 554 P.2d 233, 235 (1976). Thus, the 
Bifurcation Order may be reviewed in conjunction with a timely 
notice of appeal from the October 1, 2007 Divorce Decree. On 
October 8, 2007, Aaron timely filed a tolling motion, which was 
never ruled on by the Family Court and, therefore, was deemed 
denied pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(3). Aaron timely filed his 
January 25, 2008 notice of appeal within thirty days after the 
deemed denial of his motion. 
On appeal, Aaron's core contention is that the Family
 
Court erred in bifurcating the divorce proceedings. Although he
 
also challenges numerous findings of fact, most are unrelated to
 
his arguments on appeal.2/ To the extent they are not implicit
 
in his bifurcation argument, we deem them waived. HRAP Rule
 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we conclude that
 
the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in bifurcating the
 
proceeding and issuing the bifurcated divorce decree.
 
2/
 Aaron largely fails to address these points and requests no remedy
for them. Moreover, as they pertain to inconsequential details and minor
alleged inaccuracies, no effective remedy is available. See In re Doe, 102 
Hawai'i 75, 79, incl. n.8, 73 P.3d 29, 33, incl. n.8 (2003) (noting that
appellants' points were moot when they sought no other remedy than
"pronouncement that the family court erred."); accord Lathrop v. Sakatani, 111Hawai'i 307, 313, 141 P.3d 480, 486 (2006). 
2   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
By statute, the Family Court may enter a dissolution
 
decree and reserve jurisdiction over ancillary issues, including
 
property distribution. HRS ยง 580-47(a) provides, in pertinent
 
part:
 
Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in addition to
the powers granted in subsections (c) and (d), jurisdiction
of those matters is reserved under the decree by agreement
of both parties or by order of court after finding that good
cause exists, the court may make any further orders as shall
appear just and equitable . . . (3) finally dividing and
distributing the estate of the parties, real, personal, or
mixed, whether community, joint, or separate
.
 
The Family Court may bifurcate dissolution and final property
 
distribution upon agreement of the parties or a finding of good
 
cause. Id.; see also Magoon v. Magoon, 70 Haw. 605, 609, 612-14,
 
780 P.2d 80, 82, 84-85 (1989) (recognizing that this statute
 authorizes court to enter divorce decree and reserve final
 
property distribution). 
Aaron argues that the Family Court must also find that
 
"exceptionally compelling circumstances" justify bifurcation.
 
He derives this standard from Eaton, 7 Haw. App. at 118, 748 P.2d
 
at 805. In that case, we recognized that a divorce case is
 
comprised of four distinct parts: (1) dissolution; (2) child
 
custody issues; (3) spousal support; and (4) property
 
distribution. Id. We further stated: 
Although we recommend that, except in exceptionally
compelling circumstances, all parts [of a divorce case] be
decided simultaneously and that part (1) not be finally
decided prior to a decision on all the other parts, we
conclude that an order which finally decides part (1) is
final and appealable when decided even if parts (2), (3),
and (4) remain undecided.
 
Id. (emphasis added). In a footnote, we emphasized that in light
 
of the one-year deadline for resolving property distribution, our
 
recommendation applies especially to part (4). Id. at n.8, 748
 
P.2d at 805 n.8. However, Eaton evinces a recommendation and not
 a new standard. It does not expressly or implicitly modify the
 
"good cause" requirement established by statute. Aaron has not
 
3   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cited, and we have not found, any cases adopting the
 
"exceptionally compelling circumstances" language as a new
 
standard, separate from the good cause requirement. We therefore
 
conclude that the Family Court did not err in failing to find
 
exceptionally compelling circumstances.
 
Aaron also argues that the Family Court erred in 
failing to hold an evidentiary hearing on bifurcation and to 
specifically identify on the record the advantages and 
disadvantages of bifurcation. He roots this argument in case law 
of other jurisdictions. However, those cases are distinguishable 
as they involve different statutory requirements and policy 
considerations. Hawai 'i law does not require an on-the-record 
analysis of specific factors nor a separate evidentiary hearing. HRS ยง 580-47. The applicable statute requires only a finding of 
good cause. Id. It is not the role of this court to alter a 
statutory requirement in order to effect policy considerations 
that are vested in the legislature. See TMJ Hawaii, Inc. v. 
Nippon Trust Bank, 113 Hawai
'i 373, 384 n.6, 153 P.3d 444, 455 
n.6 (2007). Aaron's reliance on inapposite case law of other
 
jurisdictions is unavailing.
 
Aaron argues that it was error to order bifurcation
 
because the Family Court failed to take into account the expense
 
of separate medical coverage. Yet at the bifurcation hearing,
 
the court fully considered Aaron's arguments regarding the
 
increased expense and hardship of obtaining his own medical
 
insurance. The court specifically found that Aaron could afford
 
his own coverage. It concluded that as cessation of medical
 
coverage is an inevitable fact of divorce, Aaron's argument was
 
insufficient to outweigh the issues favoring bifurcation. 
Aaron also argues that the court failed to consider the
 
hardship imposed by the one-year time limit for resolving
 
4    
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property distribution.3/ He did not raise this argument below, 
and instead objected to the "predictable dilatory effect on the 
parties' efforts to finalize the property distribution." As a 
result, we need not consider his argument on appeal. State v. 
Moses, 102 Hawai 'i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("[I]f a 
party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be 
deemed to have been waived on appeal."). In any event, the 
court's central reason for granting bifurcation was that numerous 
delays had already drawn out the case for over a year and a half. 
The Family Court found that discovery disputes had left Bonnie 
emotionally drained, and noted that bifurcation would render 
further delays more tolerable. There is ample support in the 
record for the Family Court's finding that the delays warranted 
bifurcation. 
Finally, Aaron contends that the court failed to
 
consider and make adequate provision for protection of the
 
marital estate. In the court below, he expressed concern that
 
Bonnie's "true pretrial objective[]" was to obscure and dissipate
 
marital assets. Nonetheless, he insisted that if the Family
 
Court granted bifurcation, it should reserve final property
 
distribution and should "not make any rulings or orders with
 
regard to the parties' personal or real property . . . pending
 
completion of discovery and the trial of the merits on each such
 
claim." The court largely granted that request. The divorce
 
decree protected Aaron's interests: it placed Bonnie's share of
 
the marital residence in escrow pending final property
 
distribution and retained jurisdiction to enter injunctive relief
 
enjoining any improper dissipation of the marital estate. 
3/
 He also repeatedly challenges the Family Court's calculation of
the one-year time limit for final property distribution. However, he asserts
no argument as to how this affects the validity of the bifurcated divorce
decree, and he requests no remedy for the alleged error. We therefore deem
 this point waived. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After fully considering the parties' evidence and
 
arguments, the Family Court found good cause to bifurcate the
 
proceeding. It specifically found that bifurcation did not
 
prejudice Aaron. These findings are supported by the record. We
 
conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
bifurcating the issues in this case and entering the October 1,
 
2007 Divorce Decree.
 
For these reasons, the Family Court's October 1, 2007
 
Divorce Decree is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 28, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Aaron K.H. Kakinami 
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Robert M. Harris Marianita Lopezfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6 