NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29799
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
RAYMOND L. FOSTER, also known as "RAY," Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 06-1-0449(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i (the State) 
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order 
entered on April 2, 2009, which granted Defendant-Appellee 
Raymond L. Foster's (Foster) Renewed Motion for Judgment of 
Acquittal in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit 
court).1 
Foster was acquitted by the circuit court of being a 
Felon in Possession of a Prohibited Firearm in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 134-7(b) and/or (h) (Supp. 2010) 
and subject to HRS § 706-660.1 (1993) and being a Felon in 
Possession of Firearm Ammunition in violation of HRS §§ 134-7(b) 
2
 and/or (h), after the jury found Foster guilty of both charges.
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 
2
 §134-7 Ownership or possession prohibited, when; penalty.
 
(b) No person who is under indictment for, or has waived
indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit court
for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere of
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The State raises two point on appeal. First, the State
 
argues the circuit court erred by disregarding the applicable
 
standard of review by usurping the province of the fact-finder
 
when it granted Foster's renewed motion for judgment of
 
acquittal. Second, the State argues that the circuit court erred
 
by disregarding the applicable law on constructive possession
 
when it granted Foster's renewed motion for judgment of
 
acquittal.
 
After careful review of the issues raised, arguments
 
advanced, applicable law, and record in the instant case, we
 
resolve the State's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not usurp the province of the 
jury when it granted the renewed post-verdict motion for judgment 
of acquittal. By allowing "renewal" of a motion for judgment of 
acquittal, the Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 29(c) 
allows a court to reconsider and change its decision as to an earlier ruling on a motion for judgment of acquittal.
3 HRPP 
Rule 29(c) states: "If a verdict of guilty is returned the court may on [a motion for judgment of acquittal] set aside the verdict 
and enter a judgment of acquittal." HRPP Rule 29(c) expressly 
provides for the circuit court's action in this case. 
(2) As the evidence adduced in the trial court must be
 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution, there was
 
substantial evidence to support Foster's convictions of Felon in
 
2(...continued)
having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or an
illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control any
firearm or ammunition therefor. 
. . . .
 (h) Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) shall be
guilty of a class C felony; provided that any felon
violating subsection (b) shall be guilty of a class B
felony. 
3
 HRPP Rule 29(c) provides: "If the jury returns a verdict of
guilty . . . a motion for judgment of acquittal may be made or renewed within
10 days after the jury is discharged. . . . If a verdict of guilty is
returned the court may on such motion set aside the verdict and enter judgment
of acquittal."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Possession of a Prohibited Firearm and Felon in Possession of 
Firearm Ammunition. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1241 (1998) (stating that the proper standard of review on appeal for claims of insufficient evidence is whether there 
existed substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the 
trier of fact). 
"To support a finding of constructive possession the 
evidence must show a sufficient nexus between the accused and the 
[object] to permit an inference that the accused had both the 
power and intent to exercise dominion or control over the 
[object]. Mere proximity is not enough." State v. Brown, 97 
Hawai'i 323, 336, 37 P.3d 572, 585 (App. 2001) (quoting State v. 
Mundell, 8 Haw. App. 610, 622, 822 P.2d 23, 29 (1991), overruled 
on other grounds by State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai' i 87, 112, 997 
P.2d 13, 38 (2000)) (emphasis added and quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
The undisputed facts in the record reveal that Foster
 
had knowledge that the rifle and ammunition were in proximity to
 
him in the vehicle (the ammunition clip with three bullets was
 
found on the center of the front seat between Foster and his
 
passenger Phillip Malano (Malano), and Foster saw Malano take the
 
rifle out of the ukulele case, fire several rounds, and get back
 
into the vehicle with the rifle). The evidence presented by the
 
State, however, also raises a fair inference of guilt regarding
 
Foster's mental state, specifically, Foster's intent to have
 
dominion and control over the rifle and ammunition. The
 
undisputed facts in the record reveal that the ammunition clip
 
was on the front seat in easy reach of Foster, and that Foster
 
willingly and intentionally allowed Malano to re-enter the
 
4Runner with the rifle and ammunition after Foster knew that
 
Malano was carrying a working rifle and ammunition. As the
 
driver and owner of the 4Runner, Foster had ultimate control over
 
who and what was allowed inside the vehicle as well as the
 
activities occurring inside the 4Runner. Foster could have
 
refused to let Malano back into the 4Runner with the rifle and
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ammunition. Also noteworthy is the undisputed fact that during
 
his statement to the police, Foster never expressed that he was
 
fearful of or threatened by Malano. This fact is circumstantial
 
evidence of, at a minimum, Foster's willingness to assist Malano
 
in the latter's activities involving use of the firearm and
 
ammunition.
 
Upon viewing the evidence presented in the light most
 
favorable to the State, there is sufficient evidence from which
 
the jury could have reasonably concluded that Foster was a felon
 
who intentionally possessed the subject rifle and ammunition in
 
violation of HRS § 134-7(b).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the April 2, 2009 Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order entered by the Circuit Court
 of the Second Circuit is vacated and the case is remanded for re­
sentencing based on the jury's verdicts.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 18, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
Chief Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Cynthia A. Kagiwada,
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 