NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29347
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WANDA RURIKO MITA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(HPD Criminal No. 164978DL (1P108009607))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Wanda Ruriko Mita (Mita) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on August 28, 2008 in the District Court
 
of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district court).1
 
The district court convicted Mita of Animal Nuisance,
 
in violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 7-2.3.
 
On appeal, Mita contends that in finding her guilty, 
the district court erred because (1) the State of Hawai 'i (State) 
failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mita owned the barking dogs, (2) the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that Mita acted with the requisite state of mind, (3) the 
State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the dogs 
1
 The Honorable Faye M. Koyanagi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were barking in violation of ROH § 7-2.3, (4) the charge was
 
insufficient, (5) ROH § 7-2.3 is unconstitutionally vague, and
 
(6) the State failed to prove that Mita had been issued a
 
citation by a qualified animal control officer.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Mita's
 
points of error as follows:
 
The charge was sufficient. State v. Mita, 124 Hawai 'i 
385, 245 P.3d 458 (2010). 
Mita's claim that ROH § 7-2.2(a) is unconstitutionally
 
vague is without merit. Mita's only argument on appeal is that
 
"the ordinance does not make clear what amount of barking by a
 
dog would constitute 'noise intermittently for one-half hour or
 
more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or
 
night' which would violate [ROH] Sec. 7-2.2(a)." Intermittent
 
means "starting and stopping at intervals." Webster's II New
 
College Dictionary, 593 (3d ed. 2005). The ordinance does not
 
specify an amount of barking because it prohibits any amount of
 
barking that starts and stops in intervals for one-half hour or
 
more that disturbs a person at any time. The plain language of
 
ROH § 7-2.2(a) is not vague so as to make it unconstitutional.
 
Mita's objection to the State's failure to prove that
 
the citation was issued by a police officer or animal control
 
contractor who has been deputized by the chief of police as a
 
special officer is without merit. The plain language of the ROH
 
§ 7-2.3 charge does not include issuance of a citation by a
 
police officer or animal control officer as an element of the
 
charge. As stated in Mita, 124 Haw. at 391, 245 P.3d at 464, "in
 
order for a person to be found guilty of violating ROH § 7-2.3,
 
the State must prove (1) that person is the owner of an animal,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
farm animal or poultry which (2) engaged in animal nuisance." 
Thus, the failure to prove that the citation was issued by a
 
police officer or animal control officer is not an element of the
 
offense.
 
Mita's remaining points of error challenge the
 
sufficiency of the evidence to find her guilty of Animal
 
Nuisance. Mita claims the State failed to prove beyond a
 
reasonable doubt that (1) she was the owner of the barking dogs,
 
(2) the dogs were barking in violation of ROH § 7-2.3, and (3)
 
Mita acted with the requisite state of mind.
 
When the evidence is considered in the light most
 
favorable to the State together with all reasonable inferences,
 
including circumstantial evidence, there was substantial evidence
 
to find Mita guilty. Dianne Lo (Lo) testified that she lived
 
behind Mita's residence and called Mita several times regarding
 
the barking dogs. Mita called Lo back and stated that it was not
 
her dogs that were barking. Lo knows that one of the dogs is
 
named Obie because the dog responded to her when she called it by
 
name. The dogs that Lo complained about were the same dogs that
 
she observed in Mita's yard. Lo knows the sound of Mita's dogs'
 
bark because they have a very distinct bark. There was
 
substantial evidence that Mita was the owner of the two barking
 
dogs as defined in ROH § 7-2.2. 
Mita points to the fact that there was no evidence 
presented showing dog licenses, certified records from the Bureau 
of Conveyances of the State of Hawai 'i or Land Court showing who 
owned the property on which the barking dogs were found, whether Mita fed the dogs, paid for the dogs' licenses, tied or untied 
the dogs, or whether the dogs responded to Mita's call. However, 
absence of such evidence does not preclude a finding that Mita 
owned the dogs that were barking. The definition of "owner" does 
not require proof of ownership of land upon which the dogs were 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
barking. ROH § 7-2.2 states that a person can be an "owner"
 
whether or not the dogs were licensed. Therefore, evidence of
 
the dogs' licenses or who paid for a dog license is not
 
determinative of whether Mita is the owner of the dogs. 
Likewise, feeding of the dogs, tying or untying the dogs, or
 
calling to the dogs is also not determinative of whether Mita is
 
the owner of the dogs. Lastly, Mita contends that Eric Mita,
 
Casey Mita, and Codi Mita also lived on the property, which could
 
make them the owners of the dogs. Mita claims the State did not
 
"prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the dogs were in fact not
 
owned by Eric Mita, Casey Mita, or Codi Mita." Whether there
 
were also other co-owners of the dogs does not preclude that Mita
 
is an owner of the dogs as defined in ROH § 7-2.2.
 
Lo testified that on June 3, 2008, she heard Mita's two
 
dogs barking from 7:45 p.m. to 8:50 p.m. Lo stated that she
 
closes the windows and turns up the TV, but can still hear the
 
barking of Mita's dogs.
 
Alice Thomas (Thomas) testified that she can only sleep
 
between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. because she works one full-time
 
and one part-time job. Thomas noted on a tablet that on June 3,
 
2008, Mita's dogs were barking from 7:45 p.m. to 8:45 p.m. 
There was substantial evidence that on June 3, 2008
 
Mita's two dogs made noise continuously for a period of 10
 
minutes or intermittently for one-half hour or more to the
 
disturbance of any person at any time of the day or night. 
Lo testified that she complained to Mita by leaving
 
telephone messages about the barking by Mita's dogs. Thomas also
 
testified that she previously complained to Mita about her dogs
 
barking. There was substantial evidence that Mita acted at least
 
recklessly when she consciously disregarded a substantial and
 
unjustifiable risk that her barking dogs were engaged in animal
 
nuisance.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
The Judgment filed on August 28, 2008 in the District
 
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 7, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Y. Okuda
(Leu & Okuda)
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge

James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
5
 