 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29360
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
VALINDA LEILANI MORTON, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
WAHIAW
Â DIVISION
 
(CASE NOS. 1DTA-08-04018 AND 1P208-00189)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellee Valinda Leilani Morton (Morton) was
 
charged with Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an
 
Intoxicant (OVUII), as a first offense committed by a highly
 intoxicated driver, and with Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the
 Third Degree. 
A police officer stopped Morton's vehicle after
 
two people reported that Morton had rear-ended their car while
 they were stopped at a traffic light, said that Morton smelled of
 alcohol, and pointed out Morton's vehicle as it drove by the
 scene of the accident. Morton moved to suppress evidence
 obtained as a result of the automobile stop on the ground that
 the police lacked reasonable suspicion for the stop. The
 
1
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court)  granted
Morton's motion to suppress evidence, and then it dismissed the
 
1
 The Honorable Peter T. Stone presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
charges with prejudice based on the prosecution's inability to
 
prove the charges without the evidence obtained after the stop of
 Morton's vehicle.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i (State) appeals 
from: (1) the August 7, 2008, Judgments dismissing the charges with prejudice, which were based on the District Court's granting of Morton's motion to suppress evidence; and (2) the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant Morton's Motion to Suppress Evidence Filed on June 18, 2008" (Order Suppressing Evidence), which was filed by the District Court on September 19, 2008. 
On appeal, the State contends that the District Court
 
erred in concluding that the police lacked reasonable suspicion
 to stop Morton's vehicle and in granting Morton's motion to
 suppress evidence on that basis.
2 As explained below, we
 
conclude that the police had reasonable suspicion to stop
 Morton's vehicle and, therefore, that the District Court erred in
 granting Morton's motion to suppress evidence. We vacate the
 District Court's Order Suppressing Evidence and the Judgments
 dismissing the charges with prejudice, and we remand the case for
 further proceedings.
 
I.
 
Morton filed a motion to suppress evidence obtained as
 
the result of the stop of her vehicle. Morton argued that the
 stop was illegal because the police lacked reasonable suspicion
 for the stop. The District Court decided the suppression motion
 based on stipulated facts, which revealed the following
 information: 
At about 10:30 p.m., Officer Carreiro was dispatched to
 
Ainamakua Drive and Meheula Parkway, where he met with Charles
 Keama (Keama) and Shannon Crisostomo (Crisostomo). Keama, who is
 
2
 The State challenges numerous conclusions of law entered by the
District Court in support of its ruling that the police lacked reasonable
suspicion for the automobile stop. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deaf, communicated in sign language to Crisostomo, who related
 
the information to Officer Carreiro. Keama (through Crisostomo's
 translation) stated that he was stopped at a traffic light when
 he was hit from behind by a vehicle driven by Morton. The
 contact caused minor damage, a small dent to Keama's rear bumper. 
Morton stopped and provided Keama with all appropriate
 information, including her name, license, and insurance. Keama
 stated that Morton had a smell of alcohol on her breath.
 
Crisostomo provided her own statement to Officer
 
Carreiro. According to Crisostomo, Morton was the driver of a
 Dodge pickup truck that struck the vehicle occupied by Crisostomo
 and Keama from behind. Crisostomo stated that Morton smelled of
 alcohol.
 
While Keama and Crisostomo were speaking to Officer
 
Carreiro, Morton drove by the scene. Keama pointed out Morton's
 vehicle to Officer Carreiro. Officer Carreiro got into his car,
 activated his siren and blue light, and stopped Morton's vehicle. 
II.
 
The District Court concluded that "[t]he statements of
 
the two witnesses, Keama and Crisostomo, were reliable and
 Officer Carreiro was entitled to act upon those facts" in
 deciding whether to stop Morton's vehicle. The District Court
 nevertheless ruled that Officer Carreiro lacked reasonable
 suspicion to stop Morton's vehicle. 
We conclude that the District Court erred in ruling 
that Officer Carreiro lacked reasonable suspicion to stop Morton's vehicle and in granting Morton's motion to suppress evidence. We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to suppress evidence de novo to determine whether the ruling was right or wrong. State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai' i 351, 357, 173 
P.3d 498, 504 (2007). 
In determining the validity of an automobile stop, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has applied the reasonable suspicion 
standard set forth in Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). State v. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Powell, 61 Haw. 316, 321, 603 P.2d 143, 147-48 (1979). Under
 
this standard, 
[t]o justify an investigative stop . . . , "the police
officer must be able to point to specific and articulable
facts which, taken together with rational inferences from
those facts, reasonably warrant that intrusion." Terry v.
Ohio, supra, 392 U.S. at 21, 88 S.Ct. (1968) at 1880. The
 ultimate test in these situations must be whether from these
 facts, measured by an objective standard, a man of
reasonable caution would be warranted in believing that
criminal activity was afoot and that the action taken was
appropriate.
 
Id. at 321-22, 603 P.2d at 148. The determination of reasonable
 
suspicion is based on the totality of the circumstances. State
 
v. Prendergast, 103 Hawai' i 451, 454, 83 P.3d 714, 717 (2004). 
Here, the information provided by Keama and Crisostomo,
 
which the District Court acknowledged was reliable and could be
 
3
relied upon by Officer Carreiro,  provided Officer Carreiro with
specific and articulable facts establishing his reasonable
 suspicion to stop Morton's vehicle. Keama and Crisostomo both
 stated that Morton smelled of alcohol. Based on these
 statements, Officer Carreiro could reasonably infer that Morton
 had consumed alcohol. Keama and Crisostomo also stated that
 their vehicle had been rear-ended by the pickup truck Morton was
 driving as they were stopped at a traffic light. From this
 information, Officer Carreiro could reasonably infer that
 Morton's consumption of alcohol had impaired her ability to drive
 safely. The inability of a driver who smells of alcohol to
 exercise control over his or her vehicle provides strong and
 clear indicia of impairment due to the influence of alcohol. 
We conclude that Officer Carreiro had reasonable
 
suspicion to believe that Morton was operating her truck "[w]hile
 under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair
 [her] normal mental faculties or ability to care for [herself]
 and guard against casualty[.]" 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
3
 See State v. Decano, 60 Haw. 205, 210–11, 588 P.2d 909, 913–14 (1978)
 
(concluding that information given by a ordinary citizen who witnesses a crime
is presumed reliable). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 291E-61(a)(1) (2007). Officer Carreiro therefore had
 
reasonable suspicion to stop Morton's vehicle to investigate
 whether she was committing the offense of OVUII. The District
 Court erred in granting Morton's motion to suppress evidence.
 
III.
 
We vacate the Order Suppressing Evidence and the
 
District Court's Judgments dismissing the charges with prejudice. 
We remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 25, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian A. Costa James A. DeLacy(Costa & DeLacy, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 