 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29148
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
KAREN L. MEREDITH, individually and in her capacity as Guardian
of Ruth Scupholm; and JEFFREY MOREIRA, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
BARBARA J. RAPISORA; BRANDON C. LAU; and PRUDENTIAL LOCATIONS,
LLC; JOHN DOES 1-10 and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
KATHLEEN M.S. MIKATICH and DIANNE M.S. FRAZIER,
Intervenors/Descendants-Appellants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-1018)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Intervenors/Descendants-Appellants Kathleen M.S.
 
Mikatich (Mikatich) and Dianne M.S. Frazier (Frazier)
 
(collectively, Intervenors) appeal from the order denying their
 
1
motion for intervention or joinder (Order)  that was entered by
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
2 On
 
appeal, Intervenors contend in their points of error that the
 
1
 The full title of the Order is "Order Denying Motion to Intervene and
Rule 19 Joinder of Persons Needed for Just Adjudication and Motion for a Rule
59(e) Alteration or Amendment of Judgment and/or Alternatively Motion for Rule
60(b) for Relief from Judgment of Order and/or Alternatively Motion for Rule
62(b) Stay of Proceedings to Enforce Judgment Granting Plaintiffs' Motion to
Enforce Settlement Agreement, Filed December 28, 2007." 
2
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court erred in: (1) denying their motion to intervene as
 
of right pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
3
24(a) (2006);  (2) denying their motion for permissive
4
intervention pursuant to HRCP Rule 24(b) (2006);  and denying
their motion for joinder pursuant to HRCP Rule 19 (2000).
5 We
 
affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
Chester Scupholm (Chester) and Ruth Scupholm (Ruth)
 
were married in 1969. Intervenors are Chester's daughters from a
 prior marriage. Chester had apparently become estranged from
 Intervenors and had not seen them for approximately forty years. 
Chester and Ruth did not have any children together. 
3
 HRCP Rule 24(a) provides, in pertinent part:
 
(a) Intervention of right. Upon timely application anyone
shall be permitted to intervene in an action: . . . (2) when the
applicant claims an interest relating to the property or transaction
which is the subject of the action and the applicant is so situated
that the disposition of the action may as a practical matter impair
or impede the applicant's ability to protect that interest, unless
the applicant's interest is adequately represented by existing
parties. 
4
 HRCP Rule 24(b) provides, in pertinent part:
 
(b) Permissive intervention. Upon timely application anyone
may be permitted to intervene in an action: . . . (2) when an
applicant's claim or defense and the main action have a question of
law or fact in common. . . . In exercising its discretion the
court shall consider whether the intervention will unduly delay or
prejudice the adjudication or the rights of the original parties. 
5
 HRCP Rule 19 provides, in pertinent part:
 
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible. A person who is subject
to service of process shall be joined as a party in the action if
(1) in the person's absence complete relief cannot be accorded among
those already parties, or (2) the person claims an interest relating
to the subject of the action and is so situated that the disposition
of the action in the person's absence may (A) as a practical matter
impair or impede the person's ability to protect that interest or
(B) leave any of the persons already parties subject to a
substantial risk of incurring double, multiple, or otherwise
inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed interest. If the
 person has not been so joined, the court shall order that the person
be made a party. If the person should join as a plaintiff but
refuses to do so, the person may be made a defendant, or, in a
proper case, an involuntary plaintiff.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs-Appellees Karen L. Meredith (Meredith) and Jeffrey
 
Moreira (Moreira) are, respectively, Ruth's niece and nephew. 
In April or May of 2005, Defendant-Appellee Barbara J.
 
Rapisora (Rapisora) met Ruth at Kahala Mall and accompanied her
 home. Rapisora had no prior relationship with Chester or Ruth,
 who in 2005 were both in their eighties. Rapisora became the
 Scupholms' sole housekeeper and caregiver.
 
On January 22, 2007, Chester signed a Last Will and
 
Testament (Will) that expressly disinherited Intervenors as well
 as Meredith and Moreira, named Rapisora as the sole beneficiary
 of his estate, and appointed Rapisora to be his personal
 representative. The Will cites the lack of a relationship
 between Chester and Intervenors for a period of forty years as
 the reason for his disinheriting them and states that Chester
 does not want Intervenors to be notified of his passing. The
 Will was drafted by Navy Staff Judge Advocate Lieutenant Erin
 Baxter, a friend of Rapisora's. In January 2007, Rapisora
 replaced Ruth on a bank account at Central Pacific Bank that
 Chester had previously held as trustee for Ruth. In March 2007,
 approximately $729,000, which was originally from Chester and
 Ruth's accounts (including certificates of deposit), was
 allegedly used to purchase residential real property in Kailua
 (Kailua Property). The March 14, 2007, deed for the Kailua
 Property identifies the grantees as Chester and Rapisora "as
 JOINT TENANTS with full rights of survivorship and not as tenants
 in common[.]" Chester passed away on April 21, 2007.
 
B.
 
Meredith, individually and in her capacity as Ruth's
 
guardian, and Moreira (collectively Plaintiffs) filed a Complaint
 on June 5, 2007. Plaintiffs filed a First Amended Complaint on
 September 7, 2007, which named Rapisora, Brandon C. Lau (Lau),
 and Prudential Locations, LLC. (Prudential) as defendants. The
 First Amended Complaint alleged, among other things that: (1)
 Ruth was 86 years old and suffered from Alzheimers disease; (2) 
Chester had suffered numerous strokes before his death; (3)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chester and Ruth hired Rapisora as a full-time housekeeper and
 
caretaker in 2006; (4) through improper means, Rapisora obtained
 control over Chester and Ruth's finances and legal documents; (5)
 Lau was a real estate agent for Prudential and represented
 Chester in the purchase of the Kailua Property; (6) Lau failed to
 properly advise Chester and allowed the Kailua Property to be
 conveyed to Chester and Rapisora as joint tenants; (7) Rapisora
 manipulated Chester into using funds from the redemption of
 certificates of deposits held by Chester and Ruth to purchase the
 Kailua Property; (8) thirty-six days after the Kailua Property
 was purchased, Chester "suddenly died" leaving Rapisora as the
 sole owner of the property; and (9) at the time of Chester's
 death, Rapisora administered all of Chester's medications and
 prepared all of his meals. 
The First Amended Complaint alleged the following
 
causes of action: undue influence (Count 1), duress (Count 2),
 breach of fiduciary duties (Count 3), tortious conversion (Count
 4), unfair and deceptive trade practices (Count 5), wrongful
 death (Count 6), tortious interference with inheritance (Count
 7), negligence (Count 8), unjust enrichment (Count 9), and
 punitive damages (Count 10). Plaintiffs asserted all of the
 counts against Rapisora and Counts 3, 8, and 10 against Lau and
 Prudential. The Plaintiffs sought relief, including a
 reformation of the deed on the Kailua Property to make Chester
 and Ruth joint tenants and special, general, consequential,
 statutory, and punitive damages.
 
In the course of the proceedings, Plaintiffs engaged in
 
substantial discovery and obtained two preliminary injunctions
 directed at preventing Rapisora from selling the Kailua Property
 and accessing funds from accounts formerly held by Chester and/or
 Ruth. In addition, the Office of Public Guardian was appointed
 to replace Meredith as Ruth's guardian. 
In October 2007, the parties agreed to participate in
 
mediation. On December 13, 2007, after participating in
 mediation, the parties reached a settlement agreement, in which
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the parties agreed on various matters, including future
 
caregiving services by Rapisora for Ruth, compensation for
 Rapisora, the conveyance of the Kailua Property, and the
 distribution of Ruth's estate upon her death.
 
Rapisora apparently had second thoughts about the
 
settlement agreement. On December 20, 2007, Rapisora contacted
 Intervenors and advised them of Chester's death and Plaintiffs'
 lawsuit. Intervenors had not previously been aware of Chester's
 death or Plaintiffs' lawsuit. On December 24, 2007, Intervenors
 sent a letter to counsel for the parties, stating that
 Intervenors were Chester's biological children, were aware of the
 legal proceedings, had an interest in Chester's estate, and had
 retained counsel to protect their interests. On December 27,
 2007, Plaintiffs were informed that Rapisora had changed her mind
 about the settlement agreement. On December 28, 2007, Plaintiffs
 filed a motion to enforce the settlement agreement, and on
 January 23, 2008, the Circuit Court granted Plaintiffs' motion.
 
On February 4, 2008, Intervenors filed their motion for
 
intervention and joinder. Plaintiffs filed an opposition to
 Intervenors' motion, arguing that Intervenors had no interest in
 the property at issue in the lawsuit and had the ability to
 protect their asserted interest in Chester's estate by
 participating in the separate probate proceeding that had
 recently been filed concerning Chester's estate. Ruth passed
 away on March 14, 2008, the same day that the Circuit Court held
 a hearing on Intervenors' motion.
 
At the hearing, the Circuit Court asked whether the
 
funds used to purchase the Kailua Property and the funds in the
 
6
Chester/Rapisora bank account  had come from joint accounts held
by Chester and Ruth. The court-appointed conservator for Ruth
 responded that these funds came from jointly held accounts or
 
6
 The Circuit Court was apparently referring to the account held by
Chester as trustee for Rapisora, in which Rapisora had been substituted for
Ruth.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accounts separately held by Ruth, because Chester did not have a
 
separate account. Intervenors' counsel did not object to or
 contradict this response. The Circuit Court advised Intervenors'
 counsel of its inclination to deny Intervenors' motion because
 Intervenors "actually would not have any interest in the property
 that was subject to this lawsuit, and if [Intervenors] had any
 interest, it would be in the estate, which there is a separate
 probate and which [Intervenors] are apparently represented by Mr.
 Shigemura." After expressing its inclination, the Circuit Court
 asked Intervenors' counsel if he had any additional arguments. 
Intervenors' counsel replied that "We found out about this
 situation late and made a timely effort to become involved. 
That's all I can -- outside of that, I can't manufacture facts,
 Judge." 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Circuit Court
 
orally denied Intervenors' motion on the ground that Intervenors
 "would not have any interest in the property that is the subject
 of this lawsuit." On April 9, 2008, the Circuit Court filed its
 written Order, denying Intervenors' motion on this ground. This
 appeal followed.
 
II.
 
We resolve Intervenors' points of error as follows:
 1. Intervenors' contend that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying their motion for intervention as of right under HRCP
 Rule 24(a)(2). We disagree.
 
In order to establish their entitlement to intervene as
 
of right under HRCP Rule 24(a)(2), Intervenors must show that:
 (1) their motion for intervention was timely; (2) they claimed "an interest relating to the property or transaction which was the subject of the action"; (3) "the disposition of the action would, as a practical matter, impair or impede [their] ability to protect that interest"; and (4) their interest was inadequately represented by existing parties. Baehr v. Miike, 80 Hawai' i 341, 
343, 910 P.2d 112, 114 (1996) (block quote format and brackets 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omitted). Intervenors have the burden of proving each of these 
four elements. See Reid v. Ill. State Bd. of Educ., 289 F.3d 
1009, 1017 (7th Cir. 2002). In addition, Intervenors must satisfy all four of these requirements because the "[f]ailure to meet even one prevents intervention 'by right' under HRCP Rule 24(a)(2)." Baehr, 80 Hawai' i at 345, 910 P.2d at 116. 
Intervenors sought intervention to protect their
 
claimed interest in Chester's estate. Their claimed interest
 depended on invalidating Chester's last Will, which expressly
 disinherited them, and proving that he died intestate. However,
 even if Intervenors could establish that Chester died intestate, 
they could not claim an interest in property that Chester held
 jointly with Ruth or that Ruth held separately.
 
In support of their motion to intervene, Intervenors
 
did not show that any property owned separately by Chester was
 the subject of Plaintiffs' lawsuit. They did not object when
 Ruth's conservator represented that no funds from accounts
 separately owned by Chester had been used to purchase the Kailua
 Property or had gone into the account held by Chester as trustee
 for Rapisora. Intervenors also did not offer any evidence that
 property owned separately by Chester at the time of his death, or
 which Chester would have owned separately at the time of his
 death if not for Rapisora's alleged undue influence, was the
 subject of the lawsuit. As the Circuit Court noted, a separate
 probate petition regarding Chester's estate had been filed and
 Intervenors were represented by counsel in that separate
 proceeding. Thus, Intervenors had the ability to assert their
 claims and protect their interests regarding Chester's estate in
 that separate proceeding. In addition, because Intervenors were
 not parties to Plaintiffs' instant lawsuit or the settlement
 agreement, they were not bound by the terms of the settlement
 agreement or precluded from litigating their interest in
 Chester's estate on the merits in separate proceedings. Under 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
err in denying Intervenors' motion to intervene as of right.
 
2. Although Intervenors assert in their point of 
error (2) that the Circuit Court erred in denying their motion for permissive intervention pursuant to HRCP Rule 24(b), they do not separately argue this point. Thus, Intervenors waived this point of error. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 28(b)(7) (2008) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). In any event, we review the denial of a motion for permissive intervention under HRCP Rule 24(b)(2) for abuse of discretion. Estate of James Campbell, 106 Hawai' i 453, 461, 106 P.3d 1096, 
1104 (2005). We conclude that Intervenors have not shown that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying their request for permissive intervention. 
3. With respect to point of error (3), in which
 
Intervenors assert that the Circuit Court erred in denying their
 motion for joinder pursuant to HRCP Rule 19, Intervenors simply
 incorporate "all the factual reasons listed in [their argument
 regarding intervention as of right]." We review the trial
 court's decision on joinder pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(a) for abuse
 of discretion. See Puyallup Indian Tribe v. Port of Tacoma, 717
 
F.2d 1251, 1255 (9th Cir. 1983) (construing analogous federal
 rule). We conclude that Intervenors have not shown that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying their motion for
 joinder. Moreover, this court has ruled that the appropriate
 procedural vehicle for a non-party, on its own motion, to seek
 entry into a case is intervention pursuant to HRCP Rule 24,
 rather than joinder pursuant to HRCP Rule 19(a). W.H. Shipman,
 
Ltd. v. Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co., 8 Haw. App. 354, 370,
 802 P.2d 1203, 1211 (1990).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 31, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Stuart M. Cowan
 
for Intervenors/
Descendants- Appellants 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Lyle S. Hosoda
Raina P.B. Gushiken Christopher T. Chun
Kevin T. Morikone
 (Lyle S. Hosoda & Associates, LLC)
for Plaintiffs-Appellees 
9
 