FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--–
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
CURTIS RAY BROOKS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. 29605 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 07-1-0394)
 
OCTOBER 21, 2011
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Curtis Ray Brooks (Brooks) and
 
Sistine Rangamar (Rangamar) were charged with the murder,
 
kidnapping, and robbery of Ted Arifuku (Arifuku). 
Rangamar gave
 
a statement to the police shortly after his arrest. In his
 statement, Rangamar admitted that he had assaulted, restrained,
 and robbed Arifuku, but also asserted that his actions had been
 pursuant to a plan devised by Brooks and implicated Brooks in
 Arifuku's murder. Rangamar committed suicide before trial. 
Brooks filed a pre-trial motion in limine, seeking
 
authorization to introduce at trial selected portions of
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rangamar's statement that incriminated Rangamar. Brooks sought
 
to introduce these self-incriminating portions of Rangamar's
 statement to bolster his claim that Rangamar was solely
 responsible for the offenses committed against Arifuku. 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) argued that 
if Brooks was allowed to introduce the self-incriminating portions of Rangamar's statement, then the State should be allowed to introduce other portions of the statement that incriminated Brooks, pursuant to the "rule of completeness" set forth in Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 106 (1993).
1 
Brooks countered that the self-incriminating portions of Rangamar's statement were admissible as statements against penal 
2
interest, pursuant to HRE Rule 804(b)(3) (1993),  but that the
admission of the portions of Rangamar's statement that
 incriminated Brooks would violate Brooks's constitutional right
 of confrontation under 
Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36
 
(2004). 
1 HRE Rule 106 provides:
 
When a writing or recorded statement or part thereof is
introduced by a party, an adverse party may require the party at
that time to introduce any other part or any other writing or
recorded statement which ought in fairness to be considered
contemporaneously with it.
 
2 HRE Rule 804(b)(3) provides:
 
(b) Hearsay exceptions. The following are not excluded by
the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable as a witness:
 
. . . .
 
(3) Statement against interest. A statement which was at
 
the time of its making so far contrary to the declarant's
pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so far tended to subject the
declarant to civil or criminal liability, or to render invalid a
claim by the declarant against another, that a reasonable person
in the declarant's position would not have made the statement
unless the declarant believed it to be true. A statement tending
to expose the declarant to criminal liability and offered to
exculpate the accused is not admissible unless corroborating
circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the
statement[.]
 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)3
 
determined that the self-incriminating portions of Rangamar's
 
statement that Brooks sought to introduce, when taken in
 isolation, were "likely to mislead the jury and to distort the
 content and context of Rangamar's entire statement." The Circuit
 Court also concluded that "Crawford does not bar the introduction
 of evidence required under HRE Rule 106." The Circuit Court
 ruled:
 
Once [Brooks] makes the tactical decision to introduce
the selected portions of Rangamar's statement to the police,
he will waive or forfeit any claim that the introduction by
the State of the portions of the statement necessary to
prevent the jury from being misled pursuant to HRE Rule 106
violates the Confrontation Clause.
 
At trial, Brooks introduced selected self-incriminating
 
portions of Rangamar's statement, and the State was permitted to
 
introduce other portions of Rangamar's statement under HRE Rule
 106. The jury found Brooks guilty of the lesser included offense
 
of manslaughter and guilty as charged of kidnapping and robbery.
 
As his sole issue on appeal, Brooks argues that the 
Circuit Court erred in ruling that by introducing selected
 portions of Rangamar's statement, Brooks waived or forfeited any
 claim that the State's introduction of the portions of the
 statement necessary to prevent the jury from being misled
 pursuant to HRE Rule 106 violates the Confrontation Clause. We
 affirm the Circuit Court's decision.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
On January 15, 2007, an apartment manager opened the
 
door to Arifuku's apartment and found Arifuku lying face down on
 the floor with his hands tied behind his back. Arifuku was dead. 
Arifuku had bruises and cuts on his face and bruises on his
 scalp, neck, chest, back, arms, and legs. Based on Arifuku's
 autopsy, Gayle Suzuki, M.D., Deputy Medical Examiner for the City 
3
 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided. 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and County of Honolulu, determined the cause of death to be
 
"asphyxia due to neck compression, due to manual strangulation." 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Detective James
 
Anderson (Detective Anderson) was assigned to investigate
 Arifuku's death. In Arifuku's apartment, the police recovered a
 homemade utility knife, consisting of an "X-Acto" blade wrapped
 in a cigarette package, next to Arifuku's body; a blue cap that
 was on the bed; $2,002 from a wallet in pants hanging inside a
 closet on the door; and various quantities of what appeared to be
 methamphetamine and marijuana located in drawers. 
On January 16, 2007, the day after Arifuku's body was
 
discovered, Detective Anderson learned that an FBI agent had
 received information about the case from Patty Estabilio
 (Estabilio), Brooks's aunt by marriage. After being apprised of
 this information, Detective Anderson began looking for Brooks. 
Detective Anderson spoke to Estabilio over the phone on January
 16, 2007, and he later held in-person interviews with Estabilio
 and her roommate, Amy Katten (Katten), at their apartment. 
Katten identified a cap that Detective Anderson showed her at the
 police station as belonging to Brooks. Both Estabilio and Katten
 testified at Brooks's trial.
 
According to Estabilio, she encountered Brooks by
 
chance in 2006 and learned that she was his aunt. Brooks would
 frequently visit her apartment, and they developed a relationship
 of trust and were able to confide in each other. Prior January
 13, 2007, Brooks told Estabilio on several occasions that he
 wanted to rob Arifuku because Brooks thought Arifuku had a load
 of "ice" (crystal methamphetamine) and money. At the time Brooks
 made these statements, Estabilio did not believe that Brooks was
 serious, but when she heard that Arifuku had been killed, she
 immediately thought that Brooks had done it. Estabilio talked to
 Katten who called an FBI agent they both knew. A short time
 after Estabilio learned about Arifuku's death, Brooks told
 Estabilio that Brooks "did something that he couldn't fix."
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
According to Katten, she met Brooks and found out he
 
was related to Estabilio. After Katten and Estabilio learned
 
that Arifuku had died, Brooks, while alone with Katten, told her
 that "I did something that I cannot undo."
 
In January 2007, Brooks was homeless and living out of 
a van parked on Mahi' ai Street just off of Date Street. 
Estabilio provided Detective Anderson with the location of the van. On January 24, 2007, Brooks was found in his van and was arrested. The van was secured and towed to the main police station. Brooks provided Detective Anderson with Rangamar's name, and Detective Anderson began looking for Rangamar as an additional suspect in the case. 
On February 5, 2007, the police located Rangamar and
 
his girlfriend, Naliki Christopher (Christopher), and arrested
 Rangamar. On that day and again on the following day, Detective
 Anderson interviewed Christopher. Christopher also testified at
 trial.
 
According to Christopher, she had been in a long-term
 
relationship with Rangamar. Christopher and Rangamar met Brooks
 in January 2007 through Brooks's girlfriend, "Honey Girl," who
 was Christopher's friend. At that time, all four of them were
 using ice, and Christopher and Rangamar were living in a tent at
 Ala Wai Park, which was not far from where Brooks's van was
 parked. Rangamar's birthday was January 13th. Prior to January
 13, 2007, Christopher heard Brooks discuss with Rangamar a plan
 to rob Arifuku. Brooks knew Arifuku and said that Arifuku was a
 drug dealer who sold ice and was disabled. Brooks drew a floor
 plan of Arifuku's apartment in Brooks's sketchbook, which was
 introduced at trial. Under Brooks's plan, Rangamar was to knock
 Arifuku out, then signal Brooks that it was okay for Brooks to
 come in by turning on the light in front. Brooks said he was a
 "good friend" of Arifuku and therefore knew where things were in
 Arifuku's apartment.
 
Christopher testified that on January 13, 2007, Brooks
 
came to the tent in the morning, wished Rangamar "Happy
 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Birthday," and left with Rangamar. Brooks later returned to the
 
tent without Rangamar. Christopher went to get something to eat
 and Brooks tagged along. When they came back, they found
 Rangamar lying in the tent. Rangamar was bleeding from cuts on
 his "right lap," wrist, and ankle, and he was upset with Brooks. 
Rangamar asked Brooks why he had not come into Arifuku's
 apartment when Rangamar turned on the light and opened the door. 
Brooks asked Rangamar, "where's the money," "where was the
 drugs," and if Arifuku was dead or not.
4 Rangamar explained that
 
he went into Arifuku's apartment and tried to knock Arifuku out,
 but they got into a struggle, during which Arifuku got ahold of a
 knife and stabbed Rangamar. Brooks had earlier placed the knife
 in Rangamar's pocket. Eventually, Rangamar was able to
 incapacitate Arifuku and tie him up.
 
Christopher saw Rangamar give Brooks $300 to $400,
 
which was roughly half of the amount of money that Rangamar said
 he had taken from Arifuku. Rangamar did not have any drugs to
 split with Brooks. Rangamar later confided to Christopher that
 he had obtained more money from Arifuku than Rangamar had
 disclosed to Brooks. Brooks indicated that he thought there was
 drugs and more money in Arifuku's apartment. Brooks left the
 tent and came back with Honey Girl, and they all smoked ice. 
Brooks and Honey Girl then left the tent. When they returned,
 they had a lot more ice. Brooks stated that he had gone by
 Arifuku's apartment "to go check and see" and that he "went go
 choke 'em one more time." When Brooks said that, his girlfriend,
 Honey Girl, pinched him and said, "why you got to say it like
 that for?".
 
II.
 
On February 7, 2007, Rangamar waived his Miranda rights
 
and made a recorded statement to Detective Anderson. Rangamar's
 recorded statement included the following information.
 
4
 Christopher stated that Brooks used the Hawaiian word "make," which
means "[t]o die, perish; . . . dead, killed . . . ." Mary K. Pukui & Samuel
H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary 228 (1986). 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rangamar reported that Brooks had first discussed a
 
plan to rob Arifuku before January 13, 2007. At that time,
 
Brooks drew a layout of Arifuku's apartment in an "art book." 
However, Rangamar turned Brooks down because Rangamar still had
 money and Christopher told Rangamar not to participate.
 
On January 13, 2007, which was Rangamar's birthday,
 
Brooks came by Rangamar's tent. They went to Brooks's van, where
 Brooks gave Rangamar ice to smoke, so they could "get rev up
 about [Brooks's] plan." Rangamar had run out of money and
 decided to participate in the plan. Brooks told Rangamar that
 Arifuku sold ice and "weed," so Rangamar should knock on
 Arifuku's door and say that "Mark" sent Rangamar to "pick up a
 twenty dollar." Brooks would be waiting at the back of the
 apartment for Rangamar to get into the apartment, "knock
 [Arifuku] up," and let Brooks in from the back door. Brooks
 instructed Rangamar that once Arifuku is "knocked out," to "tie
 him up" so that Arifuku could not move and Brooks could come into
 the apartment without being seen. Brooks wanted Rangamar to do
 this because Arifuku knew Brooks and could identify Brooks. 
Brooks told Rangamar that Arifuku was old and crippled and that
 it would be easy for Rangamar to "knock [Arifuku] out." Brooks
 gave Rangamar a homemade knife to use to threaten Arifuku and
 some cloth to tie up Arifuku. Rangamar also put on a cap that
 was in Brooks's van that belonged to Brooks.
 
In accordance with Brooks's plan, in the morning on
 
January 13, 2007, Rangamar went to Arifuku's apartment and
 knocked on the door. When Arifuku opened the door, Rangamar
 stepped in, asked if he could buy a "twenty," and said that
 "Mark" had sent him. Arifuku apparently became suspicious and
 tried to usher Rangamar out of the apartment. Rangamar hit
 Arifuku in the face and a struggle ensued. During the struggle,
 Arifuku obtained possession of the knife Brooks had given
 Rangamar and cut Rangamar. They ended up on the floor, and
 Rangamar was able to use his heels to kick Arifuku until Arifuku
 became incapacitated and released the knife. Rangamar turned
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Arifuku over on his stomach and tied his hands behind his back. 
Arifuku was bleeding from the mouth, but Rangamar could still
 hear him breathing. Rangamar himself collapsed and lost
 consciousness. When Rangamar came to, he knocked on the back
 door to signal Brooks to come in, but Brooks did not enter. 
Rangamar took about $2,600 from Arifuku's back pocket and
 Arifuku's keys. When Rangamar left the apartment, Arifuku was
 still breathing, and while outside, Rangamar thought he heard
 Arifuku say "help."
 
Rangamar looked for Brooks and eventually went back to
 
Rangamar's tent. Brooks showed up at the tent with Christopher,
 and Brooks asked Rangamar, "[D]id you get anything?" Rangamar
 was mad at Brooks for leaving him "hanging" at Arifuku's
 apartment. Rangamar told Brooks that he had only taken $600 from
 Arifuku's apartment, and Rangamar split that amount with Brooks. 
Brooks wanted to go back to Arifuku's apartment. Honey Girl came
 to the tent, and Brooks and Honey Girl left the tent and came
 back on two occasions that evening.
 
Rangamar later learned that Arifuku had been killed by
 
manual strangulation. Rangamar denied strangling Arifuku. 
Arifuku was still breathing when Rangamar left Arifuku's
 apartment. Rangamar thought that Brooks had gone back and choked
 Arifuku.
 
III.
 
Brooks and Rangamar were jointly charged by complaint
 
with second degree murder (Count 1); kidnapping (Count 2); and
 first degree robbery (Count 3). Prior to trial, Rangamar
 committed suicide, leaving Brooks as the sole defendant.
 
A.
 
Brooks filed a motion in limine, seeking a pre-trial
 
ruling from the Circuit Court allowing him to introduce selected
 portions of Rangamar's recorded statement to Detective Anderson
 as statements against Rangamar's penal interest, pursuant to HRE
 Rule 804(b)(3). The portions of Rangamar's recorded statement
 that Brooks sought to introduce included portions in which
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rangamar recounted his actions in assaulting, tying up, and
 
robbing Arifuku; stated that he had brought Brooks's cap and a
 homemade knife to Arifuku's apartment that had been left behind;
 detailed his conduct after leaving Arifuku's apartment; told
 Brooks and Christopher at the tent that Rangamar did not know if
 he had just knocked Arifuku out or might have killed Arifuku; and
 claimed that he heard Brooks say that Brooks went back to
 Arifuku's apartment and choked Arifuku, but later acknowledged
 that Christopher told him that Brooks had made this statement,
 and Rangamar told Christopher he did not remember Brooks saying
 it.
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court heard argument and orally ruled on
 
Brooks's motion in limine before trial. The Circuit Court
 subsequently filed a written order setting forth in detail its
 decision and analysis.
5
 
1.
 
The Circuit Court began its analysis by noting:
 
In Crawford v. Washington, the United States Supreme
Court held that the Confrontation Clause of the Federal
 
Constitution bars the admission of out-of-court
 "testimonial" statements except where the declarant is
unavailable and the defendant had the prior opportunity to
cross-examine the declarant on the statement. Crawford, 541
U.S. 36, 68 (2004); accord State v. Fields, 115 Hawai' i 503,
513, 168 P.3d 955, 965 (2007). The Supreme Court declinedto comprehensively define the term "testimonial", but heldthat, at a minimum, the term included . . . statements madeduring police interrogations. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 68. 
The Circuit Court framed the parties' arguments as
 
follows:
 
1. Brooks seeks to introduce selected portions of an
 
out-of-court statement made by Rangamar, who is deceased, to
 
Detective Anderson when Rangamar was under arrest for the murder
 
5 We note that the transcript of the hearing held by the Circuit Court
on Brooks's motion in limine on November 29, 2007, is not included in the
record on appeal. As the appellant, Brooks is responsible for ensuring thatthe record is complete. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 10
(2009) and Rule 11(a) (2006 & 2010). However, in light of the Circuit Court'sdetailed order setting forth its decision on the motion in limine, we are ableto evaluate the Circuit Court's decision based on the existing record. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Arifuku. Brooks asserts that the selected portions of
 
Rangamar's statement that Brooks seeks to introduce are
 admissible as statements against Rangamar's penal interest that
 are corroborated by other evidence. 
2. The State argues that if Brooks is permitted to
 
introduce portions of Rangamar's statement, then it should be
 allowed to introduce other portions of the same statement
 necessary to explain or clarify the portions proffered by Brooks. 
The State relies upon the rule of completeness set forth in HRE
 Rule 106. The Commentary to HRE 106 provides that the rule is
 based on considerations which include "the misleading impression
 created by taking matters out of context." Statements introduced
 under HRE Rule 106 need not otherwise be admissible. Monlux v.
 
General Motors, 68 Haw. 358, 367, 714 P.2d 930, 936 (1986). 
3. Brooks argues that because Rangamar cannot be
 
cross-examined on his statement to Detective Anderson, Crawford
 precludes the State from introducing the portions of the
 statement that would otherwise be admissible under HRE 106. "In
 other words, [Brooks] argues that he should be able to introduce
 the self-incriminating portions of Rangamar's statement as
 statements against penal interest while, at the same time, using
 Crawford to prevent the State from introducing other portions of
 the statement that may incriminate [Brooks]."
 
2.
 
The Circuit Court asserted that although neither the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court nor the United States Supreme Court had 
addressed the argument advanced by Brooks, courts from other jurisdictions have "held that the rule of completeness need not yield to Crawford when a defendant voluntarily introduces portions of an out-of-court testimonial statement." The Circuit Court cited and explained the rationale of the following cases that have reached this holding: Arizona v. Prasertphong, 114 
P.3d 828 (Ariz. 2005); People v. Parrish, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 868 (Cal. Ct. App. 2007); United States v. Moussaoui, 382 F.3d 453 
10
   
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4th Cir. 2004); and State v. Selalla, 744 N.W.2d 802 (S.D.
 
2008).
 
The Circuit Court agreed with the reasoning and the
 
rationale advanced in these cases, and it concluded as follows:
 
The Court concludes that, because the statement is
testimonial and Rangamar is not available for cross-
examination, [Brooks] could prevent the [S]tate from
introducing any portion of the statement under Crawford. 
The Court also concludes that the portions of Rangamar's
statement proffered by [Brooks] are admissible as statements
against Rangamar's penal interest and are corroborated by
other evidence. When taken in isolation, however, the
portions of the statement [Brooks] seeks to introduce are
also likely to mislead the jury and to distort the content
and context of Rangamar's entire statement. The Court finds
 that Crawford does not bar the introduction of evidence
 required under HRE Rule 106. This rule applies regardless
of the reason for the declarant's unavailability. Even
 though [Brooks] is not responsible for the unavailability of
Rangamar, he cannot be permitted to introduce misleading or
distorted evidence to a jury.
 
Based on its analysis, the Circuit Court ruled: 
Once [Brooks] makes the tactical decision to introduce
the selected portions of Rangamar's statement to the police,
he will waive or forfeit any claim that the introduction by
the State of the portions of the statement necessary to
prevent the jury from being misled pursuant to HRE Rule 106
violates the Confrontation Clause.
 
In addition, the Circuit Court noted that absent such a waiver or
 
forfeiture of the confrontation right, the portions of Rangamar's
 statement that Brooks sought to admit would be excluded under HRE
 
6
Rule 403 (1993)  (if the State was not allowed to introduce other
portions authorized by HRE Rule 106) "because the probative 
value of the statements [proffered by Brooks] would be
 substantially outweighed by their prejudicial effect of
 misleading the jury."
 
6 HRE Rule 403 provides:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
11
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. 
The Circuit Court's order also separately reviewed the
 
portions of Rangamar's statement that Brooks sought to introduce
 
and analyzed whether the portions of Rangamar's statement the
 State proffered in response were admissible under HRE Rule 106. 
For purposes of its analysis, the Circuit Court divided the
 portions of Rangamar's statement proffered by Brooks into eight
 groups, and for each group evaluated the portions of Rangamar's
 statement that the State proffered in response. With one
 
7
exception,  the Circuit Court ruled that the responsive portions
proffered by the State were admissible under HRE Rule 106 because
 the portions proffered by Brooks would mislead the jury if the
 responsive portions proffered by the State were not admitted.
 
4. 
After completing its HRE Rule 106 analysis, the Circuit
 
Court evaluated the admissibility of the responsive portions of
 Rangamar's statement proffered by the State under HRE Rule 403. 
The Circuit Court ruled that the responsive portions of
 Rangamar's statement proffered by the State that the court found 
admissible under HRE Rule 106 were not excludable under HRE Rule
 403. 
The Circuit Court determined that the responsive
 
portions of Rangamar's statement proffered by the State were
 "extremely probative" because (1) they "place the exculpatory
 portions proffered by [Brooks] in context and prevent the jury
 from being misled about what Rangamar said about his involvement
 in the crime"; and (2) if admitted in isolation, the portions of
 the statement proffered by Brooks would create a "significant
 
7
 The exception pertained to the portion of Rangamar's statement in
which Rangamar acknowledged that he had brought a cap belonging to Brooks to
Arifuku's apartment, which Rangamar had left behind. The Circuit Court noted
 that Brooks was offering this portion of the statement to refute the inference
that Brooks's cap was at the crime scene because Brooks had left it there.
The Circuit Court ruled that the portion of Rangamar's statement proffered by
the State in response was not admissible under HRE Rule 106 because it did
"little to clarify, explain, or counter" the portion proffered by Brooks. At
 trial, the parties stipulated that Brooks was a contributor to the mixed DNA
profile obtained from the cap. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
likelihood that the integrity of the factfinding process would be
 
compromised because the jury would receive a misleading portrait
 of Rangamar's statement."
 
The Circuit Court further found that the responsive
 
portions of Rangamar's statement proffered by the State would not
 subject Brooks to unfair prejudice. Rather, the Circuit Court
 stated that "contrary to [Brooks's] assertions, it would be
 unfairly prejudicial to allow [Brooks] to introduce the proffered
 portions of Rangamar's statements without allowing the State to
 introduce any portion necessary to correct the misleading
 impression created by the jury considering the statement out of
 context." The Circuit Court reasoned that "the portions of
 Rangamar's statement that [Brooks] seeks to introduce would so
 distort the accuracy and integrity of the factfinding process if
 offered in isolation that HRE Rule 403 would bar their admission
 if the State were not allowed to introduce clarifying and
 contextualizing portions of the statement."
 
IV.
 
Brooks's theory of defense at trial was that Rangamar
 
was solely responsible for the crimes committed against Arifuku,
 in other words, that Rangamar acted alone and not pursuant to a
 plan devised by Brooks. In support of this theory, Brooks
 elicited during his examination of Detective Anderson selected
 portions of Rangamar's statement to Detective Anderson that
 Brooks had proffered in his motion in limine. This included
 portions of Rangamar's statement in which Rangamar admitted his
 involvement in assaulting, restraining, and robbing Arifuku and
 acknowledged bringing the cap and homemade knife to Arifuku's
 apartment that were later recovered by the police. In response,
 the State elicited other portions of Rangamar's statement in
 which Rangamar asserted that his actions had been pursuant to a
 plan devised by Brooks and also implicated Brooks in Arifuku's
 murder.
 
The jury returned verdicts of guilty of the lesser
 
included offense of manslaughter and guilty as charged of
 
13
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
kidnapping and robbery. The jury also returned special
 
interrogatories supporting the merger of the manslaughter and
 robbery charges and the merger of the kidnapping and robbery
 charges. The State elected to dismiss the robbery charge, and
 the Circuit Court dismissed that charge. The Circuit Court
 imposed twenty-year terms of imprisonment on the manslaughter and
 kidnapping convictions to be served consecutively to each other
 and concurrently with the sentences imposed in another case. The
 Circuit Court entered its Judgment on December 30, 2008, and this
 appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
On appeal, Brooks challenges the Circuit Court's ruling
 
that once he made the tactical decision to introduce selected
 portions of Rangamar's statement, he waived or forfeited his
 claim that the State's introduction, pursuant to HRE Rule 106, of
 other portions of the statement necessary to prevent the jury
 from being misled violated the confrontation clause. Brooks does
 not challenge the Circuit Court's determination that the
 responsive portions of Rangamar's statement offered by the State
 were necessary to place the portions offered by Brooks in context
 and to prevent the jury from being misled. In effect, Brooks
 argues that he was entitled to introduce evidence favorable to
 his case in a manner that would mislead the jury, and then use
 Crawford to block the State from revealing that his evidence was
 misleading. We disagree.
8
 
8
 Our analysis is directed at the portions of Rangamar's statement
proffered by Brooks for which the Circuit Court ruled that the responsive
portions proffered by the State were necessary to avoid misleading the jury
and were admissible under HRE Rule 106. As noted, there was one exception in
the Circuit Court's ruling that pertained to the portion of Rangamar's
statement in which he acknowledged bringing a cap belonging to Brooks to
Arifuku's apartment and leaving it behind. The Circuit Court ruled that the
 portion of Rangamar's statement proffered by the State in response was not
admissible pursuant to HRE Rule 106. See footnote 7, supra. Thus, Brooks was
permitted to introduce the portion of Rangamar's statement relating to the cap
evidence without the State being able to introduce any portion of Rangamar's
statement in response. 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
A defendant has the right under the confrontation 
clause of the United States and Hawai' i Constitutions to preclude 
the prosecution from admitting a testimonial hearsay statement 
unless the declarant is unavailable and the defendant had a prior opportunity to cross-examine the declarant about the statement. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 68; State v. Fields, 115 Hawai' i 503, 513, 
516, 168 P.3d 955, 965, 968 (2007).
9 However, both the United 
States Supreme Court and the Hawai' i Supreme Court have concluded 
that a criminal defendant's "right to confront and to cross-examine is not absolute and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodate other legitimate interests in the criminal trial process." Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284, 295 (1973); 
State v. El'ayache, 62 Haw. 646, 649, 618 P.2d 1142, 1144 (1980). The same is true of a criminal defendant's right to present relevant testimony which also "is not without limitation" and may be subject to evidentiary rules designed to further legitimate interest in the criminal trial process. Michigan v. Lucas, 500 
U.S. 145, 149 (1991); State v. Pond, 118 Hawai' i 452, 463, 193 
P.3d 368, 379 (2008) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see Crane v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 683, 690 (1986) ("[The United States Supreme Court has] never questioned the power of States to exclude evidence through the application of evidentiary rules that themselves serve the interests of fairness and reliability -- even if the defendant would prefer to see that evidence admitted."). 
9
 The confrontation clause of the United States Constitution provides,
in pertinent part: "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the
right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against him[.]" U.S. Const. amend. VI. The confrontation clause of article I, section 14 of the Hawai‘iConstitution is virtually identical and states: "In all criminal prosecutions,the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be confronted with the witnessesagainst the accused [.]" In State v. Grace, 107 Hawai' i 133, 141, 111 P.3d
28, 36 (App. 2005), this court noted that "federal constitutional guaranteesare the absolute minimum constitutional protections we must afford criminaldefendants[.]” 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For example, in State v. Pond, 118 Hawai' i at 462-68, 
193 P.3d at 378-84, the Hawai' i Supreme Court rejected Pond's 
claim that the trial court had violated his constitutional right 
to present a defense and examine witnesses by precluding him from introducing HRE Rule 404(b) "bad act" evidence concerning the complaining witness due to Pond's failure to comply with the notice requirement of HRE Rule 404(b). The supreme court concluded that the notice requirement of HRE Rule 404(b) was not unconstitutional as applied to a criminal defendant because it served a legitimate interest in "protect[ing] parties and the jury trial system from falling prey to opposing counsel's trial tactics and strategies that do not promote a fair trial." Id. at 
462-67, 193 P.3d at 378-83. The supreme court also concluded that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in relying on the HRE Rule 404(b) notice requirement in precluding Pond's HRE Rule 404(b) evidence. Id. at 467-68, 193 P.3d at 383-84.
10 
In United States v. Nobles, 422 U.S. 225, 241 (1975),
 
the United States Supreme Court rejected Nobles's claim that his
 Sixth Amendment rights to compulsory process and cross-
examination were violated by the trial court's refusal to allow a
 defense investigator to testify. The trial court ruled that a
 defense investigator could not testify about interview statements
 the investigator had obtained from two key government witnesses
 unless the defense disclosed portions of the investigator's
 report that contained the witnesses' statements for the
 prosecution's use in cross-examining the investigator. Id. at
 
10
 In support of its analysis, the Hawai' i Supreme Court cited Michigan 
v. Lucas, 500 U.S. at 149 (1991) (holding that precluding a defendant charged
with rape from introducing evidence of his prior sexual relationship with the
alleged victim based on the defendant's failure to comply with the notice
requirements of Michigan's rape shield law did not per se violate the Sixth
Amendment). See also Taylor v. Illinois, 484 U.S. 400, 410-18 & n.15 (1988)
(rejecting the defendant's claim that precluding a defense witness as a
sanction for the defendant's violation of a discovery rule violated his right
to compulsory process under the Sixth Amendment and stating that "[i]n the
exercise of the right to present witnesses, the accused, as is required of the
State, must comply with established rules of procedure and evidence designed
to assure both fairness and reliability in the ascertainment of guilt and
innocence" (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted)). 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
227-29. Nobles's counsel sought to call the investigator to
 
impeach the government witnesses' trial testimony. Id. When
 
Nobles's counsel stated that he did not intend to disclose the
 investigator's report, the trial court precluded the investigator
 from testifying. Id. at 229. In holding that the trial court's
 
ruling did not violate Nobles's Sixth Amendment rights, the Court 
reasoned as follows:
 
The [trial court] did not bar the investigator's testimony.
It merely prevented [Nobles] from presenting to the jury a
partial view of the credibility issue by adducing the
investigator's testimony and thereafter refusing to disclose
the contemporaneous report that might offer further critical
insights. The Sixth Amendment does not confer the right to
present testimony free from the legitimate demands of the
adversarial system; one cannot invoke the Sixth Amendment as
a justification for presenting what might have been a
half-truth. Deciding, as we do, that it was within the
court's discretion to assure that the jury would hear the
full testimony of the investigator rather tha[n] a truncated
portion favorable to [Nobles], we think it would be
artificial indeed to deprive the court of the power to
effectuate that judgment.
 
Id. at 241 (citation omitted; emphasis added).
 
Moreover, a defendant's right of confrontation can be
 
waived. Defense counsel can waive certain aspects of a
 
defendant's right of confrontation "where such waiver is
 considered . . . a matter of trial tactics and procedure." 
El'ayache,  62 Haw. at 648, 618 P.2d at 1143; Thompson v. Yuen, 63
 
Haw. 186, 190, 623 P.2d 881, 884 (1981).
 
B.
 
Brooks provides no authority for the proposition that
 
he has a right to introduce evidence that would mislead the jury. 
Indeed, HRE Rule 403 authorizes the trial court to exclude
 relevant evidence, "if its probative value is substantially
 outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice . . . or misleading
 the jury . . . ." 
HRE Rule 403 (quoted in footnote 6). In this
 
case, the Circuit Court determined that "the portions of
 Rangamar's statement that [Brooks] seeks to introduce would so
 distort the accuracy and integrity of the factfinding process if
 offered in isolation that HRE Rule 403 would bar their admission
 if the State were not allowed to introduce clarifying and
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contextualizing portions of the statement." See State v. Faria, 
100 Hawai' i 383, 391, 60 P.3d 333, 341 (2002) (noting that 
despite a defendant's constitutional right to confront a witness, 
relevant evidence may be excluded pursuant to HRE Rule 403); Montana v. Egelhoff, 518 U.S. 37, 42 (1996) (stating that "[t]he accused does not have an unfettered right to offer evidence that is . . . inadmissible under standard rules of evidence" and citing Montana Rule of Evidence 403, which is identical to HRE Rule 403, as among the "number of familiar and unquestionably constitutional evidentiary rules" that "authorize the exclusion of relevant evidence" (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted)). In other words, the Circuit Court concluded that the selected portions of Rangamar's statement that Brooks sought to introduce would be inadmissible under HRE Rule 403 if the State was not permitted to introduce the portions of Rangamar's statement that the Circuit Court ruled were admissible pursuant to HRE Rule 106. 
Here, the Circuit Court gave Brooks the choice of how
 
to proceed. If Brooks chose to introduce selected portions of
 Rangamar's statement favorable to Brooks's case, Brooks would
 waive or forfeit the right to exclude other portions of
 Rangamar's statement necessary to avoid misleading the jury. 
Alternatively, by declining to introduce selected portions of
 Rangamar's statement, Brooks could have precluded the State from
 introducing any portion of Rangamar's statement. 
Brooks argues that he was not required to make this
 
choice because he was entitled to introduce the portions of
 Rangamar's statement favorable to his defense and,
 notwithstanding HRE Rule 106, use Crawford to block any
 responsive portions of the statement offered by the State. As
 noted by the Circuit Court, cases from other jurisdiction, under
 circumstances similar to those presented here, have rejected this
 argument. The Circuit Court summarized these cases as follows: 
In Arizona v. P[ra]sertphong, for example, the
defendant sought to introduce at trial portions of a co­
defendant's statement to police in which the co-defendant
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19admitted to shooting all of the victims murdered during a
robbery in which they both participated.  114 P.3d 828, 829
(Ariz. 2005)  cert. denied 541 U.S. 1039 (2006).  The state
agreed that the self-incriminating portions of the co-
defendant's statement were admissible but argued that, to
avoid misleading the jury, the entire statement should be
admitted under Arizona's version of Rule 106.  Id. at 829-
30.  The defendant maintained, however, that admission of
the entire statement would violate his Sixth Amendment right
to confront witnesses against him.  Id.
The Arizona Supreme Court held that  Crawford could not
be used to prevent the state from introducing the remainder
of the statement, because the defendant "forfeited his
Confrontation Clause right not to have [the co-defendant's]
statement admitted against him when [the defendant] himself
introduced portions of that statement."  Id. at 831-32.  The
court further held that the rule of completeness "require[d]
the admission of those portions of the statement that [were]
necessary to qualify, explain, or place into context the
portion already introduced."  Id. at 831.  Therefore, the
trial court had properly admitted the entire statement
because it "permitted admission of the remaining portions
[of the statement] only to ensure that those selected
portions of that statement [introduced by the defendant] did
not mislead the jury."  Id.
In order to demonstrate how "unfair and unreliable"
trials would be if it were to adopt the defendant's
position, the Arizona Supreme Court offered the following
example:
Under [the defendant's] analysis, if a co-
defendant had confessed to the police that he
murdered two people, but then subsequently said
in the same interview that the defendant forced
him to do so at gunpoint, the defendant could
introduce the first portion . . . because it was
a statement against interest.  The state,
however, could not introduce the remainder of
the confession under Rule 106 because it would
violate Crawford.
Id. at 834.  "Such a position[,]" the court said,
"transforms the Confrontation Clause from a shield to a
sword."  Id. 
The Court of Appeal of California dealt with a similar
argument in People v. Parrish , 152 Cal.App.4th 263 (Cal.
App. 2007)  review denied People v. Parrish , S154304, 2007
Cal. LEXIS 10549 (Cal. Sept. 25, 2007).  In  Parrish, the
defendant sought to introduce portions of a co-defendant's
statement that suggested that the defendant was coerced into
participating in a robbery.  Id. at 275.  The state sought
to introduce other portions of the statement that suggested
that the defendant was a willing participant in the crime. 
Id.  The court held that, because "Crawford forbids only the
admissibility of evidence under statutes purporting to
substitute another method for Confrontation Clause test of
reliability, evidence admissible under [the rule of
completeness] does not offend Crawford."  [Id. at 273].  The
court further held that, "Because the statements proffered  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
by defendant, when viewed in isolation presented a
misleading picture of the entirety of [the co-defendant[']s]
interview, and the evidence proffered by the prosecution
served to put those statements in context, . . . the
evidence proffered by the prosecution was admissible under
[the rule of completeness].["] Id. at 276.
 
Similarly, in U.S. v. Moussaoui, 382 F.3d 453 (4th
Cir. 2004), the defendant argued that Crawford precluded the
government from introducing inculpatory portions of a
witness' statement to counter exculpatory portions of the
same witness' statement that the defendant sought to admit.
Id. at 481-82. The court disagreed, holding that the
proffered evidence was admissible under Rule 106 so long as
the statements either explained or clarified the portions
that were introduced by the defendant. Id. 
. . . .
 
. . . In South Dakota v. Sel[a]l[l]a, the South Dakota
Supreme Court held the defendant's introduction of favorable
hearsay from an unavailable declarant's testimonial
statement to police properly enabled the prosecution to
"complete the picture" by eliciting evidence from the rest
of the declarant's statement. [744 N.W.2d 802, 818 (S.D.
2008)]. The court found that refusing to allow the
prosecution to do so would "eviscerate the rule of
completeness" and result in "unfair outcomes." Id. 
(Some brackets and ellipsis points in original, some added.)
 
The Circuit Court rejected Brooks's argument that his
 
case was distinguishable because Brooks had "nothing to do with
 
the unavailability of Rangamar." Brooks contended that in
 Prasertphong and Parrish, the defendant made the declarant
 unavailable by moving to sever the trial from the co-defendant
 and that the rationale of those cases apply only where the
 defendant is responsible for the unavailability of the absent
 declarant. The Circuit Court, however, observed that in Selalla,
 the defendant bore no responsibility for the unavailability of
 the absent declarant. The Circuit Court further noted that in
 neither Prasertphong nor Parrish did the court state that
 separate trials were held at the defendant's request, and the
 Circuit Court found that it would be "illogical" for
 admissibility under HRE Rule 106 to turn on whether the defendant
 or the prosecution moved for a severance.
11 The Circuit Court
 
11 We also note that it would be a co-defendant's Fifth Amendment
 
privilege, and not a trial severance, that would make a co-defendant
unavailable.
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
concluded that Brooks's attempt to distinguish these cases was
 
unpersuasive. 
II.
 
We agree with the Circuit Court's analysis and with the
 
decisions from other jurisdictions the Circuit Court cited which
 have held that Crawford does not bar the admission of evidence
 pursuant to the rule of completeness. We conclude that the
 Circuit Court properly ruled that Brooks was not entitled to
 introduce selected portions of Rangamar's statement that were
 favorable to his defense and, at the same time, use Crawford to
 preclude the State from introducing other portions of Rangamar's
 statement that were necessary to prevent the jury from being
 misled. 
Crawford did not address the rule-of-completeness
 
situation presented by this case. In Crawford, it was the
 prosecution that, in the first instance, introduced the
 testimonial hearsay statement. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 38-41. 
Here, it is Brooks that introduced selected portions of
 Rangamar's testimonial hearsay statement and then invoked
 Crawford in an attempt to prevent the State from placing
 Rangamar's statement in context and presenting an accurate 
picture of Rangamar's statement to avoid misleading the jury. 
The right of confrontation is not absolute, and we 
conclude that it cannot be used to distort and subvert the truth-seeking function of the criminal trial process by authorizing the admission of evidence in a manner that would mislead the jury. See Pond, 118 Hawai' i at 462-68, 193 P.3d at 378-84; 
El'ayache, 62 Haw. at 649, 618 P.2d at 1144; Nobles, 422 U.S. at 241; Taylor, 484 U.S. at 410-18 & n.15. Brooks sought to introduce selected portions of Rangamar's statement to support his claim that Rangamar acted alone and was solely responsible for the crimes committed against Arifuku. However, permitting Brooks to use Rangamar's statement in this fashion would have misled the jury since Rangamar's statement also asserted that Rangamar acted pursuant to a plan devised by Brooks and 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
implicated Brooks in Arifuku's murder. The Circuit Court
 
properly ruled that if Brooks decided to introduce selected
 portions of Rangamar's statement, the State would be entitled to
 introduce other portions of the statement necessary to prevent
 the jury from being misled.
 
It appears that the overwhelming majority of
 
jurisdictions that have addressed the issue presented in this
 appeal have held that Crawford does not preclude the application
 of the rule of completeness when a defendant selectively
 introduces portions of a testimonial hearsay statement. E.g.,
 
Prasertphong, 114 P.3d 828; Parrish, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 868;
 Moussaoui, 382 F.3d 453; Selalla, 744 N.W.2d 802. The only
 contrary authority cited by Brooks is United States v. Cromer,
 389 F.3d 662 (6th Cir. 2004). In Cromer, the court held that in
 light of Crawford, the government's introduction of testimonial
 hearsay evidence in response to the defendant's having opened the
 door to such evidence violated the defendant's right of
 confrontation. Id. at 678-79. The court reasoned that under
 
Crawford, the confrontation clause was not dependent upon the law
 of evidence. Id. 
We are not persuaded by the reasoning in Cromer and
 
decline to follow it. See State v. Birth, 158 P.3d 345, 354-55
 
(Kan. Ct. App. 2007) (declining to follow Cromer and permitting
 the government to introduce testimonial hearsay evidence where
 the defendant opened the door to such evidence; People v. Ko, 789
 N.Y.S.2d 43, 45 (N.Y. App. Div. 2005) (same); Ko v. Burge, No. 06
 Civ. 6826(JGK), 2008 WL 552629, at *13 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 26, 2008)
 ("The Cromer decision cited no authority for the proposition that
 a defendant cannot open the door to the admission of evidence
 otherwise barred by the Confrontation Clause. The decision has
 not been followed by any other Court of Appeals."). We instead
 follow the strong majority view in rejecting Brooks's contention
 that under Crawford, he had an absolute right to introduce
 selected portions of Rangamar's statement and to preclude the
 
22
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State from introducing other portions of the statement necessary
 
to avoid misleading the jury.12
 
As noted, Brooks does not challenge the Circuit Court's 
determination that the responsive portions of Rangamar's statement offered by the State were necessary to place the portions offered by Brooks in context and to prevent the jury from being misled. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in ruling that the responsive portions of Rangamar's statement offered by the State were admissible under HRE Rule 106 and HRE Rule 403. See State v. Steger, 114 Hawai' i 
162, 172, 158 P.3d 280, 290 (App. 2006) (concluding that trial court's application of HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for abuse of discretion); Parrish 160 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 876 (reviewing trial court's application of California's rule of completeness for abuse of discretion). 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment.
 
On the briefs:
 
William H. Jameson, Jr.
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Brian R. Vincent
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
12
 Brooks cites pre-Crawford decisions which precluded the government
 
from introducing an unavailable accomplice's out-of-court statement to law
enforcement authorities that inculpated the defendant as a statement against
penal interest. Brooks's reliance on these cases is misplaced. The decisions
 cited by Brooks are inapposite because in those cases, it was the government
that, in the first instance, introduced and sought to make offensive use of
the inculpatory hearsay statement against the defendant. See Selalla, 744
 
N.W.2d at 818. Here, the State was only permitted to introduce portions of
Rangamar's statement defensively, in response to portions introduced by
Brooks, to prevent the jury from being misled. 
23
 