NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29352
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, ex rel. MARK J. BENNETT,
Attorney General, on behalf of RUSS K. SAITO,
Comptroller, State of Hawai' i, Plaintiff-Appellant,
Cross-Appellee, and HAWAII GOVERNMENT
EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, AFSCME LOCAL NO. 152, AFL-CIO;
UNITED PUBLIC WORKERS, AFSCME LOCAL NO. 646, AFL-CIO;
ROYAL STATE NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY, LIMITED;
THE ROYAL INSURANCE AGENCY, INC.; VOLUNTARY;
EMPLOYEES BENEFIT ASSOCIATION OF HAWAII; MANAGEMENT
APPLIED PROGRAMMING, INC., Defendants-Appellees,
Cross-Appellants, and JOHN and JANE DOES
and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 02-1-0685)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, and Leonard, J., and
Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting)
 
From 1961 to June 30, 2003, the Hawaii Public Employees
 
Health Fund (
Health Fund) provided health benefit plans,
 
including, inter alia, health and group life insurance, to public
 
employees. See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 87
 
(repealed).1 Beginning at various times, under the Health Fund's
 
HRS Chapter 87 was repealed in 2001, effective July 1, 2003. 2001
 
Haw. Sess. L. Act 88 §§ 3, 4 & 10. For the sake of brevity, reference to
Chapter 87's repeal is not repeated with each citation. The Health Fund was
 
replaced by the Hawaii Employer-Union Benefits Trust Fund (EUTF). See HRS
 
Chapter 87A.
 1  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"porting" program, State and county employees could elect to
 
enroll in insurance plans provided through their unions, in lieu
 
of Health Fund-sponsored plans. The Health Fund would then pay
 
or "port" public funds to the unions for the public employers'
 
contribution to the cost of providing such insurance. See HRS §§
 
87-22.3, 87-22.5, and 87-23. In its current iteration, this
 action stems from the State's contention that, between 1994 and
 
2003, the funds ported to certain unions exceeded the amounts
 
authorized by applicable law.
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, Cross-Appellees, State of 
Hawai'i, ex rel. David M. Louie (Louie), Attorney General, and 
Dean H. Seki (Seki), Comptroller (collectively, the State) appeal 
from the September 29, 2008 Judgment Against Plaintiffs of the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) and challenge 
various orders, including a July 9, 2008 Order Denying 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment and Granting Summary 
Judgment Against Plaintiffs (Summary Judgment Order).
2 
Defendants-Appellees, Cross-Appellants, Hawai' i Government 
Employees Association, AFSCME Local 152, AFL-CIO (HGEA), and 
United Public Workers, AFSCME Local 646, AFL-CIO (UPW), and 
Defendants-Appellees, Cross-Appellants, Royal State Corporation 
(Royal State), Royal State National Insurance Company, Limited 
(RSN), The Royal Insurance Agency, Inc. (TRIA), Management Applied Programming, Inc. (MAP), and Voluntary Employees' Benefit Association of Hawaii (VEBAH), (collectively, the Royal State Group), seek relief from the Circuit Court's September 23, 2008 
2
 This suit was initially brought by former Attorney General Earl M.
Anzai, and former Comptroller Glen M. Okimoto, on behalf of the State. After 
the substitution by former Attorney General Mark J. Bennett and formerComptroller Russ K. Saito, the nature of the suit changed from, generallyspeaking, an action seeking an accounting or audit to a suit allegingwrongdoing by the defendants. The present plaintiffs-appellants weresubstituted automatically pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order denying the defendants' motions for attorneys' fees and
 
costs.
 This case is rife with procedural complexities and
 
strongly-worded accusations – by both "sides" against the other – 
of false representations, bad faith, and malintent.3 In an
 
apparent attempt to more effectively and efficiently manage the
 litigation, the Circuit Court exercised its control over the
 
proceedings in various ways, most notably by bifurcating the case
 
into two parts. Before allowing the State to prosecute amended
 
claims seeking, inter alia, damages, penalties, treble damages,
 
restitution, constructive trust, and injunctive relief including
 
partial reimbursement of ported funds, the Circuit Court required
 
the State to first seek a declaratory ruling on the
 
interpretation of the key phrase "actual monthly cost of
 
coverage," as it is used in the statutes that authorized the
 
porting.
 
As discussed below, the Circuit Court rejected the
 
State's formulation of the statute. This question of statutory
 
interpretation is the linchpin issue in this case because, absent
 
the adoption of the State's interpretation of the statute (or one
 
substantially similar to the State's interpretation), virtually
 
all of the State's allegations of fraud and wrongdoing – which
 
are grounded in the State's proferred definition of "actual
 
monthly cost of coverage" – appear to have become legally
 
untenable. Put another way, although the Circuit Court's
 
statutory interpretation did not bar the State from pursuing
 
other claims and theories of wrongdoing and recovery, it appears
 
to have effectively gutted the State's case as the State sought
 
to frame its claims.
 
3
 By noting the mutually acerbic tone of the parties' arguments, we
imply no equivalence, favor, or disfavor, of the merits of their respective
allegations.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We nevertheless conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
err in its interpretation of the term "actual monthly cost of
 
coverage" in HRS §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, 87-23 and hold that, as
 
used in Chapter 87 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, this term
 
means "the premium charged by and paid to the [insurance]
 
carrier." We cannot, after-the-fact, judicially rewrite statutes
 
to enable the State to allege violations of statutory provisions
 
that were not even contemplated, let alone included, in the
 
legislation that was passed and signed into law. Accordingly, we
 
affirm this aspect of the Circuit Court's judgment. This issue
 
is addressed more fully below, along with the other points raised
 
by the parties to this appeal. 
I.	 BACKGROUND
 
Prior to its participation in the Health Fund's porting
 
4
program, an employee organization or union  was required to
satisfy various criteria, including the submission, to the Health
 
Fund Board of Trustees (Board), of a copy of the union's charter
 
and by-laws, and a letter that:
 
(1) Identifies the name and address of the person who is
authorized to represent the employee organization;
 
(2) Certifies that its heath benefits plan complies with all
applicable State laws; and
 
(3) Agrees that its heath benefits plan complies and will
continue to comply with the following requirements:
 
(A) Maintain reasonable accounting and enrollment
records and furnish such records and reports as may be
requested by the board, its administrator, or the
State comptroller;
(B) Permit representatives of the board and State
comptroller to audit and examine its records that
pertain to its health benefits plan at reasonable
times and places as may be designated by the board or
the State comptroller; and
(C) Accept adjustments for error or other reasons as
may be required under chapter 87, Hawaii Revised
Statutes, and chapters 30 through 36 of title 6,
administrative rules. 
4
 The terms "employee organization" and "union" are used
synonymously herein.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hawaii Administrative Rule (HAR) § 6-34-9 (health benefits plan);
 
see also HAR §§ 6-35-5 (dental plan) & 6-36-7 (life insurance
 
plan).
 
In June of 1989, HGEA submitted the requisite
 
information, certification, and agreement, and identified Royal
 
State as HGEA's representative with respect to its benefits
 
plans. UPW filed similar certifications in June of 1989 and June
 
of 1990. UPW also identified Royal State as UPW's representative
 
with respect to the Health Fund benefit plans porting program.
 
The State contends that, during July 1, 1994 to June
 
30, 2001, the Health Fund transferred over $503 million to
 
employee organizations, including HGEA and UPW, for the purpose
 
of purchasing health benefit plans on behalf of their members. 
In May 1999, the State Auditor conducted an operational audit of
 
the Health Fund and found that the Board had never audited the
 
union health benefit plans, and therefore "falls short of
 
fulfilling its fiduciary responsibility to carry out the purposes
 
of the health fund." See HRS § 87-29 (Supp. 2002) (requiring the
 
Board to "[m]aintain accurate records and accounts of all
 financial transactions of the fund which shall be audited
 
annually and summarized in an annual report by the comptroller"). 
The Auditor's report stated that despite the State's significant
 
interest, as evidenced by the "significant increases in premiums
 
ported to union health plans," the Board had not requested that
 
the unions provide information on their health benefit plans'
 
operations. The report criticized the Health Fund for its lack
 
of monitoring of the union plans and determined that the Board
 
should "ensur[e] that the union plans are using the ported funds
 
to provide health benefits, and are in compliance with the
 
statutory requirements[.]" As a result of the Auditor's
 
findings, the State Comptroller sent notices requesting that
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
participating unions, including HGEA, UPW, and others, make their
 
records available for audit. 
On January 3, 2002, the Comptroller sent letters to
 
HGEA and UPW indicating that the State "has the duty and
 
responsibility to investigate and ensure that public funds are
 
properly appropriated, administered, and expended," as well as a
 
"fiduciary, moral, and legal responsibility to ensure compliance
 
with the provisions of Hawaii law regarding the porting of these
 
public funds." The letters stated that, pursuant to HAR §§ 6-34­
9(b)(3)(B), 6-35-5(3)(B), and 6-36-7(3)(B), Health Fund
 
representatives and the State Comptroller are authorized to
 
conduct an audit of the employee organizations' records and that
 
he would be exercising his discretion to conduct an audit of the
 
union welfare benefit plans.
 
In response, UPW requested the legal authority for the
 
audit, a specific list of requested records in order "to
 
determine whether the records [the State] require[s] are subject
 
to the audit," and "an agreement of the written procedure that
 
[the State] will use to reimburse the UPW for the cost to the UPW
 
to participate in the audit." On February 8, 2002, the State
 
sent letters indicating the scope of the audit and a list of the
 
required financial records for the audit to HGEA and UPW. On
 
February 11, 2002, UPW again requested "a copy of the state and
 
federal laws" that require UPW to submit the requested records to
 
the State. In a letter response dated March 1, 2002, the
 
Comptroller again indicated his authority to perform an audit
 
pursuant to the Board's administrative rules and further
 
requested UPW to inform the Comptroller in writing whether it
 
planned to honor its certification to the State that the records
 
would be made available. After further correspondence, UPW took
 
the position that the State's articulation of its legal
 
authority, and the purpose, scope, and objectives of the audit,
 
had "not been satisfactorily resolved" and requested a copy of
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the "RFP used in the procurement of an independent auditor and
 
the contract with Ernst & Young to perform the independent
 
audit."5 Similar exchanges occurred between the Comptroller and 
HGEA. 
In March 2002, after issues regarding HGEA and UPW's 
failure to make records available for audit were not resolved,
 the Comptroller filed suit seeking access to the records needed
 
for the audit (Initial Complaint). HGEA, UPW, and Royal State
 
were named as defendants.
6 The Initial Complaint alleged
 
violation of the Board's administrative rules, a right to an
 
accounting, and breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, and
 
promissory estoppel claims. The State sought an order requiring
 
the defendants and their agents to fully comply with the audit,
 
to provide an accounting of the payments made by the Health Fund,
 
and a decree of specific performance requiring HGEA and UPW to
 
honor their certifications to make their records available for
 
inspection.
 
The Circuit Court granted the State's motion for a
 
preliminary injunction on April 23, 2002, and ordered UPW, HGEA,
 
and their agents and representatives, to make their records
 
available to the State for review and audit. 
HGEA moved for clarification or instructions, claiming
 
that VEBAH, its insurance representative, physically possessed
 
the responsive records and refused to produce them because VEBAH
 
is not an "agent" bound by the Circuit Court's order. UPW joined
 
HGEA's request. On May 31, 2002, the Circuit Court granted
 
HGEA's motion, instructing UPW and HGEA to issue and serve
 
subpoenas duces tecum on VEBAH, TRIA, and MAP to produce the
 
required documents.
 
5
 Although not specified in the letter, "RFP" likely refers to a
request for a proposal to provide the audit services.
 
6
 RSN, TRIA, VEBAH, and MAP, affiliates of Royal State, were
subsequently added as defendants.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Further discovery disputes between the parties
 
followed. And, as more information became available to the
 
State, the State filed various motions for leave to amend its
 
complaint. 
On January 18, 2006, the Circuit Court bifurcated the
 
case into (1) a declaratory judgment action as to the meaning of
 
the statutory provision "actual monthly cost of coverage," and
 
(2) dependent upon the outcome of the declaratory ruling, an
 
action on the State's remaining claims.
 
On July 9, 2008, after extensive litigation regarding
 
the form of the State's complaint, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Summary Judgment Order, concluding that the phrase "actual
 
monthly cost of coverage" meant "the premium charged by and paid
 
to the carrier[.]" On September 29, 2008, the Circuit Court
 
entered its Judgment Against Plaintiffs. Timely notices of
 
appeal and cross-appeal were filed thereafter.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, the State raises the following points of
 
error:
 
1. The Circuit Court erred when it incorrectly
 
interpreted the term "actual monthly cost of coverage" from HRS
 
§§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, 87-23 to mean "the premium charged by and
 
paid to the carrier";
 
2. The Circuit Court erred when it denied the State
 
leave to file a second amended complaint and rewrote the State's
 
complaint;
 
3. The Circuit Court erred when it held that the
 
Attorney General's office had no attorney-client privilege over
 
communications with the former Health Fund Administrator;
 
4. & 5. The Circuit Court erred when it granted in
 
part Royal State, UPW, and HGEA's motions to compel;
 
6. The Circuit Court erred when it underestimated the
 
costs of production from the State's expert; and
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7. The Circuit Court erred when it refused to allow
 
preparation costs for the State's expert's deposition. 
On their respective cross-appeals, the Royal State
 
Group, UPW, and HGEA each contend that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it denied their requests for attorney fees' and costs.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Statutory interpretation is reviewed de novo by [the
appellate] court. When construing a statute, our foremost
obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention
of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from
the language contained in the statute itself. Moreover, it
is a cardinal rule of statutory interpretation that, where
the terms of a statute are plain, unambiguous and explicit,
we are not at liberty to look beyond that language for a
different meaning. Instead, our sole duty is to give effect
to the statute's plain and obvious meaning.
 
Bhakta v. Cnty. of Maui, 109 Hawai' i 198, 208, 124 P.3d 943, 953 
(2005) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations 
omitted). 
The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 120 Hawai' i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009). 
The allocation of the costs of discovery, like the 
taxation of other litigation costs, is within the discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent an abuse of 
discretion. See Eastman v. McGowan, 86 Hawai' i 21, 27, 946 P.2d 
1317, 1323 (1997); Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 10­
11, 143 P.3d 1205, 1212-13 (2006). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. The Actual Monthly Cost of Coverage
 
The threshold issue in this case is the meaning of the
 
phrase "actual monthly cost of coverage," which appears in each
 of the statutory provisions governing the funds ported from the
 
Health Fund to the unions. HRS § 87-22.3(2), governing union-
sponsored health benefits plans, provides, in relevant part:
 
For employee-beneficiaries who participate in the health
benefits plan of an employee organization, the board of
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trustees shall pay a monthly contribution for each employee-
beneficiary, in the amount provided in section 87-4(a), or
 
the actual monthly cost of the coverage, whichever towards
the purchase of health benefits under the health benefits
plan of an employee organization.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The same language also appears in HRS § 87-22.5,
 
governing dental plan benefits, and HRS § 87-23, governing group
 
life benefits or group life insurance.
 
Pursuant to this statutory provision, the contribution
 
ported to the union is the lesser of either: (1) the employer's
 
contribution to the cost of insurance, as determined by the
 
applicable collective bargaining agreement (see HRS § 87-4); or
 
(2) the actual monthly cost of the coverage. 
To illustrate how this would work, in principle, we
 
adapt a hypothetical example discussed in the State's opening
 
brief. First, say the applicable collective bargaining agreement
 
provided that the public employer would pay 60% of the monthly
 
health premiums for the unionized employees. This calculation
 
was based on the monthly premium of the medical plan sponsored by
 
the Health Fund, which in turn was defined as the plan with the
 
largest number of active employee enrollments as of December 31st
 
of the previous fiscal year. If the most popular plan's monthly
 
premium was, say, $100, the amount ported to the union would be,
 
at the most, $60. If, however, the "actual cost of coverage" of
 
the union's health benefits plan was $50, then the maximum amount
 
that could be ported under this statutory provision would be $50.
 
In the Summary Judgment Order, the Circuit Court ruled
 
that the "actual cost of coverage" is "the premium charged by and
 
paid to the [insurance] carrier." The State argues that the
 
Circuit Court erred because the "actual cost of coverage" means
 
the real cost of providing coverage, which should be interpreted
 
as the fair market value of the coverage in an arm's length or 
bona fide business transaction. The State further argues that
 
the definition of "actual cost of coverage" should take into
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
account not only the premiums charged by and paid to the
 
insurance carriers, but also rate credits, reimbursements,
 
refunds, reasonable profits, and reasonable administrative fees. 
First, we note that there is no statutory definition of 
"actual cost of coverage" contained in Chapter 87. "The words of 
law are generally to be understood in their most known and usual 
signification, without attending so much to the literal and 
strictly grammatical construction of the words as to their 
general or popular use or meaning." HRS § 1-14 (2009). As the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court has explained, when a "term is not 
statutorily defined, this court may resort to legal or other well accepted dictionaries as one way to determine its ordinary 
meaning." Gillan v. Gov't Emps. Ins. Co., 119 Hawai' i 109, 115, 
194 P.3d 1071, 1077 (2008) (citations, brackets, and internal quotation marks omitted). According to Black's Law Dictionary, 
"actual" is defined as "[e]xisting in fact; real[.]" Black's Law 
Dictionary 40 (9th ed. 2009). "Cost" is defined as "[t]he amount paid or charged for something; price or expenditure." Id. at 
397. "Coverage" plainly refers to the insurance coverage 
provided to the State employee who participates in the union's
 
plan.
 
Although no ambiguity is apparent from these words, we 
necessarily consider the "statutory language in the context of 
the entire statute and construe it in a manner consistent with 
its purpose." Lingle v. Hawai' i Gov't Employees Ass'n, Local 
152, 107 Hawai' i 178, 183, 111 P.3d 587, 592 (2005) (citation 
omitted). Citing the legislative history of the various 
enactments incorporating the actual-cost-of-coverage-if-it-is­
lower concept in the Health Fund statute, the State argues that 
the purpose of this language was to, potentially, lower the cost 
of providing insurance. See, e.g., Sen. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 
893, in 1980 Senate Journal, at 1448 (actual monthly cost of coverage" language added to the statute governing children's 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dental plans "may also have the effect of lowering employer
 
contributions"). This proposition is true, in the sense that
 
cost savings were viewed as a possible and desirable outcome. 
However, nothing in the legislative history of Chapter 87 even
 
remotely suggests that the Legislature intended a meaning other
 
than the plain meaning of "actual cost."
 
For reasons that are external to and independent from
 
the words contained in the statute, the State essentially argues
 
that we must read "actual cost of coverage" to include
 
restrictions on the profits and administrative expenses of the
 
insurers selected by the unions to provide coverage to the State
 
employees. With this argument, the State alleges that the
 
premiums charged for the union-sponsored plans were inflated and
 
did not reflect the "actual value" of the coverage provided. 
Accordingly, the State argues that, in order to effectuate the
 
"purpose, reason, and spirit behind the porting program," this
 
court must conclude that "actual cost of coverage" means "the
 
fair market value of the coverage in a legitimate business
 
transaction," rather than the premium charged to the union by the
 
insurance carrier.
 
Although the State's money-saving goal is laudable,
 
this court simply cannot rewrite the Health Fund statute in order
 
to drive down the State's expense stemming from the union-
sponsored coverage. As discussed above, the Health Fund statute
 
capped the portable funds by limiting them to the lesser of the
 
cost of Health Fund-provided coverage, as determined pursuant to
 
collective bargaining, or the actual cost of the coverage
 
provided by the union. The State is not alleging that the ported
 
funds exceeded the cost of Health Fund-provided coverage. Nor is
 
the State alleging that the ported funds exceeded the actual
 
amounts that the unions paid to the insurance carriers. Instead,
 
the State is suggesting that the unions paid too much for the
 
coverage because of the close ties between the unions and the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insurers. The State's theory of legal liability based on a
 
violation of Chapter 87, however, is untethered from the plain
 
language of the statutes and the State's suggested interpretation
 
is unsupported by the legislative history, except for the general
 
aspiration that the union-sponsored plans might be less expensive
 
than the Health Fund-sponsored plans. Additional limitations,
 
checks, and/or restraints certainly could have been written into
 
the statute, but they were not. Thus, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court did not err when it interpreted the term "actual
 
monthly cost of coverage," as used in HRS §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5,
 
87-23, to mean "the premium charged by and paid to the
 
[insurance] carrier" for the union-sponsored coverage.
 
B. Concerns Expressed by the Dissent
 The dissent expresses concern that, in enacting Chapter 
87, the Legislature did not intend to pay for the cost of premiums that were established fraudulently, were collusively 
set, or were set in bad faith. We, of course, agree with that 
proposition. We respectfully must point out, however, that this 
is not an accurate and fair characterization of the issues before 
us. Prior to the repeal of Chapter 87, Hawai' i had a statutory 
scheme that set a limit on funds that could be ported to the unions using the lesser of two measures, the amount determined 
pursuant to collective bargaining, and the actual cost of the 
insurance coverage. Although the health benefits plans provided 
by the unions apparently were no less expensive than the plans 
provided by the Health Fund, nor apparently were they any more 
expensive than the plans provided by the Health Fund. With the 
benefit of hindsight, we can see that this statutory scheme 
failed to realize the hoped-for savings. However, there is 
nothing in the statute or legislative history that required the 
unions to seek the hoped-for savings, or prohibited any 
particular level of fees and/or profit by the unions' insurers, 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or prohibited related-party transactions, or required "bona fide
 
negotiations," bidding, or other procurement procedures.
 
The premise underlying the State's fraud claim is not
 
whether the premiums were established fraudulently, as is stated
 
repeatedly in the dissent – the unions made no representation as
 
to how the plans were established – but whether the unions
 
fraudulently misrepresented their compliance with the provisions
 
of HRS Chapter 87. The State has not alleged that the
 
requirements of the Hawaii Public Procurement Code, Hawaii
 
7
Revised Statutes Chapter 103D,  were applicable to the unions'
provision of health benefit plans under Chapter 87. The State
 
has not asked this court to remand for prosecution of any claim
 
8
for "fraud," "collusion," or "bad faith",  apart from its claims
that the amounts ported to HGEA and UPW exceeded the amount
 
permitted by Chapter 87. Requirements that the unions engage in
 
arm's length transactions and pay only "reasonable"
 
administrative fees, and that insurer carriers only make
 
"reasonable" profits, while desirable, were wholly absent from
 
the provisions of Chapter 87. It is not an "absurd result," as
 
the dissent suggests, to decline to create statutory provisions
 
where none exist. The proper remedy, as was ultimately
 
undertaken, was a change in the legislative scheme.
 
7
 At all times relevant to this case, HRS § 103D-101 (1993), for
example, provided that: "All parties involved in the negotiations,
performance, or administration of state contracts shall act in good faith."In 2010, the Hawai' i Public Procurement Code was substantially rewritten to
more specifically require ethical conduct in public procurement, including themandate for public employees to: (1) "[r]emain independent from any actual orprospective bidder, offeror, contractor, or business;" (2) "[i]dentify andmaximize efficiencies in the public procurement process;" (3) "[e]nsureeconomic competition[;]" (4) "[a]void the intent and appearance of unethicalbehavior;" and (5) "[i]dentify and eliminate any conflicts of interest." HRS §103D-101(a)(2),(3),(5),(6),(7) & (11) (Supp. 2011). 
8
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court has expressly held that it does not
recognize a tortious cause of action for "bad faith" outside of the context ofan insurer's dealings with the claims of its insured. See, e.g., Laeroc
Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K.(Oahu) Ltd. Partnership, 115 Hawai' i 201, 229­
30, 166 P.3d 961, 989-90 (2007). 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Second Amended Complaint & Alleged Discovery Errors
 
The State contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
denied the State leave to file a second amended complaint and
 rewrote the State's complaint. Before considering the parties'
 
arguments, we must consider whether, in light of our rejection of
 
the State's interpretation of the "actual cost of coverage," this
 
issue is moot.
 
On July 9, 2008, the Circuit Court entered the Summary 
Judgment Order, denying the State's motion for summary judgment 
and rejecting the State's interpretation of the statutes in 
question. In this order, in the interest of "judicial economy, 
efficiency, integrity and consistency of ruling," the Circuit 
Court also granted summary judgment against the State and in 
favor of all defendants, interpreting the term "actual monthly 
cost of coverage," as used in HRS §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, and 87-23, 
to mean "the premium charged by and paid to the carrier." 
Thereafter, with the resolution of the issue of payment of 
certain fees and costs, the Circuit Court entered a final 
judgment, pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 58, which concluded that there were no remaining parties or 
issues. 
The State does not argue, nor does it appear from the
 
record, that the State's proposed second amended complaint would
 
have survived the summary judgment ruling which is affirmed
 
herein. In its opening brief, the State represents that "the
 
only difference between the second amended complaint (3rd ed.)
 
(which the court struck) and the third amended complaint (which
 
the court allowed) is the statutory definition." On appeal, the
 
only challenge posed by the State to the entry of summary
 
judgment against the State involves the statutory definition. 
Thus, even if the Circuit Court improperly rejected and edited
 
the State's second amended complaint, in light of our affirmation
 
of the Circuit Court's statutory definition, there is no
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
effective remedy available to the State, and this issue is no 
longer justiciable. See, e.g., Kaho' ohanohano v. State, 114 
Hawai'i 302, 332, 162 P.3d 696, 726 (2007)(citations omitted) 
(the dispute "must remain alive throughout the course of 
litigation to the moment of final appellate disposition to escape 
the mootness bar"); Life of the Land v. Burns, 59 Haw. 244, 250, 
580 P.2d 405, 409 (1978) (citation, internal quotation marks and 
brackets omitted) ("[an appellate court] may not decide moot 
questions or abstract propositions of law); see also Wong v. 
Board of Regents, Univ. of Hawaii, 62 Haw. 391, 395, 616 P.2d 
201, 204 (1980) ("Courts will not consume time deciding abstract 
propositions of law or moot cases, and have no jurisdiction to do 
so.") (citation omitted). 
Similarly, because this case will not be remanded for
 
further proceedings on the State's claims, the errors alleged in
 
the Circuit Court's order granting in part the motions to compel
 
filed by Royal State, HGEA, and UPW are moot and need not be
 
addressed.
 
D. The Fees and Costs Related to the Biggs' Discovery
 The State contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it denied entirely the State's request for
 
reimbursement for the time spent by Samuel Biggs (Biggs), the
 
State's expert, preparing for his deposition by Royal State. We
 
agree.
 
HRCP Rule 26(b)(5)(C) provides, in relevant part:
9
 
Unless manifest injustice would result, [] the court
shall require that the party seeking discovery pay the
expert a reasonable fee for time spent in responding to
discovery under this subdivision[.]
 
Although neither party cites, and we did not find, any 
Hawai'i cases discussing this provision, numerous other courts 
have addressed the parallel federal rule, now found at Federal 
9
 The second part of HRCP(b)(5)(C) pertains to discovery from non-
testifying witnesses. Biggs was an expert who was anticipated to be called by
the State as a witness at trial.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 26(b)(4)(E) (formerly FRCP
 
Rule 26(b)(4)(C)). The majority view is that a reasonable fee
 
for an expert's deposition preparation time is compensable. See,
 
e.g., Waters v. City of Chicago, 526 F.Supp.2d 899, 900 (N.D.
 2007); Fleming v. U.S., 205 F.R.D. 188, 190 (W.D. 2000); Packer
 
v. SN Serv. Corp., 243 F.R.D. 39, 42 (D. Conn. 2007); New York v.
 
Solvent Chemical Co., 210 F.R.D. 462 (W.D.N.Y. 2002) (cases cited
 
by the State); see also, e.g., Knight v. Kirby Inland Marine
 
Inc., 482 F.3d 347, 356 (5th Cir. 2007); Boos v. Prison Health
 
Servs., 212 F.R.D. 578, 579-80 (D. Kan. 2002); Collins v. Village
 
of Woodridge, 197 F.R.D. 354, 357-58 (N.D. Ill. 1999) (cases
 
cited by the Royal State Group).
 
Although we conclude that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in denying any reimbursement of Biggs's fees for time
 
spent in preparation for his deposition, on remand the Circuit
 
Court may use its discretion to determine a reasonable fee
 
including but not limited to the reasonableness of the amount of
 
Biggs's time spent in preparation.
10
 
The State also contends that the Circuit Court abused
 
its discretion when it granted only $6,235.60 of the $36,604.61
 
that the State requested for responding to Royal State's second
 
request for production of documents, which sought a significant
 
volume of electronic documents and files, including the
 
associated metadata. Although we recognize the unique
 
considerations, complexity, and added expense associated with
 
electronic discovery, unlike the FRCP, the HRCP provides no
 
specific guidance to trial judges concerning the discovery of
 
electronically-stored information. In this case, the Circuit
 
Court carefully considered motions by both the State and the
 
Royal State Group, including representations, communications, and
 
10
 On appeal, the State has waived its request for reimbursement for
Biggs's assistant's time spent aiding Biggs with his deposition preparation.
Therefore, only Biggs's preparation time need be revisited on remand.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arguments presented by the parties concerning the nature, extent,
 
burden, and necessity of the subject discovery. Upon careful
 
review of the record, while recognizing that the Circuit Court
 
would have been well within its discretion to award a more
 
substantial part or even all of the State's requested costs, we
 
cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 
limiting its award to the specified amount.
 
E. The Defendants' Cross-Appeals
 HGEA, UPW, and the Royal State Defendants each contend
 
that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it denied their
 requests for an award of attorneys' fees and costs. Attorneys'
 
fees and costs were sought based on HRS § 607-14 (allowing
 
attorneys' fees in an action in the nature of assumpsit), HRS
 
§ 607-14.5 (permitting an award of attorneys' fees based on bad
 
faith frivolous claims), and/or HRCP Rule 11 (permitting
 
attorneys' fees as sanctions for frivolous filing(s)).
 
The complaints filed by the State in this case did not
 
include any claims in the nature of assumpsit. Although the
 
State attempted to include an assumpsit claim, the Circuit Court
 
disallowed it, instead requiring the parties to litigate only, in
 
the first instance, the State's entitlement to review and audit
 
HGEA, UPW and the Royal State Group's records related to the
 
public funds ported from the Health Fund to the unions and, in
 
the second instance, the statutory interpretation question. 
Thus, the Circuit Court did not err when it declined to award
 
attorneys' fees and costs pursuant to HRS § 607-14.
 
A frivolous claim is "manifestly and palpably without 
merit, so as to indicate bad faith on the pleader's part such 
that argument to the court was not required." Coll v. McCarthy, 
72 Haw. 20, 29, 804 P.2d 881, 887 (1991); see also Taomae v. Lingle, 110 Hawai' i 327, 332, 132 P.3d 1238, 1243 (2006) 
(erroneous interpretation in a case of first impression, without more, is not frivolous). In this case, although the State's 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interpretation of Chapter 87 was not adopted, we cannot conclude
 
that it was so manifestly and palpably without merit as to
 
indicate bad faith on its part. The Circuit Court did not abuse
 
its discretion when it concluded that the State's claims were not
 
frivolous.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
As set forth above, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
September 29, 2008 Judgment Against Plaintiffs with respect to
 
its interpretation of the term "actual monthly cost of coverage"
 
in HRS §§ 87-22.3, 87-22.5, 87-23 to mean "the premium charged by
 
and paid to the carrier." Therefore, we do not reach the issues
 
raised concerning the State's proposed second amended complaint
 
or the Circuit Court's rulings on Royal State, UPW, and HGEA's
 
motions to compel. We also affirm the Circuit Court's September
 
29, 2008 Judgment Against Plaintiffs with respect to the costs
 
awarded to the State in conjunction with Royal State's second
 
request for production of documents and the denial of Royal
 
State, UPW, and HGEA's requests for attorneys' fees and costs. 
We vacate the Circuit Court's September 29, 2008 Judgment 
Against Plaintiffs with respect to the denial of any
 
reimbursement for the time spent by the State's expert preparing
 
for his deposition by Royal State and remand the case for a
 
determination of a reasonable fee for Biggs's deposition
 
preparation.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 27, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Deirdre Marie-Iha
 
Deputy Solicitor General
for Plaintiffs-Appellants,
Cross-Appellees
 
James E.T. Koshiba
 
Charles A. Price
 (Koshiba Agena & Kubota)
for Defendant-Appellee,
Cross-Appellant Hawaii
Government Employees
Association, AFSCME Local
No. 152, AFL-CIO
 
Adrian W. Rosehill
 
Alan J. Ma
 (Stubenberg & Durrett)
for Defendant-Appellee,
Cross-Appellant United
Public Workers, AFSCME
Local No. 646, AFL-CIO
 
Paul A. Schraff
 
(Dwyer Schraff Meyer
Grant & Green)
for Defendants-Appellees,
Cross-Appellants Royal
State Corporation, Royal
State National Insurance
 Company, Limited, The Royal
Insurance Agency, Inc.,
Voluntary Employees' Benefit
Association of Hawaii and
 Management Applied Programming,
Inc.
 Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
20
 