 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29124
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
GREGORY SCOTT JARRELL, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CYNTHIA MARIE JARRELL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 04-1-3259)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Cynthia Marie Jarrell ("Cynthia")
 
appeals from the Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Defendant's Motions Filed 10/3/07 and 12/4/07 and Plaintiff's
 Motion Filed 11/16/07 filed on March 25, 2008, in the Family
 
Court of the First Circuit ("Family Court").
1
 
Cynthia and Plaintiff-Appellee Gregory Scott Jarrell
 
("Gregory") had two children during their marriage, Daughter and
 
Son. On November 14, 2005, the Family Court entered the Decree
 Granting Divorce and Awarding Child Custody ("Divorce Decree"),
 which mandated, among other things, that Gregory pay (1) $3,000
 per month to Cynthia as alimony for a period of 5 years; (2)
 $1,120 per month per child in child support; and (3) 65.4% of the
 children's educational expenses as "higher-educational support,"
 with Cynthia paying 34.6%, while the children were full-time
 students and under the age of twenty-three. Two separate
 paragraphs in the Divorce Decree, Paragraphs 4.3.3 and 4.4.2,
 governed educational support responsibilities for the children. 
Both paragraphs included a provision stating that should
 Gregory's child-support obligations exceed his educational
 
1/
 Judge Karen M. Radius presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
support obligations, the excess would be deemed a gift to the
 
child ("excess/gift provision").
 
Cynthia timely moved for reconsideration of the Divorce
 
Decree ("Motion for Reconsideration"), challenging various
 provisions, including some of those in Paragraphs 4.3.3 and
 4.4.2. Cynthia did not, however, object to either of the
 
excess/gift provisions. The Family Court granted the Motion for
 Reconsideration in part ("Reconsideration Order"), deleting a
 portion of Paragraph 4.3.3 (but leaving the excess/gift provision
 intact) and Paragraph 4.4.2 in its entirety (including the
 excess/gift provision pertaining to Daughter). Neither party
 appealed from the Divorce Decree or the Reconsideration Order.
 
In 2007, Cynthia and Gregory each filed motions for
 
post-decree relief. Following a trial on the post-decree
 motions, the Family Court entered the Order Granting in Part and
 Denying in Part Defendant's Motions Filed 10/3/07 and 12/4/07 and
 Plaintiff's Motion Filed 11/16/07 from which the instant appeal
 lies. 
Cynthia raises twenty-two points of error, which we
 
condense into five general points of error. Cynthia argues that
 (1) the Family Court mistakenly interpreted the Divorce Decree as
 requiring Gregory to pay either child support or educational
 support for his children while they attended college rather than
 both child support and educational support, and that, as a
 result, the Family Court's conclusion that Gregory had satisfied
 his educational and child-support obligations was erroneous. 
Cynthia also argues that the Family Court erred (2) in concluding
 that Gregory's prospective child support and educational support
 were not cumulative obligations; (3) in holding that Cynthia owed
 Gregory $6,549.12, which represented her educational support
 obligation to Daughter in 2005–2006; (4) in concluding that
 Cynthia failed to prove the existence of a material change of
 circumstances justifying a downward adjustment of her imputed
 income for child-support and spousal-support purposes because
 certain findings of fact are clearly erroneous; and (5) by
 denying Cynthia an increase or extension of alimony payments. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Cynthia's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Divorce Decree initially contained excess/gift
 
provisions specific to both Daughter and Son. Analyzing the
 Divorce Decree as it existed before the Reconsideration Order's
 alterations, Gregory's child-support and educational support
 obligations were clearly linked. Should Gregory's child-support
 obligations exceed his educational support obligations for either
 child, the "excess" would be treated as a "gift" to that child. 
That is, should the child's educational expenses be less than
 $1,120 per month, $1,120 per month would satisfy both Gregory's
 child-support and educational support obligations. Implicit in
 this is that should 65.4% of either child's educational needs
 exceed $1,120 per month, Gregory would pay only educational
 support, not both educational and child support.
2
 
In the Motion for Reconsideration, Cynthia did not
 
challenge the excess/gift provisions in Paragraphs 4.3.3 or
 4.4.2. The Family Court granted the Motion for Reconsideration
 
as to Paragraphs 4.3.3 and 4.4.2., keeping the excess/gift
 provision as it pertained to Son, but deleting it as to Daughter. 
As a result, the sentence in Paragraph 4.3.3 – "If [Gregory's]
 annual child support obligation exceeds his obligated educational
 costs, any excess shall be deemed a gift to the child to cover
 incidental expenses" – was never deleted.
 
The Divorce Decree was poorly drafted. The Family
 
Court further complicated the issue by deleting the excess/gift
 provision in Paragraph 4.4.2. despite not being asked to do so. 
2/
 This interpretation is supported by some of the provisions in the
Divorce Decree. Paragraphs 4.3.1 and 4.4.1 provide for Gregory to pay "child
support" to either Son's or Daughter's university and/or the child directly
should the child go to college and not live with Cynthia during that time.
There is no apparent reason for "child support" to be payable to the child's
university unless it is related to the child's education. Furthermore, when
the child is "not living principally with one or the other of the parties"
while in college, educational support expenses include "room and board,
transportation to and from school, and a reasonable allowance for the child's
incidental expenses." Similar expenses for Son while attending high
school—books, transportation costs, field trips, etc.—were to be paid out of
Gregory's child-support payments for Son. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, given that Cynthia never objected to the excess/gift
 
3
provisions in her Motion for Reconsideration,  we conclude that
the Family Court (and the parties) understood and intended that
 
Gregory would not be required to pay both educational and child
 support for those children who were attending college as full-
time students.
4 Nakata v. Nakata, 3 Haw. App. 51, 55, 641 P.2d
 
333, 335 (1982) ("When interpreting a decree, the determinative
 factor is the intention of the court as gathered from all parts
 of the decree itself.").
 
Cynthia fails to show that Gregory was in arrears on
 
his child-support or educational support obligations. The Family
 Court found that while Daughter was attending Santa Clara
 University her educational costs were $18,849.00 per year and
 that Son's educational costs at Western Washington University
 were $11,829.00 per year. Gregory was obligated to pay Daughter
 and Son (and/or their respective colleges) either 65.4% of the
 child's educational costs or $1,120 per month, whichever amounted
 to the larger sum. Twelve months multiplied by $1,120 equals
 $13,440 per year per child. In comparison, Daughter's and Son's
 educational expenses, multiplied by 65.4%, are $12,327.25 and
 $7,736.17 per year, respectively. Thus, for each child, Gregory
 was obligated to pay at least $13,440 per year in
 child/educational support.
 
The Family Court found that Gregory paid $23,040.63 to
 
Daughter between September 1, 2005 through August 2006,
 
3/
 Cynthia maintains that the Divorce Decree was drafted by Gregory's
attorney who, she apparently argues, inserted provisions foreign to an oral
decision rendered by the Family Court at a hearing on August 30, 2005. Even if this were true, Cynthia moved for the amendment of the Divorce Decree innumerous respects, but failed to object to the provisions conflating Gregory'schild-support and educational obligations. Cynthia also failed to appeal. As a result, Cynthia waived the argument that the excess/gift provisions wereimproperly inserted into the Divorce Decree and cannot raise it now in post-
decree proceedings years after the time for appeal has passed. See Citicorp 
Mortgage, Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i 422, 436, 16 P.3d 827, 841 (App. 2000)
(noting that Rule 60(b) motions cannot remedy a failure to appeal). 
4/
 Cynthia argues that this interpretation of the Divorce Decree is
"at variance with governing precedent" and "runs counter to standard
practice." However, whether the Divorce Decree was in conformance with"governing precedent" or "standard practice" were issues that should have beenaddressed on direct appeal from the Divorce Decree. Cynthia lost heropportunity to challenge the Divorce Decree when she failed to appeal from it.
See Bartolome, 94 Hawai' i at 436, 16 P.3d at 841. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
$15,415.70 for the 2006–2007 school year, and $6,163.43 for the
 
fall semester of 2007. The Family Court also found that Gregory
 paid $15,415.70 between September 2006 through August 2007 to Son
 and $4,487.63 for a portion of the fall semester. Those sums,
 paid over a full year, exceed $13,440.00.
5 Thus, Gregory was not
 
in arrears on his child-support payments, and the Family Court
 did not err.
 
(2) Cynthia failed to present an argument in support
 
of her second point of error. Thus, it is waived. Haw. R. App.
 P. 28(b)(7).
6
 
(3) Cynthia argues that if, as Gregory contends, "his
 
65.4% share of the children's higher educational support was
 included as part of his child support obligation of $1,120 per
 month per child, pursuant to paragraph 4.1 and 4.2 of the Divorce
 Decree, then logically [Cynthia's] obligation for the children's
 higher educational support, pursuant to the same paragraphs,
 would also have been included in her child support obligation of
 'not more than $50 per month per child.'" However, Gregory was
 only required to pay either $1,120 in child support per child per
 month or 65.4% of the child's total educational monetary need,
 whichever was the greater amount. Under this interpretation, it
 does not follow that Cynthia would only be obligated to pay $50
 in child support if 34.6% of the child's educational financial
 need was greater than $50. The argument is without merit. As
 
5/
 Cynthia argues that Gregory parceled out payments to the children
and made purchases in lieu of support payments, which should not have counted
toward the satisfaction of his obligations under the Divorce Decree. Argument
in an opening brief, however, must include "the contentions of the appellant
on the points presented and the reasons therefor, with citations to the
authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied on." Haw. R. App. P.
28(b)(7) (emphasis added). The only part of the record that Cynthia cites to
in support of her arguments that the Family Court improperly credited Gregory
for certain payments is Plaintiff's Exhibit 2, a ledger recording payments to
Daughter and Son over several years. The description of the payments in
Plaintiff's Exhibit 2 are generally no more than a few words—for instance,
"Public Storage - for kids" or "Costco - Glasses." The exhibit is not self-
explanatory, and Cynthia fails to cite any record evidence demonstrating the
exhibit's import or application to this case. Cynthia's unsupported arguments
describing Gregory's allegedly defective method of satisfying his obligations
under the Divorce Decree are devoid of value. Thus, the argument is deemed
waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
6/
 To the extent that Cynthia may have addressed this point of error
tangentially in her general argument on the issue of child support, Cynthia
fails to show error for the reasons set forth supra.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
such, there is no demonstration that the Family Court erred in
 
holding that Cynthia owed Gregory $6,549.12, which represented
 her educational support obligation to Daughter in 2005-2006.
 
(4) A party receiving spousal support "is always under
 
a duty to exert reasonable efforts to attain self-sufficiency at
 the standard of living established during the marriage and will
 not be allowed to benefit from the consequences of a violation of
 that duty." Saromines v. Saromines, 3 Haw. App. 20, 28, 641 P.2d
 
1342, 1348 (1982). The Family Court found that Cynthia (a) made
 no efforts after the divorce to maximize her earnings at
 Cinderella beauty salon, the business that she owns, as she
 typically scheduled appointments with her clients for only a few
 hours a day, four days a week, and (b) made no efforts to seek
 better employment. Cynthia claims that these findings are clearly
 erroneous. 
a. Work at Cinderella
 
The Family Court found that Cynthia's "scheduled
 
appointments with clients typically are for a short number of
 hours, four days per week" and that she "had made no efforts in
 the two years post-divorce to . . . maximize her potential with
 the Cinderella shop." The Family Court stated that Cynthia's
 justification for working reduced hours was that she wanted to
 care for her mother who is in an assisted-living facility. The
 Family Court concluded that Cynthia's desire to care for her
 mother did not constitute a material change in circumstances for
 the purposes of any change in alimony. 
The Family Court's finding that Cynthia's "scheduled
 
appointments" were only "for a short number of hours, four days
 per week" is not clearly erroneous. Plaintiff's Exhibit 11
 consists of both monthly calendars, which apparently indicate the
 days Cynthia took appointments, and daily schedules, which
 indicate when Cynthia had scheduled appointments and with whom. 
Cynthia states that these were calendars "that Cynthia and the
 other cosmetologists used to keep track of their appointments." 
As Cynthia notes, the work calendar "showed that Cynthia
 scheduled appointments for herself on an average of about three
 days per each five-day work week." Cynthia's description of her
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
work schedule is wholly consistent with the Family Court's
 
finding that Cynthia only scheduled appointments four days a
 week. The finding is not clearly erroneous.
 
Cynthia's argument, then, is that her scheduled hours
 
do not support the Family Court's finding that she "work[ed]
 reduced hours" and "made no effort" to maximize her potential
 earnings at Cinderella. Cynthia argues that the work calendar
 did not reflect other things she did at the shop—like answering
 telephones, talking to customers, and bookkeeping. 
The Family Court's findings are not, however, clearly
 
erroneous. Cynthia did not show how she did anything more at
 Cinderella than what she had been doing at the time of divorce to
 earn additional income.
7 Although she may have been performing
 
tasks at Cinderella in addition to her scheduled appointments,
 when the other salon employees—independent contractors—took an
 appointment, Cinderella would pay them a 50% commission. Thus,
 by only taking appointments on a limited basis, the Family Court
 apparently found that Cynthia was not doing enough to justify
 decreasing her imputed income. It cannot be said that this is
 clearly erroneous.
 
Cynthia argues that the evidence "did not establish
 
that she cut her hours to care for her aged mother . . . ." The
 Family Court did not find that she worked reduced hours because
 of her mother; instead, the Family Court stated that it was
 Cynthia's stated justification for not working longer hours. 
The Family Court's finding that Cynthia was not making efforts to
 maximize her income was based on evidence that she was, in fact,
 not making those efforts.
 
Therefore, the Family Court's findings that Cynthia did
 
not make efforts to maximize her income at Cinderella and only
 took appointments on a part-time basis are not clearly erroneous.
 
b. Efforts to get new employment
 
The Family Court found that Cynthia "had made no
 
7/
 Cynthia points to testimony where she said: "I have my business,
and I tried to expand upon that, and I did somewhat." Cynthia did not,
however, elaborate upon what this expansion consisted of at all, as her
attorney changed the subject immediately. This vague statement, offered
without any context, is insufficient to undermine any of the Family Court's
findings of fact.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
efforts in the two-years post-divorce to seek better
 
employment . . . ." Cynthia argues that her testimony
 established, "without contradiction, that she did reasonably
 explore work opportunities other than the continued operation of
 [Cinderella]." 
Cynthia testified that she "looked into getting back
 
into the court reporting field," but claimed that she would have
 needed to get recertified and could not have done so locally. 
She also testified that she "looked into" going into "medical
 transcriptioning," but claimed that those jobs were being
 outsourced to foreign countries. Cynthia testified that she
 "talked with somebody down at the health department", but that
 her age was "working against [her]." Finally, she testified that
 she "was just . . . perusing other totally different job
 opportunities," but claimed that she was hampered by her lack of
 education. 
Cynthia fails to establish that the Family Court's
 
finding that Cynthia put no effort into obtaining better
 employment was clearly erroneous. The evidence presented does
 not establish, as Cynthia contends, that she reasonably explored
 better work opportunities. The most her testimony shows is that
 she looked into, perused, or spoke to someone about different job
 opportunities; her testimony does not indicate that she took any
 meaningful steps toward getting a better job. 
The Family Court's finding of fact is quite reasonably
 
read as an interpretation of the evidence that was presented. A
 trial judge is only required to make "brief, definite and
 pertinent findings, not elaborate findings nor negative findings
 of fact." Doe v. Roe, 5 Haw. App. 558, 565–66, 705 P.2d 535,
 
542–43 (1985). A trial court "is not required to make findings
 of fact on all the evidence presented, nor state every option it
 considered." In re J.A.A., 623 S.E.2d 45, 75 (N.C. Ct. App.
 
2005). Simply because a trial judge did not mention something
 "does not mean [s]he did not consider it." Id.
 
Just because Cynthia's testimony was "without 
contradiction" does not mean that the Family Court needed to afford it any significance. See Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 
8
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (weight of the evidence is a
 
determination made by the trier of fact). Nor does it mean that
 the Family Court, by not acknowledging the testimony explicitly
 in its findings of fact, failed to consider it. While Cynthia
 argues that the Family Court's finding of fact is clearly
 erroneous because she testified that she made some, rather than
 no, effort toward finding a new job (that is, she at least
 thought about it to some extent), the import of Cynthia's
 testimony is patently weak. The finding just as easily indicates
 that the Family Court, reasonably interpreting Cynthia's
 testimony, found that Cynthia failed to make any meaningful
 effort toward finding new work. Cynthia has not shown that the
 finding of fact was clearly erroneous.
8
 
Therefore, the Family Court did not err in concluding
 
that Cynthia failed to establish a material change in
 circumstances justifying a decrease in her imputed income.
 
(5) Cynthia contends that the Family Court erred by
 
denying Cynthia a modification of the alimony set forth in the
 Divorce Decree because the federal mandatory retirement age for
 airline pilots was increased from 60 to 65, and Gregory's monthly
 income increased from $14,100 per month to $16,455 per month. 
A family court's denial of a modification based on a
 
material change in circumstances is reviewed for "manifest abuse
 of wide discretion." See Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. App. 501, 506,
 
653 P.2d 1167, 1171 (1982). Here, the Family Court held that
 Cynthia "failed to meet her burden of proof as to the existence
 of a material change of circumstances justifying a modification
 of spousal support with respect to either the amount of periodic
 
8/
 Even if the Family Court's finding here was clearly erroneous, the
error would be harmless and any prejudice to Cynthia would be de minimis. 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 641-2 (Supp. 2011). Even if she could not get a better job,
the Family Court found that Cynthia did not put effort into increasing her
income from the job she already had as the owner and operator of Cinderella.
That is, the Family Court found that Cynthia had two viable paths to
increasing her income and she did not try to take either of them. Cynthia's
failure to put sufficient effort into increasing her income from Cinderella
was, for all intents and purposes, the reason why the Family Court did not
impute to her a lower monthly income; thus, any error in finding that Cynthia
made "no efforts" in seeking better employment is harmless. Cf. United States
 
v. Cavera, 550 F.3d 180, 197 (2d Cir. 2008) (holding that potential error is
necessarily harmless "in light of the alternative independent ground" for the
decision).
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
spousal support payable to her, or as to the duration of spousal
 
support." 
The Family Court did not abuse its discretion. Nothing
 
indicates that the Family Court ever intended to correlate
 Cynthia's receipt of spousal support to the mandatory retirement
 age set by the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA"). At the
 time of divorce, Gregory was 52 years old and, under the FAA's
 age regulations, would have been required to retire at a time
 somewhere between seven and eight years later. However, the
 Family Court ordered alimony of $3,000.00 per month to be paid
 for only five years. In the oral decision, the Family Court
 specifically set the term of alimony at five years because of
 "the length of the marriage, and quite frankly in five years the
 last child will be out of college with any luck." Therefore, the
 FAA's decision to increase the mandatory retirement age for
 pilots is an immaterial change of circumstances; in any event,
 Cynthia has not shown an abuse of discretion.
 
Cynthia further states that "[t]he record does not
 
establish if Cynthia had the option of receiving her share of
 Greg[ory]'s retirement benefits prior to the actual date of his
 retirement." Cynthia then states how her economic situation
 hypothetically could be affected based on whether she could or
 could not receive retirement benefits prior to Gregory's
 retirement. As Cynthia admits that she did not establish whether
 or not she could have received such benefits prior to Gregory's
 retirement, the Family Court had no basis for rendering any
 findings or conclusions on this point and did not err by failing
 to do so.
 
Finally, Cynthia argues that the Family Court erred by
 
not considering a $2,355 increase in Gregory's monthly income to
 be a material change of circumstances justifying a modification
 of spousal support. The family court, sitting in equity, "for
 good cause shown may amend or revise any order and shall consider
 all proper circumstances in determining the amount of the
 allowance, if any, which shall thereafter be ordered." H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 580-47(d) (2006). Here, after considering numerous
 
factors, the Family Court held that Cynthia failed to meet her
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
burden of proof. Cynthia cites to no authority stating that an
 
increase in one party's income, standing alone, entitles the
 other to an adjustment in alimony. Cynthia has failed to show an
 abuse of discretion.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Family Court's
 
March 25, 2008 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 Defendant's Motions Filed 10/3/07 and 12/4/07 and Plaintiff's
 Motion Filed 11/16/07 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Robert M. Harris 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Huilin Dongfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
11
 