  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29743
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
HONG GUO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(NORTH & SOUTH KONA DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 3DTI-08-074324)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley, and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Hong Guo (Guo) appeals pro se from
 
the Judgment against him for committing the traffic infraction of
 
speeding in a construction area, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 291C-104 (2007 & Supp. 2009). 
The Judgment was
 
filed on March 3, 2009, in the District Court of the Third
 Circuit (district court).
1/
 
I.
 
On September 15, 2008, Traffic Enforcement Officer 
Thomas Koyanagi (Officer Koyanagi) of the Hawai 'i County Police 
Department issued a citation to Guo for "speeding in [a] construction zone," in violation of HRS ยง 291C-104. The citation described the the location of the violation as "Queen Kaahumanu Hwy/Makala to Palani Int." 
At trial, Officer Koyanagi testified that while
 
following Guo's car in a construction zone, Officer Koyanagi
 measured the speed of Guo's car using a radar unit mounted on the
 dashboard of Officer Koyanagi's vehicle. Officer Koyanagi
 
1/ The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr., presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
initially determined Guo's car to be traveling at thirty-seven
 
miles per hour and later at thirty-eight miles per hour. The
 
speed limit in the construction zone was twenty-five miles per
 
hour, and there was at least one posted sign indicating that
 speed limit. Guo's car "pulled up to" Officer Koyanagi's right
 at the intersection of Palani Road and Queen Kaahumanu Highway. 
Officer Koyanagi then measured the speed of Guo's car as they
 traveled south on Queen Kaahumanu Highway, eventually stopping
 Guo's car past the Henry Street intersection. 
After the presentation of evidence and during his
 
closing argument, Guo stated that he "forgot to mention" that
 Officer Koyanagi's testimony about where the officer measured
 Guo's car speeding was different from the location indicated on
 Guo's citation. The district court disputed Guo's recollection
 of Officer Koyanagi's testimony, but asked if Officer Koyanagi
 was available to clarify the matter. However, by that time,
 Officer Koyanagi had apparently left the courthouse. 
The district court found that Plaintiff-Appellee State 
of Hawai
'i (State) had proven by a preponderance of the evidence 
that Guo committed the traffic infraction of speeding in a construction area. The district court further found that Officer Koyanagi had "measured [Guo's] speed between the intersection of Palani and Henry Street" at thirty-eight miles per hour in an area where the speed limit was twenty-five miles per hour. 
II. 
On appeal, Guo contends that 1) Officer Koyanagi was
 
not credible and therefore there was insufficient evidence to
 prove the alleged violation; and 2) it was improper for Officer
 Koyanagi to leave the courthouse and not be available to be
 recalled as a witness to clarify his testimony. We affirm the
 district court's Judgment.
 
There was sufficient evidence to support the district
 
court's determination that Guo had committed the traffic 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
infraction of speeding in a construction area. In evaluating the 
sufficiency of the evidence, we view the evidence in the light most favorable to the State. See State v. Moleta, 122 Hawai
'i 
233, 241, 145 P.3d 776, 784 (App. 2006). In addition, "an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 
87, 101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). "Verdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be set aside where there is substantial evidence to support the trier of fact's findings." Id. at 100-01, 997 P.2d at 26-27 
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
Here, the district court apparently found Officer
 
Koyanagi's testimony credible despite the evidence and arguments
 presented by Guo. When viewed in the light most favorable to the
 State, Officer Koyanagi's testimony provided sufficient evidence
 to support the district court's verdict. 
The district court did not abuse its discretion in 
deciding not to reopen the trial to recall Officer Koyanagi. Guo had the opportunity during the trial to cross-examine Officer Koyanagi and to present evidence that Guo believed cast doubt on the officer's testimony. Officer Koyanagi had apparently left the courthouse and was not immediately available to be recalled. Guo does not point to any rule or statute that was disregarded by the district court in deciding not to recall Officer Koyanagi. Under the circumstances of this case, we cannot say that the district court abused its discretion in failing to recall Officer Koyanagi. See State v. Christian, 88 Hawai
'i 407, 417, 967 P.2d 
239, 249 (1998) (applying the abuse of discretion standard to a trial court's decision on whether to permit a party to reopen its case for the purpose of submitting additional evidence). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
We affirm the Judgment filed on March 3, 2009, by the
 
district court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 21, 2010 
On the briefs:
 
Jay T. Kimura Chief Judge
Mark D. Disher 
Office of Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Hong Guo
Defendant-Appellant Pro Se
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 