                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      
      
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 28774
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JOHN MUSSACK, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. STATE OF HAWAI' I, PATRICIA HAMAMOTO,
LEA ALBERT, MICHAEL HARANO, and LANELLE HIBBS,
in their official capacities, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 04-1-0455-03 SSM)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard, J., and
Circuit Judge Karen S.S. Ahn, in place of Nakamura, C.J.,
and Fujise, Reifurth, and Ginoza, JJ., all recused)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant John Mussack (Mussack) appeals from 
the Judgment entered on October 15, 2007, by the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit (Circuit Court), in favor of Defendants-
Appellees State of Hawai' i (State), Patricia Hamamoto, Lea 
Albert, Michael Harano (Harano), and Lanelle Hibbs (collectively, State Defendants).
1 
On appeal, Mussack raises the following points of
 
error:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in entering FOF 10, which 
states that Mussack "filed the instant lawsuit on May 27, 2004," 
alleging violations of [the Hawai' i Whistleblowers' Protection 
1
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Act (HWPA), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 378-62 (Supp.
 
2009)]."
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred in entering COL 5, which
 
provides that "[c]laims of employment retaliation, including
 
those filed under HWPA are subject to the burden-shifting
 
analysis set forth by the United States Supreme Court in
 
McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-03 (1973)." 
(3) The Circuit Court erred in entering COL 8, which
 
provides that "[b]ecause [Mussack] cannot show that [the State's]
 
explanation for his termination was pretext for retaliation,
 
[Mussack] has presented no triable issue, and [the State] is
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law."
 
This court reviews "the circuit court's grant or denial
 
of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai' i 
48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (citation omitted). The Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has often stated: 
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Querubin, 107 Hawai' i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (citation, brackets, 
and ellipsis omitted).
 
In First Hawaiian Bank v. Weeks, 70 Haw. 392, 772 P.2d
 
1188 (1989), the Hawai' i Supreme Court discussed the burden of 
demonstrating entitlement to summary judgment:
 
A summary judgment motion "challenges the very
existence or legal sufficiency of the claim or defense to
which it is addressed. In effect the moving party takes the
position that he is entitled to prevail because his opponent
has no valid claim for relief or defense to the action, as
the case may be." 10 Wright, Miller & Kane, Federal
Practice and Procedure: Civil 2d
 § 2711, at 555-56 (1983)
(footnote omitted). 
He thus has the burden of demonstrating
that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
relative to the claim or defense and he is entitled to
 
judgment as a matter of law. 10A Wright, Miller & Kane,
 supra, § 2727, at 121.
 
He "may discharge his burden by demonstrating that if
the case went to trial there would be no competent evidence
to support a judgment for his opponent." Id. at 130
 
(footnote omitted); cf. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S.
317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986) (One moving
for summary judgment under Fed.R.Civ.P. 56 need not support
his motion with affidavits or similar materials that negate
his opponent's claims, but need only point out to the
district court that there is absence of evidence to support
the opponent's claims). For "if no evidence could be
 mustered to sustain the nonmoving party's position, a trial
would be useless." 10A Wright, Miller & Kane, supra, at
 130.
 
Weeks, 70 Hawai' i at 396-97, 772 P.2 at 1190 (brackets and 
ellipses omitted). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve
 
Mussack's contentions as follows: 
(1) Mussack alleges that FOF 10, providing that the
 
instant lawsuit was filed on May 27, 2004, is incorrect because
 
the lawsuit was actually filed on March 10, 2004. We agree. 
However, as Mussack acknowledges, this error is harmless. 
(2&3) The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that
 
there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the State
 
Defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
 
The HWPA, codified at HRS § 378-62, provides, in
 
relevant part:
 
An employer shall not discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee regarding the employee's
compensation, terms, conditions, location, or privileges of
employment because
:
 
(1) The employee, or a person acting on behalf of the
employee, reports or is about to report to the employer, or
reports or is about to report to a public body, verbally or
in writing, a violation or a suspected violation of: 
(A) A law, rule, ordinance, or regulation, adopted
pursuant to law of this State, a political subdivision
of this State, or the United States;. . .
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unless the employee knows that the report is fals[e.] 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In Crosby v. State Dept. of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai' i 
332, 8762.3d 1300 (1994), the Hawai' i Supreme Court described and 
discussed the elements of a valid claim under the HWPA:
 
In order for an employee to prevail under the HWPA,
however, the employer's challenged action must have been
taken 'because' the employee engaged in protected conduct in
order to be considered 'discriminatory' under the HWPA. In
other words, a causal connection between the alleged
retaliation and the 'whistleblowing' is required. The HWPA's
legislative history indicates that the legislature intended
that the required burden of proof be similar to that
utilized in traditional labor management relations discharge
cases. Under the National Labor Relations Act, as amended,
29 U.S.C. §§ 151-168 (1988), an employee has the burden of
showing that his or her protected conduct was a 'substantial
or motivating factor' in the decision to terminate the
employee.
 
. . . .
 We note, however, that an aggrieved employee always
retains the ultimate burden of proof in a retaliatory
discharge case. . . . Once the employee shows that the
employer's disapproval of his first amendment protected
expression played a role in the employer's action against
him or her, 'the employer can defend affirmatively by
showing that the termination would have occurred regardless
of the protected activity.' . . .
 
Id. at 342, 876 P.2d at 1310 (citations and brackets omitted;
 
emphasis added).
 
Thus, under Crosby, an HWPA plaintiff must show that
 
the employee engaged in protected conduct, as defined in HWPA,
 
that the employer took some adverse action against the employee,
 
and that the employer's challenged action was taken because the
 
employee engaged in the protected conduct, i.e., that the
 
protected conduct was a substantial or motivating factor in the
 
employer's decision to take the challenged action. To defeat the
 
employer's summary judgment motion, the employee must bring
 
forward some evidence of each element of his or her HWPA claim.
 
In this case, Mussack was first suspended, and later
 
terminated, after two incidents, on February 22, 2001 and
 
February 23, 2001, in which he removed and destroyed papers
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
freshly installed by a fellow teacher on five classroom bulletin
 
boards and threateningly pointed his finger at another teacher,
 
incidents characterized as "violent and threatening behavior
 
towards other teachers" that "fails to meet the standards of
 
conduct for professional teachers and creates an atmosphere of
 
fear and violence in the workplace." In opposition to the State
 
Defendants' summary judgment motion, Mussack submitted excerpts
 
from the depositions of each of the four individual defendants,
 
Mussack's declaration, and thirty-one exhibits thereto. As the
 
State Defendants freely admit, during the course of his
 
employement, Mussack engaged in protected activity when he
 
reported his belief – i.e., that Kailua Elementary School (KES)
 
and/or the Department of Education (DOE) were violating special
 
education laws – to his principal, school district
 
representatives, state legislators, the Board of Education, the
 
DOE Complaints Resolution Office, the federal judiciary, and the
 
news media. It is also undisputed that Mussack was terminated
 
from his employment. However, even viewing all of the evidence
 
and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to
 
Mussack, which we must do, we conclude that Mussack has failed to
 
bring forward any evidence whatsoever of a causal connection
 
between Mussack's protected activities and his termination.
 
Mussack points to a November 1, 2000 oral warning from
 
Harano regarding Mussack's conduct during parent-teacher
 
conferences, specifically Mussack's upsetting of parents in those
 
conferences, and with multiple follow-up calls to the parents,
 
alleging that the school was breaking the law. HWPA clearly
 
proscribes retaliation for reporting alleged law violations to
 
the employer or to a public body, but it does not protect
 
Mussack's conduct in the context of parent-teacher conferences. 
Moreover, Mussack fails to present any evidence that the warning
 
regarding how he conducted parent-teacher conferences adversely
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affected his "compensation, terms, conditions, location or
 
privileges of employment." 
Mussack also points to the "temporal proximity" of his
 
whistleblowing activities and his termination. The record indeed
 
includes evidence and reasonable inferences therefrom tending to
 
show that Mussack made reports and raised complaints about KES's
 
and DOE's alleged law violations almost continuously (at least
 
monthly and often more frequently) from the beginning of his
 
employment at KES. The mere fact that Mussack engaged his
 
protected conduct with regularity is not evidence that his
 
protected conduct was a substantial or motivating factor in his
 
termination. Although the deposition excerpts and other exhibits
 
establish that the State Defendants were aware of Mussack's
 
"whistleblowing" activities, they show no disapproval of or
 
retaliatory action in response to his reports to appropriate
 
authorities. The evidence submitted by Mussack tends to show
 
only that the State Defendants followed up on Mussack's
 
complaints by investigating them, and seeking legal and other
 
professional opinions regarding KES's compliance with special
 
education laws. Having brought forward no evidence of a causal
 
connection between his protected activities and his termination,
 
Mussack failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact
 
regarding his HWPA claim. Thus, it is unnecessary to look beyond
 
the Supreme Court's decision in Crosby to conclude that the State
 
Defendants are entitled to the entry of judgment as a matter of
 
law and the Circuit Court did not err in entering summary
 
judgment against Mussack on his HWPA claim. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
October 15, 2007 Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 7, 2011 
On the briefs: 
Lunsford Dole Phillips
for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
James E. Halvorson Maura M. Okamoto Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendants-Appellees 
Associate Judge 
Acting Associate Judge 
7
 