NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. 29778
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
M.S. and J.S., in their capacity as parents
and legal guardians of M.S.,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0034)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal, Defendants-Appellants M.S. 
and J.S. (collectively, Parents), in their capacity as parents 
and legal guardians of M.S. (Minor), appeal from the Judgment filed on March 17, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(circuit court).1 The circuit court entered judgment in favor of 
the State of Hawai 'i Department of Education (the State) and 
against Parents. In the Judgment, the circuit court reversed the decision of the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs Administrative Hearings Officer (Hearings Officer), who had found in favor of Parents. 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Parents contend the circuit court erred in
 
reversing the Hearings Officer's December 7, 1007 Findings of
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision (Decision) and denying
 Parents' cross-appeal from the Decision because
 
(1) the court failed to provide findings of fact and
 
conclusions of law in support of its Judgment, in violation of
 the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA); 
(2) the court erroneously applied a "some" educational
 
benefits rather than a "meaningful" educational benefits analysis
 with regard to whether Minor had been denied a Free and
 Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) for the 2005-2006 and 2006­2007 school years;
 
(3) a "[f]irst bite at failure" is not required under
 
the IDEA;
 
(4) the court failed to adequately explain why it
 
reversed the Hearings Officer's Decision; and
 
(5) the court failed to apply the correct standard of
 
review.
 
Parents ask that we reverse the Judgment and hold that
 
they are entitled to full and equitable relief and compensatory
 damages.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 appeal is without merit.
A. Findings of Fact 
Parents argue that the circuit court failed to provide
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law in support of its
 Judgment, in violation of the IDEA. They cite to 34 C.F.R.
2
 
§ 300.512(a)(5) to support this argument. That section provides: 
"Any party to a hearing conducted pursuant to §§ 300.507 through
 300.513 or §§ 300.530 through 300.534, or an appeal conducted
 
2
 Code of Federal Regulations
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pursuant to § 300.514, has the right to . . . [o]btain written,
 
or, at the option of the parents, electronic findings of fact and
 decisions." As Parents admit, 34 C.F.R. § 300.512 pertains to
 decisions by the Hearings Officer, not the circuit court. 
Parents cite to no authority for their argument that the circuit
 court was required to provide them with written findings of fact
 and conclusions of law, and we find none. Further, we note that
 Parents did not request written findings of fact or conclusions
 of law from the circuit court or move for reconsideration or
 clarification of the February 17, 2009 Order Reversing the
 Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs Administrative
 Hearings Office December 7, 2007 Decision.
B. Analytical standard
 
Parents contend that during the hearing and in its oral 
ruling, the circuit court erroneously applied a "some" educational benefits rather than a "meaningful" educational benefits analysis with regard to whether Minor was denied a FAPE for the 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 school years. Parents maintain that throughout the hearing, the circuit court "referred solely to the pre 1997 Rowley concept of the substantive requirement under the IDEA of 'some educational benefit' as opposed to 'meaningful educational benefit,'" which has been the standard in the Ninth Circuit since 1997. Parents note that the Hearings Officer applied the meaningful educational benefit standard when the Hearings Officer concluded in the Decision that Minor was entitled to a program that would allow Minor "to make meaningful educational gains." Parents cite to N.B. v. Hellgate Elementary School District ex rel. Board of Directors, Missoula County, Montana, 541 F.3d 1202, 1212-13 (9th Cir. 2008), and Blake C. ex rel. Tina F. v. Department of Education, State of Hawaii, 593 F. Supp. 2d 1199, 1205-07 (D. Hawai
'i 2009), to support this 
argument. 
In Hellgate, the United States Court of Appeals for the
 
Ninth Circuit stated that "[u]nder the 1997 amendments to the
 IDEA, a school must provide a student with a 'meaningful benefit'
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in order to satisfy the substantive requirements of the IDEA." 
541 F.3d at 1212-13. In Blake C., the United States District Court for the District of Hawai
'i construed the phrase 
"meaningful educational benefit": 
Various opinions have left it ambiguous as to what the
precise difference, if any, is between meaningful benefit
and some benefit. Indeed, the circuits are split. The
 Court interprets the latest guidance from the Ninth Circuit
in Hellgate as meaning that an IEP must be individualized
and tailored to the unique needs of the child and reasonably
calculated to produce benefits (i.e., learning, progress,
growth) that are significantly more than de minimus, and
gauged in relation to the potential of the child at issue.
 
Only by considering an individual child's capabilities
and potentialities may a court determine whether an
education benefit provided to that child allows for
meaningful advancement. That is, the programs must be
sufficiently individualized to produce meaningful benefit.
Programs must be individually tailored to produce more than
a trivial education benefit. A satisfactory IEP must
provide significant learning. What is appropriate cannot be
reduced to a single standard but, rather, must be gauged in
relation to the child's potential.
 
For example, when students display considerable
intellectual potential, IDEA requires a great deal more than
a negligible benefit. Courts must analyze the type and
amount of learning of which a student is capable in order to
determine how much of an educational benefit must be
 provided.
 
593 F. Supp. 2d at 1206 (internal quotation marks, citations,
 
footnote, and brackets omitted).
 
In the instant case, in its oral ruling, the circuit
 
court did not explicitly find that the State had provided Minor
 with either a "meaningful" educational benefit or "some"
 educational benefit. However, the circuit court's oral ruling
 reveals that the court clearly considered whether the FAPE the
 State offered to Minor was "individualized and tailored to"
 Minor's "unique needs" and "reasonably calculated to produce
 benefits" that were "significantly more than de minimus, and
 gauged in relation to" Minor's potential. Blake C., 593 F. Supp.
 2d at 1206. The circuit court stated that in passing the IDEA,
 "Congress sought to provide meaningful access to education. . . .
 Therefore, the [State] does provide a [FAPE] if it provides
 specialized instruction and related services which are
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
individually designed to provide educational benefit to a special
 
needs student." (Emphasis added.) The circuit court went on to
 hold:
 
In the case at bar, the [Hearings Officer] found that
[Minor] was enrolled in a private placement because
[Minor's] mother did not believe the [State's] program could
meet [Minor's] chronic behavioral problems. The behavioral
 problems referred to in Findings [sic] of Fact 63 [of the
Hearings Officer's Decision] appears [sic] to be [Minor's]
behavioral problems at home.
 
The record does show that [Minor's] IEP dated March 16
and 17, 2006 did address [Minor's] homework, appropriate
ways to express [Minor's] emotional and self-esteem and
self-confidence needs.
 
The strategies and method appear to have been working
because the record does show that [Minor] was receiving
[sic] passing grade, and [Minor] was advancing from grade to
grade.
 
The record further shows that [Minor] was making
progress based upon [Minor's] goals and objectives.
Therefore, [Minor] was receiving educational benefit from
[Minor's IEP] at the DOE [sic].
 
The record is also clear that [Minor] also made
progress at [Minor's] private placements; in fact, it
appears that [Minor] made more progress in the private
placement than [Minor] did while at the DOE [sic].
 
There is great temptation to be favorably impressed
and significantly influenced by the quality of the progress
[Minor] achieved in his private placement. However, the law
does not require the [State] to provide at no cost to
parents the best educational program to maximize a student's
potential.
 
The [State] meets its obligations under the IDEA if
the student receives educational benefits from his program,
and the record shows that [Minor] did achieve such
educational benefit in this case.
 
With regard to the issue of homework . . . there was
no evidence in the record that the educational benefits of
 homework are only achieved when the homework is done at
home. The key benefit of homework is that it is done; that
gives the student the opportunity to reinforce class work.
 
The record shows that if [Minor] did not complete
[Minor's] homework at home, [Minor] was allowed to complete
it in school outside of [Minor's] class time. Therefore,
there was insufficient evidence to show that the benefit of
 homework was lost if [Minor] did not do it on school grounds
outside of the class time and not at home. As such, there
was no failure of the [State] to provide a [FAPE], because
[Minor] did [Minor's] homework on school grounds instead of
home.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding science in the regular education setting,
the [State] was not given a meaningful opportunity to
implement its strategy to address [Minor's] low performance
in science for the first three or four weeks of the fall
 semester, because [Minor] was removed on August 30, 2006
before the [State] had the chance to implement its IEP
regarding science.
 
Regarding the skills trainer to address behavioral
problems at home, the Court agrees with the [Hearings
Officer] that [Parents] failed to show that a skills trainer
for [Minor's] behavioral problems at home was appropriate.
 
[Minor's] own behavioral problems did not prevent
[Minor] from achieving educational benefit from [Minor's]
IEP. The [State] did provide a de facto skills trainer for
[Minor's] homework by providing [Minor] a tutor.
 
Although the circuit court repeatedly refers to "educational
 
benefit" throughout its oral ruling, the court does so after
 citing to a "meaningful access to education" standard and
 analyzing the facts according to that standard. The circuit
 court nowhere refers to a "some" educational benefit standard. 
Given the foregoing, the circuit court did not apply the wrong
 standard of review.
 
C. "First bite at failure"
 
In the Decision, the Hearings Officer determined that
 
the State had not provided Minor with a FAPE for the 2006-2007
 school year because the State had not placed Minor in a special
 education science class, despite the opinion of Minor's science
 teacher (Mr. C) that Minor needed special education in that
 subject because Minor was receiving a "D" or "F" in the class a
 month into the semester. At oral argument, Parents' counsel
 argued that the Hearings Officer's decision on this issue was
 correct and the State was obligated to put Minor in a special
 education science class once Mr. C made his report. In response
 to a question by the circuit court, Parents' counsel conceded
 that Parents removed Minor from the public school and enrolled
 him in the private school soon after Mr. C made his report. The
 State's counsel responded that an IEP team meeting had been
 convened in response to Mr. C's report and the team discussed the
 possibility of moving Minor to a special education science class,
 but ultimately determined that a change could have a negative
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
emotional impact on Minor and Minor should remain in the regular
 
education class with accommodations. At that meeting, Parents
 announced they would be enrolling Minor in the private school.
 
In its oral ruling, the circuit court stated:
 
Regarding science in the regular education setting,
the [State] was not given a meaningful opportunity to
implement its strategy to address [Minor's] low performance
in science for the first three or four weeks of the fall
 semester, because [Minor] was removed on August 30, 2006
before the [State] had a chance to implement its IEP
regarding science.
 
Parents contend that a "[f]irst bite at failure" is not
 
required under the IDEA. By this, they mean the circuit court
 
erred in finding that the IDEA required an educational policy
 mandating that parents of a severely emotionally disturbed,
 learning disabled child should continue that child in an
 inappropriate and even failed educational placement, just to test
 the State's serial, subtle, small incremental changes in the
 offer of a FAPE to see if, at some point in time, any of the
 changes will actually work. Parents cite to Frank G. v. Board of
 Education of Hyde Park, 459 F.3d 356 (2d Cir. 2006), to support
 this argument.
 
In Frank G., the mother of a son diagnosed with
 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) requested an
 impartial hearing to review an IEP developed for her son
 (Student) by a Committee on Special Education (CSE) in Student's
 school district (School District). Id. at 359-60. The CSE had
 
recommended in the IEP that Student receive special education
 services at a public school. Id. at 360. In her request,
 
Student's mother asked that CSE provide Student with special
 education services at the private school Student had been
 attending, instead. Id. Subsequently, Student's parents
 
enrolled Student in a new private school (Upton Lake). Id. at
 
361. A hearing was held before an impartial hearing officer
 
(IHO). Id. The IHO ruled that the School District was not
 
required to reimburse Student's parents for tuition they paid for
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the 2001-2002 school year because Upton Lake was not an
 
appropriate placement for Student. Id.
 
The School District and Student's parents filed 
administrative appeals from the IHO's ruling to the State Review
 Officer (SRO). Id. The SRO affirmed the IHO's order. Id. 
Student's parents then filed a complaint in the United States
 District Court for the Southern District of New York, seeking
 tuition reimbursement for the 2001-2002 school year. Id. at 362. 
The district court found that Upton Lake was an appropriate
 placement for Student and awarded Student's parents tuition
 reimbursement. Id.
 
The School District appealed from the district court's
 
judgment, arguing, among other things, that the School District
 had an "absolute legal defense" against Student's parents'
 reimbursement request based on 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(10)(C)(ii),
 which authorized reimbursement to a disabled child's parents who
 had previously received special education and related services
 under the authority of a public agency and who had enrolled the
 child in a private school without the private agency's consent or
 referral, if the court or hearing officer found that the agency
 had not made a FAPE available to the child in a timely manner
 prior to enrollment. Id. at 362 & 367. The School District
 
argued that Student's parents were not entitled to reimbursement
 because they had enrolled Student in another school before the
 IHO had determined that Student was entitled to a FAPE. Id. at
 
368. The district court stated that the School District's
 
interpretation of the statute would produce an absurd result
 because, among other things, it would "place the parents of
 children with disabilities in the untenable position of
 acquiescing to an inappropriate placement in order to preserve
 their right to seek reimbursement from the public agency that
 devised the inappropriate placement." Id. at 372. The district
 
court stated that 
[s]uch a result, it has been suggested, ensures that a
parent's rejection of a public school placement is not based
on mere speculation as to whether the recommended school
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
placement would have been appropriate. This suggestion
turns on the erroneous assumption that parents would have to
keep their child in a public school placement until it was
clear that their speculation was borne out by a wasted year
of actual failure. Such a first bite at failure is not
 
required by the IDEA.
 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted; emphasis
 
added).
 
Frank G. is inapplicable to this case because 20 U.S.C.
 
§ 1412 is not at issue here. In the instant case, the State did
 not argue and the circuit court did not find that Parents were
 barred from receiving tuition reimbursement for the 2006-2007
 school year because they removed Minor from the public school
 before the Hearings Officer determined that Minor was entitled to
 a FAPE. Frank G., 459 F.3d at 368. Rather, the circuit court
 
ruled that Parents had not shown that the State failed to provide
 Minor with a FAPE for the 2006-2007 school year because the State
 was denied "a meaningful opportunity to implement its strategy to
 address [Minor's] low performance in science" when Parents
 removed Minor from the public school before the strategy could be
 implemented. In Frank G., the district court held that if § 1412
 were to be construed as the School District argued it should,
 parents of children with disabilities would be placed "in the
 untenable position of acquiescing to an inappropriate placement
 in order to preserve their right to seek reimbursement from the
 public agency that devised the inappropriate placement." Frank
 
G., 459 F.3d at 372. In the instant case, the circuit court
 found that Parents failed to show that Minor's placement in a
 regular science class with accommodations was inappropriate in
 the first place.
 
The circuit court's finding on this issue did not
 
suggest that Parents were required to take a "first bite at
 failure" to receive reimbursement for the private school tuition
 they paid for the 2006-2007 school year.
D. Inadequate explanation for reversal
 
Parents contend the circuit court failed to adequately
 
explain why it reversed the Hearings Officer's Decision. Parents
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maintain that the circuit court, when rendering its Judgment,
 
erroneously failed to consider and/or address the Hearings
 Officer's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law specifically
 relating to Minor's global behavior problems. Parents allege
 that the circuit court "made no attempt to explain why it
 discredited the [Hearings Officer's] interpretation of some of
 the evidence set forth in the [Hearings Officer's] findings." 
Parents cite to Town of Burlington v. Department of Education for
 Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 736 F.2d 773, 791-92 (1st Cir.
 1984), and Frank G. to support this contention.
 
In Town of Burlington, the United States Court of
 
Appeals for the First Circuit stated:
 
Because Congress intended courts to make bounded,
independent decisions –- bounded by the administrative
record and additional evidence, and independent by virtue of
being based on a preponderance of the evidence before the
court -- the question of the weight due the administrative
findings of facts must be left to the discretion of the
trial court. The traditional test of findings being binding
on the court if supported by substantial evidence, or even a
preponderance of the evidence, does not apply. This does
 not mean, however, that the findings can be ignored. The
 court, in recognition of the expertise of the administrative
agency, must consider the findings carefully and endeavor to
respond to the hearing officer's resolution of each material
issue. After such consideration, the court is free to
accept or reject the findings in part or in whole.
 
736 F.2d at 791-92. The United States Court of Appeals for the
 
Second Circuit in Frank G. stated that "when reviewing
 administrative decisions, federal courts must base their
 decisions on the preponderance of the evidence, taking into
 account the evidence in the administrative record and any further
 evidence presented before the District Court by the parties." 
459 F.3d at 367 (internal quotation marks, citation, and emphasis
 omitted).
 
In the instant case, there is no evidence in the record
 
on appeal that the circuit court failed to carefully consider 
the Hearings Officer's findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
Town of Burlington, 736 F.2d at 791-92. In the circuit court's
 oral ruling, the court clearly "endeavor[ed] to respond to the
 hearing officer's resolution of each material issue." Id. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Parents cite to no authority requiring the circuit court to
 
address on the record the Hearings Officer's findings of fact or
 conclusions of law one by one or explicitly state why the court
 interpreted the findings differently, and we find none.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
March 17, 2009 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 17, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Karen J. Lee
 
for Defendants-Appellants.
 
Jerrold G.H. Yashiro and 
Holly T. Shikada,
Deputy Attorneys General
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Presiding Judge

Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
11
 