FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---O0O--­
NO. 27851
 
ROSEMARIE A. JAYLO, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALDO M. JAYLO, Defendant-Appellant
 
AND
 
NO. 28049
 
ROSEMARIE AGUIRRE JAYLO, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ADLO MACAPAL JAYLO, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D No. 96-1929)
 
February 8, 2011
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
In these consolidated appeals, Defendant­
Appellant/Appellee Aldo Macapal Jaylo (Husband) and Plaintiff­
Appellee/Appellant Rosemarie Aguirre Jaylo (Wife) appeal from

 
post-divorce decree orders entered by the Family Court of the
 First Circuit (family court). In appeal No. 28049, Wife appeals
 
from an order entered by the family court on July 19, 2006,
 
denying her motion for enforcement of the divorce decree
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
provision of in-lieu payments of her share of Husband's military
 
retirement benefits. In appeal No. 27851, Husband appeals from
 
1
the March 6, 2006 order entered by the family court,  awarding
educational child support for the parties' twenty-six-year-old
 
child to Wife. We affirm in No. 28049 and vacate and remand in 
No. 27851. 
I. 
Husband and Wife were married in Hawai 'i on January 26, 
1980. During the course of their marriage, they had three 
daughters who, at the time this divorce action was filed, were 
living in Washington State with the children's aunt and attending 
middle and high schools. Wife, who filed for divorce on June 4, 
1996, also asked for custody of and child support for the three 
children and for division of the parties' debts and assets. 
On July 29, 1996, the family court entered a divorce
 
decree (Decree) that (1) dissolved the marriage of Husband and
 
Wife; (2) awarded (a) full legal and physical custody of the
 
children to Wife, (b) reasonable visitation to Husband, and (c)
 
child support to be paid by Husband to Wife; (3) awarded no
 
spousal support; and (4) divided the assets and debts between
 
Husband and Wife.
 
Regarding child support, the Decree provided:
 
Payments of child support shall continue for each
child until each child attains the age of 18 years or
graduates from high school or discontinues high school[,]
whichever occurs last, subject to further order of the
court. Child support for each child shall further continue
uninterrupted so long as each child continues his education
post high school on a full-time basis at an accredited
college or university, or in a vocational or trade school
and shall continue until each child's graduation or
attainment of the age of 23 years, whichever event shall
first occur.
 
The decree also provided for the payment of educational expenses
 
as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Karen M. Radius presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7. EDUCATION.
 
(A) Special education Expenses. [Wife] and
[Husband] shall equally split any and all costs incurred for
special education needs of the minor children.
 
(B) Post High School, Higher Education Expenses. 
Should either child of the parties continue his education
post high school on a full time basis at an accredited
college or university, or in a vocational or trade school,
[Wife] and [Husband] shall each assume and pay one-half
(1/2) of the said post high school higher education
expenses, including but not limited to tuition, fees, book
expenses and necessary transportation expenses. [Wife] and
[Husband] shall each continue to pay one-half (1/2) of the
higher education expenses for said child until said child's
graduation or attainment of the age of 23 years, whichever
event shall first occur. This provision shall be subject to
further order of the Court.
 
The Decree also included the following, regarding the
 
division of Husband's military retirement benefits:
 
13. PERSONAL PROPERTY.
 
. . . .
 (E) Retirement. Effective upon [Husband's] retirement
from the United States Armed Forces, and continuing for so
long as both parties shall live, [Wife] shall receive a
portion of each payment of military disposable retired or
retainer pay to which [Husband] is entitled.
 
[Wife's] portion of each payment of disposable retired
or retainer pay shall be "X" in the following formula, in
which "M" is the total number of years of the marriage
[that] were also years credited to [Husband] for retirement
purposes, "Y" is the total number of years credited to
[Husband] for retirement purposes, and in which "DRRP"
equals the payment of disposable retired or retainer pay to
be divided.
 
X = [.5] [M/Y] [DRRP]
 
Disposable retired or retainer pay for these purposes
 
shall be the gross retired or retainer pay to which
 
[Husband] is entitled less only amounts which:
 
. . . .
 
(3) in the case where [Husband] is entitled to
 
retired pay under Chapter 61 of Title 10, U.S.C.,[ 2
] an
 
2
 It is doubtful that Husband drew his retirement pay under "Chapter 61
of Title 10, U.S.C." Although the record provides no evidence of the reasons
for Husband's separation from the military, the record shows that Husband had
retired after fifteen and one-half years in the military and prior to
February 26, 2003, was 20% disabled. A service member with these
 characteristics today would be "separated" from the military with a one-time
severance payment. See 10 U.S.C. § 1203, 1212 (2000).
 
(continued...)
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
amount which is equal to the amount of retired pay of
 
[Husband] under that Chapter computed using the percentage
 of [Husband's] disability on the date when [Husband] was
 retired (or the date on which his name was placed on the
 temporary disability retired list); or
 
. . . .
 
If other deductions from gross monthly retired of
[sic] retainer pay are made, [Wife's] portion of each
payment of disposable retired or retainer pay shall be
increased so that [Wife] receives what she would have
received had those other reductions not occurred.
 
The United States Government shall directly pay [Wife]
her portion of [Husband's] disposable retired or retainer
 pay.
 
(a) The parties were married on January 26, 1980.
 
(b) [Husband] has served in the United States Armed
Forces since 1988. [ 3
]
. . . .

 
In the event that the United States Government will
 
not directly pay [Wife] all she is entitled to under this
Section, [Husband] shall immediately make payment to [Wife]
of her portion of his disposable retired or retainer pay as
soon as he receives it.
 
Each time [Husband] receives a statement of his
retired or retainer pay, he shall promptly send [Wife] a
 copy.
 
2(...continued)
The most likely explanation for Husband's ongoing receipt of
retirement benefits despite his comparatively low disability rating is the
Temporary Early Retirement Authorization (TERA), a mechanism to effectuate
troop draw down. Pub. L. No 102-484 § 4403, 106 Stat. 2702, 2703 (1992). See
 
notes following 10 U.S.C. § 1293 (2000). Under TERA, each branch of the armed
forces was authorized to grant prorated retirement pay and other benefits to
personnel with between fifteen and twenty years in active-duty service. Id. 
Based on the record in this case, it is likely that Husband retired early.
See In re Marriage of Wherrell, 58 P.3d 734, 738-39 (Kan. 2002) (recognizing
possibility that former husband, an eighteen-year veteran with thirty percent
disability, retired under TERA).
3
 Although the Decree states that Husband joined the military in 1988,
and neither party contested that date, in Exhibit D attached to his "Affidavit
of Defendant in Response and Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion and Affidavit
for Post-Decree Relief Filed November 12, 2002," Husband calculated Wife's
percentage share of his retirement benefits as 46.5% using military service
dates of December 1978 and June 1994. Wife agreed with Husband's calculation.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Family Court has jurisdiction over [Husband's]
disposable retired or retainer pay pursuant to the
Uniform[ed] Services Former Spouses Protection Act of 1982
as amended
.[4]
 
(1) Pursuant to Section 580-47 of the Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes [HRS] [Husband's] disposable retired or retainer
pay is subject to equitable division upon divorce.
 
(2) Pursuant to Section 580-1 of the [HRS] the Family
Court has jurisdiction to divide property incident to
divorce.
 
(3) [Husband] has been afforded his rights under the
Soldiers and Sailors Civil Relief Act of 1940.
 
(4) [Husband] has consented to Family Court
jurisdiction over his retired or retainer pay.
 
(5) [Husband] is domiciled in the territorial
jurisdiction of the court.
 
If at any time after he is retired, [Husband]
 
voluntarily causes a reduction in his gross retired or
 
retainer pay, and thereby deprives [Wife] of a part or all
 of his [sic] benefits conferred by this Section, [Husband]
 shall be deemed to have created a constructive trust for
 [Wife's] benefit under Federal and applicable State law, and
 [Wife] shall thereupon have an interest in, and the right of
 immediate possession of, so much of [Husband's] property
 awarded hereby as is necessary to satisfy said trust. The
 Family Court shall have continuing jurisdiction to enforce
 the trust, and make all orders necessary to implement the
 trust.
 
(Emphasis and footnotes added).
 
On November 12, 2002, Wife filed her first "Motion and
 
Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief" (First Motion), asking for
 
modification and enforcement of the Decree. Wife asked that,
 
instead of selling the marital residence and dividing the
 
proceeds, the family court should award title of the marital
 
residence to her. This request was based on Husband's failure to
 
pay, as ordered in the Decree, (1) his share of the children's
 
4
 The Uniformed Services Former Spouses Protection Act (USFSPA) allows
Wife to request direct payment of her share of Husband's retirement pay, if he
is entitled to any, by presenting the appropriate documentation. 10 U.S.C.
 § 1408 (2000). Although the record shows that Wife submitted the Order for
Income Assignment to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) in
1996, there is no evidence that Wife served DFAS with other required
documentation. Regardless of any previous defects in filing with DFAS, there
is nothing in 10 U.S.C. § 1408 that prevents Wife from reapplying to receive
her share of any retirement pay in the future. However, DFAS cannot operate
retroactively. See 10 U.S.C. § 1408(d)(5).
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
educational expenses and (2) Wife's share of Husband's military
 
retirement benefits. Wife alleged that Husband's total
 
obligation for these two items exceeded the parties' equity in
 
the marital residence.
 
Wife claimed that Section 13(3) of the Decree entitled
 
her to a marital portion of Husband's military retired pay, but
 
since the Decree was entered, she had not received any military
 
retired pay from either the military pay center or Husband. She
 
calculated that Husband owed her $35,959.
 
Husband agreed that he should pay some of the
 
children's educational expenses and that Wife was entitled a
 
share of his retirement benefits, but disagreed with Wife's
 
calculations.
 
After Wife filed her First Motion but before trial was
 
held on November 21, 2003, the Veterans' Administration (VA),
 
upon Husband's application, increased Husband's disability rating
 
5
to 60 percent, and pursuant to federal law,  Husband waived his
retirement in order to receive VA benefits.
 
The parties submitted closing arguments on January 20,

 
2004. Husband admitted that he did not pay Wife $12,921.77 in
 
military retirement, but he argued that Wife's entitlement to
 
Husband's retirement ended on February 28, 2003, the date on
 
which Husband exclusively received VA disability payments.
 
Wife disputed Husband's argument that she was no longer
 
entitled to any portion of his retirement benefits given that he
 
was no longer receiving them. She concluded:
 
5
 Prior to January 1, 2004, service members were required to waive
retirement benefits on a dollar-for-dollar ratio with benefits received from
 
the VA. See 38 U.S.C. § 5305 (2000 and Supp. 2004). As of January 1, 2004,
qualified retirees with a disability rating over 50% could receive both
pension and VA benefits, which the military calls Concurrent Retirement and
Disability Pay (CRDP). Pub. L. 108-136 § 641, 117 Stat. 1392, 1511 (2003); 10
U.S.C. § 1414 (Supp. 2004). Service members retired on account of disability
with less than 20 years in service cannot collect CRDP, but early-retirees
under TERA can. Id. at 1511, 10 U.S.C. § 1414(b)(2). The retirement portion
of CRDP is divisible in a divorce. See Youngblood v. Youngblood, 959 So.2d
416, 417-19 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2007).
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Pursuant to above-referenced [ 6
] plain language of the
Decree, regardless of Husband's present disability rate, and
regardless whether this is termed as VA benefits rather than
Disability, Wife is still entitled to the same 46.5% as on
the date of the Decree, Husband only had 20% disability and
therefore, would still be entitled to receive retired pay
rather than full VA benefits.
 
7
On June 1, 2004, the family court  entered its order
deciding Wife's First Motion (June 1, 2004 Order) by denying
 
Wife's request to have the marital residence placed in her name
 
and awarding Wife $
20,615.80 as Husband's share of the children's
 
past educational expenses. With regard to Husband's retirement
 benefits, the family court ruled,
 
Pursuant to Paragraph 13(E) of the Divorce Decree regarding
the division of [Husband's] retirement benefits, [Husband]
owes [Wife] $12921.77 for benefits received prior to
February 28, 2003. A judgment for $12921.77 shall hereby be
entered against [Husband].
 
[Husband's] retirement benefits ended on February 28,
2003 due to the receipt of veterans' disability benefits.
 
The family court said nothing in its order regarding Wife's
 
rights, or lack thereof, to payments Husband might receive after
 
February 28, 2003.
 
6 Wife's reference is to the following language contained in section 13
(E)(5) of the Decree:
 
If at any time after he is retired, [Husband]
voluntarily causes a reduction in his gross retired or
retainer pay, and thereby deprives [Wife] of a part or all
of his benefits conferred by this Section, [Husband] shall
be deemed to have created a constructive trust for [Wife's]
benefit under Federal and applicable State law, and [Wife]
shall thereupon have an interest in, and the right of
immediate possession of, so much of [Husband's] property
awarded hereby as is necessary to satisfy said trust. The
 Family Court shall have continuing jurisdiction to enforce
the trust, and make all orders necessary to implement the
trust.

 7The Honorable Nancy Ryan presided. The order was drafted by Huilin
Dong, Wife's attorney at the time. On the same day the order was filed, a
"Withdrawal and Substitution of Counsel" was also filed, substituting
Steven J. Kim, Wife's present counsel, for Ms. Dong.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On September 3, 2004, based on Husband's June 10, 2004
 
motion for reconsideration, the family court reduced the
 
educational support award to $19,255.12 and ordered that Husband
 
pay the retirement and educational support arrearage award in
 
twelve equal monthly installments (September 3, 2004 Order).
 
No appeal from this September 3, 2004 Order or the
 
June 1, 2004 Order was taken by either party.
 
On May 24, 2005, Wife filed "Plaintiff's Motion for 
Relief From Provisions of [June 1, 2004 Order] Pertaining to 
Retirement Benefits and For Order Re-Establishing Child Support 
for Adult Handicapped Daughter" (Second Motion). Wife argued 
that the family court should grant relief, under Hawai 'i Family 
8
Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 60(b)(1) and (6),  from the portion of
9
the June [1], 2004 Order  "which held that [Wife] was not
entitled to any payment from [Husband] after February 28, 2003 for her share of retirement benefits" because that ruling was "a 
mistake, or, alternatively, that relief is justified from that 
portion of the Court's ruling in light of the ICA's recent 
decision" in 
Perez v. Perez, 107 Hawai 'i 85, 110 P.3d 409 (App. 
8 HFCR Rule 60(b) provides,
 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud.  On motion and upon such terms
as are just, the court may relieve a party or a party's
legal representative from any or all of the provisions of a
final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following
reasons: (1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable
neglect; . . . or (6) any other reason justifying relief
from the operation of the judgment. The motion shall be
 made within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1), (2), and
(3) not more than one year after the judgment, order, or
proceedings was entered or taken. For reasons (1) and (3)
the averments in the motion shall be made in compliance with
Rule 9(b) of these rules. A motion under this subdivision
 (b) does not affect the finality of a judgment or suspend
its operation. This rule does not limit the power of a
court to entertain an independent action to relieve a party
from a judgment, order, or proceeding, or to set aside a
judgment for fraud upon the court.
9
 Although Wife references the "June 4, 2004 order," we again surmise
this is a typographical error as no order was filed in this case on June 4,
2004.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10 11 
2005). Relying on HRS §§ 577-7(a)  and 580-47(a) as her
 
authority, Wife also sought child support for the parties' adult
 
blind daughter born on April 28, 1980 (Daughter), who was
 
continuing to pursue her college education past the age of
 
twenty-three years.
 
On July 14, 2005, Husband filed a response to Wife's

 
motion, arguing that, with regard to Wife's claim to his
 
retirement benefits, HFCR Rule 60(b) did not apply because the
 
change in case law was not made retroactive. As to Wife's
 
request for support for Daughter, Husband argued that Daughter's
 
disability was known at the time of the Decree, no provision for
 
her was sought or ordered, the family court did not reserve
 
jurisdiction over the issue of child support and, in any event,
 
10 The portion of HRS § 577-7(a) (2006) quoted by Wife provides, "[a]ll
parents and guardians shall provide, to the best of their abilities, for the
discipline, support and education of their children." HRS § 577-7(a).
11 HRS § 580-47(a) (2006) (emphasis added) provides, in pertinent part,
 
§ 580-47. Support orders; division of property
 
(a) Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in
addition to the powers granted in subsections (c) and (d),
jurisdiction of those matters is reserved under the decree
by agreement of both parties or by order of court after
finding that good cause exists, the court may make any
further orders as shall appear just and equitable (1)
compelling the parties or either of them to provide for the
support, maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties; (2) compelling either party to provide for the
support and maintenance of the other party; (3) finally
dividing and distributing the estate of the parties, real,
personal, or mixed, whether community, joint, or separate;
and (4) allocating, as between the parties, the
responsibility for the payment of the debts of the parties
whether community, joint, or separate, and the attorney's
fees, costs, and expenses incurred by each party by reason
of the divorce. In making these further orders, the court
shall take into consideration: the respective merits of the
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the
condition in which each party will be left by the divorce,
the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of the
children of the parties, and all other circumstances of the
 case. In establishing the amounts of child support, the
court shall use the guidelines established under section
576D-7. Provision may be made for the support, maintenance,
and education of an adult or minor child and for the
 support, maintenance, and education of an incompetent adult
child whether or not the petition is made before or after
the child has attained the age of majority. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Wife's request for this support was not brought within a
 
reasonable time.
 
A short trial was held on September 9, 2005, both
 
parties submitted additional memoranda regarding whether (1) HFCR
 
Rule 60(b) authorized a reopening of the June 1, 2004 Order and
 
(2) child support could be reestablished under HRS § 580-47.
 
In her supplemental memorandum, Wife argued that, at
 
the time the June 1, 2004 Order was entered, "there was no
 
existing Hawaii case law on the issue of whether a military
 
retiree could diminish a former spouse's entitlement to
 
retirement benefits by electing to receive his/her benefits as
 
veteran's disability benefits instead of as retirement benefits." 
The state of the law changed, Wife argued, when this court issued
 
the Perez decision on March 22, 2005, and Wife brought her motion
 
approximately two months after the Perez decision and within one
 
year of the June 1, 2004 Order.12
 
As to Wife's request for extended support for Daughter,
 
Wife primarily relied on HRS § 580-47(a) authorizing the family
 
court to issue orders regarding child support after the divorce
 
is granted and after the child has attained the age of majority
 
as well as the language in the Decree reserving jurisdiction of
 
the family court over child support.
 
Husband argued that none of the bases identified in
 
HFCR Rule 60(b) applied, that the Perez case was not, by its
 
terms, retroactive, and that Wife's remedy was to have appealed
 
the June 1, 2004 Order. Husband relied on an unidentified
 
"Family Court memorandum" for his position that an "adult child"
 
for the purposes of HRS § 580-47 was a child under the age of
 
12 Perez held that "a party's vested interest in a military pension 
cannot be unilaterally diminished by an act of a military spouse," inasmuch as
this "would constitute an impermissible modification of a division of maritalproperty." 107 Hawai' i at 91-92, 110 P.3d at 415-16. As such, Perez affirmed
an order entitling a non-military spouse to "an amount equal" to her share ofthe military spouse's pension, provided that the military spouse is "able tosatisfy his obligation with a source of funds other than his disabilitybenefits," which could not be treated as divisible. 107 Hawai' i at 92, 110
P.3d at 416. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
twenty-three. Husband also argued that Wife should have asked
 
for support for Daughter in Wife's First Motion, as by then
 
Daughter had already reached age twenty-three and was attending
 
college, and therefore this relief was also barred under HFCR
 
Rule 60(b). Husband did not counter Wife's arguments as to
 
Daughter's needs and expenses.
 
On March 6, 2006, the family court granted Wife's
 
motion with regard to child support and denied relief with regard
 
to Husband's retirement benefits, making the following findings
 
of fact and conclusions of law (March 6, 2006 Order):
 
1. The parties were divorced on July 29, 1996. At
 
that time [Daughter] was 16 years old.
 
2. The Divorce Decree provided child support for the
minor children of the parties including [Daughter] through
graduation from high school and then continuing through age
23 so long as then adult child attended an accredited
college or university. The Divorce Decree further provided
for each of the parties to pay one half of the post high
school higher education expenses (defined as tuition, fees,
book expenses and necessary transportation) for each child
until that child graduated or attained 23 years of age. The
 Decree provided that "This provision shall be subject to
further order of the Court."
 
3. [Daughter] was born on April 14, 1980 and thus was
25 years old when [Wife] filed her motion in this case on
May 24, 2005.
 
4. [Daughter] has been legally blind since birth.
She currently lives in Washington state. She graduated from
high school at the Washington State School for the Blind in
2000 at age 20.
 
5. [Daughter] has continued on in college in
Washington, living independently and taking between 10-15
credit hours per semester as well as life-skills courses
through the Department of Services for the Blind. She hopes
to graduate with a degree in music.
 
6. Given [Daughter's] challenges she is taking the
maximum number of credits to be able to complete college in
a timely fashion and thus would be considered a full time
student.
 
7. [Daughter] has hopes of earning a bachelor's
degree and becoming a flute teacher.
 
8. [Daughter] has secured scholarships and other
benefits for tuition and some related expenses. She has
 maximized the benefits available to her.
 
9. [Daughter] has joined in [Wife's] request that
[Husband] pay a portion of her reasonable living expenses as
she pursues a bachelor's degree.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10. [Daughter's] uncovered expenses of $834.00 per
month as testified to and set forth on the statement
 
attached to [Wife's] Income and Expense statement are
reasonable.
 
11. The parties['] proportional share of income as
set forth on line 13 of the Child Support Guidelines
Worksheet attached hereto as Exhibit "A" are 63% [Husband]
and 37% [Wife].
 
12. HRS [§] 580-47 provides that "Provision may be
made for the support, maintenance, and education of an adult
child . . . whether or not the petition is made before or
after the child has attained the age of majority."
 
13. Good cause exists in this case to order that
 
[Husband] pay 63% of the $834.00 per month of [Daughter's]
expenses, namely $525.42 per month for her support,
maintenance and education. [Wife] shall pay 37% of the
$834.00 per month of [Daughter's] expenses, namely $308.58
per month for her support, maintenance and education.
 
14. Said order shall be in full force and effect so
 
long as [Daughter] is pursuing a bachelor's degree and
continuing at the maximum amount of courses prescribed by
the college based upon her disability.
 
15. As to the [Wife's] Motion for Relief from [the
June 1, 2004] Order Pertaining to Retirement Benefits,
[Wife's] Motion is denied. [Wife] chose not to appeal Judge
Ryan's [June 1, 2004 Order]. See Hammon v. Monsef
, 8 Haw.
 
App. 58 (1990). [13]
 
(Footnote added.)

 
On March 20, 2006, Wife filed "[Wife's] Motion For
 
Clarification and/or Reconsideration of Order Granting in Part
 
and Denying in Part [Wife's] Motion for Relief From 6/30/04 [sic]
 
Order Pertaining to Retirement Benefits and for Order
 
Reestablishing Child Support for Adult Handicapped Daughter,
 
Filed 3/6/06." The motion asked for clarification of the child
 
13 The family court presumably relied upon the following reasoning from
Hammon v. Monsef, 8 Haw. App. 58, 64, 792 P.2d 311, 314 (1990) :
 
We agree with Ritter v. Smith, 811 F.2d 1398, 1401
(11th Cir. 1987) that "something more than a 'mere' change
in the law is necessary to provide the grounds for Rule
60(b)(6) relief." We further agree with the view that
"[t]he broad power granted by clause (6) is not for the
purpose of relieving a party from free, calculated, and
deliberate choices [she] has made. A party remains under a
duty to take legal steps to protect [her] own interests. In
 particular, it ordinarily is not permissible to use this
motion to remedy a failure to take an appeal." Wright &
Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 2864 (1973)
(footnotes omitted).
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
support award contained in the March 6, 2006 Order. However, no
 
disposition of this motion appears in the record and Wife did not
 
appeal from the March 6, 2006 Order. 
On March 31, 2006, Husband filed a notice of appeal
 
from the March 6, 2006 Order.14
 
On April 6, 2006, Wife filed "Plaintiff's Motion to
 
Enforce the Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child
 
Custody by Establishment of Perez Payments and/or a Constructive
 
Trust" (Third Motion). Wife based her motion on HFCR Rule 7 (the
 
basic motions rule), the Perez decision, and the USFSPA (10
 
United States Code § 1408 (1982)), authorizing division of
 
service members' retirement benefits. Wife argued that the court
 
should impose a constructive trust for the portion of Husband's
 
retirement benefits she was entitled to but for Husband's
 
election of disability benefits and should enforce the Decree and
 
award payments in lieu of her share of retirement benefits as
 
provided in Perez. Husband responded to Wife's Third Motion,
 
arguing that Wife was presenting the same issue and seeking the
 
same relief as in the First and Second Motions, and as Wife
 
failed to appeal the family court's adverse rulings in both
 
motions, Wife should not be entitled to any relief.
 
After hearing argument on the Third Motion, the family
 
court entered a written order denying Wife's Third Motion. While
 
the family court's July 19, 2006 "Order Denying Plaintiff's
 
Motion to Enforce Decree, et al." (July 19, 2006 Order) merely
 
stated that Wife's motion was denied, at the close of the
 
July 19, 2006 hearing, the family court stated that Wife's motion
 
was denied "[b]ased upon the arguments presented by [Husband’s
 
counsel], based upon the totality of the circumstances in this
 
case," and "based upon the law, the court rules, and prior orders
 
entered in this case."
 
14 Husband also moved for relief from the March 6, 2006 order,
challenging the computation of the child support amount awarded. Husband's
 
motion was summarily denied.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On July 21, 2006, Wife filed a notice of appeal from
 
the family court's July 19, 2006 Order.
 
II.
 
A. Wife's Appeal
 
15
On appeal, Wife argues  that the family court erred by
refusing to enforce the retirement division provisions in the
 
divorce decree. While Wife did not explicitly bring her Third
 
Motion pursuant to HFCR Rule 60(b), we look to the substance of
 
her motion to determine its nature. Madden v. Madden
, 43 Haw.
 
148, 149-50 (1959) ("motion to set aside the final order and for
 other relief was a motion to alter or amend a judgment under rule
 
59(e), although not denominated as such") and Anderson v. Oceanic
 
Properties, Inc., 3 Haw. App. 350, 355, 650 P.2d 612, 617 (1982)
 
("it is the substance of the pleadings that control, not its
 
nomenclature").
 
15 Wife raises the following questions on appeal:
 
Whether the Family Court erred by its refusal to
enforce the provisions in the Divorce Decree filed 7/29/96
awarding her a portion of [Husband's] retirement plan, in
view of Perez v. Perez, 107 Haw. 85 (2005), where [Husband]
has other income and assets besides military disability,
from which to satisfy his obligation to pay the amounts owed
to [Wife].
 
Whether, the Family Court acted outside of its subject
matter jurisdiction set forth in HRS § 580-56(d) by its
determination on 6/1/04 that [Husband's] retirement benefits
ended due to his election to receive his retirement benefits
 in the form of VA disability benefits, and whether such
order had the legal effect of modifying the parties' Divorce
Decree and terminating [Wife's] entitlement to payments
equivalent to her share of [Husband's] retirement benefits,
as set forth in Perez v. Perez, 107 Haw. 85 (2005).
 
We note that Wife's points on appeal fail to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) and on that basis alone could bedisregarded. O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 385, 885 P.2d
361, 363 (1994). Nevertheless, the appellate courts of this jurisdiction have"consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity tohave their case heard on the merits where possible." Housing Fin. & Dev.
Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 Hawai' i 81, 85-86, 979 P.2d 1107, 1111-12 (1999)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Counsel is reminded,however, that failure to comply with court rules may result in sanctions. 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In her Third Motion, Wife sought relief from the
 
June 1, 2004 Order insofar as it terminated her entitlement to
 
Husband's retirement benefits on the date he opted for disability
 
benefits. She essentially argued that the terms of the Decree
 
and case law decided subsequent to the June 1, 2004 Order
 
justified relief from this order. See HFCR Rule 60(b)(6). 
Wife's Third Motion is, in substance, identical to her Second
 Motion, which was explicitly based on HFCR Rule 60: both ask for
 
enforcement of the terms of the Decree regarding the retirement
 
benefits and both rely on Perez as the primary support for the
 
motion. Both motions asked the family court to reconsider its
 
previous ruling that Wife was no longer entitled to her share of
 
Husband's retirement benefits. As such, Wife's Third Motion was
 
a second HFCR Rule 60(b) motion to reconsider the June 1, 2004
 
Order. Indeed, the family court treated the Third Motion as
 
seeking the same relief, as it denied the same, in large part,
 
because Wife had not appealed from the orders denying her
 
previous motions.
 
Under similar circumstances, this court has affirmed
 
the denial of an HFCR Rule 60(b) motion for reconsideration of an
 
order denying a prior motion for reconsideration, where both
 
motions were denied on the same grounds. Dosland v. Dosland, 5
 
Haw. App. 87, 88, 678 P.2d 1093, 1095 (1984). There, the
 appellant moved to reconsider a divorce decree and the family
 
court denied the motion. A second motion to reconsider based on
 
the same grounds was also denied. We held that the order denying
 
the first motion to reconsider became final when it was not
 
appealed.
16 "[A]s such, it bars consideration of a subsequent
 
motion under Rule 60(b) HFCR, which is based on the same
 
16 "A post-judgment order is an appealable final order under HRS § 641­
1(a) if the order finally determines the post-judgment proceeding." Hall v. 
Hall, 96 Hawai' i 105, 111 n.4, 26 P.3d 594, 600 n.4 (App. 2001), affirmed in
part, and vacated in part on other grounds, 95 Hawai' i 318, 22 P.3d 965
(2001). For example, "[a]n order denying a motion for post-judgment relief
under HRCP [Rule] 60(b) is an appealable final order under HRS § 641-1(a)."Ditto v. McCurdy, 103 Hawai' i 153, 160, 80 P.3d 974, 981 (2003). 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
grounds." Dosland, 5 Haw. App. at 88, 678 P.2d at 1095. We see
 
no reason to hold differently here. 
A motion for reconsideration is "not a device to 
relitigate old matters" (Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai 'i 283, 
288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 (2009) (citation omitted)), and is 
generally not intended to relieve parties from their "free, 
calculated, and deliberate choices," including the choice not to 
appeal. Hammon v. Monsef, 8 Haw. App. at 64, 792 P.2d at 314 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). We find no error in the family court's decision to deny Wife's Third Motion. 
B. Husband's Appeal
 
Husband summarizes his position on appeal as follows:
 
In this case there was no question that [Daughter] was
an adult child of the parties at the time that [Wife's]
[First Motion] was filed and adjudicated. There was also no
 question that the parties' [Decree] reserved the issue of
modification of future child support. Additionally, there
was no question that, pursuant to HRS §580-47(c), the Family
Court had statutory authority to modify child support post-
divorce. The other elements of the HRS §580-47(a)
requirements were either disputed at the trial, or at least
required clarification at trial in terms of the parties'
positions. Those elements were: (1) whether [Daughter] was
an incompetent adult child; (2) whether [Daughter] was an
adult child entitled to child support while she pursued her
education; and (3) whether the Court had authority to modify
child support pursuant to HRS §580-47(d).
 
However, as Wife conceded below during the short trial held on
 
her Second Motion, Daughter "is not an incompetent child" for HRS
 
§ 580-47(a) purposes. Therefore, the remaining issues before us
 
on appeal are (1) whether the family court had the authority to
 
consider awarding educational child support for Daughter (a)
 
without a showing of a material change in circumstances or good
 
cause and (b) where Daughter was over the age of twenty-three;
 
and if so, (2) whether the amount of the family court's award was
 
appropriate.17
 
17 Husband challenges the following conclusions of law contained in the
May 19, 2006 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and which read as
follows:
 
23. [HRS] Section 577-7(a) provides, in pertinent
part, that "[a]ll parents and guardians shall provide, to
(continued...)
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this state, parents are statutorily required to
 
"provide, to the best of their abilities, for the discipline
 
support, and education of their children." HRS § 577-7. Given
 
this responsibility, when parents divorce, HRS § 580-47 expressly
 
authorizes the family court to compel the parents, "or either of
 
them to provide for the support, maintenance, and education of
 
the children of the parties[,]" and "[p]rovision may be made for
 
the support, maintenance, and education of an adult or minor
 
child . . . whether or not the petition is made before or after
 
the child has attained the age of majority." HRS § 580-47.
 
17(...continued)
the best of their abilities, for the discipline, support,
and education of their children."
 
. . . .
 
25. In addition to the foregoing, the Court has

continuing jurisdiction over the issues of child support and
the children's post high school, higher educational
expenses, as such continuing jurisdiction was specifically
reserved in the Decree. See the Decree, at pp. 5-6. 
26. Applying the gross incomes of the parties to the
applicable child support guidelines, Father's child support
obligation would be $660.00 per month, and Mother's child
support obligation would be $390.00 per month. However,
this Court concludes that [Daughter's] receipt of her own
income of $625.00 per month is an exceptional circumstance
warranting deviation from the parties' child support
obligation under the child support guidelines. Nabarrete v.
 
Nabarrete, 86 Haw. 368, 949 P.2d 208 (1997).
 
27. Accordingly, the Court concludes that
[Daughter's] current reasonable monthly need is $834.00 per
month, and that good cause exists to require Father to be
responsible to pay 63% ($525.42 per month) and Mother to be
responsible to pay 37% ($308.58 per month), based on their
proportionate incomes, as ordered by the Court in its order
filed herein on March 6, 2006.
 
28. Mother's and Father's obligations to pay child
support for [Daugher] shall remain in full force and effect
for a limited time, so long as [Daughter] is pursuing a
bachelor's degree and continuing at the maximum amount of
courses prescribed by her college, taking into account her
disability.
 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Decree in this case provided for, among other
 
things, child support payments for all three of the parties'
 
children, so long as they continued their education on a full-
time basis at an accredited college or university, "until each
 
child's graduation or attainment of the age of 23 years,
 
whichever event shall first occur." The Decree's provision for
 
educational support stated that it "shall be subject to the
 
further order of the court."
 
Wife made her request for educational support for
 
Daughter in her Second Motion, when Daughter was still 22. 
Husband argues that the family court had no authority to take up
 
Wife's request for educational child support for Daughter because
 
Wife failed to establish "a material change of circumstances" to
 
justify modifying the Decree. Husband is mistaken.
 
18
It is true that HRS § 580-47(c)  preserves the family
court's ability to revise its orders regarding support "upon a
 
18 HRS § 580-47(c) provides,
 
(c) No order entered under the authority of subsection
(a) or entered thereafter revising so much of such an order
as provides for the support, maintenance, and education of
the children of the parties shall impair the power of the
court from time to time to revise its orders providing for
the support, maintenance, and education of the children of
the parties upon a showing of a change in the circumstances
of either party or any child of the parties since the entry
of any prior order relating to the support, maintenance, and
education. The establishment of the guidelines or the
adoption of any modifications made to the guidelines set
forth in section 576D-7 may constitute a change in
circumstances sufficient to permit review of the support
order. A material change of circumstances will be presumed
if support as calculated pursuant to the guidelines is
either ten per cent greater or less than the support amount
in the outstanding support order. The need to provide for
the child's health care needs through health insurance or
other means shall be a basis for petitioning for a
modification of the support order. The most current
 guidelines shall be used to calculate the amount of the
child support obligation.
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
showing of a change in the circumstances." However, HRS § 580­
19
47(e) (2006)  gives the custodial or responsible parent the
right to seek review or adjustment of the child support order

 
once every three years, without showing a change in
 
circumstances. See also
 HRS § 576D-7(e) (2006).20 As Wife's
 
2005 Second Motion was the first request for a modification of
 the child support award contained in the 1996 Decree, she was not
 
required to show a change in circumstances before the family
 
court was authorized to review the award.
 
We thus turn to Husband's argument that the family
 
court's award of educational support to Daughter after her
 
twenty-third birthday was unauthorized. We begin with a survey
 
of the statutory framework.
 
Family courts are authorized to order parties to a
 
divorce "to provide for the support, maintenance, and education
 
of the children of the parties[,]" either at the time of the
 
19 HRS §580-47(e) provides,
 
(e) The responsible parent or the custodial parent
shall have a right to petition the family court or the child
support enforcement agency not more than once every three
years for review and adjustment of the child support order
without having to show a change in circumstances. The
 responsible or custodial parent shall not be precluded from
petitioning the family court or the child support
enforcement agency for review and adjustment more than once
in any three-year period if the second or subsequent request
is supported by proof of a substantial or material change of
circumstances.
20 HRS § 576D-7(e) provides,
 
(e) The responsible or custodial parent for which
child support has previously been ordered shall have a right
to petition the family court or the child support
enforcement agency not more than once every three years for
review and adjustment of the child support order without
having to show a change in circumstances. The responsible
or custodial parent shall not be precluded form petitioning
the family court or the child support enforcement agency for
review and adjustment of the child support order more than
once in any three-year period if the second or subsequent
request is supported by proof of a substantial or material
change of circumstances.
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
granting of a divorce or, where jurisdiction over child support
 
is reserved, at a later time "as shall appear just and
 
equitable[.]" HRS § 580-47(a). Since 1969, the state
 
legislature has authorized family courts to order provision of
 
"education of an adult or minor child whether or not the
 
application is made before or after the child has attained the
 
age of majority." 1969 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 221, § 1 at 411-12. 
In doing so, the state legislature intended 
to clarify the power of the Family Court in a matrimonial
action to order support or continued support by parents for
a child even after he or she has reached the age of majority
in order that the child may complete whatever program of
education that may be suitable and feasible under the
circumstances.
 
Under Hawaii's existing statutes and case law this
power probably already exists, but in some jurisdictions
distinctions have been drawn based on whether the
 application was made before or after the child reached
majority. This bill reflects the current trend which favors
 extending economic support for education for a child who has
reached the age of majority or continued support for
education for a child beyond the age of majority in certain
cases, provided that the divided parents are financially
able to render such support.
 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 797, in 1969 Senate Journal, at 1177. 
The legislature did not, then or since, specify how far beyond
 
the age of majority a parent could be required to provide
 
economic support for the education of an adult child.
 
In 1977, the state legislature amended HRS § 580-47 by
 
granting explicit authority to award "support and maintenance" in
 
addition to the costs of education, for an adult or minor child
 
and explicitly provided the same for "an incompetent adult
 
child." 1977 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 37, § 1 at 46-47.21 The Senate
 
Standing Committee on Judiciary reported to the Senate as
 follows:
 
21 Although subsequently renumbered as subsection (a), this language
remains in the current version of the statute. 

 20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The purpose of this bill is to clearly and
specifically define the authority, which has been exercised
by long custom and practice, of the Family Courts of the
State of Hawaii in their discretion in domestic relations 
cases, under already accepted criteria and guideline [sic],
. . . to make appropriate orders: . . . (3) Relating to
the support and maintenance of the adult and minor children
of the parties in a divorce action who are dependent by
reason of their need for education or by reason of their
being incompetent.
 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 535, in 1977 Senate Journal, at 1081
 
(formatting modified).
 
In 1986, in order to "bring the State into compliance
 
with federal statutory and regulatory requirements" the
 
Legislature amended HRS § 580-47 to require that the courts
 
develop and use guidelines, established under what became chapter
 
576D, in determining child support awards. 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws
 
Act 332, §§ 1, 2, and 18 at 695-99 and 707-08.22 The courts were
 
also required to periodically update the guidelines and use the
 most current version of the guidelines in calculating the amount
 
of the support obligation. HRS § 576D-7(c) and (d) (2006). 
Among other things,
23 
courts are required to use the Child
22 Guidelines in establishing amount of child support. 
(a) The family court, in consultation with the agency,
shall establish guidelines to establish the amount of
child support when an order for support is sought or
being enforced under this chapter. The guidelines
shall be based on specific descriptive and numeric
criteria and result in a computation of the support
obligation.
 
1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 332, §2 at 698. Codified as HRS § 576D-7, this
provision remains unchanged today. The first set of guidelines were created
in 1987. See Tomas v. Tomas, 7 Haw. App. 345, 346-47, 764 P.2d 1250, 1252
 
(1988).
 
23
 [T]he court shall take into consideration: the
 respective merits of the parties, the relative
abilities of the parties, the condition in which each
party will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed
upon either party for the benefit of the children of
the parties, and all other circumstances of the case.
 
HRS 580-47(a)
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
  HRS § 576D-7(a) (2006) provides, in pertinent part,24
The guidelines may include consideration of the
following:
(1) All earnings, income, and resources of both
parents; provided that earnings be the net
amount, after deductions for taxes, and social
security.  Overtime and cost of living allowance
may be deducted where appropriate;
(2) The earning potential, reasonable necessities,
and borrowing capacity of both parents;
(3) The needs of the child for whom support is
sought;
(4) The amount of public assistance which would be
paid for the child under the full standard of
need as established by the department;
(5) The existence of other dependents of the obligor
parent;
(6) To foster incentives for both parents to work;
(7) To balance the standard of living of both
parents and child and avoid placing any below
the poverty level whenever possible;
(8)  To avoid extreme and inequitable changes in either
parent's income depending on custody; and
(9)  If any obligee parent (with a school age child or
children in school), who is mentally and physically
able to work, remains at home and does not work,
thirty (or less) hours of weekly earnings at the
minimum wage may be imputed to that parent's income.
22Support Guidelines established by HRS § 576D-7,24 "except when 
exceptional circumstances warrant departure."  HRS §§ 580-47(a)
and 571-52.5 (2006).  "[T]he advent of child support guidelines
significantly narrowed the trial court's discretion" with regard
to, inter alia , deviation from the guidelines, Child Support
Enforcement Agency v. Doe, 98 Hawai #i 58, 65, 41 P.3d 720, 727
(App. 2001).  Whether "exceptional circumstances" exist
warranting a deviation from the child support guidelines is a
question of law reviewed on appeal de novo, Child Support
Enforcement Agency v. Doe, 104 Hawai #i 449, 455, 91 P.3d 1092,
1098 (App. 2004).  However, the decision to order a deviation
under such circumstances is discretionary, and reviewed on appeal
for an abuse of that discretion.  Id.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
When the family court considered Wife's request, the
 
2004 Amended Child Support Guidelines (2004 Guidelines) were in
 
effect.25 See 2004 Guidelines
 
https://ku.ehawaii.gov/juddocs/page_server/SelfHelp/Forms/Oahu/7D
 004AF15FE5ADBDEEA9E49E98.html (last accessed December 15, 2010)
 
reprinted in 1 Hawaii State Bar Association, 2005 Hawai
'i Divorce 
th
Manual, § 4, App. 3 (7  ed. 2005).  Pertinent to this case is
 Section IV. E of the Instructions to the 2004 Guidelines,
 
entitled "Adult Dependent Children," which reads,
 
All stipulations and orders for child support should
expressly retain court jurisdiction to modify or extend
child support.
 
Support for an adult child who is a full-time student
may continue until the child attains the age of 23. The
 Family Court in its discretion may order support for post
high school education. In determining support for an
educationally dependent adult child, the Family Court should
take into account (a) the adult child's earnings, (b) the
adult child's property, (c) the adult child's needs, as well
as (d) both parents' income and resources. In appropriate
circumstances, an educationally dependent adult child
receiving educational support should be expected to
contribute to his or her own self support through (a) part-
time employment not harmful to the child's academic
progress, or to other appropriate school-related pursuits,
(b) grants, scholarships, and fellowships and (c) loans.
 
Payments may be made directly to the educationally
dependent adult child by agreement of the parties or by
order of the court.
 
The Family Court in its discretion may order the
parents of an incompetent child to support their child
beyond the age of majority, and beyond age 23, without
regard to the child's educational status.
 
25 The July 6, 2004 Memorandum introducing the 2004 Guidelines stated,
 
These [2004 Guidelines] will be effective October 1, 2004
and will supersede all prior guidelines and amendments.
They apply, statewide, to all divorce, paternity and other
proceedings involving child support entered on or after
October 1, 2004.
 
The 2004 Guidelines were adopted by family court judges statewide, after
review by representatives of the Child Support Enforcement Agency, in July
2004.
 https://ku.ehawaii.gov/juddocs/page_server/SelfHelp/Forms/Oahu/7D004AF15FE5ADB
DEEA9E49E98.html
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The 2004 Guidelines also address the "exceptional
 
circumstances" provided for in HRS § 571-52.5.26 Section IV. B.
 
of the Instructions provides:
 
The Court or Office of Child Support Hearings must
order the amount of child support as calculated from the
Child Support Guidelines unless there are exceptional
circumstances, which warrant deviation from the Child
Support Guidelines. Exceptional circumstances may allow a
deviation from the child support guidelines calculation of
child support. If you believe exceptional circumstances
exist in your case, complete the Exceptional Circumstance
Form (Attachment C) and attach it to your Child Support
Guidelines Worksheet. The party requesting an exceptional
circumstances deviation from the Child Support Guidelines
has the burden of proving that exceptional circumstances
exist and that the circumstances warrant departure from the
calculated Child Support Guidelines amount.
 
The Court or Office of Child Support Hearings shall
determine whether alleged exceptional circumstances exist on
a case-by-case basis. When the Court or Office of Child
 Support Hearings concludes that there are exceptional
circumstances, they shall make oral findings of fact on the
record or prepare written findings of fact regarding the
exceptional circumstances. The findings of fact shall
include the amount of support that would have been required
under the Guidelines.
 
Examples of exceptional circumstances include (without
limitation) the following:
 . . . .
 
3. Extraordinary Needs of Child/Other Parent Where
 
the subject child(ren), or the subject child(ren)'s other
parent, have extraordinary needs (e.g., special educational
and/or housing needs for a physically or emotionally
disabled child);
 
. . . .
 
6. Other Exceptional Circumstances:
The Court and Office of Child Support Hearings
has the discretion to find other exceptional circumstances.
 
In the present case, the family court expressly used
 
the 2004 Child Support Guidelines Worksheet in calculating
 
Husband and Wife's proportionate share of income, but did not
 
26 HRS § 571-52.5 provides:
 
Guidelines to determine child support amounts.  When
 
the court establishes or modifies the amount of child
 
support required to be paid by a parent, the court shall use
the guidelines established under section 576D-7, except when
exceptional circumstances warrant departure.
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appear to apply the 2004 Guidelines' provision limiting support
 
to adult dependent children to the age of twenty-three. Instead,
 
27
relying on HRS § 580-47,  the family court ordered that Husband
and Wife pay their proportionate share of Daughter's unmet
 
educational expenses because "[g]ood cause exists."
 
Nothing in HRS § 580-47 suggests that "good cause" is a

 
substitute for application of the Child Support Guidelines. To
 
the contrary, HRS § 580-47 also directs that, "[i]n establishing
 
the amounts of child support, the court shall use the guidelines
 
established under section 576D-7."
 
This leaves us with the question whether the 2004
 
Guidelines categorically prohibited the award of educational
 
support to an adult child after his or her twenty-third birthday. 
We conclude it did not. In creating the statutory framework for
 
the award of child support, including the creation of the 2004
 
Guidelines, the legislature did not specify an age-limit cap for
 
educational support for children beyond the age of majority. 
See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 535, in 1977 Senate Journal, at 1081
 
("[t]he purpose of this bill is to clearly and specifically
 
define the authority, which has been exercised by long custom and
 
practice"); H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 872, in 1977 House Journal,
 
at 1715. Rather, it appears the legislature sought to codify the
 
family courts' existing authority to order parents to continue
 
support for their adult children, under certain circumstances,
 
but to require that the family courts do so within the framework
 
of consistently-applied guidelines, absent extraordinary
 
27 Presumably, the family court relied on the following language within
HRS § 580-47: 
(a) Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in addition to the
powers granted in subsections (c) and (d), jurisdiction of those
matters is reserved under the decree by agreement of both parties
or by order of court after finding that good cause exists, the
court may make any further orders as shall appear just and
equitable (1) compelling the parties or either of them to provide
for the support, maintenance, and education of the children of the
parties[.]
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances justifying deviation from the guidelines.
 
The 2004 Guidelines provide that support for an adult
 
child who is a full-time student "may continue until the child
 
attains the age of 23." The 2004 Guidelines also provide that
 
adherence to the Guidelines is required "unless there are
 
'exceptional circumstances,'" and the Adult Dependent Children
 
provision itself is in the section entitled, "Exceptional
 
Circumstances."28 The 2004 Guidelines include examples of
 
28 Examples of exceptional circumstances include
(without limitation) the following:
 
1. The 70% Rule Where the amount of child support as
calculated by the Child Support Guidelines Worksheet for the
subject child(ren) is greater than 70% of the obligor's net
income (as set forth in Attachment A-2);
 
2. Support of Other Children If the total of (a) the
amount of child support for the subject child(ren) as
calculated by the Child Support Guidelines Worksheet and (b)
the amount of child support the obligor is legally required
2
 to pay for his or her other child(ren)  is greater than the
obligor's net income (as set forth in Attachment A-2), then
child support for (each of) the subject child(ren) shall be
the higher of the following:
 
• 
	The amount obtained by dividing the obligor's
net income by the total number of all of the
children the obligor has a legal obligation to
support, including the subject child(ren); or
 
•	 $50.00 per child;
 
3. Extraordinary Needs of Child/Other Parent Where the
subject child(ren), or the subject child(ren)'s other
parent, have extraordinary needs (e.g., special educational
and/or housing needs for a physically or emotionally
disabled child);
 
4. Other Payments for Child/Other Parent Payments made
by the obligor to or for the benefit of the subject
child(ren), or the subject child(ren)'s other parent, where
they are obligated to be made by law, including payment for
extraordinary medical needs;
 
5. Support Exceeding Needs of Child Where the amount
of child support as calculated by the Child Support
Guidelines Worksheet for the subject child(ren) exceeds the
reasonable needs of the child(ren) based on the child(ren)'s
appropriate standard of living, which will be determined on
a case-by-case basis;
 
6. Other Exceptional Circumstances:
The Court and Office of Child Support Hearings has the
discretion to find other exceptional circumstances.
 
(continued...)
 
26
           FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceptional circumstances as well as examples of circumstances 
not considered exceptional. The 2004 Guidelines also allow that
 
a court may find "other" circumstances exceptional.
 
This is not to say that the twenty-three year-old age
 
limit is to be treated lightly. Although the genesis of this age
 
limit is not clear, it is reasonable to conclude that it is based
 
on the age of a student who has had the opportunity to complete a
 
standard, four-year undergraduate course of study. Indeed, it is
 
reasonable for both the parents of adult children and the adult
 
28(...continued)
In the following situations, it has been determined
that no exceptional circumstances exist:
 
1. 
Agreement for Lesser Amount While the parties'
agreement to an amount of child support higher than the
amount calculated according to the Child Support Guidelines
may be enforceable, the parties' agreement for the payment
of less than the amount of child support as calculated from
the Child Support Guidelines is not an exceptional
circumstance.
 
2. Remarriage and New Family The remarriage of a child
support obligor to an individual who has a child not of the
obligor requiring support is not an exceptional
circumstance.
 
3. Visitation Expenses The need to pay transportation
expenses relating to visitation is not an exceptional
circumstance.
 
4. Heavy Debt Ordinarily, the existence of heavy debts
will not constitute an exceptional circumstance.
 
5. Private Education Expenses The private education
expenses of the subject child(ren) are considered as an
expense to be paid from the SOLA portion of child support,
and they are not an exceptional circumstance justifying
greater-than-Guidelines child support, unless such expenses
are so extraordinary that SOLA cannot adequately cover them,
or if the child has been in private school with the
agreement of the parties prior to separation.
2
 For the purposes of these Child Support Guidelines,
Obligor's "other children" are Obligor's biological or
adopted child(ren) living in the Obligor's household and any
child(ren) whom the Obligor is legally obligated to support
and is actually supporting. Stepchildren are not considered
to be Obligor's "other children" under these child Support
Guidelines.
 
2004 Guidelines, section IV. B.
https://ku.ehawaii.gov/juddocs/page_server/SelfHelp/Forms/Oahu/7D004AF15FE5ADB
DEEA9E49E98.html (last visited December 16, 2010) (some emphasis added).
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
children themselves to anticipate that, at age 23, adult children
 
will become financially responsible for their own support,
 
maintenance, and education. Furthermore, an age limit is
 
important so that the child support calculation can be made with
 
relative ease, certainty, and consistency.
 
Nevertheless, the 2004 Guidelines provide for
 
deviations where "exceptional circumstances" exist and allow for
 
"other" circumstances to be found by the court. Pertinent to
 
this case, they provide for extraordinary educational or housing
 
needs for a physically or emotionally disabled child as an
 
exceptional circumstance. 2004 Guidelines, section IV. B. 3. 
We do not read the 2004 Guidelines to allow for the greater
 
expenses of a disabled child younger than twenty-three but to
 
forbid support to the same child because he or she could not,
 
because of their disability, complete their education within the
 
standard four years. We therefore hold that the family court
 
could find that an adult child's physical disability constitutes
 
exceptional circumstances resulting in a child support award to
 
that disabled adult child beyond the age of twenty-three.
 
This interpretation is not unique. Many jurisdictions
 
provide for the support of disabled children beyond the age of
 
majority and many set no age limit. See "Age of Child Support
 
Termination by State Exceptions for Adult Children with
 Disabilities" National Conference of State Legislatures,
 
http://www.ncsl.org/default.aspx?tabid=16411 (last visited
 
January 27, 2011).
29
 
29 We also note that the present guidelines expressly provide for
support of a disabled child "beyond age 23, without regard to the child's
educational status." 2010 Guidelines, section III. A. On August 29, 2010,
the 2010 Child Support Guidelines went into effect. See
 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/self-help/courts/forms/oahu/child_support.html
(last visited December 15, 2010).children now reads: The guideline regarding adult dependent 
(continued...) 
28 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Turning to the instant case, it is undisputed that
 
Daughter is legally blind and that this disability caused
 
substantial delay in completing her studies. This was true
 
during high school, as she did not earn her diploma until she was
 
twenty years old, as well as during her college studies, where
 
additional classes and support were necessary to assist her in
 
learning to live independently.
 
However, on this record, it is unclear that the family
 
court considered Daughter's disability an exceptional
 
circumstance that excused application of the twenty-three year­
29(...continued)
III. OTHER CHILD SUPPORT CONSIDERATIONS
 
A. ADULT DEPENDENT CHILDREN
 
All stipulations and orders for child support should
expressly retain Court and OCSH jurisdiction to modify
or extend child support.
 
Support for an adult child who is a full-time student
according to the institution the child attends may
continue until the child attains the age of 23 after
considering these factors: (1) the adult child's
earnings, (2) the adult child's property, (3) the
adult child’s needs, as well as (4) both parents'
income and resources.
 
In appropriate circumstances, an educationally
dependent adult child receiving educational support
should be expected to contribute to his/her own self
support through (1) part-time employment not harmful
to the child's academic progress, or to other
appropriate school-related pursuits, (2) grants,
scholarships, and fellowships (tuition forgiveness),
and (3) loans.[]
 
Payments may be made directly to the educationally
dependent adult child by agreement of the parents or
by order of the court. Normally, a parent who receives
child support for an educationally dependent adult
child should pay for the child's room and board.
 
The Court in its discretion may order the parents of a
disabled child to support their child beyond the age
of majority, and beyond age 23, without regard to the
child's educational status.
 
The "2010 Guidelines [] apply, statewide, to all divorce,
paternity, and other proceedings involving child support orders entered on or
after August 29, 2010[.]" Memorandum re: 2010 Child Support Guidelines, 2
(2010),
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/form/oahu/child_support/csg_memo.pdf. See
 also HRS § 580-47(c).
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
old age limit. The 2004 Guidelines state that, "[w]hen the Court
 
or Office of Child Support hearings concludes that there are
 
exceptional circumstances, they shall make oral findings of fact
 
on the record or prepare written findings of fact regarding the
 
exceptional circumstances." As the family court did not address
 
whether exceptional circumstances were present here, we remand
 
for the entry of those findings.
 
Our resolution of the child support issue makes it
 
unnecessary for us to address Husband's challenge to the amount
 
of the support ordered.30
 
III.
 
The Family Court of the First Circuit's July 19, 2006
 
Order is affirmed. The family court's May 24, 2005 Order is
 
vacated and this case is remanded for (1) findings on the issue
 
of whether Wife has proved exceptional circumstances warranting
 
deviation from the age limit on support for an adult child beyond
 
the age of twenty-three set in the 2004 Guidelines and, if so,
 
(2) the amount and duration of support.
 
Robert M. Harris
 
(Denise Miyasaki Wheeler with
him on the briefs) for
Defendant-Appellant/Appellee.
 
Steven J. Kim,
for Plaintiff­Appellee/Appellant.
 
30 We note, however, as discussed above, Section IV. E. of the
Instructions to the 2004 Guidelines, entitled "Adult Dependent Children,"
mandates certain considerations by the family court. In appropriate
circumstances, educationally-dependent adults "should be expected to
contribute" to their support through part-time employment, grants,
scholarships, fellowships, and loans. Thus, the failure of an adult child to
pursue reasonable avenues to contribute to his or her may be considered in
determining a parent's support obligation.
 
30
 