FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
HAWAIIAN PROPERTIES, LTD., Managing Agent,
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. REGINA P.D. TAUALA, Defendant-Appellant 
NO. 29546 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
EWA DIVISION 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC07-1-6664) 
APRIL 28, 2011 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FOLEY and LEONARD, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
Defendant-Appellant Regina Tauala (
Tauala) appeals pro 
se from the Judgment for Possession (Judgment) and Writ of 
Possession (Writ), both filed on November 17, 2008 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District 
1
Court).  The District Court ordered that Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Hawaiian Properties, Ltd. (HPL) was entitled to possession of the
 
1/
 The Honorable Judge Gerald H. Kibe presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
premises occupied by Tauala and issued a writ of possession
 
against Tauala. 
The threshold issue in this appeal is whether, as 
Tauala contends, the District Court erred in denying her Motion 
to Dismiss (Motion to Dismiss) for lack of jurisdiction. Based 
on the statutory limits of the civil jurisdiction of the district 
courts, as previously construed by the Hawai 'i Supreme Court, we 
conclude that, as cooperative member, Tauala had more than a mere possessory interest in the subject premises and her right to 
occupy her cooperative unit cannot be cancelled or terminated in 
a district court summary possession action. Accordingly, we 
vacate and remand. 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The Parties' History
 
For many years, Tauala has lived in unit # 16C of 
Makalapa Manor Apartments, a Hawaii Cooperative Corporation 
(Makalapa Manor or the Cooperative), which is located at 99-128 
Kohomua St., Aiea, Hawai
'i. HPL is the managing agent for the 
Cooperative. It appears that the Cooperative was developed in 
the early 1970's, pursuant to financing insured by the federal 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, acting by and through 
the Federal Housing Commissioner (HUD), and Tauala's parents 
bought into the Cooperative in 1971. A HUD-approved document 
entitled "Makalapa Manor Apartments Information Bulletin 
2
 which is cited by both parties in
 (Information Bulletin),"
conjunction with the Motion to Dismiss, provides considerable

 
insight into the nature of the Cooperative, including the
 
following (emphasis added):
 
A subscription for membership in a housing cooperative
is more than an application for a place to live. It lends
 
to your participation in the cooperative ownership and
 
2/
 Although undated, the Information Bulletin appears to have been
provided to prospective members of the Cooperative prior to the financing and
construction of the project.
 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
operation of a housing project. . . . The cooperative
approach to housing instills a pride of ownership resulting
in a deeper interest in maintaining the property and
participating in civic affairs. A cooperative is operated
on a democratic basis. It gives the residents a greater
insight and appreciation of the democratic process in
general. Cooperative residents normally occupy the premises
for longer terms than renters. . . . 
Cooperative housing offers the following financial
benefits:
 
(1)	 The absence from the monthly housing cost of the
owner's profit inherent in most rental projects.
(2)	 Tax benefits as described later in this
 Bulletin.
 
(3)	 Rental schedules usually include an allocation
for vacancy loss. In a cooperative, the monthly
charges usually include only such income losses,
if any, as have actually been incurred.
(4)	 Maintenance costs in a well-operated cooperative
are minimized since experience has shown that
owners take better care of their property.
Cooperative members frequently handle the
redecoration of their units on a "do-it­yourself" basis, thus eliminating this as a
project expense.
(5)	 A cooperative is operated on a nonprofit basis.
Thus, increases in the monthly housing cost are
limited to actual increases in operating costs.
(6)	 If a cooperative is successfully operated, a
modest equity accrued upon resale may result,
subject to limitations set forth in the By-Laws.
Your cooperative is receiving the benefit of special
financing which Congress provided in Section 236 of the
National Housing Act to assist families of lower income and
displaced families in meeting their housing needs. . . .
 
. . . .
 The cooperative has been incorporated as a nonprofit
cooperative housing corporation for the purpose of
acquiring, owning, and operating a housing project
consisting of town houses the permanent occupancy of which
will be restricted to members in the cooperative. If your
subscription is accepted by the cooperative and approved by
FHA, you will become a member of the cooperative. The
 
cooperative will deliver to you the membership certificate
representing your interest in the cooperative not later than
 the time of initial mortgage closing, provided your cash
equity investment has been paid in full in accordance with
the terms of the Subscription Agreement. . . .
 
. . . .
 
The funds provided by your subscription and the
subscription of other members will constitute the equity
investment and are intended to furnish the cost of acquiring
the project over and above the mortgage proceeds and to
provide working capital funds . . .
The cooperative's members are in effect their own
landlord. They pay monthly carrying charges to their
cooperative in accordance with the Occupancy Agreement. The
 
cooperative corporation holds title to the property and
executes a blanket mortgage. The individual member signs no
note or mortgage and has no personal obligation thereunder.
 
3  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
[] INCOME TAX ADVANTAGES
.
 
(a) In computing his over-all housing cost, the
member may wish to consider the benefit of the federal
income tax deductions allowed to tenant-stockholders of
 cooperative housing corporations under the provisions of
Section 216 of the Internal Revenue Code. Under this
 provision, provided 80 percent of the income of the
cooperative consists of carrying charges received from its
members, the members are entitled to deduct from their gross
income their proportionate share of real estate taxes and
 mortgage interest paid by the cooperative. . . .
(b) A member of a cooperative has available to him
the same basic federal income tax advantages available to a
home owner who sells his home and purchases a new one. 
Residence has been defined by the Internal Revenue Service
to include a cooperative apartment. If a person sells or
exchanges his principal residence at a gain, the gain is
taxable. However, if within the year before or the year
after the sale, the seller buys and occupies another
residence, the gain is not taxed at the time of the sale if
the cost of the new residence equals or exceeds the adjusted
sales price of the old residence. . . . 
. . . .
 
If after taking occupancy you wish to move from the
project, you may sell your interest, giving the cooperative
the first option to purchase your stock in accordance with
the terms of the By-Laws. If the cooperative fails to
exercise its option, you may sell your stock and right of
occupancy to a purchaser approved by the cooperative. 
In addition, the Information Bulletin provides, based
 
on full occupancy and subject to change, a schedule of "down
 
payments" and monthly carrying charges for each type of dwelling
 
units. For example, for a 4-bedroom unit such as Tauala's unit,
 
the "Value Allocated to Unit by Sponsorship" is estimated (at the
 
time) at $31,977.00, with a "Proportionate Factor of Unit
 
Valuation to Total Valuation" of .010 (i.e., 1%), a required cash
 
down payment of $319.77, and "Estimated Initial Monthly Charge to
 
be Paid to Cooperative" not less than $157.00 and not more than
 
$323.69.
 
In sum, although clearly not describing membership in
 
the Cooperative as fee simple ownership in real property, the
 
Information Bulletin describes membership as a federally-assisted
 
opportunity for low income and displaced families to: (1)
 
participate in a form of housing ownership; (2) experience the
 
pride of ownership; (3) invest in their housing in a way that
 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will accrue equity, albeit in a modest amount; (4) benefit from
 
the same federal income tax advantages as other homeowners; and
 
(5) sell their interest and right of occupancy. In addition, the
 
Information Bulletin distinguishes Cooperative residents from 
renters, describes Cooperative members as being in effect their
 
own landlord, describes monthly charges as carrying charges that
 
may be adjusted for actual income losses and operating expenses
 
rather than rent, and explains that initial members pay a down
 
payment and acquire an interest in the Cooperative corporation
 
that is subject to valuation.
 
The By-Laws of Makalapa Manor Apartments (By-Laws),
 
also cited by both parties in conjunction with the Motion to
 Dismiss, establish 122 "memberships" in the Cooperative and,
 
inter alia: grant the Cooperative lien rights on Cooperative
 
memberships to secure payment on any sums due under any occupancy
 
agreements; allow a member to transfer membership by will or
 
intestate distribution upon death; establish valuation terms and
 
procedures for the Cooperative to "purchase" a membership and/or
 
for a member to sell his or her interest to a third party, and
 
provide for the Cooperative's purchase or sale of a membership to
 
a third party upon termination of a membership for cause.
 
A Model Form of Occupancy Agreement between the
 
3
Cooperative, Mary M. Dias,  and Tauala, dated September 30, 1996
(Occupany Agreement), was also before the District Court on the
 
Motion to Dismiss. Like the By-Laws, the main body of the
 
Occupancy Agreement refers to the payment of monthly carrying
 
charges, equal to one-twelfth of the member's proportionate share
 
of the sum required by the Cooperative to meet its annual
 
3/
 The record is unclear as to the role of Mary M. Dias and her
relationship to the Cooperative and Tauala. The first paragraph of the
Occupancy Agreement states that the agreement is between the Cooperative and
"Mary M. Dias and Regina P. Tauala (hereinafter referred to as Member)", but
the signature block suggests, albeit inartfully, that Mary M. Dias executed
the agreement as the President of the Cooperative.
 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expense, rather than rent. The Occupancy Agreement states a
 
three-year term, but provides for "automatic renewal" at the
 
member's option. A default provision in the Occupancy Agreement,
 
however, states that upon any default by the member, the
 
Corporation may give notice that the Occupancy Agreement will
 
"expire" at a date not less than ten (10) days thereafter. The
 
default provision also provides:
 
If the Corporation so proceeds all of the Member's rights
under this agreement will expire on the date so fixed in
such notice, unless in the meantime the default has been
cured in a manner deemed satisfactory by the Corporation, it
being the intention of the parties hereto to create hereby
conditional limitations, and it shall thereupon be lawful
for the Corporation to re-enter the dwelling unit and to
remove all persons and personal property therefrom, either
by summary dispossess proceedings or by suitable action or
proceeding, at law or in equity or by any other proceedings
which may apply to the eviction of tenants or by force or
otherwise, and to repossess the dwelling unit in its former
state as if this agreement had not been made[.]
 
In addition, the default provision of the Occupancy
 
Agreement states (emphasis added):
 
The Member expressly agrees that there exists under
 
this Occupancy Agreement a landlord-tenant relationship and
 
that in the event of a breach or threatened breach by the
Member of any covenant or provision of this Agreement, there
shall be available to the Corporation such legal remedy or
remedies as are available to a landlord for the breach or
 threatened breach under the law by a tenant of any provision
of a lease or rental agreement. 
A standardized addendum attached to the Occupancy
 
Agreement (Addendum) includes provisions referring to "the
 
Landlord" and "the Tenant." Although undefined, in context, it
 
is clear that these terms refer to the Cooperative as the
 
Landlord and the shareholder/member as the Tenant.
 
B. The Alleged Payment Default

 
The Occupancy Agreement, as executed in September of
 
1996, provides that the monthly carrying charge for Tauala's
 dwelling unit is $624.00, along with reference to a Rent
 
Supplement Contract with the HUD Secretary whereby the Secretary
 
will pay a portion of the rent on behalf of qualified members. 
6  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The copy of the Occupancy Agreement attached to the Complaint
 
includes a "Lease Amendment" letter dated October 4, 2006 (Lease
 
Amendment), from "Cert Occup Specialist" Terry L. Carvalho, and
 
"accepted" by Tauala on November 13, 2006, which states that, as
 
of 1/1/2007 and through 1/1/2008, based on Tauala's income and
 
family composition and the "Form 50059 Owner's Certification of
 
Compliance with HUD's Tenant Eligibility and Rent Procedures"
 
used to calculate Tauala's rent and rental assistance, Tauala's
 
"monthly rent has been adjusted as follows:"
 
Contract Rent $ 550 
Utility Allowance $ 97 
Assistance Payment
Total Tenant Payment $ 476 $ 171 
Tenant Rent $ 
74 
Tauala asserts that her monthly payment was $74.00, at
 
least through the end of 2007, pursuant to this Lease Amendment.
 
The "Accounting" attached as a further exhibit to the
 
Complaint appears to be calculated based on the full monthly
 
carrying charge set forth in the September 1996 Occupancy
 
Agreement, rather than the amount set forth in the later Lease
 
Amendment, beginning in or about March of 2007. With a January
 
23, 2008 filing in the District Court, Tauala submitted a
 
December 1, 2006 letter from HPL Senior Property Manager Francine
 
Martiniz (Martiniz), notifying Tauala of a "rent increase" to
 
$624.00 effective February 1, 2007, due to alleged
 
"underutilization" of Tauala's unit. Tauala contends that the
 
"unilateral" rent increase violates a written agreement between
 
the parties, i.e., the Lease Amendment.4
 
4/
 We note, although not directly germane to the issues before us,
that the record on appeal contains a Declaration from Ms. Martiniz attesting
to both a payment history for Tauala showing, inter alia, monthly payments by
Tauala throughout 2007 (and into 2008) in the amount of $74.00, and an
overlapping "Accounting" which appears not to reflect most of those payments.
 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On November 7, 2008, HPL's attorney, Richard A. Yanagi,

 
Esq. (Yanagi), submitted a declaration stating, in part: 
I am informed and believe:
 
a.
	 [Tauala] was receiving a Section 8 rental
subsidy and paying $74.00 per month in rent.
b.	 [Tauala's] subsidy was terminated and her rent
increased to $624.00.
 
On the same day, as an attachment to Yanagi's
 
Declaration, Martiniz submitted a declaration attesting to
 
exhibits showing Tauala's payment history and the "Detailed Aged
 
Receivable" for Tauala's account. Martiniz did not attest to the
 
alleged termination of Tauala's Section 8 subsidy. Neither
 
declarant provided any documentation regarding such termination.
 
It is undisputed that Tauala refused to pay the
 
increased monthly amount demanded in Martiniz's letter, but
 
continued to make monthly payments of $74.00. After the lawsuit
 
was filed, upon HPL's motion, the District Court ordered Tauala
 
to pay $624.00 monthly into a rent trust fund. Tauala made the
 
rent trust fund payments for three months, but discontinued
 
making the trust fund payments thereafter.5
 
C.	 The Relevant Procedural History
 On October 5, 2007, HPL filed a summary possession
 
complaint (Complaint) against Tauala, contending that Tauala had
 
broken a "rental agreement" with Makalapa Manor. The Complaint
 
alleges that, as of its filing, Tauala owed unpaid rent in the
 
amount of $4,420.00, plus another $120.00 in late charges. The
 
Complaint further alleges that written notice was given to Tauala
 
on September 20, 2007 to correct the situation "as specified in
 
the rental agreement or statute(s)." The written notice, in the
 
form of a letter from Yanagi, indicates that the letter was
 
mailed to Tauala on September 20, 2007 by first class mail and
 
certified mail, return receipt requested, and states, inter alia:
 
5/
 It appears that, at that time, Tauala's total monthly income, from
Social Security, was $623.00.
 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This letter demands payment of the $4,540.00. Unless
 
payment of the Unpaid Rent is made within ten (10) days of
your receipt of this letter, your tenancy and the rental
agreement will be terminated and she [sic] is hereby given
notice to vacate the Premises by Wednesday, October 3, 2007.
You have ten (10) days within which to discuss the proposed
termination of tenancy with the Landlord.
 
If you remain in default, then I intend to bring a summary
proceeding for proceeding for possession of the Premises or
other proper proceeding, action or suit for possession
and/or other relief. . . .
 
On November 1, 2007, Tauala filed pro se the Motion to
 
Dismiss, including a declaration stating the nature of her
 
claimed interest as an owner of her Cooperative unit. HPL filed
 
a memorandum in opposition, arguing that Tauala is not the owner
 
of the premises, rather she is a tenant, and title is not in
 
dispute. HPL argued, inter alia, that Tauala's "equity" was "as
 
a member of and in the Corporation, which remains after
 
termination of her Occupancy Agreement, as set forth in the
 
Bylaws." The District Court orally denied Tauala's motion to
 
dismiss at a November 9, 2007 hearing.
 
At the hearing on November 9, 2007, Tauala sought a
 
continuance of the November 16, 2007 trial date, in order to try
 
to secure an attorney to represent her. The District Court
 
granted a brief continuance and sua sponte ordered that Tauala
 
pay $624.00 monthly into a rent trust fund. Further continuances
 
were granted at HPL's request. Later in the proceeding, when
 
Tauala apparently could no longer afford to continue the trust
 
fund payments, the Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession
 
were entered. Tauala timely filed a notice of appeal.
 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Tauala raises the following points of
 
error:6
 
1. The District Court erred in denying her motion to
 
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction;
 
2. The District Court erred by "failing to equally
 
review both parties' documents before deciding";
 
3. The District Court erred in establishing a rent
 
trust fund without affording Tauala the protections of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 666-21 (1993);
 
4. The District Court erred by applying HRS § 666-21 
in a manner that violated Tauala's constitutional rights under 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai 'i Constitution; 
5. The District Court judge erred by not recusing
 
himself sua sponte and exhibited bias in his dealings with
 
Tauala; and
 
6. The District Court erred in disregarding HPL's
 
breach of the terms of the Lease Amendment.
 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that [the appellate court reviews] de novo under the right/wrong 
standard." Captain Andy's Sailing, Inc., v. Dep't of Land & 
Natural Res., State of Hawai 'i, 113 Hawai 'i 184, 192, 150 P.3d 
833, 841 (2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
"Interpretation of a statute is a question of law which 
we review de novo." Kikuchi v. Brown, 110 Hawai 'i 204, 207, 130 
6/
 The points of error set forth in Tauala's opening brief fail to
comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4).
Generally, "failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) is alone sufficient to
affirm the [trial] court's judgment." Morgan v. Planning Dep't, County of
Kauai, 104 Hawai' i 173, 180, 86 P.3d 982, 989 (2004). Nonetheless, this court 
observes a policy of affording pro se litigants the opportunity "to have theircases heard on the merits, where possible." O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 
77 Hawai' i 383, 386, 885 P.3d 361, 364 (1994). 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d 1069, 1072 (App. 2006) (internal quotation marks and
 
citation omitted).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. District Court Jurisdiction
 
Tauala contends that she was a homeowner, not merely a
 
renter, and therefore, pursuant to HRS § 604-5(d) (Supp. 2007),7
 
the District Court lacked jurisdiction over this matter. Tauala
 
relies on Queen Emma Found. v. Tingco, 74 Haw. 294, 845 P.2d 1186
 
(1992) (Queen Emma), to support her argument.
 
In Queen Emma, the appellants were lessees under long-
term residential ground leases. Id. at 301, 845 P.2d at 1189. 
The lessor-appellee filed complaints for summary possession in 
district court, based upon material breaches of the subject lease
 
agreements, and sought cancellation of the leases, recovery of
 
possession of the premises, and certain damages. Id. at 296-300,
 
845 P.2d at 1187-89. The Queen Emma appellants cited HRS § 604­5(d) and argued that the district court did not have subject
 
matter jurisdiction because, inter alia, the cases involved a
 
question of title to real property. Id. at 297, 845 P.2d at
 
1188.
8 The district court assumed jurisdiction pursuant to HRS
 
chapter 666 and granted various relief to the lessor. Id. at
 
298-99, 845 P.2d at 1188-89. 
On appeal, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court stated the nature 
of summary possession proceedings: 
Summary possession is a statutory proceeding that
enables a landlord to regain possession of his property and
remove any tenant who is wrongfully in possession of theland in question. . . . The purpose of a summary possessionproceeding is to provide a prompt remedy for landlordsagainst tenants who have violated a material condition of 
7/
 HRS § 604-5(d) (1993) provides, in relevant part that "[t]he
district courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor actions in
which the title to real estate comes in question[.]"
 
8/
 The Queen Emma appellants also argued that the district court
 
lacked the jurisdiction to exercise equity powers in fashioning a remedy. 74
 Haw. at 299 n.6, 845 P.2d at 1189 n.6.
 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
their lease or have wrongfully withheld possession after
expiration of the lease.
 
Id. at 300, 845 P.2d at 1189. 
The court further explained:
 
HRS chapter 666, the summary possession statute, was
enacted to provide an expedient remedy to restore a landlord
 
to the possession of his premises when it is clear that the
 tenant holds nothing more than a possessory interest in the
property. When a long-term ground lease is involved, the
lessee often holds more than a possessory interest and the
 relationship between the landlord and tenant may be more
complex. In the present case the district court remedy of
summary possession is ill-suited to protect the rights and
determine the obligations of all parties with an interest in
these long-term leasehold estates.
 
Id. at 304, 845 P.2d at 1190-91 (emphasis added, footnote
 
omitted).
 
In 
Queen Emma, the district court exceeded its legal
 
authority when it attempted to fashion an equitable remedy in
 
order to avoid the harsh result of the summary possession, which
 
was essentially a lease foreclosure. Id. at 305, 845 P.2d at
 
1191. As the supreme court observed:
 
The inequity that the district court strived to avoid
was the prospect that the Appellants would, in a summary
manner, be dispossessed of a valuable property right upon
which they relied in building their homes.  The "Surrender"
 
provision of the lease provided that a defaulting lessee has
no entitlement to the improvements once the lease is
cancelled. Therefore, if the district court granted summary
possession in favor of [the lessor], under the lease
agreements with Appellants, [the lessor] would be entitled
to the Appellants' homes.
 
Id. (emphasis added).
 
In order to protect valuable property rights that would
 
be subject to loss in a summary manner, the supreme court
 
concluded that the district court lacked jurisdiction over the
 
dispute in Queen Emma:
 
We hold today that long-term residential ground
leases, such as those held by Appellants, cannot be
cancelled or forfeited in a district court summary
possession action under HRS chapter 666. In
 contradistinction, actions to dispossess lessees involving
short-term rental agreements or other leases that grant
lessees solely the right of possession may only be
adjudicated in district court, pursuant to HRS § 666-6. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This is because such actions cannot be characterized as
 
involving title to property or a right of property beyond
mere possession. Because HRS § 604-5(d) limits the civil
jurisdiction of the district court by excluding real actions
or actions involving title to real property, the only court
that may take cognizance of actions seeking the cancellation
or forfeiture of the Appellants' leases is the circuit
court.
 
Id. at 305-06, 845 P.2d at 1191 (emphasis added, footnote
 
omitted); cf. Lum v. Sun, 70 Haw. 288, 769 P.2d 1091 (1989)
 
(district court had jurisdiction over the summary possession
 
against a tenant under a six-year lease of a residential property
 
owned by the landlord).
 
In the case now before us, at first blush, HPL's
 
argument that Tauala was not an owner of the premises – and
 
therefore this is simply a landlord-tenant case over which the 
District Court had jurisdiction – is appealing. The Cooperative
 
9
appears to "own" the housing project,  Tauala owned only a
membership in the Cooperative, i.e., she owned a 1% stock-like
 
interest in the Cooperative corporation, and Tauala occupied the
 
premises pursuant to the terms of the Occupancy Agreement. The
 
Occupancy Agreement, in particular the default provision,
 
includes an express agreement that a landlord-tenant relationship
 
exists between the Cooperative and Tauala. HPL also points out
 
that the Occupancy Agreement and/or By-Laws require a member to
 
get the Cooperative's consent prior to making structural
 
alterations to the premises or transferring a membership.
 
Nevertheless, putting this case in the contextual

 
framework set forth in Queen Emma, it is not "clear that [Tauala]
 
holds nothing more than a possessory interest in the property."
 
See Queen Emma, 74 Haw. at 304, 845 P.2d at 1191. The
 
relationship between Tauala and the Cooperative is clearly, and
 
by design, more complex than the typical short-term landlord­
9/
 Although the record contains no deed or other document directly
evidencing title, this issue does not appear to be in dispute. Various
 
documents, including a HUD Regulatory Agreement for Nonprofit Mortgagors and
the Occupancy Agreement, refer to Makalapa Manor as the project owner.
 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tenant relationship in which the lessee is granted "solely the
 
right of possession." Id. at 305-06, 845 P.2d at 1191. As
 
discussed above, membership in the Cooperative was intended to
 provide a way for low-income and displaced families to: (1)
 
participate in a form of housing ownership; (2) experience the
 
pride of ownership; (3) invest in their housing in a way that
 
will accrue equity; (4) benefit from the same federal income tax
 
advantages as other homeowners; and (5) be able to sell their
 
interest and right of occupancy. Cooperative members were told
 
that they, collectively, would be their own landlords, they would
 
pay monthly carrying charges (not rent) based on the
 
Cooperative's income and expenses, and they could leave their
 
membership to their loved ones when they died. Although
 
nominally stating a three-year term, the Occupancy Agreement
 
provided for the automatic and apparently perpetual renewal of
 
the three-year term, indeed a long-term agreement. 
Ownership of a cooperative membership, combined with 
the right to occupy a unit in the cooperative project, is a form 
of property ownership, even though cooperative owners do not 
directly hold the title to their properties. This form of home 
ownership is unlikely to have the economic value of fee simple 
ownership or a conventional long-term leasehold interest, but it 
has value and constitutes a right of property beyond mere 
possession. Indeed, for some low-income families, it may be the 
only form of home ownership that is economically possible. Based 
on the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's reasoning in Queen Emma, and the 
HRS § 604-5(d) limits on the civil jurisdiction of the District Court, we conclude that a cooperative member's right to occupy 
their cooperative unit cannot be cancelled or terminated in a 
district court summary possession action.
10 The only court that 
10/
 In the District Court proceeding, HPL argued that Tauala's equity
as a member of the Cooperative remains after the termination of her rights
under the Occupancy Agreement. The By-Laws require prompt delivery of the
(continued...)
 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
may take cognizance of such actions is the circuit court. See
 
Queen Emma, 74 Haw. at 305-06, 845 P.2d at 1191.
 
Courts in some other jurisdictions have similarly
 
concluded that members or shareholders in a cooperative apartment
 
corporation hold a unique form of real property ownership, and
 
their relationship to the cooperative is not merely a landlord-
tenant relationship. See, e.g., Kadera v. Superior Court, 187
 
Ariz. 557, 931 P.2d 1067 (Ariz. App. 1997) (holding that
 Arizona's landlord-tenant statute did not apply to cooperatives,
 
summary possession proceedings could not be used, and
 
shareholders in a cooperative corporation had an interest in real
 
property, rather than tenants' interest, even though legal title
 
to the land was held by the cooperative); Plaza Road Cooperative,
 
Inc. v. Finn, 201 N.J. Super. 174, 492 A.2d 1072 (N.J. Super.
 
App. Div. 1985) (affirming dismissal for lack of jurisdiction and
 
holding that the relation between a cooperative apartment
 
association and a member-occupant is not that of a landlord and
 
tenant for purpose of a summary dispossession action and that
 
cooperative ownership is a form of property ownership); Kohler v.
 
Snow Village, Inc., 16 Ohio App. 3d 350, 475 N.E.2d 1298 (Ohio
 
App. 1984) (holding that Ohio's landlord-tenant act was not
 
applicable to cooperative housing corporations because an
 
occupancy agreement was not a rental agreement, but concluding
 
that certain restrictions on the alienation of property interests
 
in the cooperative were not unconscionable). Other jurisdictions
 
have declined to distinguish the relationship between a
 
10/(...continued)
membership certificate to the Cooperative upon termination of a member's

rights under the Occupancy Agreement, and grant the Cooperative a unilateral
option to "repurchase" the membership for an amount that is unrelated to any
market value the membership might otherwise have and that is conclusively
determined by the Cooperative. If the membership certificate is not so
delivered within 10 days after demand, the membership is deemed to be
cancelled and may be reissued by the Cooperative to a "new purchaser." Thus,
it appears the value of any equity interest retained after the termination of
rights under the Occupancy Agreement is greatly diminished or, arguably,
illusory.
 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cooperative corporation and its shareholders/members as anything 
more than a landlord-tenant relationship and, accordingly, have 
allowed summary possession proceedings to be maintained. See, 
e.g., Village Green Mut. Homes, Inc. v. Randolph, 361 Md. 179, 193-194, 760 A.2d 716, 724 (Md. 2000) ("We hold that, generally, 
in Maryland, the relationship created by an occupancy agreement 
between a housing cooperative and its membership is that of 
landlord-tenant and that, generally, a member holds a leasehold, 
rather than a fee simple interest in an apartment she or he 
occupies. . . . Accordingly, actions for the restitution of 
possession of the premises that involve cooperatives may be 
maintained in the District Court."); Susskind v. 1136 Tenants 
Corp., 43 Misc. 2d 588, 591, 251 N.Y.S.2d 321, 326 (N.Y. City 
Civ. Ct. 1964) ("[New York] courts have declared the relationship 
between a cooperative corporation and its stockholder to be one 
of landlord and tenant in allowing the former to maintain summary 
proceedings against its tenant shareholder.") (citations 
omitted); Quality Management Servs., Inc. v. Banker, 291 Ill. 
App. 3d 942, 946, 685 N.E.2d 367, 370 (Ill. App. Ct. 1997) ("We 
see no reason to treat the proprietary lease or occupancy 
agreement differently than other leases for purposes of the 
[Landlord-Tenant] Act simply because it has been paired with an 
ownership interest in the [cooperative] corporation which holds 
title to the real estate."); Brandywine Townhouses, Inc. v. Joint 
City-County Bd. of Tax Assessors, 231 Ga. 585, 587, 203 S.E.2d 
222, 224 (Ga. 1974) ("Although a [cooperative] member does 
possess some characteristics of ownership, the terms of the 
occupancy agreement also limit the rights of each member in many 
respects inconsistent with ordinary elements of ownership."). 
Although it appears that this latter view is in the majority, we 
conclude that recognition of cooperative membership as a form of 
property ownership, not subject to summary possession 
proceedings, is more consistent with Hawai
'i jurisprudence. 
16  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, we conclude that the District Court lacked
 
subject matter jurisdiction over HPL's action and, on remand, the
 
District Court must dismiss the case.
 
B. The Other Issues Raised by Tauala
 In light of our conclusion that the District Court
 
lacked jurisdiction over this case, we need not address the other
 points of error raised by Tauala on appeal.
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, we vacate the District Court's

 
November 17, 2008 Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession
 
and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 
opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Regina P.D. Tauala
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant
 
Richard Yanagi
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
17 