 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28749
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ERIK R. PAREL, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0415)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Erik R. Parel (Parel) appeals from
 
the Judgment dated August 22, 2007 entered in the Circuit Court
 
1
of the First Circuit (circuit court)  convicting him of Attempted
Extortion in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500 (1993) and 707-765(1)(a) (1993) and
 707-764(1)(f) (Supp. 2006) and/or 707-764(1)(g) (Supp. 2006)
 and/or 707-764(1)(k) (Supp. 2006). Parel was convicted following
 a jury trial.
 
Parel raises two points of error on appeal. 
First, he
 
asserts that there was insufficient evidence to support his
 conviction because he proved an affirmative defense by a
 preponderance of the evidence. Second, Parel argues that the
 circuit court erred in denying his motion for a new trial because
 he was denied the right to effective assistance of counsel,
 claiming that his trial counsel (a) failed to confer with and
 properly advise him in preparation for trial, (b) failed to
 obtain an interpreter for him at trial, and (c) failed to conduct
 an adequate factual and legal investigation.
 
Based upon our careful review of the record and the
 
briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due
 
1
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by
 
the parties, we affirm Parel's conviction.
I.	 Sufficiency of the Evidence at Trial
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) contends 
that Parel attempted to extort $80,000 from Dr. Nestor Del
 
Rosario (Del Rosario), a physician who operates a clinic in
 Waipahu. Parel counters that he established an affirmative
 defense because he believed that Del Rosario had lied or
 mistakenly diagnosed a patient without a proper examination, and
 that Parel's sole intention was to either compel or induce Del
 Rosario to pay him as restitution or indemnification for the harm
 done and/or to induce Del Rosario to take reasonable action to
 correct his mistake. Significant and key facts in this case were
 highly disputed.
A.
	 Relevant Statutes
 
In this case, the pertinent elements for criminal
 
extortion are as follows:
 
§707-764 Extortion.  A person commits extortion if the
person does any of the following:
 
(1)	 Obtains, or exerts control over, the property or
services of another with intent to deprive
another of property or services by threatening
by word or conduct to:
 
* * * *
 (f) Expose a secret or publicize an
asserted fact, whether true or false,
tending to subject some person to
hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to
impair the threatened person's credit
or business repute;
 
(g) Reveal any information sought to be
concealed by the person threatened or
any other person;
 
* * * *
 
(k) Do any other act that would not in
itself substantially benefit the
defendant but which is calculated to
 harm substantially some person with
respect to the threatened person's
health, safety, business, calling,
career, financial condition,
reputation, or personal
relationships[.]
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 707-764.2
 
Criminal attempt is defined as: "[a] person is guilty
 
of an attempt to commit a crime if the person . . .
 
[i]ntentionally engages in conduct which, under the circumstances
 
as the person believes them to be, constitutes a substantial step
 in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the person's
 commission of the crime." HRS § 705-500(1)(b).
 
Parel asserts that he has proven the following
 
affirmative defense:
 
[§707-769] Defenses to extortion. . . .
 
* * * *
 
(4) It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution for
extortion as defined in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section
707-764 and as further defined by subparagraphs (e), (f),
(g), and (i), that the defendant believed the threatened
accusation, penal charge, or exposure to be true, or the
proposed action of a public servant was justified, and that
the defendant's sole intention was to compel or induce the
victim to give property or services to the defendant due the
defendant as restitution or indemnification for harm done,
or as compensation for property obtained or lawful services
performed, or to induce the victim to take reasonable action
to prevent or to remedy the wrong which was the subject of
the threatened accusation, charge, exposure, or action of a
public servant in circumstances to which the threat relates.
 
HRS § 707-769 (1993 & Supp. 2006). For purposes of an
 
affirmative defense, "the defendant is entitled to an acquittal
 if the trier of fact finds that the evidence, when considered in
 light of any contrary prosecution evidence, proves by a
 preponderance of the evidence the specified fact or facts which
 negative penal liability." HRS § 701-115(2)(b) (1993).
B. Summary of Relevant Evidence
 
Del Rosario Testimony
 
Del Rosario testified that on June 19, 2006, he
 
examined and treated a care home patient (Patient) with multiple
 medical problems whom he saw for regular follow-ups. Patient was
 
2 The requirements for Extortion in the First Degree are: "[a] person
commits the offense of extortion in the first degree if the person commits
extortion . . . [o]f property or services the value of which exceeds $200 in
total during any twelve-month period[.]" HRS § 707-765 (1993).
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
brought in by a care giver who informed Del Rosario that Patient
 
had what looked like a rash on her right hip. Del Rosario
 testified that, while Patient was seated in her wheelchair, he
 examined the area of the rash. He did not place her on the
 examination table because her weight and medical condition made
 it difficult. He was informed by the care giver that there were
 no openings on the skin, just a rash. Del Rosario prepared a
 progress note of this examination, which contained a description
 of "rash/sore right buttocks" and an assessment of "decubitus".
3
 
Del Rosario testified that on June 26, 2006, Parel came
 
to his office and insisted on meeting with him. They entered a
 consultation room and Del Rosario claims that Parel locked the
 door and accused Del Rosario of lying on the progress note for
 Patient by assessing "decubitus" and that Del Rosario had not
 examined Patient. Parel told Del Rosario that his wife operated
 the care home that took care of Patient. According to Del
 Rosario, Parel then put a bunch of keys in front of Del Rosario
 and stated "you know why I'm rich, because I'm smart and I'm very
 powerful because I know a lot of people." Parel then allegedly
 said the "Gallegos" are very close to him and "because [Del
 Rosario] lied he will bring [Del Rosario] down." Del Rosario
 told Parel that he could provide a "qualifying note" to explain
 the progress note regarding Patient. According to Del Rosario,
 Parel said it was about time he "brings [Del Rosario] down
 because [Del Rosario is] so popular" and that Parel "will call
 
3
 Witness testimony varied on what the term "decubitus" meant. Del
 
Rosario testified that there were four stages of decubitus: Stage I (redness
that looks like a rash with no opening of the skin), Stage II (opening of the
skin that can extend into the subcutaneous tissue); Stage III (open skin that
could extend into the muscle); and Stage IV (open skin that could extend as
deep as the bone). Jeri Nakamura (Nakamura), a social worker with Ohana Case
Management, testified she was not aware of the stages of decubitus but that
her interpretation from working in a hospital setting was that it involved an
open sore or an ulcer, and not a rash. Nakamura testified that a doctor's
 diagnosis of decubitus would lead her to believe there may be neglect and she
would report it to a registered nurse for assessment. She also testified that
 a report of a patient having bed sores could be very damaging to a care home
provider. Parel testified that a doctor's diagnosis of decubitus for a
patient of his care home would be very damaging to the business.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Action Line, Medicare, HMSA, and all the insurances that we
 
deal with in our offices." Parel also said he would have Del
 Rosario's license taken away.
 
Del Rosario testified he was in shock and asked Parel
 
what he wanted, if he wanted money. Parel "just smiled." During
 this exchange, Del Rosario also testified that Parel told him
 "remember I am here to help you" and that is when Del Rosario
 said "$10,000." Parel laughed and said "you're a doctor and
 you're offering me $10,000." Del Rosario then said "$25,000." 
According to Del Rosario, Parel replied that with Del Rosario
 losing his license, "there's so much at stake that [Del Rosario]
 could find more than that. [Del Rosario] could go make [his]
 rounds, meaning asking from other doctors to come up with more
 money." Del Rosario testified that Parel wanted $80,000 and
 "[h]e said he could have asked for more but because we're both
 Filipinos and [sic] he's trying to help me." Parel told Del
 Rosario to come up with the money within 48 hours. Before
 leaving Del Rosario's office, Parel told Del Rosario to call him
 the following day about the status of the money. 
Del Rosario conferred with his office and business
 
managers and was put in contact with Honolulu Police Department
 (HPD) Detective Timothy Mariani. Detective Mariani suggested
 that the only way to prove what Parel was doing was to make the
 call the next day and have it recorded. The next day, June 27,
 2006, Detective Mariani came to Del Rosario's office and set up a
 recording device on Del Rosario's phone. Del Rosario placed the
 expected call to Parel and the conversation was recorded. See
 infra for transcript of the recorded call.
 
Del Rosario testified that the following day, June 28,
 
2006, another HPD Detective, Michael Ogawa, was in Del Rosario's
 office to try to record a second telephone conversation between
 Parel and Del Rosario when Parel unexpectedly arrived at Del
 Rosario's office. Parel indicated to Del Rosario that he wanted
 to go into one of the back rooms. Once in the room, Parel asked
 "where's my money". Del Rosario told Parel he did not have all
 
5
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the money and Parel asked how much he had. Del Rosario
 
responded that he had $40,000 but that it was in a plastic bag in
 a room where he was examining a patient. Del Rosario asked Parel
 to leave, but Parel insisted on waiting until Del Rosario was
 done with the patient. Del Rosario proceeded to the next room
 and apprised Detective Ogawa of the situation. Detective Ogawa
 called for back up who arrived shortly thereafter and arrested
 Parel. 
Parel Testimony
 Parel testified that he is a certified nursing
 
assistant and he started a care home with his wife in 2003 which
 his wife now operates. Patient resided at the care home and
 Parel learned of Del Rosario's progress note on June 24, 2006
 when Jeri Nakamura (Nakamura), a social worker with Ohana Case
 Management, did a reassessment examination of Patient and pointed
 out the progress note to Parel. Parel and Nakamura examined
 Patient and found no decubitus on June 24, 2006.
4
 
Parel testified that he then spoke with Deb Clanton,
 
the care giver who took Patient to see Del Rosario. Clanton 
informed him that Del Rosario did not examine Patient's buttocks
 on the day of their visit. At Parel's request, Clanton wrote a
 statement of what she observed at Del Rosario's office.
5 On
 
4
 Nakamura testified at trial that she did periodic evaluations for
individuals like Patient who were admitted to an adult foster home. On
 
June 24, 2006, she did an evaluation for Patient and prepared an assessment
report that stated: "[Patient] has monthly visits to Dr. Nestor del Rosario's
office. His most recent note on 6/19/06 indicated rash/sore on right buttocks
and his assessment of decubitus. Upon caregiver & this LSW's examination, no
decubitus on buttocks seen on 6/24/06."
 
5
 Clanton testified at trial that she worked for Parel and his wife as
 
a substitute care giver and that she took Patient to her visit with Del
Rosario. She informed Del Rosario that Patient had a rash on her buttocks. 
Clanton testified that she remained with Patient throughout the visit with Del
Rosario and that Del Rosario did not examine the rash. At the request of
Parel and his wife, Clanton wrote a statement of what she saw when she took
Patient to see Del Rosario.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6  Transcripts from Parel's testimony indicate a last name spelling of
"Batalon", while other portions of the record indicate a spelling of
"Batalone". 
7June 25, 2006, Parel met with Mila Batalone (Batalone),6 his case
manager who sends patients to his care home, to discuss the
discrepancy involving Del Rosario's progress note.  Parel was
concerned because the assessment of decubitus would affect his
care home business.  Batalone told Parel to go to Del Rosario's
office to show him the progress note that they wanted amended.
Parel testified that he went to Del Rosario's office
because he wanted the progress note amended.  He denied locking
the door when they entered the room.  Parel testified he was not
angry, but that Del Rosario got angry when Parel accused him of
lying on the progress note and not examining Patient.  Parel
denied that he told Del Rosario that he is an important, powerful
and rich person.  Parel also denied saying he would make Del
Rosario lose his license, but admitted saying he would report Del
Rosario to Action Line because of Del Rosario's mistake.  Parel
testified he smiled when Del Rosario asked if he wanted $10,000
because "it's so ridiculous" and then Del Rosario said $20,000. 
To get the $20,000, Del Rosario wanted Parel to "take out"
Clanton's statement.  Parel testified that "everybody wants
money" but denied asking for more money or saying he wanted
$80,000.
In explaining the call with Del Rosario that was
recorded, Parel testified in part that he was not worried that he
was doing something wrong because Del Rosario is the one who kept
talking about money and he thought maybe Del Rosario was doing
something wrong, that maybe Del Rosario was bribing him.
Recording of Telephone Call Between Del Rosario and
Parel
The transcript of the telephone call on June 27, 2006
between Del Rosario and Parel was admitted into evidence.  The
jury thus had evidence of the conversation, including:NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
MD: Hey, Eric.
 
Eric: Yo.
 
MD: Yeah, Dr. del Rosario, here.
 Eric: Uh-huh.
 MD: Your last name, was it Parel or Parcel?
 Eric: Parel.
 MD: Parel, okay.
 Eric: Yeah, why?
 MD: I'd been making my rounds.
 Eric: Uh-huh.
 MD: Of course, it is very difficult to come out with that
amount, but I'm still trying to get it 'cause you told
me its 48 hours. I got some, from my contacts and
they were asking what it is for, but course, I just
told them because I owe some money on my house.
 
Eric: You know, Doc...it's like this...Doc...because we
don't want to talk about it. I'm only helping you. I
 don't want us to be talking about this on the
phone...because you might be recording me. I'm
 helping you, right?
 
MD:	 You're kind to help me.
 
Eric: Yes, I'm just helping you, but...because...what time
are you coming...because...I don't know. What time
 are you coming?
 
MD:	 Well, I'm trying to make my rounds still to find more
money.
 
Eric: Uh-huh...how much do you have?
 
MD:	 Well, I probably have about 25 right now.
 
Eric: So, what within 48 hours?  You'll be here to make rounds? 
You'll be here to see my patients?
 
MD:	 Well, I have to come to see them at your house?
 
Eric: That's how we do it, then, we do it.  I'll have it removed,
we'll fix it. Don't you want it done this way? How do you
want it done?
 
MD:	 If all the records are all removed.
 
Eric: Yes, of course, it will really be all taken out.  You'll
 
have to assess, reassess. This is what we gonna do; it is
better. I'll put it like you made mistake so that....
 
MD:	 I come and reassess the patient and what about my notes?
You'll throw away the notes?
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Eric: Of course, it has to be removed, doc.  I'm helping you.
 
MD:	 Including the....
 
Eric: This is how we talk, if you have it, so it is done faster. 
I'm worried because she wants to go...my wife...she keeps
asking and asking if you're being truthful of what you're
saying...if not, 'let me know,' she said again.
 
MD:	 What about the nature of the caretaker that came?
 
Eric: Of course, I'll take it out, I'll make it disappear.
 
MD:	 Okay.
 
Eric: Yeah...that's the...I'm just helping you, but it has to be
out of the record. You might be recording what we talk
about. Anyway, I don't have anything....
 
MD:	 No, I'm all by myself. I'm ashamed to have the other people
outside hear about it.
 
Eric: Yes, only between you and me...Please Doc, I'm just helping
you, right?
 
MD:	 Yeah.
 
Eric: When is it possible to....
 
MD:	 Well, you said 48 hours. I have to...that's why I'm having
my clinics early so that I can go around and find the money
that you need.
 
Eric: Please don't say that...because...this might be a live
recording. I don't want you saying that, you know.
 
MD:	 I have to learn my lesson from this.
 
Eric: That's why.  That's why...(inaudible)
 
MD:	 What exactly did I really do?
 
Eric: I don't know.  I don't know. I don't know. I don't want to
 
talk about it. What we talk about is if you have it, just
come. Just come. No more drama. I don't want too much
 drama. Anyway, I'm just helping you. If you want or not, I
don't know, you know. The worse may happen to us - to cut
short, to finish everything, remove everything. Then,
everything is finished...don't want anymore....Doc...remove
everything, so no more problem for you, no more problem for
us.
 
MD:	 Can you make a little reduction?
 
Eric: Doc, you're the doctor, remember?  You know what I mean;
you're a doctor, Doc.
 
MD:	 So, you're really firm with $80,000. Ahhh...I'll try to
find the rest.
 
Eric: Make the arrangement when it is going to be.  I like it when
 
no people are around.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
MD:	 That's why. That's why I'm cutting off my offices early so
I can....
 
Eric: You're all by yourself in your room, Doc?
 
MD:	 Yeah, that's why I closed it because there's no more
patients.
 
Eric: Yes, yes.  So what, until this afternoon? I'll wait or
 
what....
 
MD:	 I'll call you again later when I find more.
 
Eric: Yes, so our problem will be finished.
 
MD:	 Okay.
 
C.	 Evidence Adduced At Trial Was Sufficient To Support The
Jury's Verdict
 
We review the sufficiency of evidence on appeal as
 
follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(brackets in original) (quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 
145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997)); see also State v. Pineda, 70 Haw. 
245, 250, 768 P.2d 239, 241-42 (1989). Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241 
(citation omitted). In reviewing sufficiency of the evidence to support a conviction, we recognize that it is within the province of the jury to "determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact from the evidence adduced[.]" State v. Naeole, 62 Haw. 563, 565, 617 P.2d 820, 823 (1980) (citation omitted). 
In this case, as is evident from the summary of
 
evidence above, many of the facts were in dispute. However,
 based on the evidence adduced at trial, including the testimony
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Del Rosario and the recorded telephone conversation on June
 
27, 2006, there was substantial evidence to support the jury's
 verdict convicting Parel of attempted extortion and sufficient
 evidence for the jury to conclude that Parel had failed to prove
 his affirmative defense.
 
II. Claim of Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 
After the jury's verdict below, Parel obtained new 
counsel and, pursuant to Rule 33 of the Hawai
'i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP), filed a motion for new trial asserting that his 
trial counsel had rendered ineffective assistance of counsel. A hearing was held on July 18, 2007, and on August 7, 2007, the circuit court issued its order denying the motion for new trial.
A. Standards of Review
 
On appeal, we review a trial court's ruling on a motion
 
for a new trial for abuse of discretion.
 
"[T]he granting or denial of a motion for new trial is
within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not 
be disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion." State v. 
Yamada, 108 Hawai' i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005)
(citation omitted). It is well-established that an abuse of 
discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceed[ed]the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant." Id. (citation omitted).
Furthermore, at a hearing on a motion for new trial,
the trial court acts as the trier of fact. State v. St. Clair, 101 Hawai' i 280, 287, 67 P.3d 779, 786 (2003)
(citation omitted). 
State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai 'i 60, 69-70, 148 P.3d 493, 502-03 
(2006) (brackets in original). 
The standard for claims of ineffective assistance of 
counsel is "whether, viewed as a whole, the assistance provided 
was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 
528, 532 (1994) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). "[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 
(1998) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphasis in original). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective
assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part
test: 1) that there were specific errors or omissions
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence;
and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense. To satisfy this second prong, the
defendant needs to show a possible impairment, rather than a
probable impairment, of a potentially meritorious defense.
A defendant need not prove actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, and footnote omitted).
B.	 Parel Has Failed To Establish Ineffective Assistance of
 
Trial Counsel
 
1.	 Preparation For Trial
 
Parel first contends that his trial counsel failed to
 
adequately meet with him and prepare for trial. In a short
 
declaration in support of the motion for new trial, Parel's only
 statement in this regard is: "Mr. Glenn and I had very limited
 contact prior to the day before the trial when he called me and
 told me to come to court for the trial." At the hearing on the
 motion for new trial, no testimony was submitted by either party. 
In particular, Parel did not provide any further statement or
 testimony to elaborate on this claim or how he believed it
 affected the trial or his defense.
 
In the circuit court's order denying the motion for new
 
trial, the court made findings of fact that, prior to trial,
 Parel appeared at least three times in court with his trial
 counsel for arraignment and pretrial matters and at no time did
 Parel request new counsel or inform the court of any problems
 with trial counsel. We conclude that the circuit court's
 findings are not clearly erroneous and that Parel has not met his
 burden as to this first contention.
 
2.	 Alleged Failure To Obtain An Interpreter
 
Parel's second contention is that his trial counsel
 
failed to obtain an interpreter for him. Regarding this issue,
 Parel's declaration states: "I told Mr. Glenn that I believed I
 needed an interpreter for the trial as English is my second
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
language. He told me that it was a simple case and that I did
 
not need an interpreter. . . .During the trial, there were things
 said in English that I did not understand." At trial, Parel
 testified that Ilocano is his first language but that he
 understands English:
 
Q.	 Is English your first language?
 
A.	 Second.
 
Q.	 What's your first language?
 
A.	 Ilocano.
 
Q.	 You understand English enough to communicate though;
right?
 
A.	 Uh-huh
 
Q.	 Okay
 
A.	 But I'm sorry if not clearly good in English, right.
 
Q.	 If you don't understand a question that I ask, feel
free to tell me so I can ask it in a way you do?
 
A.	 Okay. Sorry about that.
 
The circuit court's order denying the motion for new
 
trial included findings of fact, such as: at three pretrial court
 
appearances, Parel did not request an interpreter; at trial,
 Parel voluntarily and with a full understanding of his rights
 testified and did not request an interpreter. The circuit court
 also made a finding that: "During his testimony, Defendant Parel
 was asked and answered questions in English. At no time did he
 say to anyone that he did not understand English. He answered
 questions without hesitation or any indication that he did not
 understand."
 
The circuit court concluded that: "[b]ased upon its
 
review of transcript [sic] of Defendant Parel's trial testimony
 and the Court's independent recollection of that testimony
 itself, Court finds that Defendant had sufficient command of the
 English language to understand questions posed during the
 proceedings and to convey his thoughts to the jury."
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
From our review of the record, the circuit court's
 
findings of fact were not clearly erroneous. Parel has not
 
established that trial counsel's alleged decision not to obtain
 an interpreter constituted ineffective assistance and therefore
 the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying a new
 trial on this basis. See State v. Faafiti, 54 Haw. 637, 638-39,
 
513 P.2d 697, 699-700 (1973) (where defendant asserted he was not
 completely familiar with English and claimed he was improperly
 denied an interpreter, court held that "[a]lthough the defendant
 did not speak grammatically correct English, upon review of the
 transcript of the defendant's testimony, we are satisfied that he
 had sufficient command of the English language to understand
 questions posed during the proceedings and to convey his thoughts
 to the jury[.]").
3. Alleged Failure To Investigate The Case 
Parel's third contention on appeal is that trial
 
counsel failed to conduct a careful legal and factual
 investigation, primarily in his failure to call Milagros Batalone
 as a witness. At the hearing on the motion for new trial,
 Batalone was present but did not testify. Instead, an offer of
 proof was accepted by the State that she would have testified at
 trial that she told Parel to go to Del Rosario's office to clear
 up the dispute about the progress note. We agree with the
 

 circuit court's conclusion that:
While Batalone's testimony would have corroborated Defendant
Parel's testimony that Batalone told him to go to Dr. Del
Rosario's to try to get the doctor to amend the progress
note, there was no real dispute at trial that Defendant
Parel did in fact go to the Doctor's office and confront him
about the progress note. The real issue was whether
 Defendant went further and demanded $80,000.00 from [] Dr.
Del Rosario. Batalone's testimony would have added little
if anything to Defendant Parel's case on that issue. Also,
"the decision whether to call a witness in a criminal trial
 is normally within the judgment of counsel and, therefore,
will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State
 
v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 70 (1992).
 
Therefore, we conclude that Parel has failed to
 
establish that his trial counsel was ineffective on this basis.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the above, we affirm the Judgment dated
 
August 22, 2007 convicting Parel of Attempted Extortion in the
 
First Degree.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 23, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael Jay Green
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Presiding Judge

Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
15
 