 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 







NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. 29407
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ELLEN J. O'PHELAN, Petitioner-Appellee,
 
v.
 
 
JEFF MEEK, and MARYLOU ASKREN,
 
Respondents-Appellants
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
 
NORTH AND SOUTH HILO DIVISION
 
 
(CIVIL NO. 3SS08-1-148)
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley, and Fujise, JJ.)
 
 
Respondents-Appellants Jeff Meek (Meek) and Marylou

 
Askren (Askren) appeal from the August 11, 2008, "Order Granting
 
Petition for Injunction against Harassment" and the October 29,
 2008, "Written Order Denying Respondent's Motion to Set Aside or
 Amend Order Filed 08/11/2008" issued by the District Court of the
 Third Circuit (district court).
1
 
1
 The Honorable Harry P. N. Freitas presided over the proceedings and
issued the rulings contested in this appeal. Askren and Meek each filed their
 
own separate motion to set aside or amend the district court's August 11,
2008, Judgment. Although the district court's October 29, 2008, "Written
Order Denying Respondent's Motion to Set Aside or Amend Order Filed
08/11/2008" (the "October 29, 2008, Order") refers to "Respondent's Motion" in
the singular, it appears that October 29, 2008, Order denied the motions filed
by Askren and Meeks, and we construe the October 29, 2008, Order as denying
both the motion filed by Askren and the motion filed by Meek. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 
	 



 

 







 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Petitioner-Appellee Ellen O'Phelan (Ellen) and Daniel
 
O'Phelan (Daniel) filed a "Petition for Ex Parte Temporary
 
Restraining Order and for Injunction Against Harassment"
 (Petition) against Meek and Askren pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5
 (Supp. 2009).
2 The Petition alleged, among other things, that
 
Meek had physically and sexually assaulted Ellen and that Askren
 had given Ellen a sedative prior to the assault. The district
 court granted Ellen's and Daniel's request for a temporary
 restraining order on the day the Petition was filed. After
 holding evidentiary hearings on the Petition, the district court
 granted Ellen's request for an injunction against harassment and
 denied Daniel's request for an injunction against harassment. 
On August 11, 2008, the district court issued its order
 
granting the injunction against harassment in favor of Ellen and
 against Meek and Askren. The order restrained and enjoined Meek
 and Askren for a period of three years from contacting,
 threatening, or physically harassing Ellen and any person
 residing at her residence; telephoning Ellen; and entering or
 visiting Ellen's residence or place of employment. Meek and
 Askren filed motions to set aside the district court's order 
2
 HRS § 604-10.5 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) For the purpose of this section:
 
. . . . .
 
"Harassment" means:
 (1)	 Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat
of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or
assault[.]
. . . .
 
(f) . . . .
 If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that
harassment as defined in paragraph (1) of that definition exists,
it may enjoin for no more than three years further harassment of
the petitioner . . . ; provided that this paragraph shall not
prohibit the court from issuing other injunctions against the
named parties even if the time to which the injunction applies
exceeds a total of three years.
 
2
  
 


 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
granting the injunction against harassment in favor of Ellen,
 which the district court denied. 
On appeal, Meek and Askren argue that the district
 
court erred in issuing the order granting the injunction against
 harassment and in denying their motions to set aside that order. 
We affirm the district court. 
I.
 
The district court held evidentiary hearings on the
 
Petition. At the time the hearings were held, the investigation
 by the police into Ellen's complaint of sexual assault was still
 pending. Meek and Askren both invoked their Fifth Amendment
 privilege against self-incrimination and declined to testify at
 the hearings. The following evidence was adduced at the
 hearings. 
Daniel and Ellen O'Phelan were friends with Meek and
 
Askren. The O'Phelans were married and Meek was Askren's
 boyfriend. On May 18, 2008, Daniel invited Meek and Askren to
 the O'Phelans' residence. Daniel left on an errand while Meek
 and Askren remained at the O'Phelans' residence with Ellen.
 
Ellen testified that during Daniel's absence, Askren
 
gave Ellen a prescription sedative that "knocked [Ellen] out." 
According to Ellen, Meek came into her bedroom while she was
 sleeping, pinned her down, and physically and sexually assaulted
 her. Ellen testified that while Meek was assaulting her, Askren
 opened the bedroom door, saw Meek on top of Ellen, and then
 closed the door and left. Ellen introduced into evidence
 photographs taken a day after the alleged assault, which showed
 bruising on her arm, and a toxicology report regarding tests
 conducted the day after the alleged assault, which revealed that
 she tested presumptively positive for Benzodiazepine. 
Meek offered the testimony of Richard Randall Auriemma
 
(Auriemma), a tenant who resided in the basement of the
 O'Phelans' residence. According to Auriemma, on the day of the
 alleged incident, Ellen was upset at her husband Daniel and not
 at Meek; Meek did not harass Ellen during the short time Ariemma
 
3
  
 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
observed them together; and Ellen told Auriemma not to call the
 police. 
In support of its decision to grant the injunction
 
against harassment in favor of Ellen, the district court stated:
 
As far as the restraining order as to [Ellen], the
 
Court will find that she has established by clear and
 
convincing evidence that there was physical harm, bodily
 
injury, assault or the threat of imminent physical harm,
 
bodily injury or assault to her. 
 
 
Based on the photographs that were presented and her
 
testimony, there was some cross testimony of Mr. Auriemma. 

However, his own testimony stated that he saw maybe five
 
minutes of the contact between [Ellen] and Mr. Meek and 

that's it.
 
 
So although her credibility may be in question,
 
[Ellen] was very clear in her testimony and her beliefs that
 
she was assaulted, or as you say, physically harmed or
 
resulted in bodily injury that would follow under the
 
statute. And as such, the Court is going to grant her
 
request for the restraining order and I'll make it for three
 
years. 
 
II.
 
On appeal, both Meek and Askren argue that: (1) Ellen
 
did not show by clear and convincing evidence that Meek or Askren
 committed any acts of harassment, either as a principal actor
 (Meek) or an accomplice (Askren), as required to issue an
 injunction against harassment under HRS § 604-10.5; (2) the
 district court erred in failing to issue findings of fact and
 conclusions of law in support of its decision to grant the
 injunction against harassment in favor of Ellen; (3) the district
 
court violated Meek's and Askren's due process rights because it
 
improperly prejudged the case; (4) the injunction against
 harassment violates Meek's and Askren's constitutional right to
 travel; and (5) the district court erred in denying Meek's and
 Askren's motions to set aside the order granting the injunction
 against harassment. In addition, Askren separately argues that
 the district court denied her due process when it "disregarded"
 her during the evidentiary hearings. Meek separately argues that
 
the district court compromised the integrity of the hearings by
 
permitting Daniel to act as Ellen's counsel.
 
4
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We resolve the arguments raised by Meek and Askren on
 
appeal as follows:
 
A.
 
We reject Meek's and Askren's claim that there was 
insufficient evidence for the district court to grant the 
injunction against harassment in favor of Ellen and against them under HRS § 604-10.5. When reviewing a sufficiency of evidence claim, we view the evidence and the inferences which may be fairly drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party that prevailed at trial. See Kramer v. Ellett, 108 Hawai
'i 426, 
430, 121 P.3d 406, 410 (2005). We will not disturb the trial court's findings if there is substantial evidence to support them. See In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawai
'i 443, 454, 979 P.2d 
39, 50 (1999); Adair v. Hustace, 64 Haw. 314, 324, 640 P.2d 294, 302 (1982). Sufficient evidence can be established by the testimony of a single percipient witness. State v. Pulse, 83 
Hawai
'i 229, 244, 925 P.2d 797, 812 (1996). 
When viewed in the light most favorable to Ellen, there
 
was sufficient evidence to support the allegation that Meek
 physically assaulted Ellen and that Askren acted as Meek’s
 accomplice in the assault. The district court found that Ellen
 had "established by clear and convincing evidence that there was
 physical harm, bodily injury, assault or the threat of imminent
 physical harm, bodily injury or assault to her[,]" and that Ellen
 therefore had met the statutory definition of "harassment." See
 
HRS § 604-10.5; footnote 2, supra. We conclude that there was
 substantial evidence to support the district court's findings and
 its decision to grant the injunction in Ellen's favor, including
 Ellen's testimony and the photographs depicting injuries to her
 arm. Meek and Askren attack Ellen's credibility. However, it is
 well settled that an appellate court will not pass upon the
 credibility of the witnesses and the weight of evidence, for
 those matters are the province of the trier of fact. See Domingo
 
v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 237, 242, 873 P.2d 775, 780 (1994); Pulse, 
83 Hawaii at 244-45, 925 P.2d at 812-13. 
5
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Meek and Askeren argue that pursuant to the District
 
Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 52(c) (1996), the
 district court was required to issue findings of fact and
 conclusion of law and that the district court erred by failing to
 do so. We disagree. DCRCP Rule 81(a)(4) (1996) specifically
 provides that the DCRCP "shall not apply to . . . [a]ctions for
 relief from harassment maintained pursuant to HRS Section 604­
10.5 . . . ." Accordingly, the DCRCP do not apply to this case. 
In any event, we conclude that the district court's oral ruling
 was sufficiently clear that a remand for the district court to
 issue findings of fact and conclusions of law is not necessary. 
C.
 
Meek's and Askren's claim that the district court
 
improperly prejudged the case is without merit. The matters they
 cite in support of their claim do not show improper prejudgment
 on the part of the district court.
 
D.
 
We reject Meek's and Askren's argument that the
 
injunction against harassment violated their right to travel
 because they were not given a sufficient opportunity to prepare
 for and defend against the Petition. The record shows that both
 Meek and Askren were given an adequate opportunity to obtain
 counsel prior to the evidentiary hearings and to prepare for the
 hearings on the Petition; that both were present at the hearings;
 and that Meek was represented by counsel. We conclude that the
 district court's granting of the injunction against harassment
 pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5 did not violate Meek's and Askren's
 right to travel.
 
E.
 
Meek and Askren filed motions, pursuant to DCRCP Rules
 
59 and 60, to set aside the district court's order granting the
 
6
  
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 



 

 

 







 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injunction against harassment.3 We review the trial court's 
decision on such motions under the abuse of discretion standard. See Gossinger v. Assoc. of Apartment Owners of the Regency of Ala Wai, 73 Haw. 412, 425, 835 P.2d 627, 634 (1992); Beneficial Hawai
'i, Inc. v. Casey, 98 Hawai 'i 159, 164, 45 P.3d 359, 364 
(2002).4 
In support of their motions, Meek and Askren asserted,
 
among other things, that there was new evidence in the form of
 Ellen's medical records and that Ellen and Daniel had engaged in
 fraud and misrepresentations that invalidated the district
 court's decision.
5 However, Meek and Askren failed to
 
demonstrate that Ellen's medical records could not have been
 discovered through due diligence prior to the evidentiary
 hearings, and they failed to adequately substantiate their
 allegations of fraud and misrepresentation. We conclude that
 Meek and Askren did not meet their burden of demonstrating that
 they were entitled to set aside the district court's order
 granting the injunction or to any other relief sought by their
 motions. Accordingly, we cannot say that the district abused its
 discretion in denying their motions. 
F.
 
We conclude that Askren is not entitled to any relief
 
on her claim that the district court violated her right to due
 process by "disregarding" her during the evidentiary hearings. 
While Meek was represented by counsel, Askren appeared pro se. 
3
 Notwithstanding DCRCP Rule 81(a)(4), we utilize DCRCP 59 and 60 for
purposes of our analysis of the issue raised in this section.
 
4
 DCRCP Rules 59 and 60 are patterned after the corresponding Hawai' i 
Rule of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 59 and 60. Gossigner and Beneficial 
Hawai'i applied the abuse of discretion standard to decisions on motions
brought pursuant to HRCP Rules 59 and 60, respectively. 
5 Askren also asserted that her motion should be granted because she did
not have counsel at the evidentiary hearings on the Petition and because the
district court disregarded her at the hearings. We disposed of the former
claim in Section II.D., supra, by noting that the record shows that Askren was
given an adequate opportunity to obtain counsel prior to the evidentiary
hearings. We discuss the latter claim in Section II.F., infra. 
7
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 
 


 

 


 

 


 

 

 



 
 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During the evidentiary hearings, the district court asked Meek's
 counsel whether he wanted to cross-examine Ellen's witnesses,
 whether he objected to evidence offered by Ellen, and whether
 Meek wanted to present any witnesses. However, the district
 court did not specifically address Askren and ask for her
 position on these matters. Nevertheless, during the parties'
 closing arguments, the district court realized this oversight. 
The district court apologized to Askren and asked her whether she
 wanted to call any witnesses or cross-examine any of the
 witnesses who had testified. Askren advised the district court
 that she did not want to call any witnesses "at this time" and
 that she did not want to cross-examine the witnesses who had
 testified. 
Therefore, when given the opportunity, Askren did not
 
seek to cross-examine the witnesses who had testified or to call
 her own witnesses. Instead, she told the district court that she
 did not want to cross-examine or call witnesses. We conclude
 that Askren waived any claim that her due process rights were
 violated on the grounds that she was not permitted to cross-
examine witnesses and to call her own witnesses. Askren does not
 argue that she had a valid basis for excluding any of the
 evidence offered by Ellen that the district court admitted. 
Accordingly, Askren has not established that she is entitled to
 relief on her claim that the district court "disregarded" her
 during the evidentiary hearings. 
G.
 
We reject Meek's claim that the district court
 
compromised the integrity of the hearing on Ellen's portion of
 the Petition by permitting Daniel to act as Ellen's counsel. 
Daniel was a practicing lawyer at the time of the hearings. 
However, Daniel advised the district court that because Daniel
 planned to be a witness, Daniel did not represent Ellen at the
 evidentiary hearings. The district court reminded Daniel several 
times that he did not represent Ellen when Daniel attempted to
 intervene during Ellen's portion of the evidentiary hearings. 
8
 
 

 

 

 


 

 


 


 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Our review of the record does not support Meek's claim that the
 
district court was influenced by Daniel's statements or attempts
 to intervene on Ellen's behalf; that the district court's
 reminders were insufficient; or that the integrity of the
 hearings were compromised. 
III.
 
We affirm the district court's August 11, 2008, "Order
 
Granting Petition for Injunction against Harassment" and its 
October 29, 2008, "Written Order Denying Respondent's Motion to
 Set Aside or Amend Order Filed 08/11/2008." 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 28, 2010. 
On the briefs:
 
Dan O'Phelan 
for Petitioner-Appellee
 
 Chief Judge

Gerard D. Lee Loy
 
for Respondent-Appellant MARYLOU ASKREN
 
 Associate Judge

Christopher P. Schleuter
 
for Respondent-Appellant JEFF MEEK
 
 Associate Judge

9

 