 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 28877
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LAWRENCE CORDER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NOS. 07-1-1080; 06-1-2012; and 07-1-1048)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Lawrence Corder (Corder) appeals
 
from Counts II and III of the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
1
(Conviction and Sentence)  for two offenses of Violation of an
Order for Protection under Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 586-11
 
(2006), entered on November 29, 2007, by the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit (Family Court) in FC-CR No. 07-1-1080.2
 
On March 31, 2009, this court entered a Summary
 
Disposition Order vacating the Conviction and Sentence on the
 
grounds that:
 
The Family Court abused its discretion in denying Corder's
alternative request for a bill of particulars because the
Family Court failed to consider whether, under the
circumstances, the bill of particulars was necessary to
Corder's preparation for trial and to prevent him from being
prejudicially surprised as to what acts he allegedly
committed in violation of the Extended Order.
 
Judgment was entered on May 21, 2009 and an application
 
for writ of certiorari was timely filed. On November 19, 2009,
 
1
 On October 12, 2007, a jury found Corder not guilty as to Count I
and guilty as to Counts II and III of the complaint. Count I charged Corder
with committing the same offense alleged in Counts II and III, but on a
different date. Corder was acquitted of the charges brought in FC-Criminal
Nos. 06-1-2012 and 07-1-1048.
 
2
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
1   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court issued an Opinion concluding that this 
court erred in concluding that the Family Court abused its 
discretion in denying Corder's request for a bill of particulars. 
The supreme court reversed the decision of this court and 
remanded the case to this court to address the remaining four 
points of error raised by Corder in his opening brief. 
In the remaining four points of error, Corder contends:
 
[1] The trial court erred in denying Defendant's
requested jury instruction re: ambiguous orders;
 
[2] The trial court erred in denying Defendant's
motion for judgment notwithstanding verdict with respect to
Count III;
 
[3] The trial court erred in sentencing Defendant
without allowing him an opportunity to address the court as
required by H.R.P.P., Rule 32(a); and
 
[4] The sentence is illegal.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Corder's points of error as follows: 
(1) Regarding the jury instructions, Corder argues:
 
[I]n the absence of an election by the prosecution
specifying exactly what conduct was allegedly wrongful, if
the jury was being allowed to interpret the meaning of the
order, they should have properly been instructed that any
ambiguity must be resolved in Mr. Corder's favor. This
 should have been done, even if the prosecutor had made an
election as it was relevant to the issue of intent. Mr.
 Corder should not have been found guilty if he was being
charged with something that was ambiguously prohibited by
the order.
 
(Citations omitted.)
 
Corder does not otherwise argue that the jury was
 
improperly instructed on the issue of intent or the prosecution's
 
burden of proof in this case. The requested jury instruction,
 
entitled Defendant's Supplemental Instruction No. 1, read:
 
The law requires that a [court order] state with reasonable
clarity the act it proscribes and provide fixed standards
for adjudging guilt[, or the order is void for vagueness].
[Orders] must give a person of ordinary intelligence a
reasonable opportunity to know what conduct is prohibited so
that he or she may choose between lawful and unlawful
 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conduct. State v. Tripp, 71 Haw. 479, 482, 795 P.2d 280,
282 (1990).
If you find that the order for protection is ambiguous, you
must resolve any such ambiguity in favor of Mr. Corder.
STATE v. ALULI, 78 Haw. 317, 321 (1995); STATE v. BUCH, 83
Haw. 308, 327 (1996); STATE v. MAHOE, 88 Haw. 181, 184
(1998); STATE v. BAUTISTA, 86 Haw 207, 210 (1997); STATE v.
COELHO, 107 Haw. 273, 277 (App. 2005)
 
Corder argued, generally, that the Extended Order was
 
ambiguous and that this instruction was necessary to provide him
 
with due process of law. The DPA responded that an Arceo
 
instruction would be appropriate instead of Defendant's
 
Supplemental Instruction No. 1, that the Extended Order was
 
clear, and that the jurors could interpret the Extended Order
 
themselves. The Family Court denied Corder's requested jury
 
instruction, stating:
 
. . . the redacted protective order [] states what it
states. As to how the jury interprets, that's for the jury
but also for the attorneys. If they wish to persuade the
jury to adopt their, uh, respective interpretations, it's up
to the attorneys in their closing argument. Tie it in to
 the particular facts. And also the requisite state of mind. 
(Format altered.)
 
The Family Court approved the Arceo instruction, which
 
was given by agreement, and which stated the following:
 
COURT'S GENERAL INSTRUCTION NO. 35
 
8.02 UNANIMITY INSTRUCTION
 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the
 
purpose of showing that there is more than one act upon
which proof of an element of an offense may be based. In
 order for the prosecution to prove an element, all jurors
must unanimously agree that the same act has been proven
beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
We reject Corder's argument that the extended order for
 
protection was ambiguous. Moreover, the cases cited by Corder
 
address the issue of statutory construction, not purportedly
 
ambiguous court orders. Corder has failed to provide any
 
persuasive authority to support the requested instruction. The
 
Family Court's Arceo instruction properly instructed the jury on
 
the necessity of reaching a unanimous verdict on the same
 
underlying act. Accordingly, we conclude that the omission of
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the requested jury instruction did not render the jury 
instructions prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, 
or misleading. See State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 334, 141 
P.3d 974, 981 (2006). 
(2) Corder argues that there was no basis for finding
 
a violation as to the younger child, and also no violation as to
 the older child, who had the discretion to make contact with
 
Corder and had testified that contact was made by the older
 
child's initiation, except for the initial contact. Corder
 
argues that the school should be considered a neutral location
 
under the extended order for protection and that paragraph 4 of
 
the extended order, which prohibits Corder from coming within 100
 
feet of mother, should apply to the children. Corder claims that
 
the older child did not testify that he came within 100 feet of
 
the younger child at any time on January 19, 2007. This is
 
inaccurate because the older child testified that Corder came
 
within 30 to 40 feet of the younger child. In his reply brief,
 
Corder argues that on Defendant's Exhibit D-1, the older child
 
marked the locations of the younger child and Corder where they
 
stood nearest each other. Corder argues that this distance was
 
125 feet away, thus, more than 100 feet away. 
Regardless of how many feet Corder came within the two
 
children, the record on appeal shows that the older child told
 
Corder to leave and Corder refused. Also, the record contains
 
substantial evidence of Corder's proximity to the younger child's
 
school, to the older child, and to the younger child, sufficient
 
to support a finding of impermissible contact in violation of the
 
Extended Order. 
Therefore, viewing the evidence in the light most
 
favorable to the prosecution, we conclude that the Family Court
 
did not err in denying Corder's Motion for JNOV as to Count III.
 
(3) In the opening brief, Corder argues that his
 
statement to the Family Court at the initial sentencing hearing 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
held on October 18, 2007, could not be considered a fair
 
opportunity to be heard because it was made before the pre-
sentence investigation report was filed.3 In the reply brief,
 
Corder further argues that at the continued sentencing hearing
 held on November 19, 2007, he was not given a fair opportunity to
 
address the issue of his disposition or mitigation of punishment
 
because he was not invited to make his statement until after the
 
Family Court first announced the disposition.
 
"Allocution is the defendant's right to speak before 
sentence is imposed." State v. Chow, 77 Hawai
'i 241, 246, 883 
P.2d 663, 668 (App. 1994) (citation, brackets, and internal quotation marks omitted). The right of allocution is a right 
guaranteed under the due process clause, article I, section 5, of 
the Constitution of the State of Hawai
'i. State v. Schaefer, 117 
Hawai'i 490, 498, 184 P.3d 805, 813 (App. 2008). HRS § 706-604 
(1993 & Supp. 2006) states in relevant part: 
§ 706-604 Opportunity to be heard with respect to
sentence; notice of pre-sentence report; opportunity to
controvert or supplement; transmission of report to
department.  (1) Before imposing sentence, the court shall
afford a fair opportunity to the defendant to be heard on
the issue of the defendant's disposition.
(2) The court shall furnish to the defendant or the
defendant's counsel and to the prosecuting attorney a copy
of the report of any pre-sentence diagnosis or
psychological, psychiatric, or other medical examination and
afford fair opportunity, if the defendant or the prosecuting
attorney so requests, to controvert or supplement them.
 
Under HRS § 706-604(2), the defendant has a right to controvert
 
or supplement the pre-sentence investigation report, but the
 
statute is silent as to whether the defendant's opportunity to be
 
heard must occur entirely after receiving the report. Instead,
 
HRS § 706-604(1) provides that the court shall afford the
 
defendant a fair opportunity to be heard "[b]efore imposing
 
sentence[.]" 
3
 Corder waived the pre-sentence investigation report and objected
when the State requested that the court order a pre-sentence report.
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 32(a) 
further provides that "[b]efore suspending or imposing sentence, 
the court shall address the defendant personally and afford a 
fair opportunity to the defendant and defendant's counsel, if 
any, to make a statement and present any information in 
mitigation of punishment." At the initial sentencing hearing, 
the Family Court gave Corder the opportunity to make a statement. 
However, over Corder's objections, the court ordered the 
preparation of a pre-sentence investigation report before 
imposing Corder's sentence. Corder failed to identify any 
reasons why making his statement prior to the filing of the pre-
sentence investigation report did not constitute, at least in 
part, a fair opportunity to be heard before the Family Court 
imposed its sentence. 
In addition, at the continued sentencing hearing, as
 
the Family Court announced the granting of the State's motion for
 
consecutive sentence, Corder asked the court if he had the chance
 
to say something before he was sentenced. The court's response
 
was: "Of course, you can." Although this portion of the
 
November 29, 2007 hearing transcript has several "unintelligible"
 
entries, it is clear that the Family Court invited Corder to
 
offer anything else that he wished to submit at that time. 
Corder then gave a further uninterpreted statement to the court
 
that is memorialized in over seven transcript pages. After
 
Corder finished his statement, the court finished announcing
 
Corder's sentence: "Forthwith. Credit for time." After the
 
court asked if the parties had anything further to add, the
 
hearing was concluded, and the Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence was then entered. On appeal, Corder has not alleged
 
that he was unable to fully address issues related to his
 
disposition or that the court failed to consider his statement
 
prior to the conclusion of the sentencing hearing and the entry 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of his sentence. Rather, Corder alleges that the timing of his
 
statements rendered his sentence constitutionally infirm.
 
Based on the record in this case, we conclude that the
 
Family Court provided Corder a fair opportunity to be heard on
 
the mitigation of his sentencing and the issues related to his
 
disposition, and that the Family Court did not violate Corder's
 
right of allocution.
 
(4) In his opening brief, Corder challenges the two
 
consecutive terms of one-year imprisonment on the ground that HRS
 
§ 586-11(a)(1)(A) limits a jail sentence to 48 hours. However,
 
in his reply brief, Corder notes that he overlooked one of the
 
provisions in HRS § 586-11(a). He concedes to the legality of a
 
sentence of one-year imprisonment, pursuant to HRS § 586-11(a),
 
which provides, "Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 
limiting the discretion of the judge to impose additional
 
sanctions authorized in sentencing for a misdemeanor offense."
 
Pursuant to HRS § 586-11(a), a person who knowingly or
 
intentionally violates the order for protection is guilty of a
 
misdemeanor. According to HRS § 706-663 (1993), after
 
considering the factors set forth in HRS §§ 706-606 and 706-621,4
 
the court may sentence a person who has been convicted of a
 misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor to imprisonment for a definite
 
term to be fixed by the court and not to exceed one year. 
For multiple sentences of imprisonment, HRS § 706-668.5
 
(1993) provides:
 
(1) If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a
defendant at the same time, or if a term of imprisonment is
imposed on a defendant who is already subject to an
unexpired term of imprisonment, the terms may run
concurrently or consecutively. Multiple terms of
imprisonment imposed at the same time run concurrently
unless the court orders or the statute mandates that the
 terms run consecutively. Multiple terms of imprisonment 
4
 HRS § 706-621 (1993) sets forth the factors to be considered in
imposing a term of probation. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imposed at different times run consecutively unless the court
orders that the terms run concurrently.
(2) The court, in determining whether the terms
imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or
consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in
section 706-606. 
In State v. Smith, this court stated, "[t]here is no
 
requirement, however, that the court expressly recite its
 
findings on the record for each of the factors set forth in HRS
 
§ 706-606." 106 Hawai 'i 365, 379, 105 P.3d 242, 256 (App. 2004) 
(citation omitted). We further stated, "[a]bsent clear evidence
 to the contrary, it is presumed that a sentencing court which has
 
received a pre-sentence report and conducted the required
 
sentencing hearing has considered all the factors set forth in
 
HRS § 706-606 before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of
 
imprisonment." Id. (citation omitted). 
At the hearing on the State's sentencing motion, the
 
Family Court heard arguments from both parties and stated the
 
following prior to making its ruling:
 
The court has considered everything that has been
submitted to it including the PSI. The supplement.
(Unintelligible) letter and all arguments as well statements
made by [mother] and a –- others as well as the defendant
himself.
 
In terms of responding to a motion for consecutive
sentencing the court can also consider . . . charges against
the defendant to which we have the defendant on felony
probation but also more importantly we have him having been
sentenced sometime in –- in 2006 for protective order
violation charges.
In that for that matter he was given 365 days jail
with credit for time which involves the protective order
concerning himself and [mother] . . . .
Including in that was also the harassment by stalking
which also involved [mother].
So we have a situation where the history of the
defendant involving [mother] in terms of whether or not is
he a good candidate or poor prospect for rehabilitation the
court will find that defendant's prospect for rehabilitation
is poor.
In looking at the letters submitted to the court and
–- and listening to the arguments presented to the court the
court is also struck by the lack of remorse on the
defendant's part.
Therefore the court will grant the motion for
consecutive sentence with respect to FC-CR No. 7-1-1080 for
Count 2 and Count 3.
 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Corder does not present any legal argument as to
 
how the Family Court abused its discretion, nor does he cite to
 
any part of the record demonstrating that the Family Court did
 
not consider the factors listed under HRS § 706-606. Finally, he
 
admits that he failed to object to the consecutive imprisonment
 
terms in the proceedings below. 
Based on the record before us, we conclude that the 
Family Court did not abuse its discretion by imposing two 
consecutive terms of one-year imprisonment for Counts II and III. 
See State v. Reis, 115 Hawai 'i 79, 83, 165 P.3d 980, 984 (2007). 
For these reasons, the Family Court's November 29, 2007
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 25, 2010. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9 