FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
---o0o--­
BERT YOGI and DARNELL YOGI,
Plaintiffs-Appellees
v.
 
HAWAII MEDICAL SERVICE ASSOCIATION,
Defendant-Appellant
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-99, JANE DOES 1-99, DOE ENTITIES
1-20, AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10,
Defendants
 
NO. 29145
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0147)
 
AUGUST 27, 2010
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, FOLEY, and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Hawaii Medical Service Association
 
(HMSA) appeals from the Order Denying HMSA's Motion to Compel
 
Arbitration (Order) filed on April 9, 2008 in the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1 By way of its motion
 
below, HMSA sought to compel arbitration of claims brought by
 Plaintiffs-Appellees Bert Yogi and Darnell Yogi (the Yogis) for
 breach of contract, bad faith, intentional infliction of
 emotional distress (IIED), and negligent infliction of emotional
 distress (NIED). These claims stem from the Yogis' allegations
 that, over a period of time, HMSA denied and delayed coverage for
 a medical procedure recommended by Bert Yogi's physician.
 
1
 The Honorable Sabrina S. McKenna presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, HMSA contends the circuit court erred in
 
denying its motion to compel arbitration because the Yogis'
 
claims are within the scope of an arbitration provision contained
 in an HMSA Preferred Provider Plan. For the reasons set forth
 below, we conclude that the circuit court was correct in denying
 HMSA's motion to compel arbitration.
I. Background
A. Request For Preauthorization of Medical Procedure
 
The parties do not dispute the facts in this case. In
 
1997, while working, Bert Yogi (Mr. Yogi) sustained injuries to
 
his shoulder, neck, and back which resulted in multiple surgeries
 between 1998 and mid-2003. Over the years, Mr. Yogi received
 various medications to alleviate the pain.
 
In February 2005, while Mr. Yogi was enrolled in HMSA's
 
Preferred Provider Plan for Hawaii Employer-Union Health Benefits
 Trust Fund (Plan), his physician, Dr. Endicott, submitted a
 preauthorization request to HMSA for an intrathecal infusion pump
 to treat Mr. Yogi.
2 HMSA denied coverage, initially on the basis
 
that Mr. Yogi was covered by workers' compensation insurance and
 then later, after being informed the workers' compensation
 insurer had denied coverage, on the basis that, inter alia, the
 intrathecal infusion pump was not medically necessary.
 
In June 2005, Dr. Endicott requested that HMSA
 
reconsider its denial of preauthorization for the intrathecal
 infusion pump. HMSA upheld its denial.
 
In January 2006, Mr. Yogi appealed HMSA's denial under
 
an internal appeal process set out in the Plan. Later that
 month, HMSA issued its internal appeal decision denying coverage.
 
2
 HMSA states that "[a]n intrathecal pump consists of a programmable
pump that is surgically implanted in the abdominal area and connected to a
catheter that is inserted into the intrathecal space of the spine. The pump
sends morphine directly into the cerebrospinal fluid that surrounds the spinal
cord. The morphine blocks the neurotransmitters that the brain perceives as
pain."
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3In February 2006, Mr. Yogi sought external review by
initiating a proceeding with the Hawai# i Insurance Commissioner. 
Such external review was provided for under the terms of the
Plan, as required pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §
432E-6 (2005 Repl.).  A hearing was held before a three-member
panel selected by the Insurance Commissioner and, in July 2006,
the Insurance Commissioner issued a decision reversing HMSA's
denial of coverage for the intrathecal infusion pump.  Mr. Yogi
thereafter underwent the procedure for placement of the
intrathecal infusion pump.
B. The Instant Lawsuit
On January 23, 2008, the Yogis initiated this action in
the circuit court, alleging that HMSA acted unreasonably,
wantonly, and oppressively in denying the preauthorization
request for the intrathecal infusion pump.  In their complaint,
the Yogis assert claims for breach of contract, bad faith, IIED
and NIED, and seek damages.
On February 13, 2008, HMSA filed a Motion to Compel
Arbitration.  After a hearing on March 18, 2008, the circuit
court issued its April 9, 2008 Order denying the motion, stating
in relevant part:
Defendant failed to identify any provision in the Plan for
disputes involving bad faith claims, and a provision for
further remedies such as those Plaintiffs are pursuing in
this case is also absent from the clause pertaining to a
review by the panel.  Chapter 8 of the Plan does not,
therefore, mandate arbitration of Plaintiffs' claims herein.
On May 7, 2008, HMSA filed a Notice of Appeal from the
Order denying the motion to compel arbitration.
II.  Standards of Review
A. Motion to Compel Arbitration
We review a ruling on a motion to compel arbitration de
novo and based on the same standards that apply to a summary
judgment ruling.  The Hawai# i Supreme Court has articulated the
applicable standards as follows:FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The trial court can only decide, as a matter of law, whether
to compel the parties to arbitrate their dispute if there is
no genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of
a valid agreement to arbitrate. See Par-Knit Mills, Inc. v.
 Stockbridge Fabrics Co., 636 F.2d 51, 54 (3d Cir.1980).
Therefore, we hold that the standard of review applicable to
the trial court's decision in this case should be that which
 is applicable to a motion for summary judgment. Accordingly,
we review this case de novo, using the same standard
employed by the trial court and based upon the same
evidentiary materials "as were before [it] in determination
of the motion."
 
Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's Medical Center, 73 Haw. 433,
 
439-40, 834 P.2d 1294, 1298 (1992) (citations omitted). See
 
also, Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 231, 921 P.2d 
146, 151 (1996); Peters v. Aipa, 118 Hawai' i 308, 312-13, 188 
P.3d 822, 826-27 (App. 2008).
B. Contract Interpretation
 
The standard of review applicable to the circuit
 
court's interpretation of the arbitration agreement is as
 follows:
 
As a general rule, the construction and legal effect
to be given a contract is a question of law freely
reviewable by an appellate court. The determination whether
 a contract is ambiguous is likewise a question of law that
is freely reviewable on appeal. These principles apply
equally to appellate review of the construction and legal
effect to be given a contractual agreement to arbitrate.
 
Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 239, 921 P.2d at 159 (internal quotation 
marks and citations omitted).
III. Discussion
 
As set forth by the Hawai' i Supreme Court: 
"when presented with a motion to compel arbitration, the
court is limited to answering two questions: 1) whether anarbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) ifso, whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable
under such agreement." Ko' olau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's 
Med. Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 445, 834 P.2d 1294, 1300 (1992); see also Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 247, 96
P.3d 261, 267 (2004) ("Even though arbitration has a
favored place, there still must be an underlying agreementbetween the parties to arbitrate." (Citation and internalquotation marks omitted.)). 
Hawaii Medical Ass'n v. Hawaii Medical Service Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i 
77, 91, 148 P.3d 1179, 1193 (2006).
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, there is no dispute that an arbitration provision
 
is contained as part of Chapter 8 of the Plan. The crux of this
 
case, therefore, is whether the claims asserted by the Yogis in
 this action come within the scope of that arbitration provision. 
Because there are no genuine issues of material fact and the
 issue presented turns on contract interpretation, we decide the
 issue on appeal as a matter of law.
A.	 The Relevant Provisions Of The Plan
 
Given that our "principal objective is to ascertain and
 
effectuate the intention of the parties as manifested by the
 
contract in its entirety", Brown, 82 Hawai' i at 240, 921 P.2d at 
160 (citation omitted), and to give proper context to the
 arbitration provision in this case, we set out all of the
 pertinent parts of Chapter 8 of the Plan.
 
Chapter 8: Dispute Resolution
 
. . . .
 
Your Request for an Appeal
 
Writing Us to Request an Appeal
If you wish to dispute a determination made by HMSA related
to coverage, reimbursement, any other decision or action by
HMSA, or any other matter related to this Agreement, you
must request an appeal. Your request must be in writing
unless you are requesting an expedited appeal. We must
 receive it within one year from the date of the action or
decision you are contesting. In the case of coverage or
reimbursement disputes, this is one year from the date we
first informed you of the denial or limitation of your
claim, or of the denial of coverage for any requested
service or supply.
 
. . . .
 We will respond to your appeal within 60 calendar days of our
receipt of your appeal.
 
Expedited Appeal
You may request expedited appeal if application of the time
periods for appeals above may:
 
P	 Seriously jeopardize your life or health,
P	 Seriously jeopardize your ability to gain maximum
functioning, or
P	 Subject you to severe pain that cannot be adequatelymanaged without the care or treatment that is thesubject of the appeal. 
. . . .
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
What Your Request Must Include
To be recognized as an appeal, your request must include all
of the following information:
 
P The date of your request.Your name. The date of the service we denied or date of the contested action or decision (or in the case ofprecertification for a service or supply, the date ofour denial of coverage for such service or supply).The subscriber number from your member card.The provider name.A description of facts related to your request and whyyou believe our action or decision was in error.Any other information relating to your appealincluding written comments, documents, and records youwould like us to review. P P 
P 
P P 
P 
. . . .
 
If You Disagree with Our Appeal Decision
 
Request for Arbitration
If you disagree with HMSA's appeals decision, you must
either 1) request arbitration before a mutually selected
arbitrator, or 2) request a review by a panel appointed by
the Hawaii State Insurance Commissioner
.
 
. . . . You must have fully complied with HMSA's appeals
procedures described above and we must receive your request
for arbitration within one year of the decision rendered on
appeal. In arbitration, one person (the arbitrator) reviews
the positions of both parties and makes the final decision
to resolve the disagreement. No other parties may be joined
in the arbitration. The arbitration is binding and the
parties waive their right to a court trial and jury.
 
. . . .
 . . . . The questions for the arbitrator shall be whether we
were in violation of law, or acted arbitrarily,
capriciously, or in abuse of our discretion. The
 arbitration shall be conducted in accord with the Federal
 Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. §1 et seq., and such other
arbitration rules as both parties agree upon.
 
. . . .
 Request for Review by Insurance Commissioner
You may request review by a panel selected by the Hawaii
Insurance Commissioner by submitting a request for review
within 60 days of the date of HMSA's appeals decision to the
Insurance Commissioner at:
 
. . . .
 If your request for review is accepted by the Commissioner,
the Commissioner will appoint a three member panel composed
of a representative from another health plan, a provider not
involved in your care, and a representative from the
Commissioner's office. A hearing will be conducted within
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
60 days and the panel will issue a decision within 30 days
of the hearing.
 
You may request expedited review by the Insurance
Commissioner if application of the above time frames may:
 
P	 Seriously jeopardize your life or health,Seriously jeopardize your ability to gain maximumfunctioning, orSubject you to severe pain that cannot be adequatelymanaged without the care or treatment that is thesubject of the appeal. P	 
P	 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In addition to the above, Chapter 10 of the Plan
 
contains a provision that the Yogis contend is relevant. It
 
states:
 
Chapter 10: General Provisions
 
. . . .
 
Dues and Terms of Coverage
 
. . . .
 
Governing Law
To the extent not superseded by the laws of the United
States, this coverage will be construed in accord with and
governed by the laws of the state of Hawaii. Any action
brought because of a claim against this coverage will be
litigated in the state or federal courts located in the
state of Hawaii and in no other.
 
(Emphasis added.)
B.	 Scope Of The Arbitration Provision
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated: 
"Although the public policy underlying Hawai' i law 
strongly favors arbitration over litigation, the mere
existence of an arbitration agreement does not mean that the
parties must submit to an arbitrator disputes which are
outside the scope of the arbitration agreement." Brown v.
 KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 244, 921 P.2d 146, 164
(1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
"What issues, if any, are beyond the scope of a contractual
agreement to arbitrate depends on the wording of the
 contractual agreement to arbitrate." Rainbow Chevrolet,
 
Inc. v. Asahi Jyuken (USA), Inc., 78 Hawai' i 107, 113, 890
P.2d 694, 700 (App.1995), superseded by statute as stated
 in, Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107 Hawai' i 386, 114 P.3d 892 (2005)
(emphasis added).
 
Hawaii Medical Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 92, 148 P.3d at 1194 
(emphasis in original).
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Particularly important in this case, "a contract 
'should be construed as a whole and its meaning determined from 
the entire context and not from any particular word, phrase, or clause.'" Hawaii Medical Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 92, 148 P.3d at 
1194 (quoting Hawaiian Isles Enters., Inc. v. City & County of Honolulu, 76 Hawai' i 487, 491, 879 P.2d 1070, 1074 (1994)). 
Further, "in interpreting contracts, ambiguous terms are construed against the party who drafted the contract." Luke v. 
Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 249, 96 P.3d 261, 269 
(2004) (refusing to enforce an ambiguous arbitration clause despite public policy favoring arbitration). 
Based on our reading of the Plan, it does not manifest
 
an intent by the parties to submit to arbitration the Yogis'
 claims for breach of contract, bad faith, IIED or NIED, which
 seek money damages. Rather, considering all of its relevant
 parts, we construe the Plan to mean that arbitration is one of
 two options an enrollee may select –- arbitration or review by a
 panel appointed by the Insurance Commissioner -- to challenge or
 dispute an HMSA determination, action or decision that the
 enrollee seeks to change. At best, the arbitration provision is
 ambiguous.
1. Chapter 8 of the Plan
 
The starting point for our interpretation of the Plan
 
is the sentence: "[i]f you disagree with HMSA's appeals decision,
 you must either 1) request arbitration before a mutually selected
 arbitrator, or 2) request a review by a panel appointed by the
 Hawaii State Insurance Commissioner." (Emphasis added).  Given
 this language, the scope of any potential arbitration is based on
 the matters or issues that come within HMSA's appeal process
 under the Plan.
3
 
3
 While we focus on the specific language of the arbitration provision
in this case, there are similarities to the decision in Hawaii Medical Ass'n. 
There, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that an arbitration provision contained
in an HMSA Participating Physician Agreement was triggered after a claim ordispute had been through an administrative appeal process set out by the
(continued...)
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In turn, the matters or issues within HMSA's appeal
 
process are delineated by the following language: "[i]f you wish
 
to dispute a determination made by HMSA related to coverage,
 reimbursement, any other decision or action by HMSA, or any other
 matter related to this Agreement, you must request an appeal." 
(Emphasis added.) HMSA argues that this language is very broad
 and that the arbitration provision applies to any dispute related
 to coverage or to any other matter related to the Plan. We do
 not read this provision or the Plan so broadly. This language,
 when properly construed along with the rest of Chapter 8, does
 not convey an intent that HMSA's appeal process encompasses the
 type of claims asserted in this case, seeking damages and
 alleging a series of actions over time denying and delaying
 approval of a medical procedure. In this action, the Yogis do
 not seek to have HMSA change its decision about covering the
 intrathecal infusion pump because that question has already been
 addressed by the review panel and Mr. Yogi has received the
 medical procedure. Rather, the Yogis bring this action seeking
 damages for HMSA's alleged conduct over the approximate year and
 a half period from when Dr. Endicott sought preauthorization for
 the intrathecal infusion pump to when Mr. Yogi was able to
 undergo the procedure.
 
A fair reading of Chapter 8 is that the appeal process
 
is intended to deal with a challenge or "dispute" to a
 "determination", "decision" or "action" by HMSA in order that an
 enrollee may seek to alter or change that determination, decision
 
3(...continued)
agreement. Hawaii Medical Ass'n, 113 Hawai' i at 93, 148 P.3d at 1195. Because 
the administrative appeal process was limited to disputes between an
individual participating physician and HMSA that arose from a decision by
HMSA, the arbitration provision was similarly limited. Id. Thus, the court
held that collective claims by groups of participating physicians allegingunfair methods of competition were not within the scope of the arbitrationprovision. Id. at 94, 148 P.3d at 1196. The court agreed with the plaintiffsthat "the necessary system-wide relief could never be granted in an individualproceeding where the specific issue being addressed is one isolated decisionor a series of decisions relating to one physician . . . . [T]he Agreement'sadministrative remedies by design are not adequate to provide relief for thetypes of claims alleged here." Id. (Brackets and ellipsis in original.) 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or action. Indeed, under the appeal process, a request for an
 
appeal must be received by HMSA within a year from the date of
 "the action or decision you are contesting." (Emphasis added.) 
Further, the 60 day time period for HMSA to respond to an appeal,
 as well as the expedited appeal procedure allowing for an even
 quicker appeal if the normal appeal period will seriously
 jeopardize the person's life or health, seriously jeopardize the
 person's ability to gain maximum functioning, or subject the
 person to severe pain, all suggest that the appeal process is not
 intended to deal with claims such as bad faith, IIED or NIED,
 which seek money damages.
 
Similarly, the mandatory contents of an appeal
 
"request", as detailed in Chapter 8, focus on setting out the
 specific action or decision by HMSA that is being challenged. 
Under Chapter 8, "[t]o be recognized as an appeal" the request
 must contain information including: "[t]he date of the service we
 denied", or the "date of the contested action or decision", or
 the date of HMSA's denial of coverage for precertification for a
 service or supply; the provider's name; and "[a] description of
 facts related to your request and why you believe our action or
 decision was in error." (Emphasis added.) Requiring this type
 of information indicates that the intended scope of an internal
 appeal -– and therefore the arbitration provision -- is not as
 broad as HMSA contends and it is not contemplated that the claims
 for damages brought by the Yogis would be part of the appeal
 p r o c e s s .
 
The arbitration provision itself further suggests its
 
limited scope. As noted above, if an enrollee disagrees with
 HMSA's appeal decision, the enrollee: "must either 1) request
 arbitration before a mutually selected arbitrator, or 2) request
 a review by a panel appointed by the Hawaii State Insurance
 Commissioner." (Emphasis added.) Read in its entirety and
 within the context of Chapter 8, this language could reasonably
 be interpreted to mean that the scope of issues to be addressed
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in arbitration is similar to the scope of issues to be addressed
 
in a panel review.4 The scope of panel reviews, in turn, is set
 
out under the statutory scheme provided by HRS Chapter 432E,
 entitled "Patients' Bill of Rights and Responsibilities Act."
 
The parties agree that panel reviews are done pursuant
 
to HRS § 432E-6. Under HRS § 432E-6(a), a panel reviews a
 managed care plan's final internal determination of a
 "complaint", and a complaint is defined as "an expression of
 dissatisfaction, either oral or written." HRS § 432E-1. The
 three-member panels consist of "a representative from a managed
 care plan not involved in the complaint, a provider licensed to
 practice and practicing medicine in Hawaii not involved in the
 complaint, and the commissioner or the commissioner's designee." 
The panel is authorized to "issue an order affirming, modifying,
 or reversing the decision" and to award reasonable attorney's
 fees and costs. HRS § 432E-6(a) and (e). Under this statutory
 scheme, given the composition of a panel and the scope of its
 authority, such panels are not established to consider, nor are
 they authorized to award, damages. Review panels under HRS
 Chapter 432E would not address claims such as breach of contract,
 bad faith, IIED or NIED.
 
In sum, Chapter 8 of the Plan does not establish an 
intent by the parties to have the claims in this action subject to the arbitration provision. Rather, a reasonable reading of Chapter 8 leads to the contrary conclusion. At a minimum, there is ambiguity under Chapter 8 regarding the intent and meaning of the arbitration provision. As the drafter of the Plan, ambiguous terms are construed against HMSA. See Luke, 105 Hawai' i at 249, 
96 P.3d at 269. 
4
 Even though it is possible this language could be read another way,
it is ambiguous. Moreover, adding further ambiguity, the arbitration
provision goes on to state that "[t]he questions for the arbitrator shall be
whether we were in violation of law, or acted arbitrarily, capriciously, or in
abuse of our discretion." This language does not indicate that an arbitrator
may address the question of damages, and its intended meaning is far from
clear. Simply put, this language is also ambiguous.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Chapter 10 of the Plan
 
Chapter 10 of the Plan covers the following areas:
 
"Eligibility for Coverage", "When Coverage Begins", "When
 
Coverage Ends", "Continued Coverage", "Confidential Information"
 and "Dues and Terms of Coverage". Under the section entitled
 "Dues and Terms of Coverage," there is a provision entitled
 "Governing Law". As noted above, the Yogis contend the
 "Governing Law" provision creates further ambiguity as to the
 intent of the arbitration provision contained in Chapter 8. The
 "Governing Law" provision states:
 
Dues and Terms of Coverage
 
. . . .
 
Governing Law
To the extent not superseded by the laws of the United
States, this coverage will be construed in accord with and
governed by the laws of the state of Hawaii. Any action
brought because of a claim against this coverage will be
litigated in the state or federal courts located in the
state of Hawaii and in no other.
 
(Emphasis added.) Because this provision speaks to litigating
 
claims against the Plan's coverage in Hawaii's state or federal
 courts, it undermines HMSA's argument that arbitration is
 required for any dispute as to coverage or "any other matter"
 related to the Plan. 
HMSA relies on some of the headings within Chapter 10
 
to contend that the "Governing Law" language applies only where
 HMSA denies coverage because of lack of eligibility, termination
 of coverage, or non-payment of dues -- in other words, where
 coverage as a whole does not exist. We disagree. First, the
 headings, structure and language of Chapter 10 do not support
 HMSA's argument. Second, such a reading is inconsistent with the
 language of the "Governing Law" provision itself. The initial
 sentence states "this coverage will be construed in accord with .
 . . the laws of the state of Hawaii." If, as HMSA argues, this
 provision applied only where coverage did not exist at all (i.e.
 for lack of eligibility, termination of coverage, or non-payment
 of dues), there would be no need to "construe" the coverage. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Most importantly, the second sentence applies to "[a]ny action
 
brought because of a claim against this coverage" (emphasis
 added), and not just claims involving lack of eligibility,
 termination of coverage, or non-payment of dues.
 
The "Governing Law" provision in Chapter 10 clearly
 
contemplates litigation in Hawaii's state or federal courts for
 claims against coverage, and it therefore reflects that the
 arbitration provision in Chapter 8 is not as broad as HMSA
 contends. We agree with the Yogis that the "Governing Law"
 provision adds to the already existing ambiguity of the
 arbitration provision.
IV. Conclusion
 
We conclude that the Plan does not reflect an intent by
 
the parties to arbitrate the claims asserted in this action,
 
including the relief sought for damages. Alternatively, at a
 minimum, the arbitration provision is ambiguous. We therefore
 affirm the circuit court's denial of HMSA's motion to compel
 arbitration.
 
Charles A. Price
 
(Koshiba Agena & Kubota)
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Rafael G. Del Castillo
 
(Arleen D. Jouxson with
him on the briefs)
(Jouxson-Meyers & Del Castillo)
for Plaintiffs-Appellees
 
13
 