 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29587
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
HATEM A. EID, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KANE'OHE DIVISION
 
(HPD Traffic No. 1DTC-07-045030)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Hatem A. Eid (Eid) was paced by a 
Honolulu police officer as traveling forty miles over the posted 
speed limit and cited with Excessive Speeding, in violation of 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C–105(a)(1) (2007). Before 
1
trial, Eid sought to compel discovery of seventeen items  and to 
1
 Eid's motion to compel discovery, filed January 25, 2008, asked
the district court to order the prosecution to disclose:
 
(a) HPD departmental policies and procedures for
conducting speeding citations; 
(b) The HPD manual for speeding citations; 
(c) The make and model of the car or motorcycle; 
(d) The age of the car or motorcycle; 
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(...continued)
(e)
 
(f)
 
(g)
 
(h)
 
(i)
 
(j)
 
(k)
 The maintenance records, for one year prior and one
year after the date(s) of any alleged offense(s), for
any device used to calibrate the speedometer/odometer
of any motor vehicle used to pace [Eid’ s] motor
vehicle;
 
(1)
 The police maintenance records for any other speed
measuring device used in this case, for the year prior
and one year after the dates of any alleged
offense(s), done on any vehicle alleged to have paced
[Eid's] speed;
 
(m)
 The manufacturer's operators and maintenance manuals
for any other speed measuring device used in this
case, for the year prior and one year after the dates
of any alleged offense(s), done on any vehicle alleged
to have paced [Eid's] speed;
 
(n)
 The speed check device manufacturer's established
procedures for verifying and validating that the
instrument was in proper working order;
 
(o)
 Written verification that said manufacturer's established
 procedures were followed;
 
(p)
 Written verification that the speed check device or
The dates and description of repair work done on the
car or motorcycle during the period of any applicable
speedometer check;
 
The age of each tire on the car or motorcycle and any
information regarding maintenance of the tires;
 
The speed check card, including:
 i. The name of the auto shop used; 
ii. The name of the person who conducted the speed
check; 
iii. A description of the procedures used to test thespeedometer; 
iv. Any other records regarding the speed check. 
The maintenance records for any vehicle alleged to
have paced [Eid's] speed for the period of any speed
checks (in particular, the records relating to the
tires and drive train of the vehicle) for one year
prior to and one year after the date(s) of the alleged
offense;
 
Any certification from any government or nongovernmental
agency, including any speedometer/odometer check, done on
any vehicle alleged to pace [Eid's] speed;
 
Any speed reading for [Eid's] vehicle;
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exclude evidence of the officer's speedometer reading and the
 
"speed checks" done to verify the accuracy of his speedometer. 
The District Court of the First Circuit (district court)2
 
rejected his requests and found him guilty on December 19, 2008.
 
Eid appealed, arguing that the district court erred (1)
 
by refusing to compel discovery "where the requested items were
 material to challenge the admissibility of the alleged speed
 
reading" and (2) by denying his motion in limine to exclude the
 
speedometer reading and speed-check evidence.
 
In its January 26, 2012 decision in this case, the 
Hawaii Supreme Court concluded Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai'i (State) "provided adequate assurances that the results of 
the speed checks were reliable" and there was "a sufficient foundation to admit the speed check evidence, and consequently 
the speedometer reading in this case." State v. Eid, No. SCWC­
29587, 2012 WL 503231, at *16, *17 (Haw. Jan. 26, 2012). The supreme court remanded this case to the ICA "for a determination 
of whether the district court abused its discretion in denying 
Eid's motion to compel." Id. at *17. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant law, we conclude that the district court did
 
not abuse its discretion in denying Eid's motion to compel.
 
(...continued)
 
machine was in proper working order;
 
(q)	 Records of regular maintenance, servicing, upkeep,
repair, modification and/or calibration of the speed
check machine or device performed by the manufacturer
(or the manufacturer's duly trained and licensed
representative), a year before and a year after the
dates of any alleged offenses(s), as well as official
maintenance, repair, modification, servicing, and/or
calibration manuals for the device in question
prepared by and/or relied upon by the manufacturer (or
the manufacturer's duly trained and licensed
representative).
 
2
 The Honorable David W. Lo presided.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Because Excessive Speeding is a criminal traffic 
offense and a petty misdemeanor, discovery in Eid's case was 
discretionary. Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rules 
16.1 and 16(d). Discretionary discovery, "may be permitted by the trial judge '[u]pon a showing of materiality and if the 
request is reasonable,' but only to the extent authorized by HRPP 
Rule 16 for felony cases." State v. Lo 116 Hawai' i 23, 26, 169 
P.3d 975, 978 (2007) (citing State ex rel. Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 309, 788 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1990)). Under HRPP Rule 
16(b)(1), the prosecutor in felony cases shall disclose, among 
other things, 
(iv) any books, papers, documents, photographs, or
tangible objects which the prosecutor intends to introduce
. . . or which are material to the preparation of the
defense and are specifically designated in writing by
defense counsel;
 
. . . .
 
(vii) any material or information which tends to
negate the guilt of the defendant as to the offense charged
or would tend to reduce the defendant's punishment therefor.
 
Eid has maintained that discovery was necessary to
 
obtain information to challenge the accuracy of the officer's
 
speed readings, which if shown to be inaccurate would "tend[] to
 
negate the guilt of the defendant[.]"
 
On appeal Eid must establish that the district court's 
failure to order discovery worked to his substantial detriment. 
See State v. Wong, 97 Hawai' i 512, 517, 40 P.3d 914, 919 (2002) 
(providing the "abuse of discretion" standard of review). "The burden of establishing abuse of discretion is on appellant, and a 
strong showing is required to establish it." Id. 
Eid did not make a prima facie showing that the speed
 
check evidence or speedometer reading were unreliable, and any
 
claim on his part that the requested discovery would tend to
 
negate his guilt or was material to his defense was speculative. 
Balancing the record produced in this case with Eid's assertion
 
that the undisclosed information could--but might not--
demonstrate that the officer's speed reading was grossly
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inaccurate, we conclude that Eid failed to meet his burden of
 
showing that the district court's denial of discovery
 
substantially prejudiced his defense.
 
During five days of hearings on the motion to compel,
 
two mechanics Roy and Duane Ozaki testified regarding the
 
procedures and equipment they used to test speedometers for HPD
 
officers' vehicles, including the vehicle in this case. The
 
defense cross-examined them and introduced its own expert
 
mechanic to testify about the possibility of errors. Even if we
 
added the margin of error which was measured in the citing
 
officer's speedometer, the margin of error found in the Ozakis'
 
dynamometer (the device used to conduct the speed check), and the
 
errors which the mechanics hypothesized might come from changes
 
in tire size due to wear and improper inflation, that number
 
would not be large enough to create doubt about whether Eid was
 
speeding excessively, given that he was paced at forty miles over
 
the posted speed limit and ten miles over the limit provided in
 
HRS § 291C-105.
 
Although the district court refused to compel
 
discovery, it allowed the defense to elicit testimony regarding
 
"the applicable speed check card covering the date of citation,
 
any repairs to the speedometer made since the date of the
 
applicable speed check and any change in tire size made since the
 
date of the applicable speed check." The defense did question
 
the officer on these matters at trial. The district court's
 
order indicates that the judge considered the mechanics'
 
testimony on factors affecting the speedometer's reliability and
 
gave Eid the opportunity to obtain information by means that
 
would not unreasonably burden the prosecution.
 
In the context of the whole record in this case, we
 
cannot conclude that Eid demonstrated that the district court
 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
 
principles of law to his substantial detriment by denying his
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion to compel discovery. Wong, 97 Hawai' i at 517, 40 P.3d at 
919.
 
Therefore,
 
The December 19, 2008 judgment of the District Court of
 
the First Circuit, Kane' ohe Division is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 30, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 