NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. 29569
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
SARASOTA CCM, INC., a Florida corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. ROBERT LEVINE, Defendant-Appellant, v.
SARASOTA CCM, INC., a Florida corporation, et al.,
Counterdefendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-160K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.) 
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Appellant Robert M. 
Levine (
Levine), a Hawai 'i resident, appeals from Findings of 
Fact and Conclusions of Law, filed December 8, 2008, and the 
Judgment entered January 21, 2009, in the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit (Circuit Court) in favor of Plaintiff/Counterclaim­
Defendant/Appellee Sarasota CCM, Inc. (Sarasota), a Florida 
corporation.1 
On appeal, Levine maintains that: (1) the Circuit Court 
erred in finding that the senior lienholder foreclosed on its 
senior deed of trust, thereby resulting in the loss of Sarasota's 
1 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
junior security interest in certain real property located in
 
Utah; (2) the Circuit Court reached the wrong conclusion in its
 
application of Utah law; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in
 
finding that there was no evidence to support Levine's
 allegations of fraud.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Levine's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Circuit Court's findings that the senior
 
lienholder foreclosed on the Utah property, rendering Sarasota an
 unsecured junior lienholder, was not clearly erroneous. The
 Circuit Court's finding concerning the Utah foreclosure is
 
supported, inter alia, by the following evidence presented at
 trial: (1) on June 7, 2001, the senior lienholder duly recorded
 
a Notice of Default on its senior deed of trust, announcing that
 the senior beneficiary "does hereby elect to cause the trust
 property to be sold to satisfy the obligations secured thereby";
 (2)
 in addition to specifying that the principal amount owing on
 
the senior note was $1,495,947.49
 plus interest, the Notice of
 
Default stated that "[t]here is also due all of the expenses and
 fees of these foreclosure proceedings"; (3) Levine testified that
 he received a notice of foreclosure; (4) Levine testified that,
 in anticipation of foreclosure, he attempted to sell the Utah
 property but was unsuccessful; and (5) Levine, himself, testified
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the first deed of trust had indeed been foreclosed. Levine
 
did not object to any of the aforementioned evidence or offer any
 rebuttal evidence.
 
There was also substantial evidence presented to
 
support the Circuit Court's finding that the foreclosure sale
 resulted in the loss of Sarasota's security interest in the Utah
 property. Under the applicable Utah Trust Deed Act, proceeds
 from a trustee's foreclosure sale are applied "first, to the
 costs and expenses of exercising the power of sale and of the
 sale, . . . second, to payment of the obligation secured by the
 trust deed, and the balance, if any, to the person or persons
 legally entitled to the proceeds." Utah Code Ann. § 57-1­29(1)(a) (West 2008). As a junior lienholder, Sarasota's
 predecessor-in-interest, Keybank, was entitled to excess proceeds
 from the sale of the Utah Property. See Randall v. Valley Title,
 
681 P.2d 219, 221 (Utah 1984) (acknowledging that the junior
 lienholder was entitled to excess proceeds at the conclusion of
 sale under a trust deed because, "[a]lthough § 57-1-29 does not
 specifically mention junior trust deeds or lienholders, the
 surplus from the sale stands in the place of the foreclosed real
 estate and is subject to the same liens and interests that were
 attached to it"). Plaintiff's Exhibit 2, a statement of Levine's
 Keybank account received by Sarasota in December of 2003,
 indicated that the last payment made on the account was made on
 January 31, 2001, and that no excess proceeds from the
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreclosure sale were credited to Levine's account with KeyBank. 
Again, Levine presented no rebuttal evidence. 
After carefully reviewing the record, and in light of
 
the evidence presented, we conclude that the Circuit Court's
 finding that the senior deed of trust had been foreclosed,
 rendering Sarasota an unsecured creditor, was not clearly
 erroneous.
 
(2) Levine further argues that Sarasota should not
 
have been deemed a sold-out junior lienholder because Sarasota
 failed to prove that foreclosure of the senior deed of trust took
 place and that Sarasota's junior security interest in the Secured
 Property had been exhausted. Thus, Levine argues, the Circuit
 Court reached the wrong conclusion in its application of Utah law
 because it applied the law to an erroneous finding. Levine
 asserts that, instead, the following conclusions should have been
 reached: (1) Sarasota was bound by the "one-action" rule; (2)
 Sarasota failed to comply with the statute of limitations in the
 Utah deficiency statute; and (3) further noncompliance with the
 Utah deficiency statute resulted from Sarasota's failure to prove
 the fair market value of the Secured Property as required by the
 statute.
 
As discussed above, we conclude that the Circuit
 
Court's finding that the senior deed of trust had been
 foreclosed, rendering Sarasota an unsecured junior lienholder,
 was not clearly erroneous. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Utah case law is clear that a sold-out junior
 
lienholder, i.e., a junior lienholder whose security interest in
 
real property was extinguished through a foreclosure sale on a
 
senior interest, is not bound by the "one-action" rule. See,
 e.g., City Consumer Services, Inc. v. Peters, 815 P.2d 234, 236­37 (Utah 1991). 
Levine also asserts that the instant action is barred

 
because Sarasota failed to seek recovery within the three-month
 statute of limitations provided in the deficiency statute of the
 Utah Trust Deed Act, codified as Utah Code Ann. § 57-1-32 (West
 2001). In G. Adams Ltd. P'ship v. Durbano, 782 P.2d 962, 963-64
 (Utah Ct. App. 1989), however, the Utah Court of Appeals declined
 to apply the three-month limitation to a non-foreclosing junior,
 reasoning that the statute only applied to the creditor who
 foreclosed. Consistent with the Utah case law, the Circuit Court
 concluded that Sarasota, as a sold-out, unsecured junior
 lienholder, was not barred by the three-month statute of
 limitations in Utah's deficiency statute.
 
Levine also asserts that the Circuit Court failed to
 
comply with the deficiency statute by failing to determine the
 fair market value of the Utah Property. In City Consumer
 Services, however, the Utah Supreme Court expressly stated that
 in an action involving a sold-out junior lienholder, the value of
 the property is not relevant because the "action is not for
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deficiency judgment, but rather is simply a suit on [the] note." 
City Consumer Services, 815 P.2d at 240.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
err in determining that Sarasota became an "unsecured general
 creditor" and that Sarasota was not limited by the fair market
 value provision of Utah's deficiency statute.
 
(3) Levine argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
finding that there was no evidence supporting a defense of fraud
 and that Levine did not establish his counterclaim fraud
 allegations by clear and convincing evidence. Levine cites no
 legal authority to support his argument; rather, Levine relies on
 a recitation of select purported "facts" to support his
 allegations of fraud. Based on Levine's assertions, it is
 unclear whose or which, if any, representations or actions Levine
 alleges constituted fraud. Under Utah law, to successfully
 establish a fraud claim, the party asserting fraud must show by
 clear and convincing evidence
 
(1) [t]hat a representation was made; (2) concerning a
presently existing material fact; (3) which was false; (4)
which the representor either (a) knew to be false, or (b)
made recklessly, knowing that he had insufficient knowledge
upon which to base such representation; (5) for the purpose
of inducing the other party to act upon it; (6) that the
other party, acting reasonably and in ignorance of its
falsity; (7) did in fact rely upon it; (8) and was thereby
induced to act; (9) to his injury and damage.
 
Prince v. Bear River Mut. Ins. Co., 56 P.3d 524, 536-37 (Utah
 
2002) (citations omitted). Furthermore, "[a] person cannot be
 liable for fraud unless he made the false representations
 himself, authorized someone to make them for him, or participated
 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the misrepresentation in some way, such as through a
 
conspiracy." Israel Pagan Estate v. Cannon, 746 P.2d 785, 792
 
(Utah Ct. App. 1987).
 
The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that Levine
 
failed to meet his burden. There is no evidence on the record,
 nor does Levine allege, that Sarasota or KeyBank, made false or
 reckless representations, authorized someone to make such
 representations, or had any connection to or participated in any
 such representations. Even though Levine alleges that he was
 deceived by members of an investment program, he also testified
 that he chose not to pursue any legal action against the program
 members who deceived him.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
January 21, 2009 Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 28, 2010. 
On the briefs: Charles H. Brower 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Gregory T. Grabfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
7 